Kd) 
oe) 
ag). 


aes 


8 94 
beast ene 


es 


2 
fs 


oa 


Oe) 


ote! 
‘v 


“ie 


Pepa ed hie 
atrelise pipe ces 
hac 


shetatatane 
neat s aoe 


i 


ches 

Fo tee ia 
a oa 
ea 


‘3 


Pap ata tat 
Areas 


ee 
Paks: 


Maes 
vs iin 


tLe ore ae pie it 
ha datgedurare yeas 


oh! {1x 
ee 


etary 
Gases 


OR Mn Pl 
ee oa L355 
satay: 


ia 
yee 9, 
a f 


inns ate 

Velaitgpatash 

Ra Rios 
, 


ey het 
+2) 


at 


ses, 
Atulalatn 
Set 


salt 
Paria 
a 


hens 


Sine 


ptt Ae 


seers 
erally 
Sas 


Lay 
Eee 


ate 
rien: 


regen 
teoeatat 
ax 


esearta 


td 


Pps; 
ay 


ee 


Fa 
ast 


son 


A; 


Te PON rns oa ow * 

Sialadstaee denne spare, 
sa napatse eErahany aed : ai 
fader taza) x a Teg ies 4 ah ary oe 
mH a Sys oe a5, yes oS ©} 

< seis : eco tistet uss 


eae) 
mbesaniae 


Library of Che Theological Seminary 


PRINCETON - NEW JERSEY 


<3): 


PRESENTED BY 


Presbyterian church in the U.S.A. 
Board of National Missions 


ie if Hy’ i 
ale ® Wats aer gy 


we 
prey 


wT) ei Lay eaaey i 
ial: and 
ee M4 Vea t he Na t 
at thi Wik Ori? eas! 


: i 


wy 


a 


y the Internet Archive — | 


oy aD 


2th ‘una from 


Bayi) | 
¢ 


rf at a ny : im : ea 7 F : may 
Bae i th ay AAR We AAR fac AMES Aah Read 
he ’ | : i 
J idetails/zoninglawsadminiOObass _ 
| a PN a ici ae: 


, “FG 


ae 


a 


MEGA tN 
Phe Ny 
tae wa 


LONING 


The Laws, Administration, and Court Decisions 
During the First Twenty Years 


BY ¥y 
EDWARD M. BASSETT 


MEMBER OF THE NEW YORK BAR 


NEW YORK 
RUSSELL SAGE FOUNDATION 
1940 


Copyright, 1936, 1940, by 
EpwarpD M. BASSETT 
Printed in the United States of America 
Printed December, 1936: 


Reprinted, with additions, 
February, 1940 


———————E 
WM, F. FELL CO., PRINTERS 
PHILADELPHIA 


THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED BY THE 
AUTHOR TO FREDERIC B. PRATT, 
LAWSON PURDY, ano WALTER STABLER 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PREFACE . F 
PREFACE TO FIRST reas 
INTRODUCTION 


CHAPTER | 
RELATION OF ZONING TO STATE CONSTITUTIONS 


Power to Zone Must Come from State 
Home Rule Charters 
Constitutional Amendments for enine 


CHAPTER II 
STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


The First Zoning Commission 

Investigations in European Countries. 

Early Incomplete Zoning 

Reasons for Zoning in New York ity 

Different Regulations in Different Districts 

Police Power vs. Eminent Domain . 

The Development and Spread of State Enabine Acts 
What Land Can Be Zoned SARE UAS AME MIN Ni fees 
Public Buildings 

Enabling Acts Permissive ‘Orit 

Zoning Imposes No Encumbrance 


CHAPTER III 


Tue ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES 


The Zoning Commission 
Advertisement and Hearings 

Twenty Percent Protest 

Notice to Owners 

Consents and Protests of Heandowrers 


PAGE 


ZONING 


CHAPTER IV 
ZONING DISTRICTS 


Bases of Differentiation 

The Territory Zoned 

Fields of Regulation 
Uniformity Within a Disaate 
Purposes . 

Substantial Balaton 

Height and Area 

Vision Clearance ; 
Methods of Area Regulation 
Use Regulations 
Humanitarian Institutions 
Dumping . 

Problems of Use Biiticts 
Different Kinds of Business and aligeeell Distner 
Density of Population 
Interim Ordinances 
Piecemeal Ordinances 
Discrimination 

Nuisance . 

Boundaries of Detncen : 
Esthetics . 

Accessory Buildings an Uses 


CHAPTER V 
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND UsEs 

Continuance of Use : : 
Completion of Nonconforming Buildings : 
Additions to Nonconforming Buildings 
Occupancy Permits 
Refusal of Lawful Permit 
Abandonment . 
Destruction 
Retroactive Regulations 


. 105 
107 
. 109 
. 109 
he 
VEDI 
mae eb 
Bs Ot 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER VI 

BOARD OF APPEALS Oe 
Its Composition. Pa Vata eb aioe) Bt Oy 
Notice of Hearing Beare Board ai aye ae te ete on eo A Bo 
Mean iperOre: the DOATAlar wl lear eh tes fi se dae itll el LTS 
Vote Required for Variance... PAN Le Tar veh tly hal aed RE 
Return to be Made by Board of neal: Hida Won Stina ans a SY AMIN REA BA 
Rescission of Determination by the Board of Appeals .  . 119 
Variances. PRN Ate ae ie eo Re nT OC) 
Conditions Attached to shanties neh salen HO Naren Oba TH AUBY pode 
Panesar. Conduct.) 1): 131 
Development of the Board of one ey in rhe Oe of New ork 133 
Interpretation of Rules of Conduct... 142 

Limitation of the Powers of the Board of Anpen (on in ine Otis 
of New York ._. . 148 
Review of Determination of Board of Nopeals by ine Gout 153 
Exhausting the Remedy Given by Law... 160 

Statutory Abbreviation of Proper Functions of Rania ; 
Bopcdisar.)” « GMO Ceti wen Mikes th tui Tt OS 
Advising the Local Levislature a A . 164 
General Conclusions Applicable to all Ses ana CHS. . 165 


CHAPTER VII 
CourRT PROCEDURE 


REGO USATICN VLANICAMUS 4 tartan easly. Vogt he eed.) aes aieoar oe cll 70 
Re eee CtelrODICMS ie nmi by imental ETO 


CHAPTER VIII 
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS 182 


CHAPTER IX 
CONTRACTUAL RELATIONS 


Contracts Improper... AUN ARO a) Gah ME id sts had 
Effect of Zoning on Private Restrictions ORR eee tne eT OB 


ZONING 


CHAPTER X 
DEFINITIONS IN THE ORDINANCE 


Definitions Sometimes Do More Harm Than Good 
Examples of Good Definitions 

Examples of Bad Definitions 

The Word “Premises” . 


CHAPTER XI 
PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND UsEs 
RESIDENCES 
One-Family Detached Residences . 
Two-Family Detached Residences . 
One-Family Semi-Detached Residences . 
Two-Family Semi-Detached Residences 
One-Family Attached Residences 
Two-Family Attached Residences . 
Group Residence Units. . 
Multi-Family Houses 
OTHER BUILDINGS AND UsEs 
Boarding Houses 
Rooming Houses 
Hotels . 
Schools . 
Dormitories . 
Fraternity Houses 
Libraries 
Clubs 
Community Houses 
Hospitals 
Sanitariums . 
Asylums or Homes 
Churches 
Greenhouses 
Stores ; 
Office Buildings . 
Personal Service Shops 
Laundries 


PAGE 


. 188 
. 188 
. 190 
. 190 


. 192 
. 193 
. 193 
. 193 
. 194 
. 194 
. 194 
. 194 


- 195 
- 195 
an 1.8) 
. 196 
- 197 
- 197 
- 197 
AS hGe 
. 198 
. 198 
- 199 
. 199 
. 200 
. 200 
. 201 
. 201 
. 202 
202 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Brera DER YV ALCHOUSCS Bich yim mentite AM he T ih an Tae Vhs C203 
Re DCrAYAtUSa a 1 iia SM aNa Tt ewd ce neliiy Cs HA pM AAR Seve oO 
MATS Bop ee Ina DORA bo ye OLE ic ML 20 
ee CN AMM of UA iot MaRS rah AM or Me Aarts NC OA 
Garages : CURA RIMES USS UWA MINIS Stara eked OA. 
Gasoline Filling Stations SON Lessa LRA iaa KU aT ike heehee] ore 
Restaurants. . RN Ce eee ae Lar Siena he emma N AD AE 
Public Utility Brides ERAN UCAT eel hey reted RSS TE 
Public Buildings. PEAS NT ha Ph SOLER oO EAR ge DD 
Undertaking Berablichments SUMO R pecan Utd 5 Pans TEMS KB EAL Ue 
Bakery and Confectionery ae LE HEM Mente AUN Rec MeN OT A 
Theatres. Se USN Aa iN mena TE ak od Gi 
Newspaper relay Offices POOR AME EUS UUrL oc 0%, Mod Mien sc MRT 
Teele RIS 0 RT MS 3 Bt SS A a oD bo 8 
Factories. Rea o I DN I te 3 
Earth-Product Orerione) AME O lala. at Wes YL ommeone DFS 
EM MENA Me Ach Mt rd oc ek re Ree 2 1G 
[OOS AGGy RAIS Ma a AA AO aa eT Ro 
ISLES CSH Me OM yar.) sec Any Phau ane yey dad we NOT 7 
Pee OM ATK Stine cast NG On Beate Fe AS hey eu pe i Glee, EF 
RA EGOONINKS .2 ie 0.) 6, faite ohare Wat eet ere D7 
Standard and Miniature Golf Opies AA MEN HR Galas I HAN ok 
Ice Making and era Establishments #1 ur he MeO 
Junk Yards... nies PER HA GATE Od Re: 
Rares ALIONS Miele MW yeaa hem tn hab Wie tf Raw Te AD TS 
Slaughter Houses SV EAL ES RUA Ma Aliana RU eed Oy Malan a eo SS 
Manneries | |. : MAM OT Abd beled Lenn Oe EO 
Transformer Saiond. Ny Ane ache MY ACU ay Ln A Bee oT © 
SeereanCthens Ents yew oes ey the tai nl Rede aT O 
Poultry Markets SARS aKa Ce aN ena ti) ai eRe RTS LO 
Ree VIA KIC LANtS ee WS ie ida Ney en Mesh at LO 
Bighsh |). EO NALA NPE OUR BRL ett RN a eed cr 3°38. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ATG tay SU RIE Dee Dea rT tar Cae aman PME re 
INDICES 
Bre MAOle SASCS ea iui en Oana ol ceils “Tl phe uM deeb al aT A 


Index of Subjects AIDE ONL TE UU CG Me pp WAV WAI UU LAM g ey J 


‘ * 
Pane 
cm Aa! 
a 
— S| 
7 ’ 
i ae 
.) 
' 


cc 


PREEAGE 


HE first edition of Zoning, published by the Russell Sage 
Foundation in 1936, has been sold out and, since there is 
considerable demand for it, a new printing is necessary. This 
affords the author an opportunity to make some improvements in 
fuliness of citations, but, what is more important, it enables him to 
restate the principles of zoning for height, area, and use in the light 
of misunderstandings that have developed, and to analyze the prog- 
ress during the last ten years of planning experiments, commonly 
called zoning. 

The widespread approval by courts of zoning for height, area, 
and use has induced students to employ the word “zoning” to de- 
scribe other forms of regulation, some of which have none of the 
essentials of zoning. So much has been written under this head and 
the word is used so often in colleges, as well as in legislatures, that 
it seems desirable to discover, if possible, which applications of the 
word are to zoning and which are not, also the kind of zoning that 
is lawful and the kind that is not. 

The introduction contains such an analysis. 


EDWARD M. BASSETT 
January 1, 1940 


Pe pACE TOE LRS TE DITION 


HE purpose of the author in preparing this book was not 
only to bring together the court decisions on zoning but to 


outline the early development of zoning in this country. 
George McAneny and the author had been officially connected 
with the preparation of the dual subway plans in New York City. 
Both had worked in that city for several years to progress rapid 
transit for the prevention of congestion and the better distribution 
of residences, business, and industry. After the dual subway con- 
tracts were signed, a group interested in the better distribution of 
population conferred on the possibilities of supplementing the 
rapid transit plan by a system of regulatory laws that would pre- 
vent overbuilding at locations affording the best transit facilities. 
The view was expressed that if the new subways produced only 
increased congestion of living and business conditions they would 
be a doubtful benefit to the city. Under the leadership of Mr. 
McAneny the Board of Estimate and Apportionment appointed a 
commission in 1913 to study and propose regulations for limiting 
the height and size of buildings. The book containing the report of 
this Commission, called the Report of Heights of Buildings Com- 
mission, was printed by the city and resulted in the appointment 
by the Board of Estimate and Apportionment of a new commission 
on building districts to explore the possibilities of the regulation, 
under the police power, of the height, area, and use of buildings. Its 
report is called the Report of the Commission on Building Dis- 
tricts and Restrictions. These two reports were the foundation 
of the zoning plan of New York City. 

The members of the two Commissions were Edward M. Bassett,! 
Edward C. Blum,! Edward W. Brown, William H. Chesebrough, 
James E. Clonin, William A. Cokeley, Otto M. Eidlitz,! Abram I. 
Elkus, Burt L. Fenner,! Edward R. Hardy, J. Monroe Hewlett, 
Robert W. Higbie, C. Grant La Farge, Richard W. Lawrence, 
Nelson P. Lewis, Alrick H. Man, Alfred E. Marling, George T. 
Mortimer,! Lawson Purdy,! Allan Robinson, August F. Schwarzler, 
J. F. Smith, Walter Stabler, Franklin S. Tomlin,! Lawrence Veiller, 
George C. Whipple, Gaylord S. White, and William G. Willcox. 

10On both Commissions. 


7 


ZONING 


These two Commissions were fortunate in having the assistance 
of George B. Ford, John P. Fox, Herbert S. Swan, George W. 
Tuttle, Robert Whitten, and Frank B. Williams. The work de- 
manded a wide knowledge of municipal engineering, architecture, 
law, and the history of building regulations. Skill was necessary 
in handling land and statistical problems and estimating trends of 
distribution of future residence, business, and industry. 

After the zoning plan was adopted by New York City a citizens’ 
committee, called the Zoning Committee of New York, was estab- 
lished to assist in the administration of the new law in New York 
City, and to help extend zoning throughout the country. It was 
feared that if this rather new invocation of the police power was 
employed in only one city courts would frown on it because of its 
limited use. The future of zoning was at that time precarious and 
it was considered that its extension to other cities would be an aid 
to securing the approval of courts. Judicial approval of extensions 
of the police power depends somewhat on a widespread opinion 
that such extensions are needed, and also upon their actual employ- 
ment by governing bodies. 

Fortunately other cities rapidly adopted the New York City 
method in whole or part. The zoning plan is now in operation in ~ 
more than 1,200 municipalities in this country. The United States 
Department of Commerce prepared a form for a state enabling 
act, which was widely used by state legislatures. 

The author has been counsel of the Zoning Committee of New 
York since its formation, was a member of the Advisory Committee 
on Zoning appointed by Herbert Hoover, Secretary of Commerce, 
and has had the privilege of visiting many states and cities for the 
purpose of helping the establishment of zoning. 

The Zoning Committee of New York has kept files of all state 
enabling acts, local ordinances, and court decisions. The cases 
cited in this book are taken from such files. The author wishes to 
express his grateful appreciation to the Zoning Committee for the 
use of these files. He also acknowledges the indispensable assist- 
ance of Fred S. Hall, Elizabeth Wallace, and Katherine McNamara. 


Epwarp M. BAssETT 
July 25, 1936 


INTRODUCTION 


HIS book is confined to zoning for height, area, and use of 

: buildings. Zoning merely means the division of land into 

districts having different regulations. But in the sense that 
the word is used in this book the regulations are imposed by law, 
and they must be reasonable; also they must have a substantial 
relation to the health, safety, comfort, and convenience of the com- 
munity. Otherwise the regulations are void. 

Land similarly situated must be zoned alike. Otherwise the regu- 
lations are discriminatory and void. 

These requirements are so simple and self-evident that one won- 
ders why comprehensive zoning did not begin in this country 
earlier. There is no doubt that the method of protection afforded 
by zoning was desired before 1916. In Chicago and St. Louis many 
of the streets in the exclusive residential neighborhoods were laid 
out and were usually approached through a handsome stone en- 
trance way. They were given a name like Belmont Court. In sev- 
eral instances the help of the municipal council was obtained which 
imposed ordinances known as block ordinances, excluding every 
structure but high-class residences. One by one these ordinances 
were swept away by the courts because other land similarly situated 
was not regulated in the same way; in other words, the regulations 
were discriminatory and void. These well-known court decisions 
caused lawyers and legislators to consider in the early days that 
zoning was unlawful on account of its being unconstitutional. 

Confronted by these adverse decisions pioneer zoners in the vari- 
ous states sought broad and safe fundamentals for their work. They 
urged that a state enabling act giving the specific power to munici- 
palities be established before a municipality adopted an ordinance; 
that the entire municipality should be zoned; that the regulations 
should be reasonable and not discriminatory; and that these regu- 
lations should have a substantial relation to the health, safety, 
comfort, and convenience of the community. The result was that 
the New York Court of Appeals (Lincoln Trust Co. v. Williams 


9 


ZONING 


Bldg. Corp., 229 N. Y. 313, 128 N. E. 209, 1920) promptly de- 
clared that they would uphold such regulations. Since then all 
states have adopted zoning enabling acts and the courts in these 
states uphold these acts. 

Zoning for height, area, and use began with cities and extended 
to villages, boroughs, and towns. The method was found to be fully 
as convenient for country districts as for city districts. In some 
states, especially in California, counties take the place of the towns 
and townships, which embrace the rural areas in the East. This 
form of zoning was found to be equally convenient when applied to 
an entire county. In the latter instance it has been called county 
zoning. Whether applied to cities or counties, it has been the same 
kind of zoning, namely, that for height, area, and use, and it has 
been upheld by the courts. 

To repeat, discussion in this study relates exclusively to zoning 
for height, area, and use. The legislature of Wisconsin in 1929 
passed an enabling act empowering counties to establish districts 
for forestry or recreation, from which agriculture can be excluded. 
Many Wisconsin counties have adopted ordinances pursuant to 
this enabling act and a few counties in various states have done the 
same. The method is to lay out districts unsuited to agriculture, 
from which new agriculture is excluded, the areas of prohibition 
being called either forestry or recreation districts. By preventing 
agriculture in these districts or zones the cost of roads, schools, and 
other scattered public improvements can be lessened without harm 
to the community; soil erosion due to premature and improper dis- 
turbance of ground can be prevented; forests can be preserved and 
utilized; and outdoor life, especially in summer, can be promoted. 
Existing homes are not ousted but bought, necessary buildings for 
camps can be erected, and hunting and fishing carried on. Private 
ownership will continue. The land is inexpensive. Owners desire 
light taxation. There will be some earnings from forestry, game, 
and campers. 

By some this form of zoning has been called county zoning and 
by others rural. Both terms seem to be misnomers. All counties 
can be zoned by all zoning methods, present and future. The term 
“county zoning” is not differentiating. The term “rural” is equally 
misleading. Far more rural than urban land is covered by the 

10 


INTRODUCTION 


ordinary zoning for height, area, and use. “‘Submarginal farm zon- 
ing’ is an accurate term. It has already been widely used and can- 
not be applied to other kinds of zoning. 

The word “recreational” as used in the Wisconsin statute to de- 
scribe one sort of district seems unfortunate. Land devoted to rec- 
reation is usually public land and is called park land. We have our 
national, state, and city parks. To call private land a recreational 
district is confusing. We suggest the term “non-usable” or “un- 
broken”’ land. 

This submarginal farm form of zoning will probably meet with 
the favor of courts if the regulations are reasonable and not con- 
fiscatory. Lands of different characteristics are placed in different 
districts. The courts will probably decide that the regulations have 
a substantial relation to community health, safety, morals, con- 
venience, and general welfare. Although the benefits of zoning are 
almost entirely economic, preservation of the soil, protection of the 
forests, and saving to the taxpayers of unnecessary expense would 
appear to bring this method of zoning within the protection of the 
police power. 

For at least fifteen years there has been constant pressure for 
roadside zoning to prevent billboards, filling stations, and eating 
stands. It is not strange that many consider that such regulation 
is a field for zoning. People know that the usual zoning for height, 
area, and use, in residence districts, prevents billboard and other 
objectionable uses along the roadsides and that residence districts 
in zoned towns comprise more than nineteen-twentieths of the en- 
tire roadsides. They know, too, that many towns, especially those 
made up of farms, are not zoned, and they jump to the conclusion 
that there is no need of waiting for the entire town to adopt an or- 
dinance; but, since they are interested in roadsides only, they 
advocate the establishment of zoned strips along the edges of roads 
which will prevent objectionable structures. 

State legislatures seem to give almost no attention to roadside 
zoning. Plainly there must be some good reason. Many agricul- 
tural towns do not like zoning. Farmers are afraid that an effort 
will be made to regulate their crops. They dislike this kind of zon- 
ing as much as they do the usual comprehensive zoning of the en- 
tire terrain. Failing to interest the towns, advocates of roadside 

1] 


ZONING 


zoning urge state legislatures to enact strip zoning regulations 
covering all roadsides in the state, forgetting that the state legis- 
lators come from towns that are largely against roadside zoning, 
and that the last thing such legislators care to do is to take the local 
decision away from the towns. 

Zoning for height, area, and use has been upheld by the courts 
because it is comprehensive and not piecemeal. Legislators are 
likely at once to ask why the whole of a town should not be zoned 
instead of narrow strips along roads. 

Then, too, it is well settled that a zoning plan consists in apply- 
ing different regulations to different districts. Regulation without 
different kinds of districts may be within the police power, but it 
is not zoning. Accordingly we should speak of roadside regulation 
and not roadside zoning. States will undoubtedly find methods of 
regulating roadsides, partly for safety of traffic and partly for 
amenity. At present nearly all courts say no to esthetics. Massa- 
chusetts has made progress by charging license fees on billboards 
and signs. Billboards and signs along roadsides are an injury. The 
method of complete prevention is not clear at present. In the 
meantime the old-fashioned way of zoning an entire town, which is 
supported by the courts in all states, should be more and more em- 
ployed. Comprehensive zoning ordinances should be adopted. In 
residence districts shown on the maps of such ordinances, bill- 
boards and signs are strictly excluded. 


CHAPTER | 
RELATION OF ZONING TO STATE CONSTITUTIONS 


POWER TO ZONE Must COME FROM STATE 


UNICIPALITIES must obtain their power from the state. 

M Especially is this true of the power to zone because this 
is a power that has not been customarily exercised. In 

the early days of zoning many authorities were inclined to con- 
sider that zoning regulations were an unlawful invasion of property 
rights. Courts properly looked for some expression of the state 
legislature in the statutes, or of the people of the state in the state 
constitution, which would justify the adoption by the municipality 
of a zoning ordinance.! They were loath to uphold such ordinances 
unless there was a state enabling act for zoning.2? The constitutions 
of some states, however, have given their municipalities rather 
specific powers to adopt regulations to secure the health, safety, 
morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the com- 
munity. Where a constitution grants this power as fully as it can 
be granted by the state legislature the municipality can proceed to 
adopt zoning regulations without waiting for the state legislature 
to pass a zoning enabling act. Thus what may be called the first 
use-zoning regulations in this country were established by Los 
Angeles, acting under the constitution of the state of California. 
There was no state enabling act for zoning. An ordinance divided 
the business sections of the city into seven industrial districts 
and declared the remainder to be a residence district. In the 
residence district laundries were excluded. This exclusion was up- 
held by the courts.2 By another ordinance the city was divided 
into residence districts, from which the brick industry was ex- 
cluded, and other districts in which such industry might be carried 


1 Clements v. McCabe, 210 Mich. 207, 177 N. W. 722 (1920) 


2 Md.—Goldman v. Crowther, 147 Md. 282, 128 A. 50 (1925) 
Mich.—Clements v. McCabe, 210 Mich. 207, 177 N. W. 722 (1920) 
Mo.—City of St. Louis v. Evraiff, 301 Mo. 231, 256 S. W. 489 (1923) 
Tex.—Spann v. City of Dallas, 111 Tex. 350, 235 S. W. 513 (1921) 


8 Ex parte Quong Wo, 161 Cal. 220, 118 P. 714 (1911) 
13 


ZONING 


on. Under this provision an existing brick yard was ousted from 
the prohibited district. The court declared that the owners could 
continue to excavate the clay but they must take it elsewhere to 
be burned into bricks.!. This retroactive form of zoning has not 
been employed to an appreciable extent in this country because 
when more comprehensive systems of regulation were discovered 
and adopted, it was deemed best to allow existing nonconforming 
buildings and uses to remain, on the ground that lawful investments 
should be protected. 

Before the comprehensive zoning of New York City the legisla- 
ture of Massachusetts passed a law applicable to Boston, establish- 
ing two kinds of height districts, one with an 80-foot height limit 
and the other with a 125-foot limit. It was held that this was law- 
ful under the state constitution.2, Later a comprehensive system 
of zoning for Boston was passed by the state legislature and is now 
in effect. Boston is the only city in this country zoned directly 
by the state legislature. 


HomME RULE CHARTERS 


State constitutions have sometimes empowered cities to adopt 
so-called home rule charters.2 Under this permission the voters 
may insert broad powers in the charter and bestow on the local 
legislative body the authority to pass regulations based on the 
police power. In the ten years after 1916 a few cities considered 
that their home rule charters gave their local legislatures as full 
authority to employ the police power for zoning as they would 
have under specific zoning enabling acts passed by the state 
legislatures. In some of these cases there was no lack of power in 
1 cannes Sebastian. 165 Cal. 416, 132 P. 584, 239 U. S. 394, 36 S. Ct. 143 

IOI 
2 Welch rs see 193 Mass. 364, 79 N. E. 745, 214 U. S. 91, 29 S. Ct. 567 (1909) 
3 Cal.—Thille v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 82 Cal. A. 187, 255 P. 294 


1927) 

Colo.—Colby v. Board of Adjustment, 81 Colo. 344, 255 P. 443 (1927) 

Mich.—Clements v. McCabe, 210 Mich. 207, 177 N. W. 722 (1920) 

N. Y.—Home rule constitutional amendment, Article XII, adopted November 6, 
1923, enacted by Chapter 363 of the Laws of 1924 

Ohio— Bauman v. Underwood, 122 Oh. St. 269, 171 N. E. 336 (1930) 

Wis.—Ekern v. City of Milwaukee, 190 Wis. 633, 209 N. W. 860 (1926) 

* Md.—Goldman v. Crowther, 147 Md. 282, 128 A. 50 (1925) 
Mo.—City of St. Louis v. Evraiff, 301 Mo. 231, 256 S. W. 489 (1923) 


14 


RELATION OF ZONING TO STATE CONSTITUTIONS 


the city, but the courts were critical of what seemed to be an un- 
usual application of the police power, which they considered to 
invade private property rights. When a city once took the position 
that it had a full right to adopt zoning regulations without going 
to the state legislature for authority, it was prone to continue one 
effort after another to adjust these regulations so as to satisfy the 
courts. The cities were, however, in the main unsuccessful.! 
Courts considered the regulations unreasonable. Years of time 
and prodigious efforts were lost in insisting on the validity of the 
home rule method instead of accepting the inevitable and procuring 
a permissive enabling act from the state legislature. Sometimes 
cities pursuing these fruitless efforts became convinced that the 
courts would not uphold zoning, regardless of whether it was 
undertaken under home rule provisions or under a state enabling 
act. However, after a state enabling act for zoning was obtained 
some cities passed new zoning ordinances and the courts almost 
uniformly upheld them.? In New Jersey, exceptionally, even after 
such an act was passed, the courts declared that zoning for use 
was an unreasonable exercise of the donated power.’ For instance, 


1 Md.—Applestein v. Baltimore, 156 Md. 40, 143 A. 666 (1928) 
Bauernschmidt v. Standard Oil Co., 153 Md. 647, 139 A. 531 (1927) 
Mayor and City Council of Baltimore v. Rutherford, 145 Md. 363, 125 A. 725 
(1924) 
R. B. Const. Co. v. Jackson, 152 Md. 671, 137 A. 278 (1927) 
Rutherford v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, City Court, Baltimore 
Daily Record, October 25, 1923, 145 Md. 363, 125 A. 725 (1924) 
Tighe % Osborne, 149 Md. 340, 131 A. 801 (1925); 150 Md. 452, 133 A. 465 
(1926 
Minn.—Lachtman v. Houghton, 134 Minn. 226, 158 N. W. 1o17 (1916) 
Mo.—Better Built Home & Mortgage Co. v. McKelvey, 301 Mo. 130, 256 S. W. 
495 (1923) 
Kansas City v. Liebi, 298 Mo. 569, 252 S. W. 404 (1923) 
Penrose Inv. Co. v. McKelvey, 301 Mo. 1, 256 S. W. 474 (1923) 
2 Md.—Jack Lewis, Inc. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 164 Md. ao 
164 A. 220, 290 U. S. 585, 54 S. Ct. 56 (1933) 
Lipsitz v. Parr, 164 Md. 222, 164 A. 743 (1933) 
North Baltimore M. P. Church v. Board of Zoning Appeals, Baltimore City 
ek Baltimore Daily Record, June 24, 1932, 164 Md. 487, 165 A. 703 
(1933 
Mo.—Cadillac Co. v. Christopher, 317 Mo. 1179, 298 S. W. 720 (1927) 
3N. J.—Ignaciunas v. Town of Nutley, 99 N. J. L. 389, 125 A. 121 (1924) 
Kantorowitz v. Bigelow, 102 N. J. L. 13, 130 A. 811 (1925) 
Newman v. Scott, 5 N. J. Misc. 514, 137 A. 924 (1927) 
Pfarr v. Schmidt, 4 N. J. Misc. 861, 134 A. 840 (1926) 
West End Investment Co. v. Osterman, 5 N. J. Misc. 335, 136 A. 926 (1927) 


Footnote continued on page 16. 


15 


ZONING 


they declared that the exclusion of stores from a residence district 
had no substantial relation to the community health, safety, 
morals, and general welfare. It was not until the constitution of 
the state was amended by a specific declaration in favor of the 
lawfulness of zoning that the courts of New Jersey upheld use 
zoning. 

Cities having home rule charters gradually learned that the best 
way to place zoning ordinances on a safe and enduring basis was 
to obtain in advance a state enabling act for zoning.! As a legal 
proposition a home rule charter, wherein the city has been donated 
all the power of the state to employ the police power in ordinances, 
should be as firm a basis for zoning as a state zoning enabling act. 
Nevertheless, the presence in the latter of checks and precautions— 
like those requiring a preliminary report of the zoning commission, 
and a more than majority vote if there is filed a 20 percent protest 
against changes of the map—have seemed to cause courts to resolve 
the doubt in favor of the power of the municipality. Then, too, 
where there is no state enabling act for zoning there is no provision 
for a board of appeals having power to issue variance permits in 
exceptional cases. The lack of this ameliorating power has a ten- 
dency to cause courts to hold that zoning is a more extensive power 
than is granted in the home rule charter. 

An amendment to the New York constitution passed in 1923 
gave certain home rule powers to cities, but their exercise must 


Footnote continued from page I5. 
The Nutley case did not discourage the property owners of New Jersey from 
continuing their efforts to obtain protection through use zoning. These unsuc- 
cessful efforts are shown in separate reported cases all referring to the Nutley 
case in justification of non-recognition of use zoning. They number over two 
hundred separate court cases and constitute the largest number of cases in this 
country on a single zoning situation. All are not cited here because they are 
repetitive. 
1 Ark.—Arkansas State Highway Commission v. Anderson, 184 Ark. 763, 43 S. W. 
(2d) 356 (1931) 

Fla.—Helseth v. DuBose, 99 Fla. 812, 128 S. 4 (1930) 

Metropolis Pub. Co. v. City of Miami, 100 Fla. 784, 129 S. 913 (1930) 

Shad v. Fowler, 90 Fla. 155, 105 S. 733 (1925) 

Stephens v. City of Jacksonville, 103 Fla. 177, 137 S. 149 (1931) 
lowa— Downey v. Sioux City, 208 Iowa 1273, 227 N. W. 125 (1929) 
Kan.—Julian v. Golden Rule Oil Co., 112 Kan. 671, 212 P. 884 (1923) 
Ky.—Fowler v. Obier, 224 Ky. 742, 7 S. W. (2d) 219 (1928) 
Mich.—Dawley v. Collingwood, 242 Mich. 247, 218 N. W. 766 (1928) 
Mo.—Aufderheide v. Polar Wave Ice & Fuel Co., 319 Mo. 337, 4 S. W. (2d) 

770 (1928) 
16 


RELATION OF ZONING TO STATE CONSTITUTIONS 


be preceded by enactments by the state legislature.!| Under this 
amendment and a succeeding enactment the zoning clauses of the 
charter of the City of New York have been amended by the 
municipal assembly. All of the original zoning provisions of the 
charter were placed there by the state legislature. 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS FOR ZONING 


Constitutional amendments for zoning should not be necessary. 
Courts recognize that the principles of the police power remain the 
same but that as time goes on, and enlarged needs of communities 
develop, the application of these principles may be enlarged. In 
the earlier days, when communities were sparsely populated with 
low buildings and had much open space, there was not the need for 
zoning regulations that arose after population increased. Density 
of housing, high office buildings, hotels, and apartment houses pro- 
duced entirely new conditions. Courts have recognized the law- 
fulness of zoning regulations about as rapidly as organized com- 
munities have found them necessary. 

If as each enlarged application of the principles of the police 
power becomes desirable a constitutional amendment must be 
adopted, a state constitution would become unnecessarily padded. 
In the early days of zoning most courts declared that if the zoning 
regulations were reasonable and substantially related to the com- 
munity health, safety, morals, and general welfare, the court 
would uphold them.?, Nevertheless it was deemed desirable to add 
a constitutional amendment for zoning in the state of Massa- 
chusetts.2 As in other such constitutional amendments the zoning 
of buildings was authorized in Massachusetts but there was no 
mention of the zoning of land. In order to prevent many undesir- 
able forms of business or industry on vacant land—as discussed on 
page 49—it is customary to exclude damaging open-air uses from 


1 See ante, page 14, note 3. 
2U. S.—Village of Euclid (Ohio) v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. Ct. 
114 (1926) 
N. Y.—Lincoln Trust Co. v. Williams Bldg. Corp., 229 N. Y. 313, 128 N. E. 
209 (1920) 
’ Mass.—The General Court shall have power to limit buildings according to their 
use or construction to specified districts of cities and towns.—Constitution 
of 1922, Article LX. 
Opinion of Justices, 234 Mass. 597, 127 N. E. 525 (1920) 


17 


ZONING 


residence and business districts. The reason why vacant land is 
usually omitted from constitutional amendments, and the effect 
of the amendment limited to structures, is probably because there 
is danger that the agricultural population will vote against the 
amendment for fear that crops may be regulated. Zoning ordi- 
nances in Massachusetts regulate vacant land much the same as 
in states that have no constitutional amendments for zoning. 
This shows that even in states that have adopted such amend- 
ments zoning will be exercised under the recognized principles of 
the police power rather than under the amendment. 

In addition to Massachusetts a few other states adopted con- 
stitutional amendments for zoning.1 The one adopted by New 
Jersey,? after its courts had for several years refused to recognize 
customary use zoning, merely provided that thereafter zoning 
should be considered lawful. The courts of the state had re- 
peatedly declared that they would uphold reasonable zoning, and 
that the reason why they did not uphold use zoning was because it 
was not reasonable. The constitutional amendment did not de- 
clare that use zoning should be considered reasonable. That 


1 Del.—The General Assembly may enact laws under which municipalities, other 
than counties, may adopt zoning ordinances limiting and restricting to 
specified districts, and regulating therein buildings and structures, according 
to their construction, and the nature and extent of their use, and the exercise 
of such authority shall be deemed to be within the police power of the state. — 
Constitution, Article Two, Section 25; Laws of 1929, Chapter 1, Section 25. 


Ga.—The General Assembly of the State shall have authority to grant to the 
governing authorities of .... cities having a population of 25,000 or more 
inhabitants, according to the United States census of 1920, or any future 
census, authority to pass zoning and planning laws whereby such cities may 
be zoned or districted for various uses and other or different uses prohibited 
therein, and regulating the use for which said zones or districts may be set 
apart, and regulating the plans for development and improvement of real 
estate therein.—Constitution, Article 3, Section 7, Paragraph 25; Laws 1927, 
Pwi127: 

La.—All municipalities are authorized to zone their territory; to create resi- 

dential, commercial and industrial districts, and to prohibit the establish- 

ment of places of business in residential districts.—Constitution of 1921, 

Article 14, Section 29. 


2.N. J.—The Legislature may enact general laws under which municipalities, other 
than counties, may adopt zoning ordinances limiting and restricting to 
specified districts and regulating therein, buildings and structures, according 
to their construction, and the nature and extent of their use, and the exercise 
of such authority shall be deemed to be within the police power of the state. 
Such laws shall be subject to repeal or alteration by the Legislature.— 
Article IV, Section 6, Paragraph 5 of Constitution; also Laws of 1928, 
page 820. 

18 


RELATION OF ZONING TO STATE CONSTITUTIONS 


would be tantamount to saying that unreasonable use zoning 
should hereafter be lawful. If such an amendment had been pro- 
posed, it would have failed to carry. Undoubtedly the New Jersey 
constitutional amendment means nothing more than that reason- 
able zoning should hereafter be considered lawful. Although this 
is what the courts formerly declared they would uphold, it would 
appear that the emphasis of popular approval for the constitu- 
tional amendment created a tendency on the part of the courts 
to uphold use zoning. 

Amendments of state constitutions that attempt to justify 
zoning do not appear to affect the scope of zoning, except perhaps 
in New Jersey.! The New Jersey amendment does not specifically 
sanction the zoning of vacant land, and one court decision holds 
that therefore vacant land cannot in that state be zoned for use? 


1Ga.—Fauss v. McConnell, 172 Ga. 444, 157 S. E. 625 (1931) 

Bet v. Mayor and Aldermen of Savannah, 172 Ga. 833, 159 S. E. 4go1 
(1931 

McCord v. Ed Bond & Condon Co., 175 Ga. 667, 165 S. E. 590 (1932) 

La.—Civello v. City of New Orleans, 154 La. 271, 97 S. 440 (1923) 

Dema Realty Co. v. Jacoby, 168 La. 752, 123 S. 314 (1929) 

Dema Realty Co. v. McDonald, 168 La. 172, 121 S. 613 (1929) 

Dickason v. Harris, 158 La. 974, 105 S. 33 (1925) 

Holcombe v. City of Lake Charles, 175 La. 803, 144 S. 502 (1932) 

Manhein v. Harrison, 164 La. 564, 114 S. 159 (1927) 

Palma v. City of New Orleans, 161 La. 1103, 109 S. 916 (1926) 

Roberts v. City of New Orleans, 162 La. 202, 110 S. 201 (1926) 

N. J.—Jannarone v. Board of Adjustment of Nutley, 9 N. J. Misc. 210, 153 

A. 256 (1931) 

Koplin v. Village of South Orange, 6 N. J. Misc. 480, 142 A. 235, 105 N. J. L. 
492, 144 A. 920 (1929) 

Lewis v. Board of Com’rs of Avon-by-the-Sea, 7 N. J. Misc. 27, 143 A. 865 
(1928) 

Mulcahy v. Pancoast, 6 N. J. Misc. 1003, 143 A. 925 (1928) 

2N. J.—City of Newark v. Lippmen, 13 N. J. Misc. 248, 177 A. 556 (1935) 

State v. Borough Garage, Inc., Recorder’s Court, Borough of Glen Rock, 

December 10, 1930 


GPLATsE iannt 
STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


THE First ZONING COMMISSION 


T THE time that zoning was introduced into the New York 
A City charter the word “zoning” had not been applied to 
the regulation of buildings in this country. The first study 
that led up to this subject in New York City was made by the 
Commission on Heights of Buildings. This was an investigating 
body appointed by the Board of Estimate and Apportionment to 
discover the relation of skyscrapers to the safety and health of the 
community and to indicate what regulations, if any, could be 
lawfully adopted to bring improvement. At that time an office 
building or hotel, in any part of the city, could cover the entire 
lot, rise to any height whatever, and maintain the lot size at the 
highest story. Darkened streets and buildings were found to 
result. There was no compulsory division of surrounding light — 
and air at the upper stories. Remedies were proposed by the 
Commission which were carried out in the districting resolution 
adopted later. The Commission recommended in its report that 
not only height should be regulated, but that area and use were 
also in need of regulation in the interest of public health and 
safety. It was proposed that different regulations should be es- 
tablished for height, area, and use, according to the varying needs 
of the districts. 

On the filing of this report a bill, prepared by the Commission, 
was presented to the state legislature: by the city administration. 
This bill amended the city charter by introducing districting pro- 
visions, and gave the Board of Estimate and Apportionment the 
power to appoint a districting commission to prepare a resolution 
and map. The bill was passed April 20, 1914. The new Commis- 
sion held many hearings, both in the Municipal Building and in 
the different boroughs of the city. The demand for reasonable 
1 Report of Heights of Buildings Commission [New York City], December 23, 1913 

20 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


regulations to prevent the increase of chaotic conditions was almost 
universal. The districting resolution was passed by the Board 
of Estimate and Apportionment July 25, 1916, and has been in 
operation ever since.! 

The subject was for several years called “districting.”” However, 
the word “zoning” soon caught the popular fancy, and by com- 
mon consent the older term has been dropped in ordinary parlance, 
the word “zoning” taking its place throughout the country. A 
zone is a belt. Walled cities in Germany and Austria were usually 
circular in form. After the walls had become obsolete circular 
parks and boulevards were laid out where the walls had been 
taken down. Outside of the circular boulevard or park system 
there was a belt or zone of apartment houses and still further out 
a belt of detached one-family houses. The word zone was com- 
monly used in European countries to designate these districts, and 
suitable building regulations were imposed which were adapted 
to the needs of each zone. 


INVESTIGATIONS IN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES 


The Commission that framed the New York City charter amend- 
ment and the building zone resolution made a careful study of 
building regulations in European countries, sending investigators 
abroad for this purpose. It was hoped that the foreign experience 
would be of great aid in establishing similar regulations in this 
country, but these expectations were not fully realized. Building 
departments in European cities, without depending on any basic 
laws which laid down general rules, could insist on different designs 
of buildings for different districts. The result was that investi- 
gators expecting to find laws and maps controlling zoning in 
the cities visited found instead that the building departments, 
under general authority to make regulations, had made different 
regulations for different areas. Much of this zoning work was 
excellently done, after systematic and broad-gauge study. But 
it was soon discovered that the European precedents were not of 
material aid in this country, where courts could declare void the 
doings of state or municipal legislatures that imposed unreasonable 


1Final Report of Commission on Building Districts and Restrictions [New York 
City], June 2, 1916 


21 


ZONING 


regulations on private property. In other words, the doings of 
every state or local legislature in this country were subject to the 
protective safeguards of written constitutions, and the courts 
could declare what was constitutional and what was not. On this 
account it was necessary here to build up a statutory structure for 
zoning that would comply with the principles of the police power. 


EARLY INCOMPLETE ZONING 


It cannot be said that the first zoning in this country was in 
New York City. In many cities fire districts had been established, 
wooden buildings being permitted in some of these and prohibited 
in others. They were not usually created by reason of a state 
enabling act relating to fire districts, but they seem to have grown 
up as part of the implied legislative powers of a municipality.! Fire 
districts, however, were a true form of zoning because different 
districts were governed by different regulations. In California, 
without any state enabling act for zoning, districts were established 
in Los Angeles where certain buildings and uses were prohibited.? 
The state legislature of Massachusetts prescribed for Boston dif- 
ferent allowable heights for buildings fronting on certain streets. 


1 Fire districts were upheld before the days of zoning. The establishment of such 
districts for lessening the fire risk was deemed to be within the inherent 
powers of the municipality. 

Kaufman v. Stein, 138 Ind. 49, 37 N. E. 333, 46 Am. S. R. 368 
Monticello v. Bates, 169 Ky. 258, 183 S. W. 555 

Monroe v. Hoffman, 29 La. Ann. 651, 29 Am. R. 345 
Wadleigh v. Gilman, 12 Me. 403, 28 Am. D. 188 

Brady v. Northwestern Ins. Co., 11 Mich. 425 

Harris v. Poulton, 99 W. Va. 20, 127 S. E. 647 


These municipal powers, however other decisions hold, usually exist by reason of 
an express grant or necessarily implied statutory or constitutional delegation. 


Ex p. Lacey, 108 Cal. 326, 41 P. 411, 49 Am. S. R. 93 

Pratt v. Litchfield, 62 Conn. 112, 25 A. 461 

Beem v. Davis, 31 Ida. 730, 175 P. 959 

Klever Shampay Karpet Kleaners v. Chicago, 323 Ill. 368, 154 N. E. 131 

ne beset First Nat. Bank v. Sarlls, 129 Ind. 201, 28 N. E. 434, 28 Am. 
.R. 185 

Des Moines v. Gilchrist, 67 lowa 210, 25 N. W. 136, 56 Am. R. 341 

Goldstein v. Conner, 212 Mass. 57, 98 N. E. 701 

Eichenlaub v. St. Joseph, 113 Mo. 395, 21 S. W. 8, 8 L. R. A. 590 

Pye v. Peterson, 45 Tex. 312, 23 Am. R. 608 

Charleston v. Reed, 27 W. Va. 681, 55 Am. R. 336 


2 Ex parte Quong Wo, 161 Cal. 220, 118 P. 714 (1911) 
Hadacheck v. Sebastian, 165 Cal. 416, 132 P. 584, 239 U. S. 394, 36 S. Ct. 


143 (1915) 
22 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


A height of 125 feet was allowed on specified fairly-wide central 
streets and 80 feet on all other streets.!. This height regulation in 
Boston and the use regulation in Los Angeles were not called 
zoning, but they preceded the zoning of New York City. It may 
fairly be said, however, that the zoning enabling act embodied in 
the New York City charter and the building zone resolution of 
that city constituted the first comprehensive zoning of height, area, 
and use in this country. 


REASONS FOR ZONING IN NEw York CITY 


It will not be out of place at this time to trace the reasons that 
prompted New York City to investigate the possibilities of em- 
ploying the police power for the regulation of buildings and their 
uses in different parts of the city. Privately-owned elevated rail- 
roads and the original municipally-owned and privately-operated 
subway systems performed a highly useful function in distributing 
the population of the city. Nevertheless the conformation of 
Manhattan island tended to produce buildings of great height and 
to cause congestion of housing and street traffic. The continued 
growth of the city made necessary more bridges and tunnels over 
and under the East River and Hudson River in order that the city 
might assume the round form which is most economic for a great 
city. A round city affords the greatest area with the shortest 
distances to the center, whereas a long city affords the smallest 
area with the longest distances to the center. In order to bring 
about still greater distribution the so-called dual subway system 
was planned and its construction begun. Soon after the first con- 
struction contracts for this new system were let a demand arose 
that something should be done, if possible, to control the height of 
new buildings and the division of light and air at levels high above 
the streets. Experience had shown that subways tended to in- 
crease congestion. The most accessible spots were overbuilt. 
There was danger that the subways would greatly increase con- 
gestion at the same time that they afforded greater distribution in 
the outlying parts of the city. Some cities in this country had laws 
limiting the height of buildings, but there were no such laws in 
New York City. A building could legally rise to any height what- 
1 Welch v. Swasey, 193 Mass. 364, 79 N. E. 745, 214 U. S. 91, 29 S. Ct. 567 (1909) 

23 


ZONING 


ever, assume any form, be put to any use, and cover 100 percent 
of the lot from the ground to the sky. Tenement houses were the 
only structures that might not cover the whole lot. High office 
buildings not only covered their entire lots and had the same floor 
space in their top stories and their first stories, but cornices pro- 
jected into the street from eight to fourteen feet. Buildings of this 
sort in the southern part of Manhattan made dark canyons of 
narrow streets, but what was perhaps even more harmful they pro- 
duced chaotic building conditions. The first skyscraper to be 
erected in a block would cover the entire lot up to the roof and 
open its windows on neighboring lots. A high building so erected 
prevented other similar buildings from being constructed in its 
immediate vicinity. The reason for this was that the desired build- 
ing would have no light on the side toward the existing high build- 
ing. Moreover, if the first builder set his structure back from the 
lot line in order to have open space on which to front his windows, 
the builder on the next adjoining lot would front his windows on 
such open space. In other words, where the building on each lot 
could legally cover the entire space, the first builder obtained a 
virtual monopoly of the light and air. 

It became apparent that the remedy was not merely a limitation 
of height but also the setting back of the upper parts of high build- 
ings so that each owner would divide the light and air with his 
neighbor. 

These investigations, and the rules growing out of them, resulted 
in the pyramid buildings of Manhattan which have so completely 
altered the skyline of the lower and central parts of that borough. 
Perhaps it cannot be said that the tendency for buildings of great 
capacity near the best subway service has been materially checked, 
but the creation of canyon streets has been stopped and the supply 
of light and air to upper stories has been increased. 

The study of building height proved that prevention of chaotic 
conditions required much more than height regulations. The com- 
mission reported in favor of regulations of bulk and use in different 
districts of the city. Congestion may be lessened fully as much by 
regulations calling for yards and courts as by regulations of height. 
This field is usually called area or bulk. 

During the preparatory work in New York City some critics 


24 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


asserted that if zoning regulations were minimum standards of 
health and safety it was illogical to have different standards of 
height and area in different parts of the city. The argument pre- 
vailed, however, that greater density always has existed and prob- 
ably always will exist in the centers of a city where the need for 
speedy transaction of business causes people to be near together. 
Many workers desire to live near their work and avoid the expense 
of daily travel. On the other hand, suburban localities supply 
places for more roomy homes, where the supply of light and air is 
ample and space is not expensive. All these considerations of 
health and safety were held to justify making different standards 
of height and area at different distances from urban centers. 
Courts have never found any fault with this view. 

It also became evident that improper uses caused injury to 
homogeneous areas and were especially productive of premature 
depreciation of settled localities. One-family, detached-home dis- 
tricts, possessing trees and lawns, were invaded by apartment 
houses occupying nearly their entire lots. These in turn were 
damaged by the building of stores, garages, and factories. Local- 
ities of one-family detached homes and apartment houses were 
invaded by sporadic stores that sought to short-circuit the neigh- 
borhoods by utilizing eligible corners among the residences. Soon 
other stores were built on the opposite corners, and before long the 
nearby residences began to depreciate. Stores were built with win- 
dows on the property line, thus cutting off the continuation of front 
yards on the remainder of the street. 

Invasion of apartment houses by stores on their ground floors 
lessened the desirability of neighboring apartment houses because 
of the increase of noise, vehicles, fire hazard, litter, and street con- 
gestion. Business streets lined with retail stores were invaded by 
factories, garages, and junk shops. Localities devoted to light. 
industry, perhaps employing women and children, were invaded by 
heavy industries producing noise, smoke, and fumes. No land- 
owner in any part of the city could erect a building of any sort with 
assurance that in ten or twenty years the building would not be 
obsolete by reason of an unnecessary and undesirable change in 
the character of the neighborhood. Sometimes these changes left 
a blighted district behind. It became apparent that regulations 


25 


ZONING 


might be adopted that would tend to stabilize some localities for 
one-family, detached homes, others for apartment houses free 
from stores and factories, others for stores and offices, others for 
light industry, and others for heavy industry. Thus it came about 
that the new zoning clauses of the charter provided for the prepara- 
tion and adoption of regulations affecting height, area, and use of 
buildings, and the use of land. 


DIFFERENT REGULATIONS IN DIFFERENT DISTRICTS 


The novel feature of zoning as distinguished from building code 
regulations, tenement house laws, and factory laws was that suit- 
able regulations for different districts were established. We have 
become so accustomed to zoning regulations that it is difficult to 
understand how fixed the popular notion was that all land should 
be regulated in the same way throughout a municipality. On this 
account imposing different reguiations on different areas appeared 
to many to be discriminatory, arbitrary, and therefore an unlawful 
invasion of private rights. To counteract this impression it was 
considered important that the regulations within each district 
should be uniform for the same kind or class of buildings. A pro- 
vision to this effect was placed in the original zoning clauses of the 
charter of New York City, and there can be no doubt that courts 
which early passed upon these regulations were to a considerable 
extent persuaded to favor them on account of this requirement of 
uniformity. If it had been possible to make different regulations 
for the same sort of buildings in different parts of the same district, 
it is unlikely that zoning would have received the court approval 
that it now has. 


PoLicE POWER vs. EMINENT DOMAIN 


The preparatory work for the zoning of New York City covered 
the subject of zoning by eminent domain. As there had been no 
comprehensive zoning regulations in this country, it was not yet 
determined whether they could be established under the principles 
of the police power or whether the exercise of eminent domain 
would be necessary. Many eminent lawyers declared that zoning 
as proposed was a taking of property and not merely a reasonable 

26 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


regulation, and that inasmuch as private property could not be 
taken for a public use without payment, zoning under the police 
power would be declared unconstitutional. The New York City 
charter provisions proceeded, however, under the principles of the 
police power. No effective zoning plan could be accomplished by 
the exercise of eminent domain. If there were some diminution of 
the full use of property, the city would need to pay the loss to the 
private owner. This would mean a laborious and expensive pro- 
ceeding for almost every parcel of land. Since the city could not 
afford to pay this cost out of public funds, but would need to assess 
the awards on the property benefited, the cost of the process would 
be enormous. The restrictions would consist of public easements 
of a permanent nature. But as every living organism grows and 
changes, these easements would have to be changed from time to 
time by successive applications of condemnation. The method 
would be clumsy and ineffective. Some states in their zoning en- 
abling acts have tried to provide for the employment of eminent 
domain in whole or part,! but the attempts have never been suc- 
cessful. Regulation under the police power adapts itself easily to 
the growth and change of the municipality. If the regulation is 
so arbitrary that it amounts to a taking of property, the courts 
will pronounce it void. Efforts to frame enabling acts so that in 
such cases damages shall be awarded, have caused confusion.? 


THE DEVELOPMENT AND SPREAD OF STATE ENABLING ACTS 


The state legislature is the repository of the police power. The 
enabling act for zoning is the grant of this power to municipalities 
for regulating the height, area, and use of buildings, and the use of 
land. In the exercise of this grant the regulations must be reason- 
able and not arbitrary or discriminatory. They must have a sub- 
stantial relation to the health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, 
1 Kan.—City of Wichita v. Ware, District Court, 18th Judicial District, Division 

No. 2, July 10, 1922, 113 Kan. 153, 214 P. 99 (1923 
Minn.—Banner Grain Co. v. Houghton, 142 Minn. 28, 170 N. W. 853 (1919) 
Madsen v. Houghton, 182 Minn. 77, 233 N.W. 831 (1930) 
Mo.—Better Built Home & Mortgage Co. v. Davis, 302 Mo. 307, 259 S. W. 
80 (1924) 
Kansas City v. Liebi, 298 Mo. 569, 252 S. W. 404 (1923) 
Wis.—Carter v. Harper, 182 Wis. 148, 196 N. W. 451 (1923) 
? Pera v. Village of Shorewood, 176 Wis. 261, 186 N. W. 623 (1922) 


27 


ZONING 


and welfare of the community.!. Inasmuch as they have an inti- 
mate effect upon land they should be framed so far as possible with 
the knowledge and codperation of the landowners. The enabling 
act requires preparatory procedure to make sure that the system 
is worked out as a codrdinated whole. This involves the appoint- 
ment of a zoning commission to prepare the proposed ordinance 
and zoning map, the making of a preliminary report to the local 
legislative body, the holding of preliminary hearings thereon, and 
the holding of a public hearing by the legislative body. The 
ordinary state enabling act provides checks and precautions to 
prevent hasty and impulsive changes. It also provides for a board 
of appeals with authority to make variances by granting special 
permits in exceptional cases. 

In the years immediately after 1916, when the building zone 
resolution of New York City was established, several state legisla- 
tures passed enabling acts for zoning. During that period it was 
found that in addition to its regulation of height, area, and use 
zoning should be applied to another field—the density of popula- 
tion. Cities often desired to prevent multiple dwellings accom- 
modating more than a limited number of families per acre. The 
same method was sometimes expressed in another way—by requir- 
ing a certain number of square feet of lot for each family. Advo- 
cates of the earliest ordinances of this type attempted to justify 
them as a regulation of area. The difficulty was that there was 
nothing to control the crowding of a large number of families into 
a building that complied with all the area requirements, i.e., those 
of courts and yards. The courts pointed out that the regulation 
of density of population required an added grant of power from 
the state legislature to the municipality.2 The result was that the 
field of density of population was included in new enabling acts, 
and some of the old ones were amended. | 

About this time Herbert Hoover, then Secretary of Commerce, 


1U. S.—Village of Euclid (Ohio) v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. Ct. 114 
(1926) 
Nectow v. City of Cambridge (Mass.), 277 U. S. 183, 48 S. Ct. 447 (1928) 
N. Y.—Fox Meadow Estates, Inc. v. Culley, 233 App. Div. 250, 252 N. Y. S. 178, 
affd. 261 N. Y. 506, 185 N. E. 714 (1933) 
Moss v. Rubenstein, 117 Misc. 385, 191 N. Y. S. 496 (1921) 


? Barker v. Switzer, 209 App. Div. 151, 205 N. Y. S. 108 (1924) 
28 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


appointed an Advisory Committee on Zoning. The government 
printing office had expended a great deal of money for disseminat- 
ing information about good methods for agriculture, forestry, 
mining, and fisheries, but practically nothing had been done 
through the federal government to assist in bringing about eco- 
nomical building methods in cities. The new Committee, with a 
staff furnished by the Department of Commerce, investigated the 
possibilities of somewhat uniform methods of establishing zoning 
ordinances throughout the country. A standard form of state en- 
abling act for zoning was prepared and furnished to all legislatures 
and municipalities. This form was adopted in whole or part by 
many states and has been one of the causes for the spread of zoning 
throughout the states.! 

It has been found that a single state enabling act for zoning can 
apply to all the municipalities in a state—large cities as well as 
townships composed chiefly of farms. The comprehensive act 
of New Jersey is a good illustration of this statement. Some 
states, however, like New York and Pennsylvania, have separate 
enabling acts for different kinds of municipalities. Connecticut 
has many special enabling acts as well as a general act. Florida 
has no general act but many special acts. 


WHAT LAND CAN BE ZONED 


The usual enabling act does not state what land can be zoned. 
This omission is probably prudent because any statement would 
be misleading or incomplete. It has been said that zoning refers 
to privately-owned land. It is evident that this cannot be the case 
because sites for public buildings are always zoned. A more ac- 
curate statement is that only land available for buildings can be 
zoned. The first zoning map—that of New York City—placed 
height and area regulations on all land except streets, and the use 
map covered all land except streets and parks. Streets are omitted 
because they are not available for building. Street land is held by 
the municipality in trust for the people of the state for movement, 
and neither the municipality nor a private person has the right to 
1 Advisory Committee on Zoning, United States Department of Commerce, A 


Standard State Zoning Enabling Act Under Which Municipalities May 
Adopt Zoning Regulations, Revised Edition, 1926 


29 


ZONING 


place a building on it. The law itself restricts the type of buildings 
that can be erected in a public. park. They must be recreational 
or incidental to the administration or upkeep of the park. No 
grant of power in the zoning enabling act can increase or diminish 
these purposes. 

The zoning map of New York City shows many streets that are 
on the official map but not yet opened. In a sense these are not 
public streets and the area is therefore available for building. If, 
however, the owner applies for a permit for a building in the bed of 
a mapped street it will be refused unless the proposed building 
corresponds to those allowable on the adjacent land. 

Land under water may be used for building purposes and can 
therefore be zoned.!_ Even if its title is in the state or municipality 
the land can be zoned so far as the jurisdiction of the local legisla- 
tive body extends. A barge on which industry is carried on, 
anchored in navigable water off a residence district, can be pro- 
hibited if the land under water is in a residence district. Accord- 
ingly, many cities have zoned land under water, whether navigable 
or not and regardless of whether private land titles extend to the 
middle or to the edge of the stream. In Jamestown, N. Y., a per- 
mit for a store was issued where the land under water was in a 
business district and the stream under the proposed building was 
declared in early state grants to be navigable water. In Rochester, 
N. Y., the land under the Genesee River is zoned. Stores built on 
the bridge over this river are treated like those over solid land, so 
far as zoning is concerned. 

Railroad rights of way or railroad lands may be built upon and 
should be zoned for height, area, and use. The railroad company 
is likely to continue the railroad use, but there is nothing to prevent 
the sale of the land. A sale often occurs after a straightening of 
tracks or change of grade. If care has not been taken to zone this 
land, the purchaser may quickly erect a nonconforming building 
that will injure the neighborhood? 


1 Wynn v. Margate City, 9 N. J. Misc. 1324, 157 A. 565 (1931) 
2?N. Y.—Actlaw Realty Corp. v. Wilkus, Supreme Court, Queens County, New 
pee art Journal, June 17, 1926, affd. 220 App. Div. 720, 221 N. Y. S. 783 
1927 
Joleto Construction Corp. v. Walsh, 223 App. Div. 764, 228 N. Y. S. 282 (1928) 
Okl.—McCurley v. City of El Reno, 138 Okl. 92, 280 P. 467 (1929) 


30 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


PuBLic BUILDINGS 


Municipal and state officials usually comply with zoning require- 
ments as a matter of comity. It is often said that officials should 
be the first to comply with their own regulations. The question 
occasionally arises, however, whether the zoning regulations can 
prevent a public building which 1s deemed necessary by the de- 
partment having authority over a given field of public administra- 
tion. For instance, the town authorities may lay out residence 
districts on the map and exclude fire houses. The fire district 
authorities may insist that adequate fire protection demands a 
fire house in the residence district. The need of a public building 
in a certain location ought to be determined by the federal, state, 
or municipal authority, and its determination on the question of 
necessary or desirable location cannot be interfered with by a local 
zoning ordinance. However, this recognition of the public need 
would not extend to matters that are in no way necessary.! For 
instance, a fire house might be necessary in a particular residential 
locality but no reason based on necessity might exist to prevent 
compliance with regulations regarding height and yards. 


ENABLING ACTS PERMISSIVE ONLY 


No municipality is compelled by law to enter into zoning. The 
state enabling acts are permissive only. But if a municipality 
decides to zone it must follow the procedure given in the state act; 
otherwise its ordinance will be null and void. The scope of the 


1Cal.— Kubach Co. v. McGuire, 199 Cal. 215, 248 P. 676 (1926) 

Fla.—Helseth v. Du Bose, 99 Fla. 812, 128 S. 4 (1930) 

Kan.—Puhr v. Kansas City, 142 Kan. 704, 51 P. (2d) 911 (1935). A water tower 
in a residence district is lawful. 

Md.—Mayor and City Council of Baltimore v. Linthicum, 183 A. 531 (1936) 

N. Y.—Brocoris Realty Corp. v. Village of Scarsdale, 241 App. Div. 735, 269 
N. Y. S. 746 (1934) 

Yad : Larchmont v. Town of Mamaroneck, 239 N. Y. 551, 147 N. E. 191 
1924 

O’Brien v. Town of Greenburgh, Supreme Court, Westchester County, West- 
chester Law Journal, January 31, 1933, 239 App. Div. 555, 268 N. Y. S. 173, 
affd. 266 N. Y. 582, 195 N. E. 210 (1935). The court here distinguishes a 
garbage reduction plant built by the town in its corporate and not govern- 
mental capacity. 

People v. Siems, County Court, Nassau County, May 2, 1932. A fire district 
can locate and build a fire house in a residence district established by the 
town board. 

Ohio—City of Cincinnati v. Wegehoft, 119 Oh. St. 136, 162 N. E. 389 (1928) 


31 


ZONING 


ordinance cannot be greater than the subjects of zoning stated in 
the enabling act. These usually are height, area, use, and density 
of population.? 

Where the enabling act provides that the zoning regulations shall 
be established by resolution, it is dangerous to establish them by 
ordinance,” and vice versa. 


ZONING IMPOSES No ENCUMBRANCE 


A zoning regulation passed under the usual state enabling act 
does not impose an encumbrance on land.* If valid, it must be a 
reasonable police power regulation; if not valid, it cannot be en- 
forced. All owners hold their land subject to the police power 
regulations of the community, whether for health, fire protection, 
or structural safety. These regulations are not found in the official 
land records, but all persons are presumed to know the law. It 1s 
always a mistake to require zoning ordinances to be recorded in 
land record offices. They can be consulted at the office of the 
municipal clerk the same as other ordinances. 

Although a contract vendee of land cannot refuse to take title 
on the ground that unexpected zoning regulations are in force, 
a lessee need not go into possession under his lease if it would 
violate the zoning regulations and if the circumstances show that 


1 Chaotic conditions existing where there is no zoning or imperfect zoning are 
illustrated in these cases: 
Conn.— Town of Madison v. Kimberly, 118 Conn. 6, 169 A. 909 (1934) 
Minn.—Roerig v. City of Minneapolis, 136 Minn. 479, 162 N. W. 477 (1917) 
Tex.—Ikard v. City of Henrietta, 33 S. W. (2d) 578 (1930) 
City of San Antonio v. Robert Thompson & Co., 30 S. W. (2d) 339 (1930) 


2 City of Brookings v. Martinson, 61 S. D. 168, 246 N. W. 916 (1933) 


$ [l.—Binder v. Hejhal, 347 Il. 11, 178 N. E. go1 (1931) 
Kazwell v. Reynolds, 250 Ill. A. 174 (1928) 
Mass.—Siegemund v. Building Com’r of Boston, 259 Mass. 329, 156 N. E. 852 
(1927), 263 Mass. 212, 160 N. E. 795 (1928) 
N. Y.—Anderson v. Steinway & Sons, 178 App. Div. 507, 165 N. Y. S. 608, 
221 N: Y. 639,/117. No E. 575:(1917) 
Biggs v. Steinway & Sons, 229 N. Y. 320, 128 N. E. 211 (1920) 
Creighton v. Burns, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
October 9, 1925 
Davis v. Philbert, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
April 16, 1925 
Lincoln Trust Co. v. Williams Bldg. Corp., 229 N. Y. 313, 128 N. E. 209 (1920) 
_Moss v. Rubenstein, 117 Misc. 385, 191 N. Y. S. 496 (1921) 
Wis.— Kend v. Crestwood Realty Co., 210 Wis. 239, 246 N. W. 311 (1933) 


32 


STATE ENABLING ACTS FOR ZONING 


the lease is for the unlawful purpose. A tenant cannot recover 
damages for breach of covenant of quiet enjoyment where both 
landlord and tenant assumed that the tenant could operate a 
tailor shop in a residential district.? 


1N. Y.—Friedman Realty Co. v. De Stefan, 127 Misc. 608, 217 N. Y. S. 142, 220 
App. Div. 661, 222 N. Y. S. 371 (1927) 
Hartsin Construction Corp. v. Millhauser, 136 Misc. 646, 241 N. Y. S. 428 
(1930) 
Say-Phil Realty Corp. v. de Lignemare, 131 Misc. 827, 228 N. Y. S. 365 (1928) 
Shontz Co. v. Laffay, 225 App. Div. 263, 232 N. Y. S. 614 (1929) 
2N. Y.—Ober v. Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 157 Misc. 869, 284 
N. Y. S. 966 (1935) 
Ober v. Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 157 Misc. 872, 284 N. Y. S. 966 


(1935) 


BD 


CHARTERS 


THE ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING 
ORDINANCES 


THE ZONING COMMISSION 


HE state enabling act usually requires the appointment of 
a zoning commission before the original zoning ordinance 


can be established. This is a precautionary measure to 
make sure that the zoning shall not be adopted hurriedly or im- 
pulsively, but only after careful study and consultation with 
property owners. The number of members of the commission is not 
usually prescribed. It has been found that a zoning commission, 
by consulting with numerous property owners, can do much to 
allay opposition to a zoning plan and to insure popular confidence 
in it after its adoption. Nothing will produce greater hostility 
than an attempt at secrecy by the zoning commission. The prop- 
erty owner may be depended upon to know a great deal about his 
land and its probable future, and if he can be told about the pro- 
tective features of zoning, his advice to the commission is always 
well worth considering. In the preparation of the New York City 
building zone resolution and map the zoning commission held 
separate conferences with representatives of various groups, such 
as builders, fire insurance men, savings banks, real estate de- 
velopers, owners of high buildings, and factory owners. Sub- 
committees held conferences with interested property owners in 
the different boroughs of the city. One reason for the permanency 
and smooth operation of the New York City building zone resolu- 
tion is that it copied no other zoning ordinance but was built 
up during several years by property owners who were in constant 
touch with the districting commission, directly and through their 
organizations. When it finally passed there was no opposition. 
The commission should deliver to the local legislative body its 
preliminary report and draft of ordinance and map, and after hold- 


34 


ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES 


ing a public hearing on them it should deliver to the same body its 
final report and draft of ordinance and map. Upon the adoption 
of the ordinance the zoning commission under the usual enabling 
act goes out of existence. After this the planning commission, if 
there is one, is usually the adviser of the local legislative body re- 
garding amendments. It is a mistake to combine the two com- 
missions, as is sometimes done, under the title of ‘zoning and 
planning commission.”’ ‘There is no objection, however, to the 
appointment of the same persons on each commission, unless there 
is a statutory provision to the contrary. Zoning is a part of the 
city plan, and as planning commissions become more numerous 
they will undoubtedly be substituted for the present temporary 
zoning commissions. But changes of the law in this respect, when 
deemed necessary, must be made in the state enabling act for 
zoning rather than by the municipality. In most states at present 
the zoning commission exists only to do the preparatory work on 
the original zoning ordinance. The planning commission is a con- 
tinuing body. Consequently so long as the statute requires a 
zoning commission the two bodies cannot be safely coalesced. 
There should be two separate bodies, even if the individuals are the 
same on each, and separate minutes should be kept. 

Sometimes local legislative bodies consider that the zoning com- 
mission should be made up entirely of their own members or sub- 
ordinates subject to their direction. This is a mistake; not be- 
cause it is unlawful but because a broader basis for the final ordi- 
nance is obtained by securing the outlook of private citizens in the 
first instance. The local legislators and their official advisers will 
have the final approval of the plan and all of its details. Thus the 
best judgment of well-informed men outside of official circles is 
obtained first, and later the criticism and constructive additions 
of officials. Then, too, the arrangement of the original boundary 
lines between districts is often a difficult matter and arouses 
emphatic differences of opinion among property owners. It 1s wise 
for members of the local legislative body to have no part in making 
the tentative determination of these boundaries. They cannot 
then be considered prejudiced listeners when they sit as legislators 
at the subsequent public hearing at which the facts and argu- 
ments on both sides are presented, for the zoning commission com- 


35 


ZONING 


posed largely or entirely of persons holding no other office will have 
constructed and submitted the plan. 

The zoning commission is not needed for amendments made 
after the original zoning is adopted. The local legislative body 
may originate a proposed change, or petitions may be received 
from interested property owners.1 Advertising and holding a hear- 
ing are necessary regardless of the origin of the proceeding. In 
case of amendments, reports are usually had from the planning 
commission or the city engineer. 


ADVERTISEMENT AND HEARINGS 


Observation of the precautions and safeguards provided in the 
enabling act for the original adoption of the zoning ordinance and 
for its amendment is considered by the courts to be vital. Omission 
of the zoning commission, or its preliminary report, or its hearing 
thereon, or its final report, or the advertising of a public hearing 
before the local legislative body, or the holding of such hearing 
will invalidate the ordinance.?, Statutory requirements must be 


1 Marculescu v. City Planning Commission of San Francisco, 7 Cal. A. (2d) 371, 
46 P. (2d) 308 (1935) 
? Cal.—Berrata v. Sales, 82 Cal. A. 324, 255 P. 538 (1927) 

Dwyer v. City Council of Berkeley, 200 Cal. 505, 253 P. 932 (1927) 

Hurst v. City of Burlingame, 207 Cal. 134, 277 P. 308 (1929): ‘‘While the 
detriment flowing from a validly enacted zoning measure would be damnum 
absque injuria, the requirement of notice and hearing provided by the 
statute may not be treated lightly or at all disregarded. When the statute 
requires notice and hearing as to the possible effect of a zoning law upon 
property rights the action of the legislative body becomes quasi judicial in 
character, and the statutory notice and hearing then becomes necessary in 
order to satisfy the requirements of due process and may not be dispensed 
with.” 

Schofield v. City of Los Angeles, 120 Cal. A. 240, 7 P. (2d) 1076 (1932) 

D. C.—Larrabee v. Bell, 56 App. D. C. 121, 10 F. (2d) 986 (1926) 

Ga.—Jennings v. Suggs, 180 Ga. 141, 178 S. E. 282 (1935): ‘‘May’” publish 
notice of hearing before making amendment construed to mean “must.” 
Amendment declared invalid. 

Ill.—Cain v. Lyddon, 343 Ill. 217, 175 N. E. 391 (1931) 

Kan.—Armourdale State Bank v. Kansas City, 131 Kan. 419, 292 P. 745 (1930) 

Ford v. City of Hutchinson, 140 Kan. 307, 37 P. (2d) 39 (1934) 

Simmonds v. Meyn, 134 Kan. 419, 7 P. (2d) 506 (1932) 

La.—Holcombe v. City of Lake Charles, 175 La. 803, 144 S. 502 (1932) 
Mass.—Roman Catholic Archbishop v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 268 Mass. 
416, 1607 N. E. 672 (1929) 
N. eee Lumber Co. v. Schweitzer, 7 N. J. Misc. 1016, 147 A. 741 
1929 
Hendey v. Ackerman, 103 N. J. L. 305, 136 A. 733 (1927) 
Footnote continued on page 37. 
36 


ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES 


strictly complied with or else the ordinance will be void. Where 
the state legislature has required these precautions to prevent 
hasty and injurious interference with private property, they be- 
come absolutely necessary, and each owner must be given an 
opportunity to be heard in the manner provided by the law. 

The amendment of the map is an amendment of the ordinance 
because the map is always made a part of the ordinance.? It often 
happens that at the statutory hearing the local legislative body is 
convinced that a different sort of map change should be made from 
the one advertised. Then the question arises whether there must 
be a new advertisement and new hearing, or whether the desired 
change can be made then and there. The best practice is to have 
a new advertisement and a new hearing if the desired change is 
more restrictive than the present requirement. If it is less restric- 
tive the change can be made then and there without danger that 
an absent property owner, or property owners who have not been 
notified, can claim that they have been deprived of their rights 
without due process of law. 

The New York City building zone resolution, not the city charter, 
provides that if the owners of 50 percent of the land sought to be 
changed on the zoning map petition the Board of Estimate in 
writing that Board must advertise and hold a hearing. Conse- 
quently the Board can waive this provision of its own making at 
any time, if it prefers to do so. It has also been pointed out that 
the requirement of a 50 percent petition is nothing more than the 
suggestion of a method by which property owners may bring a 


Footnote continued from page 36. 


N. Y.—Buffalo Cremation Co. v. March, 222 App. Div. 447, 226 N. Y. S. 477, 
affd. 249 N. Y. 531, 164 N. E. 572 (1928) 
Village of Mill Neck v. Nolan, 259 N. Y. 596, 182 N. E. 196 (1932) 
Prescott v. Pierce, 130 Misc. 63, 223 N. Y. S. 609 (1927) 
Retoske v. Boettger, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law 
Journal, August 2, 1935 
Schierloh v. Wood, 230 App. Div. 788, 244 N. Y. S. 651 (1930) 
S. D.—City of Brookings v. Martinson, 61 S. D. 168, 246 N. W. 916 (1933) 
Tenn.—Lightman v. City of Nashville, 166 Tenn. 191, 60 S. W. (2d) 161 (1933) 
Tex.—Peters v. Gough, 86 S. W. (2d) 515 (1935) 
Va.—Standard Oil Co. v. City of Charlottesville, 42 F. (2d) 88 (1930) 


1 Quorum— Kane v. Board of Appeals of Medford, 273 Mass. 97, 173 N. E. 1 (1930) 
Both sides to be heard—Jones v. Lewis, 7 Pa. Dist. & Co. 785 (1926) 


*Conn.— Katz v. Higson, 113 Conn. 776, 155 A. 507 (1931) 
Mass.—Town of West Springfield v. Mayo, 265 Mass. 41, 163 N. E. 653 (1928) 


37 


ZONING 


proposed change of the map before the Board of Estimate, and 
has no relation to the power of the Board of Estimate to make 
the change.! 

In connection with the adoption and amendment of zoning 
ordinances and maps questions of quorum, unanimity, and number 
of votes have arisen.” 


TWENTY PERCENT PROTEST 


Most state enabling acts provide for what is usually called a 
20 percent protest. Sometimes but not often a different figure has 
been used. It is a device for the protection of the property owner. 
After the local legislative body advertises a public hearing on a 
proposed change, usually a change of the map, the landowners 
most affected may file a written protest duly acknowledged. If 
this protest is signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the 
land most affected, the change can be made only with a greater 
vote than a majority. In New York City, where this device was 
first applied, the unanimous vote of the Board of Estimate and 
Apportionment is necessary to make a change, if a 20 percent pro- 
test has been filed. Where councils are large, a vote of two-thirds 
or three-fourths is usually required. The purpose is to prevent 
easy or careless changes in the zoning regulations. For instance, 
if an owner in compliance with the ordinance has erected a six- 
story building, it is a serious matter for him to have the map 
changed so that his building is placed in a twelve-story district 
where it may be surrounded by new buildings twice as high as his 
own. The 20 percent protest will often prevent impulsive or im- 
proper map changes. The courts have upheld this requirement.’ 


1 Lieberman v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, July 31, 1924 
? Ky.—Gumm v. City of Lexington, 247 Ky. 139, 56 S. W. (2d) 703 119332, 
Md. Pane roth Co. v. Frank Novak Realty Co., 167 M 85, 172 
Qtt (1934 
N. J.—Freint v. Borough of Dumont, 108 N. J. L. 245, 157 A. 382 (1931) 
N. Y.—Sterpost, Inc. v. Gennerich, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New 
York Law Journal, July 7, 1934 
BIN Spy bat St. & Park Ave., Inc. v. Walker, 133 Misc. 907, 234 N. Y. S. 708 
1929 
Melita v. Nolan, 126 Misc. 345, 213 N. Y. S. 674 (1926) 
Footnote continued on page 39. 
38 


ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES 


The enabling act always prescribes who the owners are who may 
protest. One group is composed of the owners of the land whose 
zoning it is sought to change. Other groups are the owners of land 
across the street and the owners of contiguous land at the side or in 
the rear. These constitute three separate groups, from any one of 
which there may be a protest of the specified percent. The 20 
percent applicable to one group has no relation to any other group 
or any measurement in any other group. In the case of the usual 
proposed change, applied to less than a block, there may be three 
valid protests, each entirely independent of the others. Where 
several entire blocks are affected there can, of course, be only two 
possible protests, because there is no contiguous private land. 

Some enabling acts have defined the three groups in an obscure 
manner. This statement is still true of the zoning regulations of 
the General City Law of New York. Instead of providing that 
the protestants shall be the owners of the area defined it is specified 
that they shall be the owners of the frontage defined. Much 
trouble has followed this mistake. The frontage method of state- 
ment should be changed to the area method in every zoning 
enabling act. 


NoTICE TO OWNERS 


Enabling acts require notice to owners so that they may attend 
public hearings or file a 20 percent protest.?, This notice must be 
advertised. The period of advertising before the public hearing 
must be strictly complied with or else the ordinance or amendment 


Footnote continued from page 38. 
aatlen aed Corp. v. Rayon Holding Corp., 254 N. Y. 268, 172 N. E. 494 
1930 
Nichols v. O’Brien, 149 Misc. 280, 267 N. Y. S. 7 (1933) 
Palmer v. Mann, 206 App. Div. 484, 201 N. Y. S. 525, afid. 237 N. Y. 616, 
143 N. E. 765 (1924) 
Smidt v. McKee, 262 N. Y. 373, 186 N. E. 869 (1933) 
Okl.— Russell v. Murphy, 58 P. (2d) 560 (1936) 
R. I.—Rhode Island Episcopal Convention v. Providence City Council, 52 
R. I. 182, 159 A. 647 (1932) 
Wis.—Holzbauer v. Ritter, 184 Wis. 35, 198 N. W. 852 (1924) 
1N. Y.—Nichols v. O’Brien (1933) ante 
Smidt v. McKee (1933) ante 
2N. Y.—Estabrook v. Chamberlain, 240 App. Div. 899, 1006, 267 N. Y. S. 425 
268 N. Y. S. 1015 (1933) 
In re Cobb, 128 Misc. 67, 217 N. Y. S. 593 (1926) 


39 


ZONING 


will be void. Sometimes posting of the notice is required by the 
enabling act.2, This is the surest method of notification because ad- 
vertisements seem never to reach all the property owners affected. 
Then complaint is made that the ordinance or map was changed 
without their being given an opportunity to be heard or to protest. 
The printed notice need not contain a portion of the map or 
the text of the amendment. It is sufficient if the proposed action © 
and the location are clearly stated in general terms. The full 
amendment, consisting of text or map or both, should be on public 
inspection in the clerk’s office, and it is well to refer to this fact 
in the advertisement. It is a mistake to draw the enabling act so 
that every neighboring property owner must receive a copy of the 
notice. Such a requirement will tie up the procedure. Sometimes 
owners are permanently out of the country. Sometimes they are 
infants or incompetents. If every owner must be served with 
notice the municipality would need to examine the title to every 
neighboring parcel of land to find the present owner of a given 
property. Even when posting is followed there will always be some 
neighbor who will claim that he had no notice, but this cannot be 
helped. Some enabling acts have required personal service of the 


1 Friedlander v. 465 Lexington Avenue, Inc., Supreme Court, Westchester County, 
Mt. Ba Argus, January 6, 1927, 222 App. Div. 689, 224 N. Y. S. 800 
(1927 

2 Pressel v. Ferris, 148 Misc. g10, 266 N. Y. S. 517 (1933) 

3 Mass.— Kane v. Board of Appeals of Medford, 273 Mass. 97, 173 N. E. 1 (1930) 

N. cers v. Board of Adjustment of Orange, 6 N. J. Misc. 595, 142 A. 367 
1928 
N. Y.—Kirkpatrick v. Zoning Board of Appeals, Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, White Plains Reporter, March 16, 1925 
Ottinger v. Arenal Realty Co., 257 N. Y. 371, 178 N. E. 665 (1931) 

*The Board of Estimate and Apportionment of New York City passed a rule 
regarding posting. This is in addition to the requirement of advertising 
contained in the charter. The rule is as follows: 

“33-B. No petition for a change in the Building Zone Map shall be accorded 
favorable action by the Board of Estimate and Apportionment unless the 
petitioner submits a list containing the names and addresses of all owners 
of property within the area affected, and opposite and adjacent thereto, 
together with evidence in the form of return postal cards indicating that a 
registered notification (in a form to be provided by the Board of Estimate 
and Apportionment) has been sent out to all such owners of the intent to 
apply for the proposed amendment or that such application is pending 
before the Board of Estimate and Apportionment, and also affidavits to 
show that within a period of one month prior to the date of filing the petition 
with the Secretary of the Board of Estimate and Apportionment at least 
Footnote continued on page 41. 


40 


ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES 


notice of hearing on landowners affected or within a certain dis- 
tance. It is better to require advertising, and by a local rule to 
require the applicant as far as possible to give written notice of 
hearing to those affected.! 

It is sometimes provided, either in the zoning enabling act or a 
general law, that an ordinance will take effect a certain number of 
days after it is posted or printed in a newspaper published in the 
community. As an alternative it is usually provided that personal 
service may be made on a property owner, and in that case the 
ordinance goes into effect as to him at once. The map being part 
of the ordinance must be printed or posted, or served on the prop- 
erty owner. 

The enabling act should not require the filing of an ordinance or 
amendment in the county register’s office. The regulations do not 
affect real estate titles. They are like plumbing or fire resistance 
regulations. If, however, the state enabling act requires filing, the 
regulations are without effect unless filed.* 


Footnote continued from page 40. 
three identical posters, not less than 814 inches by 11 inches in size, describ- 
ing the change, have been conspicuously exhibited and maintained for at 
least one week, at intervals of not more than 200 feet along the entire line 
of the frontages proposed to be changed, as well as along the streets im- 
mediately in the rear thereof and less than 300 feet therefrom, such poster 
to contain a statement to the effect that all persons interested in the pro- 
posed change will be notified not less than 10 days in advance of the date 
fixed by the Board of Estimate and Apportionment for a public hearing in 
the matter provided that they register their names and addresses with the 
Secretary of the Board; and copies of the posters shall be furnished to the 
Secretary with the petition. Whenever any change is recommended in 
writing by a member of the Board or by its Chief Engineer, the amendment 
may be considered without complying with the provisions of this rule, but 
in such cases the Borough Presidents are requested to take any steps ‘they 
may deem necessary to give adequate notice to the owners of the property 
affected not less than 10 days in advance of the date fixed by the Board of 
Estimate and Apportionment for a public hearing in the matter.” 
1 Kane v. Board of Appeals of Medford, 273 Mass. 97, 173 N. E. 1 (1930) 
2 City i as Falls v. Standard Oil Company, 127 Misc. 104, 215 N. Y. S. 354 
192 
8 Mass.—Town of West Springfield v. Mayo, 265 Mass. 41, 163 N. E. 653 (1928) 
N. Y.—Friedlander v. 465 Lexington Avenue, Inc., Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, Mt. Vernon Argus, January 6, 1927, 222 App. Div. 689, 224 N. Y. S. 
800 (1927) 
eC Ba Falls v. Standard Oil Company, 127 Misc. 104, 215 N. Y. S. 354 
192 
oes v. William Penn Memorial Corporation, 311 Pa. 263, 166 A. 761 
1933 
‘City of Benton v. Phillips, 191 Ark. 961, 88 S. W. (2d) 828 (1935) 


41 


ZONING 


It is bad practice to pass a supplemental zoning ordinance and 
then insert a provision in the original one that reference should be 
made to the supplement.!' This erroneous legislative procedure 
always makes confusion. The state enabling act properly requires 
certain precautions and safeguards in the framing and enactment 
of the zoning ordinance. No municipality should have more than 
one such ordinance. If it has more than one, it will be likely to 
omit the statutory precautions and safeguards in the supplemental 
act, and confusion and misunderstanding are sure to result. 


CONSENTS AND PROTESTS OF LANDOWNERS 


It has been found advantageous, both in enabling acts and ordi- 
nances, to utilize written consents and protests of surrounding 
landowners before certain steps are taken by the local legislature 
or board of appeals. Sometimes provision is made for petitions, 
protests, and consents merely to bring additional information to 
these bodies. For instance, the New York City resolution provides 
that the Board of Estimate and Apportionment must hold a hear- 
ing if owners of 50 percent of the land to which a proposed change 
is applied file a petition for such change. The Board of Estimate 
and Apportionment may nevertheless initiate a change of the reso- 
lution or map on its own motion. It should be noticed that this 
check is not imposed in the charter, and therefore the Board of 
Estimate and Apportionment can waive or alter it.2_ The 20 per- 
cent protest will prevent a change except by the unanimous vote 
of the Board of Estimate and Apportionment. The 80 percent 
consent clothes the Board of Standards and Appeals with power to 
grant or refuse a nonconforming garage permit after a public 
hearing. The fact that consents or protests are thus provided for 
has tempted some framers of ordinances to provide that permits 
shall be issued if certain surrounding property owners consent. 
This method is almost always held invalid by courts. It is de- 
clared that permits can only be issued according to law, and that 
consenting landowners cannot make the law. 

In the Cusack case it was held that where a valid police power 
1 Sheets v. Armstrong, 307 Pa. 385, 161 A. 359 (1932) 


* Lieberman v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, July 31, 1924 


42 


ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES 


regulation prohibited a billboard, it would be lawful for the local 
legislature to provide that certain consents of surrounding land- 
owners should sanction a permit. On the other hand, in the 
Eubank case it was held that an ordinance could not place the 
power of allowing the omission of a front yard in the hands of sur- 
rounding landowners affected.2, Without recognizing the distinc- 
tion between these two cases, municipalities have sometimes pro- 
vided in zoning ordinances that a consent signed by surrounding 
landowners should be the basis for the issue of a permit by the 
building inspector. Experience has shown that the safest way is 
never to provide in an ordinance that the consents of landowners 
sanction the issue of a permit. A good principle to follow is that 
government and not private individuals can legalize a discretionary 
permit or the withholding of it. It has been found that the intro- 
duction of discretion by the board of appeals into the zoning 
ordinance is much more satisfactory than an effort to follow the 


1 Cusack Co. v. City of Chicago (IIl.), 242 U. S. 526, 37 S. Ct. 190 (1917) 
2 Eubank v. City of Richmond (Va.), 226 U. S. 137, 33 S. Ct. 76 (1912) 


8 Ala.—Gillette v. Tyson, 219 Ala. 511, 122 S. 830 (1929) 
Longshore v. City of Montgomery, 22 Ala. A. 620, 119 S. 599 (1928) 
Standard Oil Co. v. City Commissioners, Circuit Court, Montgomery Journal, 
January 9, 1925 
Colo.— Menzel v. Niles Co., 86 Colo. 320, 281 P. 364 (1929) 
D. C.—Hazard v. Blessing, 55 App. D. C. 114, 2 F. (2d) 916 (1924) 
Schwartz v. Brownlow, 50 App. D. C. 279, 270 F. 1019 (1921) 
Wright v. Wardman, 55 App. D. C. 318, 5 F. (2d) 380 (1925) 
Ill.—Deitenbeck v. Village of Oak Park, 331 Ill. 406, 163 N. E. 445 (1928) 
Koos v. Saunders, 349 Ill. 442, 182 N. E. 415 (1932) 
Spies v. Board of Appeals, 337 III. 507, 169 N. E. 220 (1929) 
lowa—City of Des Moines v. Manhattan Oil Co., 193 Iowa 1096, 184 N. W. 823 
(1921), 188 N. W. 921 (1922) 
Downey v. Sioux City, 208 lowa 1273, 227 N. W. 125 (1929) 
Marquis v. City of Waterloo, 210 lowa 439, 228 N. W. 870 (1930) 
Ky.—McCown v. Gose, 244 Ky. 402, 51 S. W. (2d) 251 (1932) 
Mass.—Bennett v. Board of Appeal of Cambridge, 268 Mass. 419, 167 N. E. 
659 (1929) 
Building Inspector of Lowell v. Stoklosa, 250 Mass. 52, 145 N. E. 262 (1924) 
Minn.—Eha v. Bundlie, District Court, Second Judicial District, Ramsey 
County, St. Paul, July 23, 1931 
N. Y.—Ballard v. Roth, 141 Misc. 319, 253 N. Y. S. 6 (1931) 
Coley v. Campbell, 126 Misc. 869, 215 N. Y. S. 679 (1926) 
City of Glens Falls v. Standard Oil Company, 127 Misc. 104, 215 N. Y. S. 
354 (1926) 
In re Russell, 158 N. Y. S. 162 (1916) 
City of Utica v. Hanna, 202 App. Div. 610, 195 N. Y. S. 225 (1922) 
Ohio—Standard Oil Co. v. Combs, 129 Oh. St. 251, 194 N. E. 875 (1935) 
Pa.—Perrin’s Appeal, 305 Pa. 42, 156 A. 305 (1931) 


43 


ZONING 


Cusack case. For instance, it is unsafe to provide that a gasoline 
station shall be permitted in a residence district if the owners of 
80 percent of the frontage within 200 feet of the site consent in 
writing. It is a greater protection to the neighborhood to provide 
that if the owners of such 80 percent consent in writing the board 
of appeals can permit the station. Then the board will give a 
hearing, consider all sides, and grant or refuse the application. The 
vitalizing act will thus uniformly be the determination of the local 
legislative body or the board of appeals.! 

aU AA as Title Trust Co. v. Roberge, 278 U. S. 116, 49 S. Ct. 50 (Wash., 

192 


Va.—Martin v. City of Danville, 148 Va. 247, 138 S. E. 629 (1927) 
Wis.— Wasilewski v. Biedrzycki, 180 Wis. 633, 192 N. W. 989 (1923) 


See also cases cited under Board of Appeals, p. 126, and under Garages, p. 205 


44 


Cra Pr Re Ly. 
ZONING DISTRICTS 


BASES OF DIFFERENTIATION 


ONING is the regulation by districts under the police power 
of the height, bulk, and use of buildings, the use of land, 
and the density of population. Most state enabling acts 

for zoning require that the regulations shall be uniform for buildings 
of the same class throughout the district. Fire limits were in use 
for many years before comprehensive zoning was known. They 
were usually placed in building codes, but they constituted a fire 
resistance zoning plan and court opinions regarding them are 
applicable to zoning regulations. Although fire risk is one of the 
elements of safety, and therefore is proper to be considered in mak- 
ing zoning regulations, it has been discussed by courts in various 
collateral relations.! 

The demand for zoning regulations as we now understand them 
began later in the large cities of this country because of growing 
congestion, impairment of access of air, light, and sunlight, and 
invasions by improper uses. In the early days of zoning many 
objectors contended that it violated the constitutional rights of 
private property, that the application of zoning to the land 
amounted to a taking of property and was not merely a reasonable 
regulation, and that the purposes desired could only be accom- 
plished by eminent domain.? But courts early pointed out that if 
1N. J.—Contras v. Mayor and Aldermen of Jersey City, 4 N. J. Misc. 680, 134 A. 

122, 5 N. J. Misc. 59, 135 A. 472 (1926) 

Manning v. Hague, 3 N. J. Misc. 329, 128 A. 375 (1925) 
Rohrs v. Zabriskie, 102 N. J. L. 473, 133 A. 65 (1926) 
N. Y.—Allerad Realty Corp. v. Fire Com’r of New York, 138 Misc. 232, 244 

N. Y. S. 531 (1930) 

See also cases cited in note 1, p. 22 
2Kan.—City of Wichita v. Ware, District Court, 18th Judicial District, Division 

No. 2, July 10, 1922, 113 Kan. 153, 214 P. 99 (1923)—an excellent example 

of an early case in the Midwest denoting recognition of enlargement of 

application of police power 


Minn.— Madsen v. Houghton, 182 Minn. 77, 233 N. W. 831 (1930) 
Be iss 5. Built Home & Mortgage Co. v. Davis, 302 Mo. 307, 259 S. W. 80 
(1924 
Kansas City v. Liebi, 298 Mo. 569, 252 S. W. 404 (1923) 


45 


ZONING 


the regulations were reasonable, and substantially related to the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the community, they should 
be upheld.! Height and area regulations brought little or no criti- 
cism from the courts.2 It was not so, however, with the regulation 
of use.2 Opposition was intense, especially in states along the 


+U; Seal of Euclid (Ohio) v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. Ct. 114 
(1926 
Dee REG and Council of Wilmington v. Turk, 14 Del. Ch. 392, 129 A. 512 
192 
ied: v. City of Wichita, 113 Kan. 153, 214 P. 99 (1923) 
West v. City of Wichita, 118 Kan. 265, 234 P. 978 (1925) 
N. Sees Trust Co. v. Williams Bldg. Corp., 229 N. Y. 313, 128 N. E. 209 
(1920 
City of Utica v. Hanna, 202 App. Div. 610, 195 N. Y. S. 225 (1922) 
2U. S.—Gorieb v. Fox, 274 U. S. 603, 47 S. Ct. 675 (Va., 1927) 
Conn.—Town of Windsor v. Whitney, 95 Conn. 357, 111 A. 354 (1920) 
La.—Sampere v. City of New Orleans, 166 La. 776, 117 S. 827 (1928) 
Md.—R. B. Const. Co. v. Jackson, 152 Md. 671, 137 A. 278 (1927) 
Etat v. Building Inspector of Wellesley, 262 Mass. 404, 160 N. E. 285 
1928 
Minn.—Beery v. Houghton, 164 Minn. 146, 204 N. W. 560, 273 U. S. 671, 47 S. 
Ct. 474 (1926) 
Seas Nr aaa Presbyterian Church v. Edgecomb, 108 Neb. 859, 189 N. W. 
17 (1922) 
N. Y.—465 Lexington Ave. Inc. v. Burden, Supreme Court, Westchester County, 
June 9, 1925 
Gordon v. Board of Appeals, 131 Misc. 346, 225 N. Y. S. 680 (1927) 
Kelmenson v. Mann, 207 App. Div. 494, 202 N. Y. S. 358, affd. 237 N. Y. 615, 
143 N. E. 765 (1924) 
Village of North Pelham v. Ohliger, 216 App. Div. 728, 214 N. Y. S. 253, affd. 
245 N. Y. 593, 157 N. E. 871 (1927) 
Wulfsohn v. Burden, 241 N. Y. 288, 150 N. E. 120 (1925) 
N. D.—City of Bismarck v. Hughes, 53 N. D. 838, 208 N. W. 711 (1926) 
Ohio—Harris v. Ball, 23 Oh. A. 33, 155 N. E. 166 (1926) 
aera v. City of Akron, Court of Common Pleas, Summit County, January 
1927 
Pritz v. Messer, 112 Oh. St. 628, 149 N. E. 30 (1925) 
Weiss v. Guion, 17 F. (2d) 202 (1926) 
Pa.—Junge’s Appeal, 89 Pa. Super. 543, 548 (1927) 
Wis.—Atkinson v. Piper, 181 Wis. 519, 195 N. W. 544 (1923) 
Bouchard v. Zetley, 196 Wis. 635, 220 N. W. 209 (1928) 
Hayes v. Hoffman, 192 Wis. 63, 211 N. W. 271 (1926) 
Piper v. Ekern, 180 Wis. 586, 194 N. W. 159 (1923) 


’ Ga.—City of Atlanta v. Smith, 165 Ga. 146, 140 S. E. 369 (1927) 

Morrow v. City of Atlanta, 162 Ga. 228, 133 S. E. 345 (1926) 
Smith v. City of Atlanta, 161 Ga. 769, 132 S. E. 66 (1926) 

Ill.—City of Aurora v. Burns, Supreme Court, Springfield, February 17, 1925, 

319 Ill. 84, 149 N. E. 784 (1925) 
Md.—Goldman y. Crowther, 147 Md. 282, 128 A. 50 (1925) 
Nr a Inspector of Lowell v. Stoklosa, 250 Mass. 52, 145 N. E. 262 
1924 


Footnote continued on page 47. 


46 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


Atlantic coast, from New Jersey to Texas. Gradually courts in all 
the states pronounced use-zoning regulations lawful if reasonable.! 
The decision of the United States Supreme Court in the Euclid 
case had much to do with this change of attitude.?, During the 
rapid spread of zoning even villages and towns began to avail 
themselves of its protective features. 

The early arguments for zoning were all related to the needs of 


Fooinote continued from page 46. 
Minn.—Lachtman v. Houghton, 134 Minn. 226, 158 N. W. 1017 (1916) 
Twin City Bldg. & Inv. Co. v. Houghton, 144 Minn. 1, 174 N. W. 885, 176 
N. W. 159 (1920) 
Vorlander v. Hokenson, 145 Minn. 484, 175 N. W. 995 (1920) 
Miss.—Fitzhugh v. City of Jackson, 132 Miss. 585, 97 S. 190 (1923) 
N. J.—Ignaciunas v. Town of Nutley, 99 N. J. L. 389, 125 A. 121 (1924) 
Tex.—City of Dallas v. Burns, 250 S. W. 717 (1923) 
Spann v. City of Dallas, 111 Tex. 350, 235 S. W. 513 (1921) 


1Cal.—Smith v. Collison, 119 Cal. A. 180, 6 P. (2d) 277 (1931) 
Zahn v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 497, 234 P. 388, 274 
U. S. 325, 47 S. Ct. 594 (1927) 
Colo.—Colby v. Board of Adjustment, 81 Colo. 344, 255 P. 443 (1927) 
D. C.— nae v. Oehmann, Washington Law Reporter, Vol. 53, No. 28, p. 437 
1925 
Ga.—Howden v. Mayor & Aldermen of Savannah, 172 Ga. 833, 159 S. E. 4o1 


(1931) 
Ill.—City of Aurora v. Burns, 319 III. 84, 149 N. E. 784 (1925) 
Deynzer v. City of Evanston, 319 III. 226, 149 N. E. 790 (1925) 
Kan.—Ware v. City of Wichita, 113 Kan. 153, 214 P. 99 (1923) 
La.—Boland v. Compagno, 154 La. 469, 97 S. 661 (1923) 
Civello v. City of New Orleans, 154 La. 271, 97 S. 440 (1923) 
Palma v. City of New Orleans, 161 La. 1103, 109 S. 916 (1926) 
Roberts v. City of New Orleans, 162 La. 202, 110 S. 201 (1926) 
Mass. athe Inspector of Lowell v. Stoklosa, 250 Mass. 52, 145 N. E. 262 
1924 
Spector v. Building Inspector of Milton, 250 Mass. 63, 145 N. E. 265 (1924) 
Ohio—Cahn v. Guion, 27 Oh. A. 141, 160 N. E. 868 (1927) 
Clifton-Highland Co. v. City of Lakewood, 41 Oh. A. 9, 179 N. E. 198, 124 
Oh. St. 399, 178 N. E. 837 (1931) 
Ottawa Hills Co. v. Village of Ottawa Hills, 41 Oh. A. 276, 180 N. E. 903 (1931) 
Santangelo v. City of Cincinnati, 25 Ohio N. P. (N. S.) 49 (1924) 
Ore.— Kroner v. City of Portland, 116 Ore. 141, 240 P. 536 (1925) 


2 Village of Euclid (Ohio) v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. Ct. 114 (1926); 
The Law of Zoning, by James Metzenbaum (Baker, Voorhis & Company, 
New York), 1930, p. 454. The Euclid Village decision of the United States 
Supreme Court did more to establish zoning in this country than any other 
case. Up to this time the courts of states were wavering, especially regard- 
ing zoning for use. After this sweeping decision in favor of zoning a change 
of attitude took place. James. Metzenbaum, counsel for Euclid, and Alfred 
Bettman of Cincinnati, appearing as amicus curzae in behalf of the National 
Conference on City Planning, submitted to the court a mass of published 
material on the effects of congestion, the benefits of an abundance of light 
and air, and the advantages of separating the locations of residences, rats, 
and factories. 


47 


ZONING 


centers of population, like cities and villages. It was assumed that 
country districts and farming localities could not be zoned. It 
was later found, however, that altered forms of district regulations 
could be as well adapted to the open country as to settled com- 
munities. Lower Merion, Pa.—a large and wealthy township, 
composed of several fairly populous centers, many fine estates of 
well-to-do people whose business was in Philadelphia, extensive 
farms, and a few industrial areas—was one of the first townships to 
adopt a zoning ordinance. This and several other township ex- 
periments were so successful that townships have been almost as 
active as cities in adopting zoning ordinances. In residence dis- 
tricts agricultural uses and buildings are allowed. Small districts, 
usually at four corners, allow business or light industry, providing 
a place for stores, garages, and gasoline stations. Heavy industry 
districts are usually laid out in proper places near railroad switch 
connections or near watercourses. 


THE TERRITORY ZONED 


A zoning ordinance covers a single political subdivision—a city, 
village, borough, town, or county. Inasmuch as lands situated 
alike should be zoned alike, the zoning map ought to cover the 
whole of the political subdivision. In Massachusetts there are 
cities and towns, the territory of each being separate from others. 
In New York there are cities, villages, and towns. A city is some- 
times in and part of a town; therefore it can be zoned as an entity, 
and the town outside of the city can be separately zoned by the 
town authorities. Similarly a village is in and part of a town. 
The village and the town outside of the village can each be sepa- 
rately zoned. In New Jersey there are cities, boroughs, townships, 
and towns, all separate from one another and constituting the 
entire territory of the state. In Pennsylvania there are cities, bor- 
oughs, and townships, each separate from the others. 

All states have counties. In Massachusetts, New York, and 
Pennsylvania the territory of the county consists of its self-govern- 
ing subdivisions. Therefore, if each of them desires to adopt its 
own zoning plan, there is no opportunity for county zoning. In 
the eastern part of this country towns are as insistent upon auton- 
omy as are cities or villages. They do not want officials residing 

48 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


elsewhere to determine such intimate matters as their zoning regu- 
lations. In the central part of our country, town governments are 
often not so unwilling to have counties assume zoning powers. 
Thus far, however, there are few illustrations of county zoning.! 
In California the situation is entirely different for there are with 
few exceptions no towns as separate political subdivisions; there 
are only cities and counties. The part of a county outside of its 
cities must zone itself. Consequently, we find county zoning in 
California. It is substantially the same as town zoning in our 
easternstates; itis not a surrender to the countyof townautonomy. 


FIELDS OF REGULATION 


The fields of regulation authorized in state enabling acts are 
usually height, area, and use of buildings, use of land, and density 
of population. Some acts have omitted the use of land and the 
omission has either been overlooked, or an attempt has been made 
to cure the defect by introducing the word “land”’ into the ordi- 
nance itself. If, however, the enabling act omits land, the munici- 
pality is powerless to supply it. The regulation of land is necessary 
because otherwise bare land can be used for a harmful purpose. 
For instance, vacant land in a residence district may be used for 
junk yards or cement block making or automobile dismantling 
plants to the serious detriment of the community. 

Density of population was not one of the fields of zoning men- 
tioned in early zoning enabling acts.2. It was pointed out by the 
New York Supreme Court in 1924 that the number of families per 
acre could not be regulated under the provisions for area or use of 
buildings.2 The words “density of population’? were thereupon 
inserted in many of the then existing enabling acts, in the standard 
form of the United States Department of Commerce and in new 
acts based on that form. The field of “density of population” is 
considered to include regulations based on the number of families 
per acre, families per square feet of lot, and families per front feet 
of lot. (See pages 28 and 86) 

Segregating races by districts is not within the field of zoning 
1 Wisconsin—Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1923 
2 Opinion of Justices, 124 Me. 501, 128 A. 181 (1925) 

’ Barker v. Switzer, 209 App. Div. 151, 205 N. Y. S. 108 (1924) 


49 


ZONING 


and would be contrary to the fourteenth amendment to the federal 
constitution. Efforts have been made, however, to employ zoning 
to separate the white and colored races.!. The usual method has 
been to exclude colored people from residing in white districts and 
white people from residing in colored districts. The reciprocal 
exclusions were expected to give an appearance of reasonableness 
to this form of zoning. Sometimes state courts have upheld these 
efforts, but the United States Supreme Court have uniformly de- 
clared such zoning to be contrary to the federal constitution. 


UNIFORMITY WITHIN A DISTRICT 

The usual enabling act provides that the regulations may differ 
in the several districts but must be uniform for each class of build- 
ings throughout each district. This requirement of uniformity was 
considered most important in the early days of zoning while the 
subject was in the balance. Property owners would have been 
more hostile if they had thought that councils could select parts of 
districts for special favors. This rule helped to make it under- 
stood that all property situated alike would be treated alike.? 
After zoning was well established some municipalities were tempted 
to disregard this rule by the apparent reasonableness of making 
differences within a district. They adjusted regulations at the 
boundaries of districts so as to protect adjoining more restricted 
districts. For instance, near the boundary line between a one- 
family, detached-house residence district and a multi-family res- 
idence district it would be provided that the regulations of the 
one-family district or some modification of them, should be ob- 
served for a certain distance within the multi-family district. This 
practice is not only contrary to the letter and intent of the enabling 


1U. S.—Harmon v. Tyler, 273 U. S. 668, 47 S. Ct. 471 (La., 1927) 
Ga.—Bowen v. City of Atlanta, 159 Ga. 145, 125 S. E. 199 (1924) 
mmnearener Co. v. City of New Orleans, 164 La. 72, 113 S. 768 
1927 
Tyler v. Harmon, 158 La. 439, 104 S. 200, 160 La. 943, 107 S. 704, 273 U. S. 
668, 47 S. Ct. 471 (1927) 
Va.—City of Richmond v. Deans, 37 F. (2d) 712 (1930) 
2 Colo.—Hedgcock v. Reed, 91 Colo. 155, 13 P. (2d) 264 (1932) 
Mich.—Holden Co. v. Connor, 257 Mich. 580, 241 N. W. 915 (1932) 
N. J.—Village of South Orange v. Heller, 92 N. J. Eq. 505, 113 A. 697 (1921) 
Pa.—Taylor v. Moore, 303 Pa. 469, 154 A. 799 (1931) 
* An excellent collection of illustrations is to be found in Transition Zoning by 
Arthur C. Comey, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1933: 


50 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


act but it is usually ineffective in producing substantial results. 
Every owner is entitled to know the exact boundary line. In 
building he can take into account the likelihood of the boundary 
being altered at some future day. He can apply to the board of 
appeals for a variance that will adjust his proposed building in the 
more restricted district to the existing buildings in the less re- 
stricted district. But if there is a belt of land shown to be in one 
district while having the regulations in whole or part of the adjoin- 
ing district, the whole situation is confused, changes of boundary 
are made more harmful, and the board of appeals is limited in its 
helpfulness. Moreover, courts cannot understand the situation 
clearly, and variances made on conditions that will protect the 
more restricted district are not clean-cut and easily enforceable. 
Marginal ameliorations ought to be made by the board of appeals 
in view of existing buildings and not by the ordinance itself. If 
made in the ordinance, the modification applies even if the land in 
the more restricted district is entirely vacant. 

It has been suggested that these modifications or ameliorations 
near boundary lines of districts do not violate the principle of uni- 
formity because the district is not the area shown on the zoning 
map but a different area as explained in the ordinance itself. This 
view is open to the objection that the usual ordinance refers spe- 
cifically to the map as showing the districts which are created. 
Moreover the modifications near boundary lines often apply only 
part of the greater restrictions to the less restricted district. In 
such cases uniformity is evidently lacking. 

The simple method of obviating all these difficulties and dangers 
is to make regulations uniform within a district, and to create 
additional districts whenever necessary. In some cases marginal 
buffer districts, shown on the zoning map, have been established. 
This is often justifiable, and is preferable to destroying the uni- 
formity of the regulations. 


PURPOSES 


The following section occurs in most enabling acts under the 
head of “Purposes in View”: 


Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehen- 
sive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to 


51 


ZONING 


secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health 
and the general welfare: to provide adequate light and air; to 
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration 
of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transporta- 
tion, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public require- 
ments. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consider- 
ation, among other things, to the character of the district and its 
peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserv- 
ing the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate 
use of land throughout such municipality. 


These “purposes in view” do not define the fields of zoning. 
They cannot be looked to as an enlargement or diminution of the 
grant of power. They have been referred to as scenery by one 
commentator and as atmosphere by another. They are more than 
that. The legislatures have thereby shown courts that the fields 
of regulation are based upon considerations of the community 
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare. They are broad 
enough to bring to the support of the ordinance when adopted all 
of the sanctions of the police power, present and future. The 
statements regarding buildings and land in the latter part of the 
section as quoted are most discriminating and illuminating, serving 
admirably to show the philosophy of modern zoning. They were 
first proposed by Lawson Purdy, long the president of the New 
York Department of Taxes and Assessments. They first appear in 
the original zoning provisions of the charter of the City of New 
York. The critic will notice that the increase of the value of land 
is not one of the purposes.!_ Land value depends on desirability and 
attractiveness. Increase of value, in and of itself, is not a purpose 
of zoning. The conservation of the value of buildings is a proper 
purpose, because lack of light, the congestion of streets and housing, 
and the invasion of harmful uses can prematurely lessen that 
value. Zoning should encourage “the most appropriate use of land 
throughout the municipality.” Years have passed since these 
words of Mr. Purdy were crystallized in the first zoning enabling 
act in this country, and still many members of councils and their 


1 Cal.—City of Beverly Hills v. Anger, 110 Cal. A. 626, 294 P. 479 (1930) 
Blumenthal & Co. v. Cryer, 71 Cal. A. 668, 236 P. 216 (1925 
Ind.—Dollman v. Osbon, Marion Circuit Court, Indianapolis, ae 3, 1928 
N. J.—Stein v. City of Long Branch, 2N. J. Misc. 121, 100 N. J. LD. 413, aoe 
924 (1924) 


52 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


advisers, and practically all petitioners for changes of zoning maps, 
maintain that increased value of land should be the main purpose 
of zoning. 

Zoning should not ordinarily be used to force a change to a 
status not existing. Some officials will declare that the first step 
to redeem a blighted district is to change the zoning. If this is 
done, confusion and litigation are sure to result. Zoning is useful 
in stabilizing districts, but when through chaotic buildings and uses 
a locality becomes depressed, the change should be made by re- 
building or rearranging streets and parks. Then the zoning can be 
harmonized with the new trend as shown by actual structures. For 
instance, if a locality is a medley of one-family and multiple dwell- 
ings, stores, and factories, it is a mistake to zone it for one-family 
residences because many lots may be between stores or factories, 
and the ordinance will be arbitrary as to them if it tries to force 
an unreasonable or inappropriate use.!. A gradual method of re- 
_habilitation must be used with depressed districts. 

Neither can distribution of business be forced by zoning. Ifa 
locality is filled with theatres, and congestion is great on sidewalks 
and streets, the municipality cannot lawfully amend its zoning 
ordinance to exclude new theatres. The police department can 
control the traffic, or some licensing law may be devised to prevent 
new theatres, but it is not a proper field for zoning. The best 
zoning argument for a new theatre permit is that the block is 
already largely occupied with theatres. Just so a zoning plan 
cannot space gasoline stations a certain distance apart. Such a 
regulation is arbitrary and unconstitutional on its face, so far as 
zoning principles are concerned. If three gasoline stations are on 
opposite corners, a fourth will ordinarily be justified in zoning. 


1U. S.—Nectow v. City of Cambridge (Mass.), 277 U. S. 183, 48 S. Ct. 447 (1928) 
Ill.—Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 N. E. 710 
(1930) 
Phipps v. City of Chicago, 339 Ill. 315, 171 N. E. 289 (1930) 
N. Y.—Cordts v. Hutton Company, 146 Misc. 10, 262 N. Y. S. 539, affd. 266 
N. Y. 399, 195 N. E. 124 (1934) 
Dowsey v. Village of Kensington, 257 N. Y. 221, 177 N. E. 427 (1931) 
Keiser v. Village of Mineola, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law 
Journal, March 9, 1933 
City of Utica v. Hanna, 202 App. Div. 610, 195 N. Y. S. 225 (1922) 
Ohio—City of Cincinnati v. Struble, 30 Ohio N. P. (N. S.) 380 (1933) 
Wis.—Tingley v. Gurda, 209 Wis. 63, 243 N. W. 317 (1932) 


53 


ZONING 


The fair distribution of different kinds of business must be ap- 
proached through private covenants or some method of trade 
regulation by the state or city, if any can be found. Zoning as we 
now understand it is not the proper instrumentality.!. Variances 
made in the discretion of boards of appeals may result in adjust- 
ments. 


SUBSTANTIAL RELATION 


Courts will uphold only such regulations as have a substantial 
relation to the health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and 
general welfare of the community. This relation should be prov- 
able in each case in its application to the lot in question? 


1N. J.—Deerfield Realty Co. v. Hague, 8 N. J. Misc. 637, 151 A. 373, 9 N. J. Misc. 
85, 155 A. 893 (1931) 
N. Y.—Wiegan v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, New York 
County, New York Law Journal, August 6, 1929, 229 App. Div. 320, 241 
N. Y. S. 456, affd. 254 N. Y. 599, 173 N. E. 883 (1930) 
2U. S.—Village vd Euclid (Ohio) v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. Ct. 
114 (1926 
Nectow v. City of Cambridge (Mass.), 277 U. S. 183, 48 S. Ct. 447 (1928) 
nets cy v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 477, 234 P. 381 
(1925 
Zahn v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 497, 234 P. 388, 274 
U. S. 325, 47 S. Ct. 504 (1927) 
Colo.—Averch v. City of Denver, 78 Colo. 246, 242 P. 47 (1925) 
Spiegleman v. Williams, District Court, Denver, May 6, 1929 
Pinna and Council of Wilmington V. Turk, 14 Del. Ch. 392, 129 A. 512 
1925 
D. C.—Bugher v. Gottwals, 60 App. D. C. 340, 54 F. (2d) 451 (1931) 
Dorsey v. Gotwals, 61 App. D. C. 41, 57 F. (2d) 407 (1932) 
I]l.—City of Aurora v. Burns, 319 Ill. 84, 149 N. E. 784 (1925) 
Deynzer v. City of Evanston, 319 Ill. 226, 149 N. E. 790 (1925) 
Ehrlich v. Village of Wilmette, 361 Ill. 213, 197 N. E. 567 (1935) 
Forbes v. Hubbard, 348 III. 166, 180 N. E. 767 (1932) 
Kennedy v. City of Evanston, 348 Ill. 426, 181 N. E. 312 (1932) 
Phipps v. City of Chicago, 339 Ill. 315, 171 N. E. 289 (1930) 
Tews v. Woolhiser, 352 Ill. 212, 185 N. E. 827 (1933) 
lowa—City of Des Moines v. Manhattan Oil Co., 193 Iowa 1096, 184 N. W. 823 
(1921), 188 N. W. 921 (1922) 
Kan.—Ware v. City of Wichita, 113 Kan. 153, 214 P. 99 (1923) 
Ky.— Fowler v. Obier, 224 Ky. 742, 7 S. W. (2d) 219 (1928) 
La.—Giangrosso v. City of New Orleans, 159 La. 1016, 106 S. 549 (1925) 
Md.—Goldman v. Crowther, 147 Md. 282, 128 A. 50 (1925) 
Lipsitz v. Parr. 164 Md. 222, 164 A. 743 (1933) 
Mo. Wea Kansas City St. Andrew Soc. v. Kansas City, 58 F. (2d) 593 
1932 
N. Y.—Alexe v. Isbister, Supreme Court, Westchester County, May 29, 1925, 
215 App. Div. 838, 213 N. Y. S. 754 (1926) 
Village of Brightwaters v. Di Blasi, Supreme Court, Suffolk County, New 
York Law Journal, May 22, 1926 


Footnote continued on page 55. 


54 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


A zoning ordinance, however, is more than the aggregate of its 
separate regulations, as applicable to particular parcels of land. 
The ordinance as a whole should have the necessary “substantial 
relation”’ to the health, safety, and general welfare of the com- 
munity, and each regulation applicable to a particular parcel of 
land should be a consistent part of the whole.! 

Courts have often declared that the duty of making zoning regu- 
lations is on the local legislature. Even if the courts conclude that 
the regulations are inferior, or that they would themselves make 
them far differently, nevertheless they consider that they are 
bound to uphold the regulations if they meet the requirement of 
substantial relation to the health, safety, morals, comfort, con- 
venience, and general welfare of the community.? If the ordinance 
as a whole has this substantial relation, and its regulations are not 
discriminatory, the courts incline to enforce them.® 

Even where this substantial relation is lacking, the passage of a 
zoning ordinance by the local legislative body will not usually be 


Fooinote continued from page 54. 

Cordts v. Hutton Company, 146 Misc. 10, 262 N. Y. S. 539, affd. 266 N. Y. 
399, 195 N. E. 124 (1934) 

Dowsey v. Village of Kensington, 257 N. Y. 221, 177 N. E. 427 (1931) 

Eaton v. Sweeny, 257 N. Y. 176, 177 N. E. 412 (1931) 

Fox Meadow Estates, Inc. v. Culley, 233 App. Div. 250, 252 N. Y. S. 178, 
affd. 261 N. Y. 506, 185 N. E. 714 (1933) 

Village of Granville v. Krause, 131 Misc. 752, 228 N. Y. S. 204 (1928) 

Keiser v. Village of Mineola, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York 
Law Journal, March 9g, 1933 

MacEwen v. City of New Rochelle, 149 Misc. 251, 267 N. Y. S. 36 (1933) 

Stevenson v. Tilley, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
September 10, 1930 

City of Utica v. Hanna, 202 App. Div. 610, 195 N. Y. S. 225 (1922) 

Willerup v. Village of Hempstead, 120 Misc. 485, 199 N. Y. S. 56 (1923) 

Ohio—Ottawa Hills Co. v. Village of Ottawa Hills, 41 Oh. A. 276, 180 N. E. 903 


1931) 
Ore.— Roman Catholic Archbishop v. Baker, 140 Ore. 600, 15 P. (2d) 391 (1932) 
1U. S.—Village of Euclid (Ohio) v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. Ct. 114 
(1926) 
Cal.—Harris v. City of Piedmont, 5 Cal. A. (2d) 146, 42 P. (2d) 356 (1935) 
Ky.— Fowler v. Obier, 224 Ky. 742, 7 S. W. (2d) 219 (1928) 
2 Cal.—Brougher v. Board of Public Works of San Francisco, 107 Cal. A. 15, 290 
P. 140 (1930) 
Ill.—Minkus v. Pond, 326 Ill. 467, 158 N. E. 121 (1927) 
Va.— Downham v. City Council of Alexandria, 58 F. (2d) 784 (1932) 
Wis.—City of La Crosse v. Elbertson, 205 Wis. 207, 237 N. W. 99 (1931) 


3 Women’s Kansas City St. Andrew Soc. v. Kansas City (Mo.), 58 F. (2d) 593 (1932) 


Py) 


ZONING 


enjoined by the courts, but its enforcement after passage will be 
enjoined, if the regulation is unconstitutional. There is no more 
reason why courts should prevent a local legislative body from 
acting within the scope of its authority than that they should en- 
join a state legislature from passing laws. The practice has be- 
come too common to appeal to courts to prevent local legislation. 
Legislative bodies acting within the scope of their authority are 
supposed to be of equal standing and dignity with courts. The 
courts have great powers in adjudicating the constitutionality of 
legislative acts, and there is no good reason why the exercise of this 
power should not wait until the questioned act is passed. The con- 
stitutionality of a regulation can be better weighed after its passage 
than before, and the court can judge what presumption of consti- 
tutionality it must grant to the legislative body in the exercise of 
legislative discretion.! 

The original zoning of many cities allowed too great density and 
set apart too great areas for business and industry. Usually this 
happened because there was not time for careful discrimination. 
All zoning was problematical in the early days and there was a 
distinct tendency for the authorities to be unnecessarily liberal. 
There is today a general desire on the part of city councils, and 
still more on the part of planning commissions, to review and 
amend the zoning maps. Few cases on this subject have found 
their way into court. In one case the court strongly approved this 
tightening up process which had been favored by the planning 
commission.? 


HEIGHT AND AREA 


In imposing height and area regulations it is assumed that there 
is need for greater density in central areas than in the suburbs. 
In central areas given over to business, people need to be near one 
another for intercommunication, buying and selling, delivery of 
business documents, and conduct of government. Such areas are 
equipped for the intensive working hours. Their buildings can 
1 Md.—Broening v. Haley, 156 Md. 605, 144 A. 836 (1929) 

N. ¥.—Steck v. Mayor of Buffalo, Supreme Court, Erie Co., Baltimore (Md.) 
Daily Record, March 20, 1925 
* Corbett v. Carson, Mayor of Portland (Ore.), Circuit Court, August, 1935 


56 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


properly be higher and nearer together than elsewhere.'! At the 
other extreme are the suburbs where families live and children 
grow up. In such areas there is no need for density of population 
but for the greatest allowance of space, sunlight, and air.2 Grada- 
tions of density lie between these extremes. There are local busi- 
ness streets and areas where multi-family houses are suitable for 
people who need to be within walking distance of their work. 
Zoning recognizes these differences in customary needs. A zoning 
plan based on such considerations alone would be approved by the 
courts because it would prevent invasions by unnecessarily high 
buildings and harmful densities. 

But the specific limitation of height and area in every district is 
supported by numerous detail considerations.’ High buildings 
cannot be so well protected against fire. They make dark canyons 
of streets. Lower floors need artificial light in the daytime. High 
buildings, coupled with great density, overload the capacity of 
streets.* Density in residence localities prevents an abundance 
of sunlight and affects the free movement of air. Congestion of 
living quarters comes with the increase of the human burden on 
the land, bringing greater danger of contagious disease, greater 
fire risk, more deliveries of goods and more litter, dust, fumes, 
and noise.® 

Some ambitious municipalities, thinking that one-story stores are 
a sign of backwardness, have required all stores to be two stories 
1 Cal.—Brougher v. Board of Public Works of San Francisco, 205 Cal. 426, 271 P. 

487 (1928), 107 Cal. A. 15, 290 P. 140 (1930) 
Wis.—Atkinson v. Piper, 181 Wis. 519, 195 N. W. 544 (1923) 
2U. S.—Gorieb v. Fox, 274 U. S. 603, 47 S. Ct. 675 (Va., 1927) 
Cal.—Thille v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 82 Cal. A. 187, 255 P. 294 
ieee v. City of Evanston, 319 Ill. 226, 149 N. E. 790 (1925) 
Mass.—Slack v. Building Inspector of Wellesley, 262 Mass. 404, 160 N. E. 285 
N. ye Welfsohn v. Burden, 241 N. Y. 288, 150 N. E. 120 (1925) 
Ohio—Harris v. Ball, 23 Oh. A. 33, 155 N. E. 166 (1926) 
Pa.—Junge’s Appeal, 89 Pa. Super. 543, 548 (1927) 
Wis.—Bouchard v. Zetley, 196 Wis. 635, 220 N. W. 209 (1928) 
3 Report of Heights of Buildings Commission (New York City), December 23, 1913 
4 Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 N. E. 710 (1930) 
5N. J.—E. & M. Land Co. v. Board of Adjustment of Newark, 4 N. J. Misc. 467, 
133 A. 413, affd. 103 N. J. L. 487, 135 A. 917 (1927) 
Ohio— Morris v. East Cleveland, 22 Ohio N. P. (N.S.) 549, 31 Ohio Dec. 98, 
197 (1920) 


57 


ZONING 


or more in height. When this regulation has been brought to the 
attention of courts it has always been set aside. They seem to 
consider that it is based on esthetics. It is, of course, hard to per- 
ceive how a two-story store is more safe or more conducive to 
health than a one-story store.! 

In New York City difficult situations involving allowable height 
have arisen. Provisions regarding buildings fronting on parks and 
public places, and their modification of allowable height, have 
been interpreted.’ 

Ordinarily the lack of a sewer system will not be held to justify 
a low height limitation. However, it is customary to show the 
presence or lack of a sewer system in determining the reasonable- 
ness of height limitation. It has been held that a three-story limit 
is justified by the sewerage situation.’ 

Similarly the lack of a fire department has not been considered a 
good reason for prohibiting apartment houses. 


VISION CLEARANCE 


Street accidents are prevented by enlarging the angle of vision at 
corners. Many ordinances provide that hedges and trees in resi- 
dence districts shall not be so placed that they prevent vision 
across a corner. A few ordinances provide that when a pier or 
column supports a building on a corner in a business district vision 
across the triangle and back of the column shall be unimpeded. 
This corner open space or vision clearance has been required only 


1]]1.—Brown v. Board of Appeals of Springfield, 327 Ill. 644, 159 N. E. 225 (1927) 
N. J.—Dorison v. Saul, 98 N. J. L. 112, 118 A. 691 (1922) 
Romar Realty Co. v. Board of Com’rs of Haddonfield, 96 N. J. L. 117, 114 
A. 248 (1921) 
N. Y.—Oppenheimer v. Kraus, 221 App. Div. 773, 223 N. Y. S. 467, affd. 246 
N. Y. 559, 159 N. E. 651 (1927) 
2N. Y.—Lash Realty Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
ra sO Ueae October 31, 1924, affd. 213 App. Div. 815, 208 N. Y. S. 920 
1925 
111 John St. Corp. v. Connell, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, May 8, 1931, affd. 235 App. Div. 611, 254 N. Y. S. 1083 (1932) 


$Van Duyne v. Senior, 105 N. J. L. 257, 143 A. 437 (1928) 


“N. J.—Ingersoll v. Village of South Orange, 3 N. J. Misc. 335, 128 A. 393, 102 
Ne [eb iortso ne 7218 1025) 
Karke Realty Associates v. Mayor, etc., of Jersey City, 104 N. J. L. 173, 139 
A. 55 (1927) 


58 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


for the first story. The reports do not contain decisions of courts on 
this and similar subjects. Billboards may be excepted from this 
statement. Property owners will strongly oppose regulations 
which prevent building on part of their land, in order to lessen 
street accidents. They wiil claim that the streets should be made 
wider or the corners should be rounded off by the use of eminent 
domain. In one case the court held that a permit to erect an 
apartment building on a corner cannot be refused on the ground of 
cutting off vision.? 


MeETHODsS OF AREA REGULATION 


One method of area regulation is the requiring of front, side, and 
rear yards.2?. The required depth of front yards cannot be made 
too great or courts will hold that it is unreasonable and based 
on esthetics.? It is far better to require a uniform depth than to 
make the depth depend on houses then existing or that may be 
built in the future. Courts have sometimes, however, upheld 
regulations of the latter kind. In certain areas they are called 


1 Tenez Const. Corp. v. Garner, 4 N. J. Misc. 485, 133 A. 396 (1926) 
2 Conn.—Town of Windsor v. Whitney, 95 Conn. 357, 111 A. 354 (1920) 
D. C.—Castleman v. Avignone, 56 App. D. C. 253, 12 F. (2d) 326 (1926) 
Ill.—Binder v. Hejhal, 347 Ill. 11, 178 N. E. 901 (1931) 
Kan.—Ware v. City of Wichita, District Court, Sedgwick County, 1924, 118 
Kan. 265, 234 P. 978 (1925) 
Md.—R. B. Const. Co. v. Jackson, 152 Md. 671, 137 A. 278 (1927) 
Mass.—Commonwealth v. Dillon, 277 Mass. 196, 178 N. E. 521 (1931) 
‘Sinclair v. Superintendent of Public Buildings of Waltham, 274 Mass. 338, 174 
N. E. 510 (1931) 
N. J.—Burg v. Ackerman, 5 N. J. Misc. 96, 135 A. 672 (1927) 
Hack v. Scales, 6 N. J. Misc. 307, 141 A. 4 (1928) 
N. Y.—Fimiani v. Board of Appeals of Buffalo, 233 App. Div. 552, 253 N. Y. S. 
757, afid. 258 N. Y. 613, 180 N. E. 355 (1932) 
465 Lexington Ave. Inc. v. Burden, Supreme Court, Westchester County: 
June 9, 1925 
Gordon v. Board of Appeals, 131 Misc. 346, 225 N. Y. S. 680 (1927) 
Kelmenson v. Mann, 207 App. Div. 494, 202 N. Y. S. 358, affd. 237 N. Y. 615, 
143 N. E. 765 (1924) 
Wulfsohn v. Burden, 241 N. Y. 288, 150 N. E. 120 (1925) 
Ohio—Neithamer v. Heyer, 39 Oh. A. 532, HE E. 925 (1931) 
Pritz v. Messer, 112 Oh. St. 628, 149 N. E. 30 (1925) 
Pa.—Junge’s Appeal, 89 Pa. Super. 543, 548 (1927) 
Wis.—Hayes v. Hoffman, 192 Wis. 63, 211 N. W. 271 (1926) 
*Ware v. City of Wichita, District Court, Sedgwick County, 1924, 118 Kan. 265, 


234 P. 978 (1925) 


59 


ZONING 


“travelling, front-yard regulations,”’! because the destruction of 
an existing house or the construction of a new house will alter the 
front-yard requirement. 

Where a residence street having a front-yard requirement enters 
a business street, it is an advantage to the former to prevent stores 
from covering the entire corner space. The owners of the resi- 
dences often try to persuade the authorities to require a substantial 
area on the business street to be left open in order to prevent 
cutting off the continuity of their front yards. They fail to con- 
sider that it is a serious matter for the owner of a corner lot, having 
a frontage of fifty feet on the business street, if he must leave half 
of it unbuilt and yet continue to pay taxes on the whole. Courts 
are likely to hold that the requirement of a large open corner is 
unreasonable, but will consider that a small yard requirement of 
from four to eight feet is reasonable. Some cities have employed 
this sort of zoning in an extremely drastic manner where the regula- 
tion has had no substantial relation to the community health, 
safety, convenience, and general welfare.” 

In relation to corner lots it is sometimes difficult to determine 
which street shall be considered the front. If left to the owner to 
select his front, he may place the side of his building on the main 
street, making a narrow side yard and preventing uniformity on 
the main street. For instance, in case of a corner lot one hundred 
feet by one hundred feet, the owner could erect two buildings 
fronting either street. If he chose to front them on the minor 
street, he could disarrange the harmony of the building plan and 
cause injury to his neighbors. Some cities have provided that the 
building in such a case shall front the wider street; others that it 
shall front the street having the higher land values on the assess- 
ment maps; and still others have established front-yard maps of 
the entire city, considering that such a map is an area-map supple- 
ment. The last method is probably the most exact and satisfactory 
although the other methods may be adapted to the needs of each 


1U. S.—Gorieb v. Fox, 274 U. S. 603, 47 S. Ct. 675 (Va., 1927) 
N. J.—Ricci v. Meyer, 5 N. J. Misc. 102, 135 A. 666 (1927) 
Vatter v. Kaltenbach, 3 N. J. Misc. 665, 129 A. 926, 102 N. J. L. 470, 131 A. 
900 (1926) 
2 Colo.—Hedgcock v. Reed, 91 Colo. 155, 13 P. (2d) 264 (1932) 
Mich.—Holden Co. v. Connor, 257 Mich. 580, 241 N. W. 915 (1932) 


60 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


city. The danger to avoid is a wording of the ordinance which 
leaves the choice of front to the owner.! This matter becomes es- 
pecially important where a front-yard requirement is imposed on 
business districts. 

Open porches are usually allowed by ordinances to extend a cer- 
tain distance into the front yard. Where buildings have a uniform 
front line, the projection of an open porch that does not cut off 
the vision, light, and air of neighbors has been considered compara- 
tively unobjectionable. But there are drawbacks. Some one will 
first enclose his porch with screens, and later insert removable 
windows in the winter. Insistence on the right to enclose such 
porches has given rise to litigation.2, Some builders have taken 
advantage of the porch privilege to insert permanent windows and 
even radiators, thus making additional rooms nearer the street 
than their neighbors’ rooms. Municipalities cannot be too careful 
about this matter of porches in front yards. Because unfair 
builders will take advantage of the slightest loophole, the ordi- 
nance should be worded so as to make sure that such porches will 
be as open to light, air, and visibility as possible.2 So long as there 
is a provable relation of the regulation to the access of light and air, 
the courts will be more inclined to uphold the constitutionality 
of the ordinance. 

Before the days of zoning some states empowered municipalities 
to establish so-called set-back or building lines by eminent domain. 
This practice seems to have caused certain municipalities to call 
their front-yard requirements zoning set-back lines. They ought 
to be called front-yard requirements. That term does not confuse 
courts. It shows that the front yards are established for the same 
reasons as side and rear yards—that is, because they increase light, 
air, and quiet.4 Calling them set-back lines tempts ignorant offi- 


1 Rollins v. Armstrong, 251 N. Y. 349, 167 N. E. 466 (1929) 
2N. J.—Mulleady v. City of Trenton, 9 N. J. Misc. 1102, 156 A. 843 (1931) 
Parker v. Brennan, 2 N. J. Misc. 260 (1924) 
N. Y.—Herman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, December 7, 1926 
Pa.—White’s Appeal, 287 Pa. 259, 134 A. 409 (1926) 
§ Valicenti’s Appeal, 298 Pa. 276, 148 A. 308 (1929) 
4D. C.—Castleman v. Avignone, 56 App. D. C. 253, 12 F. (2d) 326 (1926) 
Ind.—Major v. Board of Zoning Appeals, Circuit Court, Marion County, 
Indianapolis, September 7, 1928 
Footnote continued on page 62. 


61 


ZONING 


cials to state, sometimes in print, that one of the reasons for their 
establishment is a possible or prospective street widening. Inas- 
much as courts insist that the compulsory creation of a street shall 
be by eminent domain, such a statement can be introduced in 
court to show that the front-yard requirement was not made for 
reasons of health and safety but indirectly as the first step in a 
street widening.} 

Many ordinances have followed that of New York City in limit- 
ing building area to a fraction of the lot area. For instance, in 
New York the building area in an E district must not exceed 30 
percent of the lot area. There have been few court decisions on the 
subject of allowable building area, although many such cases come 
before boards of appeals.2 The regulation must not be so drastic 
that it compels an absurdly small house on a normal lot or an 
unreasonably large lot for a normal house. The location, whether 
suburban or in the thickly-settled part of a city, should be con- 
sidered. Then, too—at the basis of the figure used—there must 
be a substantial relation between the regulation and the com- 
munity health, safety, and general welfare. 

When the required yard space is dedicated to a particular 
building, as it is so long as that building exists, the same land can- 
not be used as the required yard for another main building.® 


Footnote continued from page O61. 
La.—Sampere v. City of New Orleans, 166 La. 776, 117 S. 827 (1928) 
Mass.—Commonwealth v. Dillon, 277 Mass. 196, 178 N. E. 521 (1931) 
Slack v. Building Inspector of Wellesley, 262 Mass. 404, 160 N. E. 285 (1928) 
N. Y.—Town of Islip v. Summers C. & L. Co., 257 N. Y. 167, 177 N. E. 409 (1931) 
Village of North Pelham v. Ohliger, 216 App. Div. 728, 214 N. Y. S. 253, 
afid!.245 N. Y.'593, 157 N. E. 871 (10927) 
Van Auken v. Kimmey, 141 Misc. 105, 117, 252 N. Y. S. 329, 343 (1930-1931) 
Ohio—Harris v. Ball, 23 Oh. A. 33, 155 N. E. 166 (1926) 
oe v. City of Akron, Court of Common Pleas, Summit County, January 
» 1927 
L. & M. Inv. Co. v. Cutler, 125 Oh. St. 12, 180 N. E. 379 (1932) 
Weiss v. Guion, 17 F. (2d) 202 (1926) 
Va.—Nusbaum v. City of Norfolk, 151 Va. 801, 145 S. E. 257 (1928) 
Wis.—Wittenberg v. Board of Appeals of West Allis, Circuit Court, Milwaukee 
County, December 6, 1929 
1 Bouchard v. Zetley, 196 Wis. 635, 220 N. W. 209 (1928) 
Baltasar Presbyterian Church v. Edgecomb, 108 Neb. 859, 189 N. W. 617 
1922) 
See also under Families Per Acre, p. 86 
’ Wood v. Building Com’r of Boston, 256 Mass. 238, 152 N. E. 63 (1926) 


62 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


Prevention of such double use of land cannot be attained by for- 
bidding the granting of the land by the first owner to the second. 
Land ought to be freely alienable and all our states insist on keep- 
ing it so. If land dedicated to a particular building is granted, it 
remains so dedicated, and the grantee cannot obtain his permit 
if he shows the same land on his plat. If the second builder 
deceives the building inspector by placing on his plat, as required 
yard space, land which has already been dedicated to another 
existing building, it will be considered that he has obtained his 
permit by deception and the permit will be withdrawn by the 
authorities or the certificate of occupancy will be canceled. It 
cannot be held that an encumbrance is created. All are supposed to 
know the law, and if the second builder does not know how the 
zoning regulations apply to surrounding buildings, the duty is on 
him to learn. The offices of corporation counsel throughout the 
country have had occasion to analyze this situation, and have 
come to conclusions stated here. 

Most ordinances are worded so as to preserve required yards 
around houses in existence before the zoning ordinance was passed. 
Similarly yards dedicated to an existing house cannot be the 
required yards for a new house.! 


UsE REGULATIONS 


Use districts are ordinarily residential, business, and industrial. 
The district of less restricted use always admits the uses of the 
more restricted ones. Perhaps the only exceptions to this state- 
ment are in a few cities where dwellings are excluded from indus- 
trial districts.2 When Greater New York was zoned there was no 
segregation of residence districts according to the number of fami- 
lies in a dwelling. It was feared that courts would not uphold 
districting on that basis because of the difficulty of showing that 
the number of families, apart from space requirements per family, 
was substantially related to the health and safety of the com- 
munity. For instance, a two-family house on a lot twice as large 
as the lot for a one-family house might seem to be equally safe 


1 Wood v. Building Com’r of Boston, 256 Mass. 238, 152 N. E. 63 (1926) 
2 America Land Co. v. City of Keene (N. H.), 41 F. (2d) 484 (1930) 
63 


ZONING 


and healthful.! Accordingly control of the number of families was 
left to area-district regulations. But the demand throughout the 
country for the segregation of detached, one-family houses from 
multi-family houses was so great, and the proof so clear that there 
were health and safety considerations that justified such a sepa- 
ration that courts gradually recognized as valid the gradations of 
residence districts according to number of families per unit build- 
ing.2. This means that a two-family-house district or a multi- 
family-house district is based on a use regulation and not on an area 
or density-of-population regulation. 

The exclusion of business from a residence district was the most 
serious of zoning problems for several years. Many courts held 
that the exclusion of stores was for esthetic reasons, and that the 
health and safety of the community were not affected* Many 


1 Cal.—Blumenthal & Co. v. Cryer, 71 Cal. A. 668, 236 P. 216 (1925) 
Ill.—Bjork v. Safford, 333 Ill. 355, 164 N. E. 699 (1928) 
N. J.—Handy v. Village of South Orange, 118 A. 838 (1922) 
Vernon v. Mayor & Council of Westfield, 98 N. J. L. 600, 124 A. 248 (1923) 
: Sirens, v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 477, 234 P. 381 | 
(1925 
Colo.—Spiegleman v. Williams, District Court, Denver, May 6, 1929 
Ill.—Village of Western Springs v. Bernhagen, 326 III. 100, 156 N. E. 753 (1927) 
Ind.—Dollman v. Osbon, Marion Circuit Court, Indianapolis, May 3, 1928 
Mass.—Bianchi v. Commissioner of Public Buildings of Somerville, 279 Mass. 
136, 181 N. E. 120 (1932) 
Brett v. Building Commissioner of Brookline, 250 Mass. 73, 145 N. E. 269 


(1924) 
N. Y.—Alexe v. Isbister, Supreme Court, Westchester County, May 29, 1925, 
215 App. Div. 838, 213. N. Y. S. 754 (1926) 
Fox Meadow Estates, Inc. v. Culley, 233 App. Div. 250, 252 N. Y. S. 178, affd. 
261 N. Y. 506, 185 N. E. 714 (1933) 
Ohio— Dantzig v. Durant, 21 Ohio Law Reporter 395 (1923) 
Koch v. City of Toledo, 37 F. (2d) 336 (1930) 
Morris v. East Cleveland, 22 Ohio N. P. (N.S.) 549, 31 Ohio Dec. 98, 197 (1920) 
Okl.—De Lano v. City of Tulsa, 26 F. (2d) 640 (1928) 


%Ga.— Reynolds v. Brosnan, 170 Ga. 773, 154 S. E. 264 (1930) 
Ore.— Kroner v. City of Portland, 116 Ore. 141, 240 P. 536 (1925) 


4Ga.—City of Atlanta v. Smith, 165 Ga. 146, 140 S. E. 369 (1927) 
Morrow v. City of Atlanta, 162 Ga. 228, 133 S. E. 345 (1926) 
Noland v. Bowen, 39 Ga. A. 813, 148 S. E. 596 (1929) 

Smith v. City of Atlanta, 161 Ga. 769, 132 S. E. 66 (1926) 
Ill.—City of Aurora v. Burns, Supreme Court, Springfield, February 17, 1925, 
319 Ill. 84, 149 N. E. 784 (1925) 
N. J.—Ignaciunas v. Town of Nutley, 99 N. J. L. 389, 125 A. 121 (1924) 
Tex.—City of Dallas v. Burns, 250 S. W. 717 (1923) 
City of Dallas v. McElroy, 254 S. W. 599 (1923) 
City of Dallas v. Mitchell, 245 S. W. 944 (1922) 
Footnote continued on page 65. 
64 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


states passed through an early period of court disapproval of use 
zoning, followed by a period of zoning disorganization, in which 
there was a popular demand for a constitutional amendment 
legalizing use zoning. Then either by reason of the adoption of a 
constitutional amendment, or the passage of a better enabling act, 
the courts began to approve use zoning.! 

The state of Missouri is a good illustration of this gradual prog- 
ress. St. Louis early passed a zoning ordinance before there was a 
state enabling act for zoning. The city charter gave ample powers 
to the city but the courts halted in their approval of use zoning, 
and the use regulations were declared void. The city accordingly 
suffered great injury from invasions of out-of-place stores, garages, 
and factories. The injury was the greater because the prior brief 
period of zoning protection had caused exploiters to perceive the 
value of certain out-of-place uses. A demand then arose, not only 
in St. Louis but in all the municipalities of the state, for a constitu- 
tional amendment; but before one was adopted an excellent state 
enabling act for zoning was passed. St. Louis therefore adopted 
another ordinance and other cities in the state took advantage of 
the new law. By that time, since courts throughout the country 
had more generally favored use zoning,” the attitude of the courts of 
Missouri toward the practice had changed, and it was held that 
stores and other business uses could be lawfully excluded from 
certain districts.’ 

The state of New Jersey is an equally good example. Although 
an enabling act was passed, the courts declared in the Nutley case 
that there was no lawful reason why a store should be excluded 


Footnote continued from page 64. 
City of Dallas v. Urbish, 252 S. W. 258 (1923) 
Hill v. Storrie, 236 S. W. 234 (1921) 
Lombardo v. City of Dallas, 124 Tex. 1, 73 S. W. (2d) 475 (1934) 
Spann v. City of Dallas, 111 Tex. 350, 235 S. W. 513 (1921) 


1Ga.—Howden v. Mayor & Aldermen of Savannah, 172 Ga. 833, 159 S. E. 410 


(1931) 
Ill.—City of Aurora v. Burns, 319 Ill. 84, 149 N. E. 784 (1925) 
Deynzer v. City of Evanston, 319 Ill. 226, 149 N. E. 790 (1925) 
La.—Roberts v. City of New Orleans, 162 La. 202, 110 S. 201 (1926) 
2 Minn.—Beery v. Houghton, 164 Minn. 146, 204 N. W. 569, 273 U. S. 671, 47 
S. Ct. 474 (1926) 
N. D.—City of Bismarck v. Hughes, 53 N. D. 838, 208 N. W. 711 (1926) 


3 Cadillac Co. v. Christopher, 317 Mo. 1179, 298 S. W. 720 (1927) 
65 


ZONING 


from a residence district. For several years a succession of refer- 
ences by courts to the Nutley case! prevented use zoning. Munici- 
palities saw no way out of the difficulty but to secure a constitu- 
tional amendment. This amendment is discussed on page 18. 

Constitutional amendments, as pointed out in Chapter I (page 
17), ought not to be necessary to cause the courts to recognize 
reasonable regulation under the police power. If a regulation is 
unreasonable it ought not to be upheld, whether or not there is a 
constitutional amendment. 

The Nutley case was an unfortunate beginning of court analysis 
of use zoning in New Jersey. The trial had shown nothing to 
relate the regulation with the community health, safety, or welfare. 
The only proof by means of which it was attempted to justify the 
employment of the police power to exclude a store from a residence 
district was that the location of the proposed store was distant 
from the village policeman, and that the builder had displeased 
the citizens by some of his previous performances. The subject 
was novel and the court could hardly be expected to supply what 
the proof lacked. Later in New Jersey, and in many other states 
where use zoning was in doubt, it became customary to show by evi- 
dence that a store in a residence district increased the fire hazard, 
and also street traffic, litter, and dust.? 

In an important early case in Washington, D. C., regarding the 
lawfulness of excluding a new store from a residence district, the 
celebrated Dr. George M. Kober, formerly connected with the 


1 Tgnaciunas v. Town of Nutley, 99 N. J. L. 389, 125 A. 121 (1924) 
See also cases cited in note 3 (p. 15) and in note 1 (p. 19) 


2 Cal.—Smith v. Collison, 119 Cal. A. 180, 6 P. (2d) 277 (1931) 
Zahn v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 497, 234 P. 388, 274 
U. S. 325, 47 S. Ct. 594 (1927) 
Conn.—City of Hartford v. Katz, Superior Court, Hartford County, July 30, 
1925 
D. C.—Steerman v. Oehmann, Washington Law Reporter, Vol. 53, No. 28, p. 437 
(1925) 
Ill.—City of Aurora v. Burns, 319 Ill. 84, 149 N. E. 784 (1925) 
Kan.—Ware v. City of Wichita, 113 Kan. 153, 214 P. 99 (1923) 
La.—Civello v. City of New Orleans, 154 La. 271, 97 S. 440 (1923) 
Palma v. City of New Orleans, 161 La. 1103, 109 S. 916 (1926) 
Roberts v. City of New Orleans, 162 La. 202, 110 S. 201 (1926) 
Dantas Inspector of Lowell v. Stoklosa, 250 Mass. 52, 145 N. E. 262 
1924) 
Spector v. Building Inspector of Milton, 250 Mass. 63, 145 N. E. 265 (1924) 


66 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


sanitation of the Panama Canal Zone, testified regarding his study 
of house flies. He showed that their life was short and that they 
spent it near the spot of their origin. They spread disease, not by 
lighting on infected meat or vegetables, but by lighting on sick 
persons and then lighting on meat and vegetables in stores, thus 
infecting the food supply which went out to the neighborhood. He 
showed that other vermin could and did in this way spread disease. 
The court decided that the segregation of stores from residences 
was substantially related to the community health and safety.! 

As use zoning gradually became better established, some munici- 
palities tried to employ it for unlawful purposes. They attempted 
to establish districts for public buildings only, or for selected kinds 
of stores only, or for high-type multiple-family houses only. The 
framers of these ordinances forgot that they must be based on 
health, safety, and the general welfare, and must not be discrim- 
inatory. They tried to employ zoning regulations to bring about 
some desired architectural arrangement. But if a district is set 
aside for public offices, it is hard to see why private offices must not 
also be permitted. A city hall has no desirable qualities that an 
office building does not or should not have. If a city hall is per- 
mitted in a zoning district, then it is usually unlawful to exclude 
the office building. Similarly if a book store and a jewelry store 
are permitted in a business street, hardware stores and furniture 
stores must also be permitted. The former uses may be more ex- 
clusive, but it would be hard to show that they are more intimately 
related to the health and safety of the community than the latter. 
The same reasoning would prevent the exclusion of a fraternity 
house from a residence district where the fraternity house is no 
more injurious than large private residences.? If a district is 
zoned for multi-family houses, it is hard to see how a two-family 
house can be excluded from it. The burden rests upon the munic- 
ipality to show that the excluded use is more hurtful than the 
permitted uses. 


One of the early efforts in use zoning was to exclude residences 
1Steerman v. Oehmann, Washington Law Reporter, Vol. 53, No. 28, p. 437 (D.C., 
1925) 
2 Appeal of Thompson, Court of Common Pleas, Allegheny County, Pa., October 
Term, 1925, and June 29, 1926 
See also cases on page 197, note 3 


67 


ZONING 


from industrial districts. There was much to be said for this prac- 
tice in that homes ought not to be among factories, and factory 
uses ought to be protected from constant complaints of common 
law nuisance. The Newark (N. J.) ordinance excludes residences 
in the industrial districts in the low-lying salt meadows. In such 
localities, now largely given over to industry, this exclusion would 
doubtless be held to be lawful largely on the ground that the high 
water-table prevented the sanitary conveniences that should be 
furnished to residences. However, on upland terrain—where 
homes can well exist until the land is needed for industry—it would 
be unreasonable to prevent residences. Then, too, an owner in 
such a locality might well say that his plot was too small for a 
factory, that owners of existing factories would not buy his land, 
that a store would be a total loss, and that to prohibit him from 
building a home would prevent his earning any return whatever 
on his land. Such considerations have prevented the widespread 
employment of this particular kind of exclusion. Under the usual 
zoning plan, where owners of land can build residences in industrial 
districts, whoever does so will assume the risk of having factories 
next door. Occupation for residence purposes will probably be 
temporary—until such time as the land can be used for factories. 

In some suburban municipalities occupied by well-to-do com- 
muters, efforts have been made to employ use regulations for the 
same purpose as restrictive covenants. The highest-class residence 
district is restricted to one-family detached houses; and schools, 
churches, clubs, and libraries are excluded. The purpose is to 
obtain through a zoning ordinance a community exclusively of 
high-class private residences. It is a grave question whether this 
is a reasonable exercise of the police power. If the specified uses are 
harmful in the residence district having the largest yards, it is 
difficult to see why they would not be even more so in residence 
districts having smaller yards or partly built up with multi-family 
houses. 

The fact that a zoning ordinance allows existing nonconforming 
uses to continue in a district where new uses of the same sort are 
prohibited does not render the ordinance void. There was con- 
1]1l.—Phelps v. Board of Appeals of Chicago, 325 Ill. 625, 156 N. E. 826 (1927) 

W. Va.—Howell v. Meador, 109 W. Va. 368, 154 S. E. 876 (1930) 
68 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


siderable uncertainty caused in the early days of zoning in II]linois 
by a court decision that this procedure was unlawful.t A more 
practical and reasonable view was, however, taken by courts 
throughout the country. It is apparent that the Illinois case if 
followed would have been fatal to zoning.” 

Many ordinances include public parks among the permissive 
uses in residence districts. However, public parks can be used for 
public recreation, and zoning cannot increase or diminish the 
extent of this use. On the original use map of New York City 
public parks were not shown, although they were shown on the 
height and area maps. It was considered that the city should 
conform the height and area of recreational and service buildings 
to the park surroundings. Zoning cannot modify the recreational 
uses of a public park. For instance, a zoning regulation cannot 
exclude skating from a public park. 

Low-lying land is often of a character that may be termed 
normally industrial land. It frequently happens that owners on 
higher land in residence districts desire to improve their surround- 
ings by persuading the local legislative body to zone the low-lying 
land for residence notwithstanding the fact that no one will will- 
ingly go there to reside. These arbitrary efforts have sometimes 
been checked by courts. In like manner land near railroad 
switch-connections has been zoned to protect neighboring resi- 
dences although such land was itself unsuitable for residences. The 
courts have frowned on this practice. In the outlying boroughs 
of New York City landowners in residential developments have 
urged residential zoning of nearby localities bordering on railroads 
because such zoning would tend to protect their own homes. This 
was quite regardless of the fact that the land near the railroads 
should be preserved for future industry. It is a serious mistake 
for a city to zone as residential the land which some day will be 
needed by industry. 


1 Roos v. Kaul, 302 Ill. 317, 134 N. E. 740 (1922) 

2N. C.—Elizabeth City v. Aydlett, 201 N. C. 602, 161 S. E. 78 (1931) 
Okl.—Baxley v. City of Frederick, 133 Okl. 84, 271 P. 257 (1928) 

$ Ohio—City of Cincinnati v. Struble, 30 Ohio N. P. (N.S.) 380 (1933) 
Wis.—Tingley v. Gurda, 209 Wis. 63, 243 N. W. 317 (1932) 

€U. S.—Nectow v. City of Cambridge (Mass.), 277 U. S. 183, 48 S. Ct. 447 (1928) 
Ill.—Tews v. Woolhiser, 352 Ill. 212, 185 N. E. 827 (1933) 


ZONING 


The absence of an industrial district does not necessarily cause 
the zoning map to be unreasonable.! 


HUMANITARIAN INSTITUTIONS 


When in 1916 the framers of the Greater New York building 
zone resolution were discussing what buildings and uses should 
be excluded from residence districts, it did not occur to them that 
there was the remotest possibility that churches, schools, and hos- 
pitals could properly be excluded from any districts. They con- 
sidered that these concomitants of civilized residential life had a 
proper place in the best and most open localities. 

New York in the beginning had only three use districts—resi- 
dence, business, and unrestricted. Further segregations were 
brought about by the height and area regulations. The argument 
was that a school ought to be where the people resided, and that it 
could not rightly be forced into a business district where land 
values are high, traffic congestion is great, noise is always present, 
and space is needed for merchandising and commerce. Then, too, 
there is commonly more open space and better access of sunlight 
in residence districts. To force children to go outside of these dis- 
tricts to schools in a business or industrial locality was out of the 
question. It was also recognized that churches should be in quiet 
localities, and as they are so intimately connected with home life 
they should be in home communities. Neither was there any ques- 
tion that hospitals should be allowed in residence districts because 
the sick of the community could hardly be thrust into noisy busi- 
ness sections or into industrial districts among factories. 

It was apparent, however, that a school, church, or hospital 
brings certain elements of disadvantage to a home community. 
Children are noisy and sometimes mischievous, and on this account 
some families, especially adult families, do not like to live next door 
to schools. Churches are not only surrounded with parked cars 
during services, but crowds of people often go to them in front of 
the private homes, and sometimes private families are disturbed 
by the practicing of music and the activities of young people. 
Hospitals likewise have their drawbacks in a home community. 
1 Cal.—Ex parte White, 195 Cal. 516, 234 P. 396 (1925) 

N. Y.—Hamlett v. Snedeker, 246 App. Div. 758, 283 N. Y. S. 906 (1935) 
70 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


Visitors and parked cars are numerous. The delivery of food and 
materials and the removal of waste approach business proportions. 
Ambulances are a disturbing factor day and night, and the influence 
of a hospital is sometimes depressing on the neighborhood. But 
these objections were met by the simple questions: “Where shall 
hospitals be built if they are not allowed in a residence district? 
Shall they be excluded from the district which has the greatest 
abundance of light and air? Shall they be excluded from the quiet 
locality? Shall they be restricted to business and industrial dis- 
tricts where there is the maximum of noise and congestion?’ There 
could be but one answer to these questions. Like schools and 
churches they were allowed in residence districts as a matter of 
right. At that time the future of zoning was uncertain. No one 
knew how the courts would look at this novel invocation of the 
police power. No one thought of it as a cure for all municipal 
shortcomings and disorders, and the most that was hoped for was 
that it might bring a fair degree of stabilization in the place of 
increasing chaos. 

The later widespread support of zoning by the courts was the 
signal for invoking the new discovery for a variety of purposes. 
Some officials thought that if they could only call their fanciful 
efforts zoning ordinances the courts would uphold them. Some 
sought to prevent one-story structures. Others simply trans- 
ferred private restrictions relating to cost, peaked roofs, and style 
of architecture into a zoning ordinance, and considered that they 
had thereby extended for an indefinite time the private restrictions 
that were about to expire. They overlooked the principle that 
lawful zoning must be based on the preservation of the public 
health, safety, morals, and general welfare, and must not be 
discriminatory. 

It became usual to indicate allowable height, area and use dis- 
tricts on a single zoning map, on which were shown three, four, or 
five kinds of residence districts and certain business and industrial 
districts. The first residence district would usually be the most 
open and would be intended for one-family detached homes with 
large yards; the next would be for similar homes with smaller 
yards; another would perhaps admit two-family houses or semi- 
detached houses; in another, apartment houses of medium density 


Fi 


ZONING 


would be allowed, and in the last district apartment houses of 
maximum density. The variety of the residence districts was a 
temptation to councils to exclude humanitarian institutions from 
the most open ones, which inevitably were those of the higher 
character. It seemed easy enough to bring a certain exclusiveness 
to such districts by omitting charitable institutions and hospitals 
from the permitted uses. This practice suited owners of homes in 
districts affected, and the owners in the other districts did not 
usually protest, perhaps because they expected to have some uses 
left open to them that were barred from the districts where the 
houses had more land. It was difficult, however, to see why hos- 
pitals should be forced into congested residence districts by ex- 
cluding them from the more open ones. To be sure it was not quite 
so unjustified as forcing these institutions into business or industrial 
districts. But the proposal was based on a conception that people 
who lived closer together could more appropriately endure these 
institutions than people who lived further apart. In other words, 
institutions that most needed an abundance of open space, light, 
and air were restricted to districts where the housing congestion 
was greater. It is evident that such exclusion from the open dis- 
tricts was not based on the public health, safety, morals, and gen- 
eral welfare but upon a desire to employ the new device of zoning 
to make exclusive districts more exclusive. 

It is difficult to escape the conclusion that humanitarian institu- 
tions, so far as zoning is concerned, should be allowed in the sun- 
niest, most quiet, and least congested district of a city. This dis- 
trict will usually be the highest-class residence district. If allowed 
here, they will be allowed in every other district as a matter of 
course. Exclusion from a district or total exclusion from a city 
does not mean that these institutions cannot be regulated under 
zoning. The allowable sizes of yards can properly be made greater 
than in the case of private dwellings. It is highly desirable that 
hospitals for contagious diseases should have ample grounds around 
them. They can also often be screened by trees. When such steps 
are taken it is of course not because of any danger of contagion, 
for it is well known that modern hospitals for contagious diseases 
bring no actual danger into a locality. There is, however, the de- 
pressing effect of such hospitals on the surrounding population, if 


72 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


the hospital and private buildings are close together. There are 
many illustrations of hospitals for mental diseases or for tuber- 
culosis, placed in ample grounds and provided with landscaped 
surroundings, that are no injury to the surrounding property. On 
the contrary they constitute locations that are attractive to sub- 
stantial one-family detached homes. 

Some cities, and also some townships with areas as great as 
one hundred square miles, have excluded hospitals for contagious 
diseases entirely. Toa certain extent the motives were to keep out 
institutions that are ordinarily exempted from taxation, but the 
main reason always was to prevent the depressing effect of these 
institutions on the surrounding inhabitants. Sometimes it was 
thought that values were affected. ‘These institutions need to be 
accessible from cities, both for transportation reasons, and for ob- 
taining the services of specialists. Municipalities in New York 
state surrounding New York City within fifty miles have been 
diligent in excluding hospitals for mental cases. About nineteen 
out of twenty municipalities exclude them today, and if the present 
tendency continues, they will soon be wholly excluded. ‘To make 
the matter worse, existing mental hospitals cannot be enlarged 
without permission of the municipal authorities, and such authori- 
ties cannot permit the enlargement contrary to the zoning or- 
dinance. 

How can hospitals or institutions for mental diseases be equal- 
ized throughout a state so that no municipality shall be compelled 
to have too much tax-exempt property or to endure the depressing 
effect of too many institutions of their nature? The answer is that 
states are increasingly taking over the function of distributing 
these institutions. This is as it should be. Some statutes provide 
that the state board of health or the state department of mental 
hygiene must hold a hearing on the proposed location of a new in- 
stitution. Then, if the location is meritorious, a state certificate 
for the location is issued. Too great a burden is not thrown on any 
one community. So far as the courts have made declarations on 
the subject, they have tended to uphold state control and dis- 
approve of exclusion by local zoning ordinances. 

In 1925 the board of appeals of Denver, against the protest of 
neighbors, issued a variance for the enlargement of the National 


73 


ZONING 


Jewish Hospital for Consumptives.!. The neighbors took the case 
to court on the ground that the ordinance prevented the enlarge- 
ment of a hospital in a residence district and that the board of 
appeals had no power to make such a variance. The District 
Court of the city, on July 24, 1925, declared that as a conforming 
use the hospital had the right to expand on contiguous property 
owned by it prior to the passage of the zoning ordinance, 

The Mineola Home for Cardiac Children contracted to buy a 
large tract of land for a building, but between the making of the 
contract and the actual purchase, the village of Irvington, N. Y., 
in which the tract was located, passed a zoning ordinance placing 
the tract in district F, from which such a hospital was excluded. 
The hospital trustees sought to enjoin the village from enforcing 
the zoning ordinance and claimed that the exclusion was uncon- 
stitutional. The court declared in 1925: 


The testimony seems to prove that one thing only was considered, 
namely the desire of certain people to avoid having the defendant 
as a neighbor. . . . The ordinance in question is invalid, 
unlawful, arbitrary and unreasonable, and the plaintiff is entitled 
to judgment restraining its enforcement, with costs.? 


The city of Pasadena selected a block of land for an isolation 
hospital in a district zoned against hospitals. Neighbors brought 
an action to enjoin the city from building the hospital on the 
ground of violation of the zoning ordinance, and also because it 
would be a nuisance. Following are quotations from the court 
opinion rendered in 1926: 


It must be conceded that the establishment and maintenance of 
the isolation hospital was an exercise of the police power of the 
city. And in this respect the police power of the city is as broad as 
that possessed by the Legislature itself, subject only to the control 
of general laws. . . 

At this point it may be noted that aN: findings of the trial court 
to the effect that the maintenance and operation of the isolation 
hospital would constitute a nuisance rest upon two classes of 
evidence: First, upon the evidence of real estate agents and others 


1 Shackelford v. Denver Board of Adjustment, District Court, Denver (Colo.) 
Rocky Mountain News, July 25, 1925 

2 Mineola Home for Cardiac Children v. Village of Irvington, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., January 3, 1925 


74 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


to the effect that the establishment and maintenance of said hos- 
pital upon the chosen site will cause a depreciation in property 
values of the plaintiffs and others in that vicinity; second, upon 
the testimony of medical experts that in their opinion there will be 
danger of the spread of contagious and infectious diseases to resi- 
dents in the neighborhood thereof such as the danger of infection 
from insects such as flies, fleas, or mosquitos, or from animals such 
as rats or other rodents, cats, dogs, or birds, or from children or 
feeble-minded people wandering into the hospital or into dangerous 
proximity thereto or from escaping patients, or from possible in- 
fection of the clothing of nurses, attendants, or from unknown 
carriers of disease. Concerning this latter class of evidence it is in 
our opinion entirely speculative, and amounts to no more than the 
conclusion of these opinion witnesses that every hospital in which 
any infectious disorders are treated, regardless of the perfection of 
its construction and operation in accordance with the most up-to- 
date principles, methods, appliances, and preventatives, constitutes 
a menace to public health and a nuisance per se in its relation to 
dwellers in the vicinity of its proposed location. We cannot sub- 
scribe to such a doctrine, since to do so would result in the exclusion 
of all hospitals treating infectious diseases from cities and other 
places in the near vicinity of private abode, a conclusion obviously 
in conflict with the clearest mandates of public policy and the 
exercise of the police power in relation to public health. 


The County Board of Spartanburg County selected a site fora 
tubercular hospital in the city of Spartanburg. This site was ap- 
proved by state authority. Thereupon the city council of the city 
of Spartanburg passed a local ordinance prohibiting the establish- 
ment and operation within the limits of the city of any hospital 
for the treatment of the tubercular. On the claim that the local 
ordinance was unconstitutional and therefore void the hospital 
authorities brought an action against the city of Spartanburg to 
prevent the latter from enforcing the ordinance. In 1928 the 
Supreme Court of South Carolina, in upholding the hospital au- 
thorities, declared: 


An ordinance which is repugnant either to the Constitution or 
general laws is ipso facto void. 

When the Legislature enacted the statute authorizing and re- 
quiring Spartanburg county to establish and maintain a tubercular 
hospital, it declared that the establishment and maintenance of 


1 Jardine v. City of Pasadena, 199 Cal. 64, 248 P. 225 (1926) 
75 


ZONING 


such hospital was not detrimental to the public health, and the city 
of Spartanburg, therefore, could not by ordinance say that it is, 
nor can any other city in the state say so by similar ordinance. 
: The Spartanburg General Hospital is a part of the county 
government, and the Legislature in its wisdom may provide for the 
establishment of a separate hospital to care for the tubercular, and 
is authorized so to do by the Constitution of the state. It isa 
humane act, intending to relieve the suffering and sick from the 
great “white plague,”’ and the ordinance of the city was passed to 
prevent what the Legislature had given the petitioners the right 
to do.} 


The Cleveland Jewish Orphans’ Home owned land in the village 
of University Heights, Ohio, on which it proposed to build a home 
for children. A village zoning ordinance prohibited such an insti- 
tution in the district in which this land was located. After the 
authorities of the Home were refused a permit by the village com- 
mission in charge, they began a court action to prevent the village 
from enforcing the zoning regulations on the ground that it was 
unconstitutional. In its decision in 1927, declaring the regulation 
unconstitutional, the court used the following language: 


The planning and zoning commission did not find facts peculiar to 
the location of appellee’s property justifying the denial of its use, 
but based its action upon financial and social considerations applic- 
able to all parts of the village, as follows: First, that the land 
would be withdrawn from the tax duplicates, resulting in a loss 
of assessed values to the city; second, that there would be a larger 
number of children attending the local school, which would require 
additional accounting and inspection by the board of education, 
and might result, notwithstanding the offer of the institution to 
provide part of the finances for additional school buildings, in an 
additional outlay for buildings and equipment; and, third, that the 
public welfare would be further affected, because in the opinion of 
the commission a school in any community, predominantly at- 
tended by the children of a single race, creed, or nationality, is 
hurtful to the community. 

All of these reasons given by the commission for its finding, would 
be equally applicable to a like use of any other land in the village. 
They would also apply in certain aspects, but in a lesser degree, to 
the use of the cottages in question for private schools or by families 
with large numbers of children of a single nationality or religious 


1 Law v. City of Spartanburg, 148 S.-C. 229, 146 S. E. 12 (1928) 
76 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


faith, . . . We must hold that the restriction as affecting the 
use intended by appellee is unreasonable. 

We do not doubt that the ordinance is a valid enactment in its 
general aspects, but as applied to this case it is, we think, un- 
reasonable.! 


The village endeavored to obtain a reversal, by a writ of cer- 
tiorari in the United States Supreme Court, but that court refused 
to grant the petition.’ 

The city of Seattle passed a zoning ordinance containing regula- 
tions that would make possible the exclusion of a philanthropic 
home for the aged poor from a residence district. The trustees for 
the proposed home attacked the validity of the regulations referred 
to; and after the action underwent various vicissitudes it finally 
reached the United States Supreme Court. That court declared 
in 1928 that governmental power to interfere with general rights of 
landowners by zoning regulations restricting the character of use 
of property is limited to restrictions which bear some substantial 
relation to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. 
The regulation in question did not have such a substantial relation 
and was therefore void.2 Under the guise of the police power 
legislatures may not impose unnecessary and unreasonable re- 
strictions on the use of private property in pursuit of useful ac- 
tivities. 

The city of Los Angeles sought by zoning regulations to exclude 
hospitals for the insane and feeble minded from certain open and 
sparsely settled districts, but allowed them in certain more densely 
settled districts. The trustees of four sanitarlums that were in 
operation in the forbidden district, either fearing that they would 
be ousted or foreseeing that they could not build additions, brought 
an action to test the constitutionality of these regulations. The 
case reached the District Court of Appeal of the state, which 
decided in 1930 that a zoning ordinance which permitted the opera- 
tion of institutions for the insane in thickly populated and densely 


1 Village of University Heights (Ohio) v. Cleveland Jewish Orphans’ Home, 20 F. 
(2d) 743 (1927) 

2 Village of University Heights (Ohio) v. Cleveland Jewish Orphans’ Home, 275 
U. S. 569, 48 S. Ct. 141 (1927) 

3 Seattle Title Trust Co. v. Roberge, 278 U. S. 116, 49 S. Ct. 50 (Wash., 1928) 


77 


ZONING 


settled districts, while excluding them from comparatively sparsely 
settled districts, was oppressive, discriminatory, and void. 

When the authorities of the town of Woodbury, N. Y., learned 
that the Jewish Consumptives’ Relief Society was about to estab- 
lish a tuberculosis hospital in an outlying part of the town, they 
made haste to adopt a zoning ordinance which prohibited a tuber- 
culosis hospital in any part of the town. The court of first resort 
declared that this was lawful, but the appellate court overturned 
the decision and held that a tuberculosis hospital could not be 
excluded from every part of the town under a zoning ordinance. 
This decision was affirmed in 1931 by the Court of Appeals? 

The New York City building zone resolution did not distinguish 
between public and benevolent institutions on the one hand and 
institutions of the same nature operated for gain on the other. 
Subsequent ordinances have sometimes barred the latter institu- 
tions from residence districts on the ground that they constitute 
a form of business. Such exclusion will probably be held to be 
lawful? 

Other court decisions will be found to harmonize with the fore- 
going discussion.* 

The apparent consensus of the courts of this country regarding 
hospitals was interrupted by a decision later than those heretofore 
cited. The village of Hastings, N. Y., passed a zoning ordinance 
excluding “insane asylums” from residence districts. A mental 
health hospital society, organized on a non-profit basis and having 
state approval, sought to enlarge its buildings. When the necessary 
permit was refused by the village authorities, the society sought to 


1 Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 286 P. 161, 211 Cal. 304, 295 P. 14 (1930) 
2 Jewish Consumptives’ Relief Society v. Town of Woodbury, 230 App. Div. 228, 
243 N. Y. S. 686, affd. 256 N. Y. 619, 177 N. E. 165 (1931) 
3 Del.—Mayor and Council of Wilmington v. Turk, 14 Del. Ch. 392, 129 A. 512 
(1925) ) 
N. Y.—City of Yonkers v. Horowitz, 222 App. Div. 297, 226 N. Y. S. 252 (1928) 
4Cal.—San Diego Tuberculosis Ass’n v. City of East San Diego, 186 Cal. 252, 200 
P. 393 (1921) 
Mo.—Women’s Kansas City St. Andrew Soc. v. Kansas City, 58 F. (2d) 593 
(1932) 
N. Y.—City of Rochester v. Rochester Girls’ Home, 194 N. Y. S. 236 (1922) 
Cromwell v. American Bible Society, 202 App. Div. 625, 195 N. Y. S. 217 
(1922) 
Town of Woodbury v. Nicoll, 236 App. Div. 752, 258 N. Y. S. 970, affd. 261 
N. Y. 507, 185 N. E. 715 (1933) 


73 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


compel them to issue it. There was ample space for the new 
buildings, as the society owned a tract of fifty-two acres, the exist- 
ing hospital occupying one-eighth of anacre. In 1935 the Court of 
Appeals refused to compel the issuance of the permit, handing down 
a brief memorandum as follows: 


The evidence sustains the finding that the institution of the ap- 
pellant is an asylum for the insane. In the circumstances the zon- 
ing ordinance is a valid exercise of authority reasonably conferred 
for the general welfare.! 


It is regrettable that the court did not state what the circum- 
stances were on which they based their opinion. The United 
States Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal from the New 
York Court of Appeals on the ground that there was not a sub- 
stantial federal question.? 

It has been pointed out that a home for the aged is not for all 
purposes in the same category as a hospital.2 The question was 
whether a regulation preventing a garage within two hundred feet 
of a hospital applied to a home for the aged. 


DUMPING 


The use zoning map of New York City originally showed three 
kinds of districts—residence, business, and unrestricted. Any 
lawful use was allowed in the unrestricted districts. So far as 
zoning regulations are concerned the most objectionable uses—like 
slaughter houses, fertilizer works, and smelting—are permissible. 
This is not to say that other local laws may not regulate these 
highly objectionable uses. Health ordinances controlled the loca- 
tions of slaughter houses before zoning was established. The courts 
will enjoin a common law nuisance if located in an unrestricted 
district just as in a business or residence district. Courts recognize 
a greater latitude, however, in passing on an alleged nuisance in an 
unrestricted district. It is the method of operation that consti- 
tutes anuisance. Zoning is not based to any extent on the doctrine 
of nuisance; a well-drawn zoning ordinance never uses that word. 


1 Jewish Mental Health Society v. Village of Hastings, 268 N. Y. 458, 198 N. E. 30 


(1935) 
2 Jewish Mental Health Society v. Village of Hastings (N. Y.), 56 S. Ct. 592 (1936) 


8 Frax Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 123 Misc. 455, 205 N. Y. S. 728 (1924) 
79 


ZONING 


It did not occur to the framers of the New York City building 
zone resolution that it was lawful to use police-power zoning to 
exclude any use that was necessary or desirable for civilized life. 
New York City, however, embraced in its five boroughs all sorts 
of land, and no municipality could be better adapted to furnish 
suitable locations for all uses whatsoever. It has great tracts of 
salt meadows in Brooklyn, Queens, The Bronx, and Staten Island. 
Navigable waterways pierce many regions not desirable for resi- 
dence. It was no sacrifice for New York City to designate ample 
districts for industrial uses however undesirable. 

As zoning spread to smaller cities and especially to suburban 
villages, the desire naturally arose to employ zoning to exclude 
altogether such objectionable uses as fertilizer works, oil refineries, 
and powder works. Accordingly the zoning regulations of the heavy 
industrial district in such municipalities often contained a list of 
uses not wanted and therefore excluded. This practice was un- 
doubtedly justifiable in suburban villages like Scarsdale, N. Y., or 
La Grange, Ill. Each is part of a metropolitan district which ought 
to accommodate all lawful uses, but they themselves being purely 
residential can reasonably exclude from their borders these objec- 
tionable industries. 

The practice of employing zoning to exclude from a municipality 
a use which it does not want but which in fairness it ought to ac- 
commodate has gained the name of dumping. For instance, where 
a village by zoning excludes from its confines a garage, a blacksmith 
shop, or a laundry, the objectionable establishments are compelled 
to locate in adjoining towns or villages. 

Up to this time the courts have not had occasion to pass on the 
lawfulness or unlawfulness of specific instances of dumping. But 
cases are sure to arise. If a town can exclude all public garages, 
for example, the adjoining town by the same token can do the same. 
A point will necessarily be arrived at where some landowner having 
a suitable site will demand a garage permit, and on its refusal will 
obtain an order of mandamus to compel its issue. This will squarely 
raise the question whether a regulation is reasonable which forces 
public garages into adjoining towns. Courts will probably hold 
that each municipality should be willing to allow these objection- 
able but necessary uses within its confines, wherever there are 

80 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


suitable locations for them; and if it refuses, in pursuance of a 
selfish zoning ordinance, the court will interfere. 

The unfairness of selfish zoning will become apparent if every 
municipality in a state should exclude some particularly objection- 
able use. However, if it is lawful for one to do it, it is lawful for 
all. If the zoning ordinance of a municipality is held lawful because 
lawfully passed, regardless of its effect on other municipalities, then 
all similar regulations in the state must be held lawful. Thus the 
particular use, which is necessary but objectionable, would be 
driven to other states. Although this reductio ad absurdum is not 
likely to happen, it shows that courts cannot allow municipalities 
to regard only their own preferences. Courts will probably take 
into account the size and geography of cities, and will to some 
extent regard a metropolitan region as a unit for the purpose of 
permitting all lawful uses in suitable locations. Zoning regulations 
must not only be reasonable, but municipalities must not be un- 
reasonably selfish in excluding their share of unwanted uses. In- 
stances of excluding such uses are the prohibitions already referred 
to (page 73) of mental and tuberculosis hospitals near large cities. 
Intolerable situations are sure to arise if the courts do not pro- 
nounce these and similar exclusions unreasonable. 


PROBLEMS OF Use DiIstTRICTS 


In adjusting the boundaries of use districts difficult situations 
have arisen where it is desired to zone one side of a street for resi- 
dences and the other side for business. Offhand one would say that 
both sides should be in the same district. But sometimes prior to 
zoning a residential development has included one side of the street 
and not the other. Substantial homes have already been built on 
one side, protected by private restrictions. Later perhaps a surface 
car line has been operated on the street, and there is logical demand 
for stores on the other side. In such a case there is temptation 
to zone one side of the street for residences and the other for busi- 
ness. Sooner or later some home on the residence side will become 
dilapidated and the owner will seek to obtain a building permit for 
a store. Courts are reluctant to hold that one side of a street can 
be retained indefinitely as a residence zone while the other side is 
zoned and occupied for business. 

81 


ZONING 


The zoning of corners has also caused difficulty in this regard. 
If in a locality mostly residential three opposite corners are oc- 
cupied by stores, the courts are likely to declare that it is not 
justifiable to zone the fourth corner so as to prevent a store. The 
invasion of the residence side of the street by the first one or two 
stores is most harmful to the residential developments in the rear. 
The injury to the residences may far outweigh the advantage of 
the new stores to the landowner. It must be admitted, however, 
that the courts have everywhere shown an inclination to set aside 
residence zoning where the opposite side of the street is actu- 
ally built up with stores and zoned as business. Broad streets 
may now and then justify an exception to this inclination of the 
courts. Where the street has a great deal of traffic, the courts 
are more inclined to hold that both sides should be open to busi- 
ness.} 

Some people have considered that residence districts should ex- 
clude all profit-making enterprises.2_ It was never the intention of 
zoning to make districts exclusively residential, but rather that 
residences should be protected against harmful uses. The New 
York City building zone resolution did not exclude private schools 
although they might be operated for profit. Similarly, accessory 
uses—such as a doctor’s or lawyer’s office—are permitted in resi- 
dence districts. The name of a district does not denote that noth- 
ing 1s allowed therein except that particular use. One city may 
allow more uses in a residence district than another. The question 
is whether such uses harmonize with the residential character, so 
as not to result in preventable injury. 

The same too literal interpretation causes many persons to 


1Cal.—Feraut v. City of Sacramento, 204 Cal. 687, 269 P. 537 (1928) 

Ill.—Forbes v. Hubbard, 348 Ill. 166, 180 N. E. 767 (1932) 
Lind v. City of Rockford, 354 Ill. 377, 188 N. E. 446 (1933) 

Kan.—Hoel v. Kansas City, 131 Kan. 290, 291 P. 780 (1930) 

Mich.—City of Pleasant Ridge v. Cooper, 267 Mich. 603, 255 N. W. 371 (1934) 

N. Y.—Dowsey v. Village of Kensington, 257 N. Y. 221, 177 N. E. 427 (1931) 
Isbister v. Isbister, Supreme Court, Westchester County, May 8, 1925, 215 

App. Div. 838, 213 N. Y. S. 826 (1926) 

Isenbarth v. Bartnett, 206 App. Div. 546, 201 N. Y. S. 383, affd. 237 N. Y. 
_ 617, 143 N. E. 765 (1924) 

Ohio— Mehl v. Stegner, 38 Oh. A. 416, 175 N. E. 712 (1930) 

Pa.—Taylor v. Haverford Tp., 299 Pa. 402, 149 A. 639 (1930) 


2'York Harbor Village Corporation v. Libby, 126 Me. 537, 140 A. 382 (1928) 
82 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


consider that a business district is for business and nothing else. 
As a matter of fact residences can be erected as freely in such dis- 
tricts as stores. A business district is usually no more than a district 
from which industries are excluded. Before a municipality is zoned 
every part is equivalent to an unrestricted or industrial dis- 
trict. The parts that are declared to be business districts are 
more protected than they were before, because new industries are 
excluded. 

It cannot be denied that municipalities of all sorts, especially 
towns, have been prone to place too much street frontage in busi- 
ness districts. In some towns one hundred times as much street 
frontage has been placed in business districts as is likely to be used 
for business purposes in two generations. The reason usually is 
that the main streets or highways are important traffic arteries 
with occasional shops and stores, and more often with occasional 
garages and gasoline stations. New private homes are not at- 
tracted. They are inclined to seek locations slightly removed from 
the main traffic arteries. Landowners on the traffic streets—on 
the sides zoned for residences—not being able to sell for residence 
purposes, naturally desire to keep their land available for both 
residences and business, and on this account they petition the 
authorities to place both sides of their street in business districts. 
It cannot be said that courts have shown any criticism of this 
generosity toward such districts. Every municipality is fortunate 
that can with fairness to property owners reduce its business dis- 
tricts to its reasonable prospective needs for business because it 
is better not to have residences and stores intermingled. 

It is usually to the advantage of owners of portions of main 
thoroughfares that are suitable for residences, to have such portions 
zoned as residential. If zoned for business there will be few buyers. 
The land may never be needed for business, but buyers of resi- 
dence locations will avoid it because of the danger that a store or 
filling station may be erected on one of the adjoining lots. 

The increase of freeways, which are thoroughfares to which the 
abutting owners have no right of direct access, will help to solve the 
problem of too extensive business districts along main ar- 
teries. Business districts will be placed on transverse and parallel 


streets. 
83 


ZONING 


It has been declared unreasonable to change a single lot from 
residence to business. 

Where a zoning regulation prohibits a change of use, this must 
usually be regarded as prohibiting a change to another grade of 
use. For instance, in a single ordinance the uses allowed in a resi- 
dence district are of one grade. Similarly in a business district the 
allowable stores are of the same grade. A change from a grocery 
store to a hardware store is not a prohibited change of use. Some 
ordinances have gone too far in this regard and have endeavored to 
require an additional permit when such a change is made. This 
is a mistake because it injures rentability. 

The use of a building may depend upon its purpose as shown 
by its form and construction.2, Thus a building constructed for a 
store and having a plate glass front might have been occupied by 
a family as their home pending rental as a store. Then on the 
adoption of an ordinance it may be included in a residence district. 
Although it never has been used for a store and has actually been 
used as a residence, it would become a lawful nonconforming build- 
ing on the principle that its business character, as shown by its 
form and construction, had existed from the beginning. 


DIFFERENT KINDS OF BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 


In most states the simple establishment of a business district, 
in which business and residences are permitted, and an industrial 
district in which industry, business, and residences are permitted 
has not afforded sufficient segregation. Some industry, especially 
light industry, must be permitted in every business district. The 
clothing store must have a repair department. The jeweler must 
set rings and repair watches. The shoe store must repair shoes. 
Cities are likely to consider that a large amount of light industry 


1N. J.—Guaranty Const. Co. v. Town of Bloomfield, 11 N. J. Misc. 613, 168 A. 34 


(1933) 

Linden Methodist Episcopal Church v. City of Linden, 113 N. J. L. 188,173 
A. 593 (1934) 

2N. Y.—Town of Islip v. Newton, Supreme Court, Suffolk County, New York Law 

Journal, November 10, 1933 

Knickerbocker Ice Co. v. Sprague, 4 F. Supp. 499 (1933) 

Wohl v. Leo, 109 Misc. 448, 178 N. Y. S. 851, affd. 201 App. Div. 857, 192 
N. Y. S. 945 (1922) 

Pa.—Haller Baking Co.’s Appeal, 295 Pa. 257, 145 A. 77 (1928) 


84 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


must be permitted in business districts. The regulations of a dis- 
trict for general business in some cities are about the same as those 
for a light industry district in others. The classes of districts that 
have been favored are local business districts for shopping in resi- 
dential localities, downtown business districts, sometimes called 
commercial districts, where buildings can be higher and nearer 
together, merchandising districts—such as those inaccurately called 
retail districts in Greater New York—from which industry is almost 
entirely excluded, light industry districts, and heavy industry dis- 
tricts. No two cities are exactly alike in their needs for these dis- 
tricts. A manufacturing city differs from a suburban residential 
city. A seaport differs from a mining town. 

Candy stores making their own candy, bakeries making their own 
products, and hand laundries are usually allowed in local business 
districts. But it early became evident that large factories for these 
purposes could not properly be allowed in these districts because 
they were tantamount to industry. Accordingly the custom arose 
of limiting the number of horse power of the machines or the 
number of workers, or in the case of laundries allowing a limited 
number of hand workers only. In the main such provisions have 
been successful and have given rise to almost no litigation.! 

Some cities have applied fanciful exclusions to business districts 
in an effort to make certain portions of their business streets of a 
higher character. For instance, some have excluded wholesaling 
of merchandise. It is hard to see how wholesaling is more injurious 
than retailing. In some districts enumerated articles of merchan- 
dise can be sold, and no others. These segregations based on 
preferences and exclusiveness are out of place in a zoning plan. 
Doubtless, however, the segregation of stores selling food products 
from stores selling other kinds of merchandise would be upheld by 
the courts because food products cause refuse and attract insects 
more than dry goods, hardware, and office business. 

Some municipalities have established modified business districts 
in which stores are allowed on the ground floor of buildings but 
only residences above. It is difficult to see what justification there 
is for this practice under the police power. The floor above a store 


1City of New Rochelle v. Blossom Cleaners & Dyers, Inc., City Court, New 
Rochelle, N. Y., Westchester Law Journal, October 17, 1933 


85 


ZONING 


is open to all the dangers and drawbacks of the store use. A fire 
in the store endangers the floor above. If food products are sold 
in the store, the floors above are subjected to the dangers of flies 
and other insects. This method of zoning has not become so prev- 
alent that cases have found their way into court, but it is an 
attractive form of zoning often favored by the property owners who 
hope to rent the first floors for stores and yet preserve a certain 
amount of exclusiveness for the apartments above. It has generally 
been considered that a residence district should be all residence 
from the lowest to the topmost floor of its buildings, and that a 
business district should at least be open to business to the same 
extent. As far as possible it is well to segregate residential uses 
from business and industrial uses. 


DENSITY OF POPULATION 


Although the segregation of dwellings according to the number 
of families is recognized by the courts as lawful, yet this segregation 
does not necessarily have any relation to density of population. 
Some multi-family houses are smaller than some one-family houses. 
The number of families does not measure the size of the building, 
and therefore does not necessarily measure the density of popula- 
tion. Instates where the enabling act authorizes zoning for density 
of population the practice has increased of providing a density 
regulation for each district and especially for each residential dis- 
trict.1 This may be done by stating the allowable number of 
families per acre of land. No prospect of trouble arises in reducing 
the allowable number to three or four families per acre. It is not 
difficult to show the court that such a regulation has a substantial 
relation to fire risk, light and sunlight, circulation of air, annoyance 
from noise, and danger of contagion. The substantial relation 
ceases, however, when unnecessarily large building plots are re- 
quired. The question sometimes arises whether these density reg- 
ulations can be used to preserve the surroundings of large estates 
1 ]11.—Bjork v. Safford, 333 Ill. 355, 164 N. E. 699 (1929) 

N. J.—Nelson Bldg. Co. v. Greene, 5 N. J. Misc. 331, 136 A. 503 (1927) 
N. Y.—Barker v. Switzer, 209 App. Div. 151, 205 N. Y. S. 108 (1924) 
MacEwen v. City of New Rochelle, 149 Misc. 251, 267 N. Y. S. 36 (1933) 


R. I.—City of Providence v. Stephens, 47 R. I. 387, 133 A. 614 (1926) 
Richard v. Zoning Board of Review, 47 R. I. 102, 130 A. 802 (1925) 


86 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


by preventing the building of nearby houses on comparatively small 
lots. For instance, a regulation requiring two acres for each family 
might be a protection to surrounding large estates, but in case of 
a lawsuit could the municipality show that a house for one family 
on two acres of land contributed to the safety and health of the 
community to a greater degree than such a house on one acre of 
landr Three families to the acre is safe. Beyond that is doubtful. 
Some point still beyond that is unlawful for the reason that there 
is no substantial relation between the regulation and the health 
and safety of the community. 

Instead of limiting the number of families per acre there may 
be a requirement as to the number of square feet of lot per family. 
Both methods are controlled by the same legal principles. A 
specified minimum number of square feet of floor space per family 
is lawful where there is a density authorization in the state enabling 
act. Similarly a minimum number of lineal feet of street frontage 
per family may be lawfully established. 

It is true that families may vary greatly in size, but no better 
way has been found of regulating density of population than by 
limiting the number of families occupying a given area. It is a 
practical method of attaining the object desired and has the added 
advantage of requiring construction features, such as cooking or 
laundry equipment, which show the examiner of the plans the use 
and density intended. 

It is important, however, that the ordinance contain a definition 
of a family, otherwise the court will stand by the dictionary defini- 
tion which is unsatisfactory for this purpose.1. The substance of 
the definition should be that the word means two or more people 
living together as a single housekeeping unit and using one cooking 
outfit only. 

INTERIM ORDINANCES 

The term interim zoning is applied to a quickly prepared ordi- 
nance, without a map, designed to preserve the status quo until 
complete regulations with a map can be established.? Such ordi- 


1 Village of Riverside v. Reagan, 270 Ill. A. 355 (1933) 


2 lowa— Downey v. Sioux City, 208 Iowa 1273, 227 N. W. 125 (1929) 
La.—Dickson v. Harrison, 161 La. 218, 108 S. 421 (1926): “What makes the 
ordinance objectionable is that it prescribes no uniform rule of action, 
Footnote continued on page 88. 
87 


ZONING 


nances are not to be encouraged. If enforced they usually result in 
unfairness to property owners and often delay or embarrass the 
adoption of a comprehensive and non-discriminatory plan. The 
defect of all interim ordinances is that their districts are so ill- 
defined and their regulations are so general that a large proportion 
of the requirements are unreasonable in their application to specific 
lots! Citizens and even courts may endure them for a short time 
but they produce excessive litigation while they last and cause 
disputes which are likely to prevent a later harmonious arrange- 
ment of districts. One of the favored methods of this sort of reg- 
ulation is to provide that no store or factory shall be built unless 
the owners within a certain distance consent.? Another is that no 
store or factory shall be built where the majority of buildings within 
a certain number of feet from the proposed site are dwellings.’ 
Sometimes a provision is added that a store or factory shall not be 
erected unless a certain fraction of the surrounding owners consent 


Footnote coniinued from page 87. 
applicable to all similarly situated, under which the council is to act in 
granting or withholding permits, but leaves it to the whim and fancy of the 
council to grant or withhold them. In our opinion the ordinance, because of 
this objectionable feature, which we think affects it in its entirety, is unconsti- 
tutional.” 
N. J.—Levy v. Mravlag, 96 N. J. L. 367, 115 A. 350 (1921) 
N. Y.—Kensington-Davis Corp. v. Schwab, 239 N. Y. 54, 145 N. E. 738 (1924) 
Longley v. Rumsey, 130 Misc. 492, 224 N. Y. S. 165 (1927) 
City of Olean v. Conkling, 157 Misc. 63, 283 N. Y. S. 66 (1935) 
In re Russell, 158 N. Y. S. 162 (1916) 
Ohio—Cahn v. Guion, 27 Oh. A. 141, 160 N. E. 868 (1927) 
Srigley v. Woodworth, 33 Oh. A. 406, 169 N. E. 713 (1929) 
Okl.—McCurley v. City of El Reno, 138 Okl. 92, 280 P. 467 (1929) 
Va.— Downham vy. City Council of Alexandria, 58 F. (2d) 784 (1932) 


1 Ark.—Herring v. Stannus, 169 Ark. 244, 275 S. W. 321 (1924) 
City of Little Rock v. Pfeifer, 169 Ark. 1027, 277 S. W. 883 (1925) 
Cal.—Andrews v. Barrett, 100 Cal. A. 801, 281 P. 79 (1929) 
Andrews v. City of Piedmont, 100 Cal. A. 700, 281 P. 78 (1929) 
Wickham v. Becker, 96 Cal. A. 443, 274 P. 397 (1929) 
La.—Dickason v. Harris, 158 La. 974, 105 S. 33 (1925) 


*Cal.—City of Stockton v. Frisbie & Latta, 93 Cal. A. 277, 270 P. 270 (1928) 
I]l.—Deitenbeck v. Village of Oak Park, 331 Ill. 406, 163 N. E. 445 (1928) 
Roos v. Kaul, 302 III. 317, 134 N. E. 740 (1922) 
Troy v. Village of Forest Park, 318 III. 340, 149 N. E. 281 (1925) 
Ky.—Cayce v. City of Hopkinsville, 217 Ky. 135, 289 S. W. 223 (1926) 
§ Ariz.—City of Tucson v. Arizona Mortuary, 34 Ariz. 495, 272 P. 923 (1928) 
Ky.—Fowler v. Obier, 224 Ky. 742, 7 S. W. (2d) 219 (1928) 
Kirkwood Bros. v. City of Madisonville, 230 Ky. 104, 18 S. W. (2d) 951 (1929) 


88 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


in writing. The courts have usually but not always pronounced 
these methods unreasonable and unlawful.? A better type of in- 
terim ordinance will name certain streets for business, certain other 
streets for industry, and declare that the remainder of the munic- 
ipality is residential. This wholesale method of zoning nearly 
always prevents a lawful building in some forgotten spot or prevents 
the lawful extension of an existing building. 

Interim ordinances that prohibit nonconforming uses within 
certain distances of other buildings are always hastily put together, 
are arbitrary in most of their provisions, and are not likely to be 
upheld by courts.’ 

State enabling acts usually require a municipality to appoint a 
zoning commission to prepare the ordinance, make a preliminary 
report and later a final report to the local legislature, holding public 
hearings at different stages of progress. These requirements have 
done much to prevent interim ordinances. Interim ordinances 
have puzzled courts. Local preferences and prejudices have affected 
local court decisions on these irrational plans and have prevented 
the growth of fixed rules for the sanction of such ordinances. 


1 lowa—City of Des Moines v. Manhattan Oil Co., 193 Iowa 1096, 184 N. W. 823, 
188 N. W. 921 (1922) 
Marquis v. City of Waterloo, 210 lowa 439, 228 N. W. 870 (1930) 


2 Cal.—Lima v. Woodruff, 107 Cal. A. 285, 290 P. 480 (1930) 
Miller v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 477, 234 P. 381 (1925) 
Fla.—Skillman v. City of Miami, 1o1 Fla. 585, 134 S. 541 (1931) 
Ill.— Koos v. Saunders, 349 Ill. 442, 182 N. E. 415 (1932) 
Ky.—McCown v. Gose, 244 Ky. 402, 51 S. W. (2d) 251 (1932) 
coat Inspector of Lowell v. Stoklosa, 250 Mass. 52, 145 N. E. 262 
(1924 
Minn.—Eha v. Bundlie, District Court, Second Judicial District, Ramsey 
County, St. Paul, July 23, 1931 
N. Y.—Ballard v. Roth, 141 Misc. 319, 253 N. Y. S. 6 (1931) 
Coley v. Campbell, 126 Misc. 869, 215 N. Y. S. 679 (1926) 
City of Glens Falls v. Standard Oil Company, 127 Misc. 104, 215 N. Y. S. 354 
(1926) 
In Pe Russell, 158 N. Y. S. 162 (1916) 
City of Utica v. Hanna, 202 App. Div. 610, 195 N. Y. S. 225 (1922) 
Pa.—Perrin’s Appeal, 305 Pa. 42, 156 A. 305 (1931) 
?Cal.—City of Stockton v. Frisbie & Latta, 93 Cal. A. 277, 270 P. 270 (1928) 
Ill.—Roos v. Kaul, 302 Ill. 317, 134 N. E. 740 (1922) 
Troy v. Village of Forest Park, 318 Ill. 340, 149 N. E. 281 (1925) 
Ky.—Cayce v. City of Hopkinsville, 217 Ky. 135, 289 S. W. 223 (1926) 
4 Kramer v. Schwartz, 336 Mo. 932, 82 S. W. (2d) 63 (1935) 


89 


ZONING 


PIECEMEAL ORDINANCES 


Piecemeal zoning has not been favored in practice. Without 
knowing where the courts would draw the line municipalities have 
usually kept on the safe side by zoning all the land within their 
boundaries. And yet in the zoning of Greater New York, although 
all the terrain was zoned on the height and area maps, large ter- 
ritories were left undetermined on the use map. These were in 
Jamaica Bay, southern Staten Island, and the Bronx, where streets 
were not shown on the official map and development was not 
sufficient to point the way for adaptation to the future. Much of 
this territory has since been definitely zoned on the use map. 

It should be added that in the early maps use districts were 
designated by markings within streets. If there were no streets (as 
was the case in these outlying territories) the use districts could 
not be shown. This awkward method of designation was abandoned 
after a few years, and districts regardless of streets were indicated 
by hatching. 

In towns that have several populous community centers, none 
of them incorporated, the question arises whether one community 
can be zoned and the others left unzoned. The well-known block- 
ordinance decisions in St. Louis and Chicago, where piecemeal 
zoning was declared void, served to warn early practitioners in zon- 
ing to avoid the charge that land in the same municipality that was 
situated alike was partly zoned and partly unzoned.!_ However, 
there is little likelihood that courts will hold that a zoning plan is 
void because some portion of the municipality is omitted. Populous 
portions having streets or highways present a situation justifying 
their regulation whereas unpopulated and undeveloped portions 
may not.? It would be improper and probably unlawful for a town 


1]]].—Friend v. City of Chicago, 261 Ill. 16, 103 N. E. 609 (1913) 
Kan.—Julian v. Golden Rule Oil Co., 112 Kan. 671, 212 P. 884 (1923) 
Mass.— Kilgour v. Gratto, 224 Mass. 78, 112 N. E. 489 (1916) 
Mo.—City of St. Louis v. Dorr, 145 Mo. 466, 41 S. W. 1094 (1897) 
N. J.—Aitken v. Borough of Hasbrouck Heights, 136 A. 802 (1927) 
Ohio—City of Youngstown v. Kahn Bros. Bldg. Co., 112 Oh. St. 654, 148 N. E. 
842 (1925) 
* Fla.—Henry v. City of Miami, 117 Fla. 594, 158 S. 82 (1934). The minority 
opinion seems the better. 
La.—Dickson v. Harrison, 161 La. 218, 108 S. 421 (1926) 


Footnote continued on page or. 


‘90 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


to zone one of its less populous communities and leave a more 
populous community unzoned. Some officials have proposed that 
zoning be applied to a part of their municipality, and extended from 
time to time as owners petition and as the experiment shows how 
to improve. No method could be more hazardous than this. Law- 
suits would be inevitable and a comprehensive and codrdinated 
zoning plan would be less attainable each year. 


DISCRIMINATION 


Regulations must recognize the effect of structures lawfully 
erected before zoning began.! An early decision in Illinois produced 
consternation throughout that state and the Middle West because 
if followed it would have overthrown all zoning. It held that if 
existing nonconforming buildings and uses were allowed to remain, 
the prohibition of similar buildings and uses was discriminatory and 
unconstitutional.? This doctrine has long been superseded even in 
Illinois, and it is held in all states that it is lawful to allow existing 
buildings to continue without jeopardizing the regulations regard- 
ing new buildings. Zoning is designed to protect the future and at 
the same time deal reasonably with buildings already lawfully in 
existence. In Greater New York, before zoning was adopted in 
1916—and especially in the Grand Central and downtown districts 
of Manhattan—there were buildings of excessive height on the 
street line. Some occupied their entire lot areas. These localities 
were designated “two” and ‘‘two and one-half times districts” on 
the height map, and “B districts” on the area map, not because the 
limits so established werethe best adapted tothe health, safety, and 
general welfare of thecommunity but because there was danger that 
the courts would declare more drastic regulations discriminatory and 
therefore unreasonable and void. Courts will undoubtedly uphold 


Footnote continued from page oo. 
N. Y.—Harris v. Village of Dobbs Ferry, 208 App. Div. 853, 204 N. Y. S. 325 
(1924) 
Hayden v. Clary, Supreme Court, Onondaga County, January 6, 1922 
Ohio—Feiss v. City of Cleveland, Court of Common Pleas, Cuyahoga County, 
September, 1924, Baltimore (Md.) Daily Record, January 1, 1925 
1 La.—Boland v. Compagno, 154 La. 469, 97 S. 661 (1923) 
Giangrosso v. City of New Orleans, 159 La. 1016, 106 S. 549 (1925) 
Sampere v. City of New Orleans, 166 La. 776, 117 S. 827 (1928) 


2 Roos v. Kaul, 302 Ill. 317, 134 N. E. 740 (1922) 
Ol 


ZONING 


ordinances that require somewhat better standards than existing 
buildings, but will not approve standards which render new build- 
ings economically impossible. A new village with no building 
higher than two stories might well expect the courts to uphold an 
ordinance making a two-story height limit. The village would 
probably show on the trial that the village was in less danger from 
fires if high buildings were not allowed and that its fire-fighting 
apparatus was not adapted to the protection of high buildings. 

As a rule both sides of a street should be in the same kind of 
district,| but where one or both sides were entirely built up before 
zoning, and varying conditions were in existence, the courts have 
sometimes upheld regulations which continue for one side of a 
street the more restricted conditions already established there.? 

The question sometimes arises whether a municipality must 
harmonize its zoning districts at the boundary line of another mu- 
nicipality with the buildings and uses existing in the latter area. 
Political boundaries should not prevent adaptation.’ As zoning is 
based on the police power, and the environment must in all cases 
be recognized, the neighboring structures and uses must have the 
same effect as if they were in the municipality that is being zoned. 
When the land in the neighboring municipality is vacant the mu- 
nicipality adopting an ordinance may properly allow its own needs 
to control. But the mere fact that the neighboring municipality 
has adopted an ordinance does not compel the newly-zoned munic- 
ipality to harmonize its districts with those of the other if no 
buildings have been erected there. In other words, it is existing 
buildings and uses that should be the basis of determination and 
not the mere existence of districts. It may happen that the dis- 
tricts will be changed before structures are built. 

When the New York City building zone resolution was framed 
there were many regulative laws and ordinances in existence like 
those relating to tenement houses and factories. In some cases the 
new zoning regulations were less restrictive than existing laws and 
in some cases more restrictive. To prevent confusion, and to make 


1 See cases cited under Problems of Use Districts, p. 81 


2 Cal.—Feraut v. City of Sacramento, 204 Cal. 687, 269 P. 537 (1928) 
N. Y.—Maloff v. Kimmey, Supreme Court, Onondaga County, April 2, 1931 


3 See Dowsey case, p. 82; also Townsend’s Pet., 21 Pa. Dist. & Co. 340 (1933) 
Q2 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


sure that a zoning regulation would not be employed to weaken 
existing laws on the principle that it was a later enactment, it was 
provided that the more restrictive rule should be in force. This 
provision has been followed almost universally throughout the 
country. 

Local legislative bodies are sometimes intrigued into the view 
that because they have the power to zone they can discriminate in 
favor of or against given areas, regardless of the principle that land 
situated alike should be zoned alike. Courts have rather uniformly 
declared that such discrimination is unlawful.” 


NUISANCE 


Zoning is not based on the doctrine of common-law nuisance. 
Good zoning enabling acts and ordinances do not even use the word 
nuisance. Nevertheless a prohibited use is sometimes a nuisance, 
and sometimes a permitted use is a nuisance. Zoning regulations 
and common-law nuisances are based on different legal principles; 
they never conflict with each other if the underlying differences are 
kept in mind. There are cases, however, where a neighbor in en- 
joining a nonconforming use will allege that it is also a nuisance. 
Thus inevitably court decisions have treated the subject of nuisance 
along with zoning regulations, but the opinions nearly always make 
it clear that the nuisance is one thing and the violation of the zoning 
regulation another.’ If zoning had been based on the doctrine of 


1 Thorofare Developing Corp. v. Deegan, 134 Misc. 592, 235 N. Y. S. 544, affd. 226 
App. Div. 871, 235 N. Y. S. 898 (1929) 
2 11l.—Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 III. 284, 172 N. E. 710 
(1930) 
N. J.—Fischer v. Borough Council of South Toms River, 181 A. 630 (1935) 
Wis.—Piper v. Ekern, 180 Wis. 586, 194 N. W. 159 (1923) 
Schwahn v. City of Eau Claire, Circuit Court, Eau Claire County, June 24, 
1929 
3Cal.—Eaton v. Klimm, 217 Cal. 362, 18 P. (2d) 678 (1933) 

Fendley v. City of Anaheim, 110 Cal. A. 731, 294 P. 769 (1930) 

Vowinckel v. Clark & Sons, 216 Cal. 156, 13 P. (2d) 733 (1932) 
Conn.—Nailor v. C. W. Blakeslee & Sons, Inc., 117 Conn. 241, 167 A. 548 (1933) 
Ind.—Albright v. Crim, 97 Ind. A. 388, 185 N. E. 304 (1933) 

Kan.—Fink v. Smith, 140 Kan. 345, 36 P. (2d) 976 (1934) 
Mass.—Beane v. H. K. Porter, Inc., 280 Mass. 538, 182 N. E. 823 (1932) 

Marshall v. Holbrook, 276 Mass. 341, 177 N. E. 504 (1931) 

Tortorella v. H. Traiser & Co., 284 Mass. 497, 188 N. E. 254 (1933) 


Footnote continued on page 04. 


03 


ZONING 


nuisance it would not have been effective, and in its broader aspects 
it would not have been upheld by courts. A good zoning plan for 
a city furnishes harmonious regulations for every part so that the 
whole conserves the health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, 
and general welfare of the whole community. To accomplish this 
purpose the incidence of the regulations on every lot should have 
a substantial relation to these bases of the police power. Clearly 
a book store is not a nuisance, but if such a store is permitted ina 
residence district a myriad of similar uses must be permitted; 
otherwise there would be unfair discrimination. Business districts 
bring increased crowds, greater street traffic, and more noise. 
Hence they are reasonably segregated from residence districts, 
whether or not any one building or use constitutes a nuisance. 
Moreover, the zoning plan affords a basis for the issue of building 
permits, thus assisting in the harmonious upbuilding of the city, 
while it is the manner of operating an existing building or use that 
usually constitutes a nuisance. 

Certain extremely harmful uses, when they are out of place, are 
considered by the courts to be nuisances per se; in such cases the 
erection of the building or the beginning of the use will be enjoined. 
These cases usually arise in cities that are not zoned. They are 
nearly always full of uncertainty and difficult for the courts. A 


Footnote continued from page 93. 
N. J.—Francisco v. Department of Institutions and Agencies, 13 N. J. Misc. 663, 
180 A. 843 (1935) 
N. Y.—Arthur v. Virkler, 144 Misc. 483, 258 N. Y. S. 886 (1932) 
Bove v. Donner-Hanna Coke Corp., 142 Misc. 329, 254 N. Y. S. 403, 236 App. 
Diviis7Nz5o Ne ye .9: 220)( 1032) 
Haber v. Paramount Ice Corp., 239 App. Div. 324, 267 N. Y. S. 349, 264 
N. Y. 98, 190 N. E. 163 (1934) 

Keenly v. McCarty, 137 Misc. 524, 244 N. Y. S. 63 (1930) 

People v. Cuneo Eastern Press, 257 N. Y. 208, 177 N. E. 422 (1931) 
Ohio—Salvation Army v. Frankenstein, 22 Oh. A. 159, 153 N. E. 277 (1926) 
Pa.—Franklin Street Methodist Episcopal Church v. Crystal Oil & Gas Co., 

309 Pa. 357, 163 A. 910 (1932) 
White v. Old York Road Country Club, 185 A. 316 (1936) 
Yeager v. Traylor, 306 Pa. 530, 160 A. 108 (1932) 
Tex.—City of Austin v. Nelson, 45 S. W. (2d) 692 (1931) 
Harvey v. City of Seymour, 14 S. W. (2d) got (1929) 
Meee be Falls v. Continental Oil Co., 5 S. W. (2d) 561, 42 S. W. (2d) 
236 (1931 
Utah—Salt Lake City v. Western Foundry & S. R. Works, 55 Utah 447, 187 P. 
829 (1920) 


94 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


zoning plan will prevent this dangerous and unsatisfactory liti- 
gation.! 


BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS 


Boundaries of districts should ordinarily be a standard distance 
from the street line. In New York City this distance is one hundred 
feet. In municipalities having deeper lots the distance may be one 
hundred and fifty feet or even two hundred feet. Boundary lines 
in the center of streets usually make trouble because courts are 
always likely to consider that regulations on both sides of a street 
should be the same. 

Land surveyors often like to make the boundary line follow rear 
lot lines. This is a mistake. A boundary line between districts 
should be a straight line usually parallel with a street. The first 
impression of the map maker is that, if the boundary line does not 
follow the rear lot lines, there will be trouble because a single lot 
will be in two zoning districts. As a practical matter this result 
is neither dangerous nor even inconvenient. If the boundary line 
is one hundred feet from the street line, and some particular lot 
is one hundred and fifty feet deep, the board of appeals will always 
assist the owner to make some reasonable use of his entire lot. 
Sometimes it will grant a variance to the effect that the business 
building on the front of the lot can extend into the residence 
district in the rear, subject to conditions that will protect the 
neighboring homes. No case seems ever to arise that cannot be 
reasonably adjusted by the board of appeals. On the other hand, 
the practice of making boundary lines follow rear lines of lots 1s 
most unfair and harmful. The owner of a lot of unusual depth can 
erect a building that will injure conforming buildings in the rear. 
For instance, if the boundary of a business district is in the rear 
of one-hundred-foot lots, but some exceptional lot is one hundred 
and fifty feet deep, a district boundary which follows the rear lot 
lines would allow the owner of the deep lot to erect a business build- 
ing that would extend into the residence district in the rear and 
injure many homes. Moreover, if the boundary follows rear lot 
lines, the owners of average depth lots are discriminated against 


1 Mass.—Polish Political Club v. Cloper, 260 Mass. 559, 157 N. E. 705 (1927) 
N. Y.—Haber v. Paramount Ice Corp., 239 App. Div. 324, 267 N. Y. S. 349, 
264 N. Y. 98, 190 N. E. 163 (1934) 


95 


ZONING 


because the mere fact of ownership will cause a neighboring lot of 
unusual depth to be available for a larger or higher building that 
will pocket or injure the buildings on lots of normal depth. If the 
boundary is a straight line parallel with the street, sales will gradu- 
ally be made that will tend to conform the lot line to the district 
boundary. 

All boundary lines are more or less arbitrary, but if laid out with 
reasonable fairness, the courts will uphold them.! 

An indefinite location of boundary lines is perhaps the most 
troublesome of all boundary mistakes. Sometimes, for example, 
the location of the line is left to a board of appeals in the expecta- 
tion that it will decide, as each case arises, where the boundary is. 
As a matter of fact the courts have never allowed a board of appeals 
to make that determination. The fixing of the boundary line is 
‘a legislative act, and the local legislative body, not the board of 
appeals, must determine it.2, Where ordinances provide that the 
board of appeals shall have this power it is the court that by in- 
terpretation fixes the line, and not the board of appeals. | 

The center or either border of a railroad right of way often 
constitutes an appropriate boundary line. Railroad land, however, 
should always be placed in one district or the other because the 
railroad is likely to part with the title to the land, and the new 
owner may obtain a permit for a harmful structure. Sometimes 
the railroad itself will erect a harmful structure if its land is not 
zoned to harmonize with the neighborhood.’ 

It is bad practice to describe boundaries of districts in the body of 
the ordinance instead of making a zoning map part of the ordinance. 
The mapping method forces the drafter to define all land areas. 
Corners are always difficult. Waterways, isolated lots, and unusual 
block shapes give rise to litigation if there is doubt as to the district 
intended. If, however, the boundaries are fixed by the terms of 
the ordinance instead of by a map, it is almost inevitable that 
serious omissions or double meanings will occur. Then, too, amend- 


1 In re Dawson, 136 Okl. 113, 277 P. 226 (1928) 
2 Mass.—Nelson v. Town of Belmont, 274 Mass. 35, 174 N. E. 320 (1931) 
N. Y.—Wertheimer v. Schwab, 124 Misc. 822, 210 N. Y. S. 312 (1925) 
3N. Y.—Joleto Construction Corp. v. Walsh, 223 App. Div. 764, 228 N. Y. S. 282 


(1928) 
Okl.—McCurley v. City of El Reno, 138 Okl. 92, 280 P. 467 (1929) 


96 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


ments of maps by pasters can be easily made, but the wording of 
the ordinance cannot usually be amended without introducing 
circuitous and long-drawn-out provisions. 


ESTHETICS 


Courts make no objection to the recognition of esthetic purposes 
in zoning regulations if the regulations are based on considerations 
of health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and the general 
welfare of the community.!. As a general rule, however, zoning 
regulations may not be based on esthetic considerations.? A zoning 
regulation controlling the color or the architectural style of build- 
ings would not be upheld today by the courts. On the other hand 
so many qualities are closely connected with the health, safety, and 
convenience of the community that police-power regulations of 
great scope will be increasingly upheld. Quiet and the presence 
of natural surroundings and even vegetation, on account of its pro- 
duction of oxygen, may be important elements in preserving health. 
Considerations of light and air affect the health of the community 
and enter into the making of lawful zoning regulations. In so far 
as other amenities accomplish the same result, they too will in- 
creasingly be recognized. It has been said that beautiful architec- 
ture is in the same way conducive to health, or at least to comfort 
and well-being. If all people were alike in taste, this might be true. 
But even architectural experts differ as to what they consider 
examples of good taste. De gustibus non est disputandum is as true 
today as it was two thousand years ago. Our courts, compelled 
as they are to pass on the reasonableness of police-power legislation, 
1U, S.—Welch v. Swasey, 214 U. S. 91, 29 S. Ct. 567 (Mass., 1909) 

La.—Civello v. City of New Orleans, 154 La. 271, 97 S. 440 (1923) 
Mass.—Ayer v. Cram, 242 Mass. 30, 136 N. E. 338 (1922) 
Opinion of Justices, 234 Mass. 597, 127 N. E. 525 (1920) 


Ohio— Kahn Bros. Co. v. City of Youngstown, 25 Ohio N. P. (N.S.) 30 (1924) 
City of a ip v. Kahn Bros. Bldg. Co., 112 Oh. St. 654, 148 N. E. 842 
(1925 
2 111.—Forbes v. Hubbard, 348 Ill. 166, 180 N. E. 767 (1932) 
Me.—York Harbor Village Corporation v. Libby, 126 Me. 537, 140 A. 382 (1928) 
N. Y.—A change of map from business to residence in order to harmonize with 
a new parkway was upheld—Leone v. Brewer, White Plains (N. Y.) Daily 
Reporter, December 30, 1927, 222 App. Div. 773) 225 N. Y. S. 856 (1927) 
Ohio—Srigley v. Woodworth, 33 Oh. A. 406, 169 N. E. 713 (1929) 
Pa.—Kerr’s Appeal, 294 Pa. 246, 144 A. 81 (1928) 
3 Cochran v. Preston, 108 Md. 220, 70 A. 113 (1908) 


97 


ZONING 


prefer to cling to fields where the evidence of qualified experts will 
aid them in coming toa conclusion. Light, air, quiet, and the effect 
of vegetation on the atmosphere are subjects wherein expert evi- 
dence can assist. There can be a perception of correctness and 
incorrectness on the part of the court if experts disagree. But if 
architectural expert witnesses disagree on what is good in color, 
texture, and architectural style, the court is left, without help, to 
decide a question of good taste. In countries where courts do not 
pronounce either for or against the reasonableness of police-power 
enactments, municipal requirements regarding color or architec- 
tural style sometimes obtain. Usually, however, there is much 
criticism from those whose advice has not been followed. If in this 
country there should be architectural control of all buildings by 
art commissions or juries, the criticism would be great, especially 
in cities where the regulation would fall into the hands of incom- 
petent persons. Freedom from control on matters of good taste 
often permits undesirable conditions, but it also allows experi- 
mentation which in the long run may produce good results. 

Roadside advertising on private land has opened up a fertile field 
of debate and an even more perplexing field of state and municipal 
legislation. The first comprehensive zoning ordinance in this 
country—that of Greater New York—provided that only dwell- 
ings, schools, clubs, and other similar buildings and uses were 
permitted in residence districts. Because it omitted billboards from 
the permitted uses billboard permits have been refused in residence 
districts, and the refusals have been upheld by the courts.! This 
was the first effective prevention of billboards on a large scale in 
this country. Advertising by billboards on private land is con- 
sidered a business purpose, and is permitted in business and unre- 
stricted districts only. 

This method of preventing billboards has spread to all states. 
Farming localities and open country are zoned as residential, thus 
precluding the undesirable construction. But many large areas, 


1N. Y.—Britting v. Hartman, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law 
Journal, August 19, 1933, modified New York Daily News, November 21, 
1933 
Lynbrook v. Harkness, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law 
Journal, January 27, 1934 
Pa.—Liggett’s Petition, 291 Pa. 109, 139 A. 619 (1927) 


98 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


especially agricultural townships distant from large cities, have no 
zoning regulations and do not want any. Consequently in almost 
every state a demand has arisen for state or county regulation and 
the prevention of roadside billboards regardless of zoning districts. 
It has been decided that roadside advertising constitutes a separate 
and distinct class of structures and that they need not be treated 
the same as buildings.! But this does not solve the entire problem. 
If billboards on private land do not interfere with the safe driving 
of automobiles, courts do not usually admit that they affect the 
health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare 
of the community.” If they are prevented by police-power regu- 
lations for purely esthetic reasons, the prevention will be held to be 
unlawful or else the courts will recognize esthetic reasons as the 
basis of invocation of the police power. The best way to control 
roadside advertising is the adoption of zoning ordinances by all 
municipalities or counties. This will exclude billboards in all 
‘residence districts and allow them only in business and industrial 
districts. Almost the total terrain of country areas can be placed 
in residence districts, and billboards which do not interfere with 
highway vision are not offensive in business and industrial districts. 
Efforts to substitute state zoning for local zoning will produce 
serious problems. The clamor for state zoning of roadsides will 
tend to confuse state and local zoning, resulting in loss of local 
support and depriving municipalities of desired autonomy. Inthe 
fields where states exercise zoning powers, local powers will cease.® 
Massachusetts adopted a constitutional amendment empowering 
the state legislature to make laws for the regulation of billboards. 
The state highway commission was given the power of control by 
licenses. Outdoor advertising companies resisted the enforcement 
of such powers and their resistance gave rise in 1935 to the im- 
portant decision of General Outdoor Advertising Co. v. Depart- 
ment of Public Works (289 Mass. 149, 193 N. E. 799). In that deci- 


1St. Louis Poster Advertising Co. v. City of St. Louis (Mo.), 249 U. S. 269, 39 S. Ct. 
274 (1919) 

2 Perlmutter v. Greene, 259 N. Y. 327, 182 N. E. 5 (1932) 

8 Mass.—General Outdoor Advertising Co. v. Department of Public Works, 289 


Mass. 149, 193 N. E. 799 (1935) a 
Inspector of Buildings of Falmouth v. General Outdoor Advertising Co., 264 


Mass. 85, 161 N. E. 899 (1928) 
99 


ZONING 


sion the highest court of the state upheld the protection of roadside 
edges and rural scenery from defacement by billboards. Although 
this is not a zoning case it contains perhaps the best gig te of 
the esthetic possibilities of billboard regulation. 

State legislatures adopting a method of state control of billboards 
should therefore exclude municipalities and counties where control 
is exercised through zoning ordinances. 


ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES 


During the formative period of comprehensive zoning it became 
evident that districts could not be confined to principal uses only. 
It had always been customary for occupants of homes to carry on 
gainful employments as something accessory and incidental to the 
residence use. The doctor, dentist, lawyer, or notary had from 
time immemorial used his own home for his office. Similarly the 
dressmaker, milliner, and music teacher worked in her own home.! 
The earliest zoning ordinances took communities as they existed 
and did not try to prevent customary practices that met with no 
objection from the community. Indeed there would have been 
great opposition to early zoning plans if efforts had been made to 
prevent doctors or dressmakers from using their own homes in 
residential districts. Customary incidental home occupations are 
therefore allowed as accessory uses, even in new houses in resi- 
dential districts. When such uses are in accessory buildings, as is 
often the case, they are similarly allowed. A smoke-house, a 
doctor’s or lawyer’s office on the same lot as his home, a stable for 
horse and carriage, and a private garage are good examples of ac- 
cessory buildings.? 

Many ordinances have elaborate statements regarding accessory 
buildings and uses, but they can usually be reduced to a prohibition 
of business and a requirement that the accessory building must 
be on the same lot as the main building. The provisions of the 
Greater New York building zone resolution are simple. They do 
not enumerate permitted accessory uses but state that customary 
incidental uses are allowed in residence districts, that accessory 
buildings must be on the same lot as the main building, and that 
1 People v. Kelly, 255 N. Y. 396, 175 N. E. 108 (1931) 

2 See cases cited under Stables, Private-Garages, etc., p. 204 
100 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


business will not be allowed. It is remarkable how well these 
general regulations have worked out with the help of the courts. 
There seems to be no demand for more specific rules. The per- 
mitted uses must be incidental and not the main use. The main 
use of a doctor’s home is his residence, but his office and professional 
practice are incidental. If he moves from his home he cannot use 
the entire building as an office for himself and his associates while 
he lives elsewhere. If he could, this would be making the practice 
of medicine the main use of the building and not an accessory use. 
A dressmaker in a residence district may not employ a dozen seam- 
stresses while she keeps up a pretense of residence by sleeping in 
a back room. In sucha case dress manufacture and merchandising 
would be the main use. Accessory uses must be customary. Taking 
in washing may annoy the neighbors more than a manicure parlor, 
but probably the former is a customary use and the latter is not. 
A shoemaker’s work in his home is customary while the work of 
a barber at home is not. Distinctions are sometimes difficult but 
an accumulation of words in the ordinance does not usually clarify. 
Very likely a woman hairdresser or a man barber working in their 
respective homes would not be complained against by neighbors, 
but if the woman displayed advertising or the man a barber pole 
the building inspector would object. 

The accessory use must not be a business.! A real estate office 
or a plumbing shop would be so regarded. An antiquity shop would 
be a business because goods would be brought into the house to 
sell and merchandising would be carried on. Selling one’s household 
goods before moving to a distant place would be allowable in a 
residence district, but the successive filling up of the house with 
furniture and advertising and carrying on removal sales would be 
business and has been stopped. Boarding houses are often allowed 
by ordinances in residence districts. The incidental furnishing of 
meals to travellers or others would be an accessory use, but ex- 
posing a sign marked “ Restaurant”? would show that the use was 
business and the inspector would cause a discontinuance.” Hotels 


1N. Y.—B. & L. Enterprises, Inc. v. Schneider, Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, New York Law Journal, December 30, 1933 
Stockton Tea Room, Inc. v. Copeland, Supreme Court, New York County, 
New York Law Journal, April 19, 1922 


* See cases cited under Restaurants, p. 211 
IO] 


ZONING 


are permissible in residence districts in some cities. The showing 
of dresses or jewelry for sale inside the hotel would be considered 
an incidental use but the display in a window by an automobile 
touring association of a small sign saying that automobile license 
plates could be procured inside has been considered a business and 
has been stopped. 

A music studio is a lawful accessory use in a residence district 
in New York City. The fact that loud singing occurs does not 
produce a violation of the building zone resolution but possibly 
it might be stopped as a nuisance. A business sign has been 
held to be a lawful accessory addition to a nonconforming office 
building, 

In the zoning of farming communities difficulties arise regarding 
the raising and keeping of animals. The usual ordinance permits 
farming in residence districts. Experience has shown that the word 
“aericulture”’ is better in most parts of this country. “Farming” 
includes both agriculture and animal raising. If so interpreted in 
zoning ordinances, animal raising is as much a principal use as 
agriculture. Chicken farms and duck farms may be equivalent to 
industries where space is limited and food is brought from outside. 
When in or near thickly-settled communities they may be injurious 
on account of odor. In some parts of the country—especially near 
large cities where no adequate pasturage is possible—dairies may 
be injurious to surrounding residents. If the raising of animals is 
a lawful principal use, then these injurious uses may be begun as 
a matter of right. If, however, agriculture can be carried on as the 
principal use and the raising of animals only as an accessory use, 
the situation will be entirely changed. A small number of animals 
such as is usually kept on what we call a farm would then be lawful. 
It would undoubtedly be considered that the keeping of thirty 
or forty hens is an accessory use. But if a chicken farm were 
begun as a business, it would be ruled out. The question arises 
whether farming is synonymous with agriculture. A Texas court 
1 People v. Kelly, 255 N. Y. 396, 175 N. E. 108 (1931) 


2 I1]—IIlinois Life Insurance Co. v. City of Chicago, 244 III. A. 185 (1927) 


N. Y.—Towers Management Corporation v. Thatcher, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, New York Law Journal, September 10, 1935, 246 App. Div. 835, 
286 N. Y. S. 435, 271 N. Y. 94, 2 N. E. (2d) 273 (1936) 


102 


ZONING DISTRICTS 


opinion, rendered in 1923, gives a careful review of definitions 
as follows: 


He [Webster] defines “farm”: 

“Orig. a piece of land held under lease for the purpose of cultiva- 
tion; hence any tract of land (whether consisting of one or more 
parcels) devoted to agricultural purposes, including the production 
of crops and generally of animals, under the management of the 
Penanton theiowner,*) .. 1 4) 

In connection with the definition of farm, Bouvier’s Law Dic- 
tionary quotes the following: “A large tract or portion of land 
taken by lease under a yearly rent payable by the tenant. Tomlin, 
Law Dict. From this latter sense is derived its common modern 
signification of a large tract used for cultivation or other purposes, 
as raising stock, whether hired or owned by the occupant, includ- 
Ing a messuage with outbuildings, gardens, orchards, yards, etc. 
Blowd, 195, Touchst. 93.” ! 

The noun “farm” means a tract of land chiefly under cultiva- 
tion. While it is in this sense that the word is most frequently 
used, yet, as we have seen in its general scope and significance it 
means any tract of land used for the production of crops or the 
rearing of animals.! 


. This subject is painstakingly discussed in a Connecticut case in 
which is a strong dissenting opinion. The majority opinion holds 
that a chicken farm is not a proper accessory use in a residence 
district under the heading of farming.? In view of the double mean- 
ing of “farming,”’ it is well to omit the word from zoning ordinances 
and use “agriculture’’ instead. Where, however, population is 
scanty and farming areas are large, it may be desirable to continue 
the word “farming.”’ 

Quite apart from farms or agriculture, animals can be kept ina 
residence district as an accessory use, where the main use is resi- 
dential. The keeping of a dog, horse, cow, or a reasonable number 
of hens under such circumstances is a customary accessory use. 
Some ordinances enumerate the kinds of animals that can be kept. 
If possible, this practice should be avoided. Local health laws 
enforced by the police should be sufficient to protect a municipality 


1Gordon v. Buster, 113 Tex. 382, 257 S. W. 220 (1923) 
2 Chudnov v. Board of Appeals of Bloomfield, 113 Conn. 49, 154 A. 161 (1931) 
See also Winship v. Inspector of Buildings of Wakefield, 274 Mass. 380, 174 
N. E. 476 (1931) 
103 


ZONING 


against the keeping of offensive or dangerous animals. If pigs and 
bees should be excluded from residence districts in a city, there is 
an equal justification for excluding them from business and in- 
dustrial districts. Therefore regulations specif ying them should not 
be placed in a zoning ordinance but in a separate ordinance appli- 
cable alike to all parts of the city. The zoning ordinance should 
contain only regulations that apply to particular districts. 

Where general contracting is allowed in a business district, the 
equipment can be stored as accessory.} 

Accessory buildings are often confined to the rear part of the lot, 
or are not allowed within a certain distance from lot lines.? 

A lawful nonconforming use carries the right to have accessory 
buildings. Such buildings, used by a nonconforming race track, 
are an illustration.’ 


1 Greenfield v. Board of City Planning Com’rs of Los Angeles, 6 Cal. A. (2d) 515, 
45 P. (2d) 219 (1935) 
* Sundeen v. Rogers, 83 N. H. 253, 141 A. 142 (1928) 
: miei cay Racing Assn. v. City of Yonkers, 132 Misc. 816, 230 N. Y. S. 457 
192 


104 


GHAR TERS 
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 


CONTINUANCE OF USE 


ONCONFORMING buildings and uses existing when an 
ordinance goes into effect are allowed to continue. It has 
been considered that buildings erected according to law, 

even if out of place, should be allowed to stand indefinitely, and 
that the nonconforming use should not be stopped.1. Zoning seeks 
to stabilize and protect and not to destroy. The view that has been 
followed is that a few nonconforming buildings and uses if allowed 
to continue will not be a substantial injury to a community if only 
such nonconforming buildings are not allowed to multiply where 
they are harmful or improper. Zoning has sought to safeguard the 
future, in the expectation that time will repair the mistakes of the 
past. When nonconforming buildings are destroyed by fire or other 
act of God, they ought not to be allowed to be rebuilt as a matter 
of right. If owners of such buildings plan to alter them substan- 
tially, they should be forced by the ordinance to consider the 
possibilities of rebuilding in a conforming manner.’ 


1 Cal.—Biscay v. City of Burlingame, 127 Cal. A. 213, 15 P. (2d) 784 (1932) 
Blumenthal & Co. v. Cryer, 71 Cal. A. 668, 236 P. 216 (1925) 
Ryan v. Andriano, 91 Cal. A. 136, 266 P. 831 (1928) 
Wilson v. Edgar, 64 Cal. A. 654, 222 P. 623 (1923) 
Conn.—Enlarging nonconforming building. Thayer y. Board of Appeals of Hart- 
ford, 114 Conn. 15, 157 A. 273 (1931) 
Kan.—City of Norton v. Hutson, 142 Kan. 305, 46 P. (2d) 630 (1935) 
La.—Charbonnet v. City of New Orleans, 176 La. 1050, 147 S. 345 (1933) 
Hochfelder v. City of New Orleans, 171 La. 1053, 132 S. 786 (1931) 
Mich.—Adams v. Kalamazoo Ice & Fuel Co., 245 Mich. 261, 222 N. W. 86 (1928) 
N. J.—Cannady v. Town of Montclair, 7 N. J. Misc. 1045, 147 A. 737 (1929) 
N. Y.—People v. Miano, 234 App. Div. 94, 254 N. Y. S. 105 (1931) 
Welch v. City of Niagara Falls, 210 App. Div. 170, 205 N. Y. S. 454 (1924) 
Wash.—Hardy v. Superior Court of King County, 155 Wash. 244, 284 P. 93 


(1930) 
Wis.—Bartkus v. Albers, 189 Wis. 539, 208 N. W. 260 (1926) 
Carter v. Harper, 182 Wis. 148, 196 N. W. 451 (1923) 
2N. Y.—Collins v. Moore, 125 Misc. 777, 211 N. Y. S. 437, affd. 215 App. Div. 786 

SIAN 9.752 (1925) 

DeFine v. Board of Health, 125 Misc. 797, 211 N. Y. S. 717, affd. 217 App. Div. 
m3. 210 N.Y. 9: 821 (1926) 

Ortman v. Burwell, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
July 3, 1929 

Wightman v. Foster, Supreme Court, Westchester County, Westchester Law 
Journal, August 23, 1932, 237 App. Div. 906, 261 N. Y. S. 1002 (1933) 


105 


ZONING 


Under the claim of being an existing nonconforming use a build- 
ing will sometimes be enlarged and become to a greater extent non- 
conforming.! Many open-air automobile repair shops with laun- 
dries and greasing pits exist today in residence and business districts 
in New York City which have gradually enlarged from a single gas- 
oline pump that was in place before zoning began. This was partly 
due to the fact that neighbors neglected to file complaints and 
partly because city officials were complaisant or negligent. 

A lawful nonconforming building can be repaired and its parts 
restored, and the building inspector cannot refuse suitable permits.? 

In New York City the building zone resolution provides that 
if structural alterations need to be made, a nonconforming building 
cannot be changed to another nonconforming use. A variance 
permit may be granted by the Board of Appeals in a proper case.’ 

The use of a building can be shown by its form. For instance, 
a store with plate glass front, constructed before a zoning ordinance 
went into effect and never actually used as a store, would be a 
lawful nonconforming store in a residence district after zoning, and 
could be used as a store. Even if such a building were used tem- 
porarily for residential purposes, its use would not be deemed to 
change. 

Where a building department through mistake has issued a 
permit for a nonconforming building, and construction has pro- 
ceeded and no appeal to the board of appeals has been taken by 
neighbors, the permit will not be revoked. 


1 Town of Lexington v. Bean, 272 Mass. 547, 172 N. E. 867 (1930) 


2 111.—Klumpp v. Rhoads, 200 N. E. 153 (1936) 

N. J.—Provident Institution for Savings v. Castles, 11 N. J. Misc. 773, 168 A. 
169 (1933) 

Weisman v. Spoerer, 11 N. J. Misc. 731, 168 A. 217 (1933) 

3 Mass.—LaMontagne v. Kenney, 288 Mass. 363, 193 N. E. 9 (1934). This case 
would be decided differently in New York City. 

N. Y.—Werbelowsky & Lavine Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law Journal, January 13, 1925 


4N. Y.—Town of Islip v. Newton, Supreme Court, Suffolk County, New York Law 

Journal, November 10, 1933 

Knickerbocker Ice Co. v. Sprague, 4 F. Supp. 499 (1933) 

Wohl v. Leo, 109 Misc. 448, 178 N. Y. S. 851, affd. 201 App. Div. 857, 192 
N. Y. S. 945 (1922) 

5 lowa—Call Bond & Mortgage Co. v. Sioux City, 219 lowa 572, 259 N. W. 33 
(1935). In this case it is doubtful whether the council had the power to 
revoke the permit. 

Footnote continued on page 107. 


106 


\ 


NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 


COMPLETION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS 


The effective beginning date of the ordinance nearly always 
breaks off some proposed building enterprise and the question arises 
whether the builder should stop or be allowed to proceed. Some- 
times, prior to the effective date, he has procured his permit and 
ordered his structural steel. Sometimes he has procured his permit, 
his steel has been partly fabricated, and yet the cellar has not been 
excavated. Sometimes he has procured his permit, put in the foot- 
ing course, and gone no further. Sometimes he has procured his 
permit, completed the cellar, the sill, and the first tier of beams. 
In any one of these cases he considers that he is wronged if he is 
not allowed to complete his nonconforming building.! 


Footnote continued from page 100. 
N. J.—Freeman v. Hague, 106 N. J. L. 137, 147 A. 553 (1929) 
Grossman v. Mayor and Aldermen of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 688, 142 A. 
558 (1928) 
Wyo.—Wikstrom v. City of Laramie, 3'7 Wyo. 389, 262 P. 22 (1927) 
1Cal.—London v. Robinson, 94 Cal. A. 774, 271 P. 921 (1928) 
Wheat v. Barrett, 210 Cal. 193, 290 P. 1033 (1930) 
Yuba City v. Cherniavsky, 117 Cal. A. 568, 4 P. (2d) 299 (1931) 
Conn.—Fitzgerald v. Merard Holding Co., 106 Conn. 475, 138 A. 483, 110 Conn. 
130, 147 A. 513 (1929) | 
City of New Britain v. Kilbourne, 109 Conn. 422, 147 A. 124 (1929) 
D. C.—District of Columbia v. Cahill, 60 App. D. C. 342, 54 F. (2d) 453 (1931) 
Ill.—City of Chicago v. Nord, Municipal Court, Chicago, January, 1925 
Hurt v. Hejhal, 259 Ill. A. 221 (1930) 
La.—Hundley v. City of Alexandria, 164 La. 624, 114 S. 491 (1927) 
Manhein v. Harrison, 164 La. 564, 114 S. 159 (1927) 
St. Bernard Oil Co. v. City of New Orleans, 165 La. 665, 115 S. 817 (1928) 
City of Shreveport v. Dickason, 160 La. 563, 107 S. 427 (1926) 
Mass.—Commonwealth v. Dillon, 277 Mass. 196, 178 N. E. 521 (1931) 
N. Y.—Alshap Realty Corp. v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, July 16, 1926, 218 App. Div. 862, 219 N. Y. S. 768 (1926) 
Cherry v. Isbister, 201 App. Div. 856, 193 N. Y. S. 57, affd. 234 N. Y. 607, 
138 N. E. 465 (1922) 
Fox Lane Corp. v. Mann, 216 App. Div. 813, 215 N. Y. S. 334, affd. 243 N. Y. 
550, 154 N. E. 600 (1926) 
Fox Lane Corp. v. Moore, 216 App. Div. 813, 216 N. Y. S. 832, affd. 243 N. Y. 
550, 154 N. E. 600 (1926) 
Frankel v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
April 21, 1925 
In re Nationwide Petrol Corp., Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, April 4, 1935 
Rice v. Van Vranken, 225 App. Div. 179, 232 N. Y. S. 506, affd. 255 N. Y. 541, 
175 N. E. 304 (1930) 
Tonson Realty Corp. v. Fried, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, June 17, 1926 
N. C.—In re W. P. Rose Builders’ Supply Co., 202 N. C. 496, 163 S. E. 462 (1932) 
Wash.—Liberty Lumber Co. v. City of Tacoma, 142 Wash. 377, 253 P. 122 (1927) 


107 


ZONING 


When the building zone resolution of Greater New York was 
adopted, it provided that any person who had obtained a lawful 
permit before that date should be allowed to complete his building, 
subject only to certain time limitations for successive stages of 
progress. This method had the advantage of giving every builder 
a fair chance and preventing a large amount of litigation! Many 
of the plans were hurriedly prepared on which the permits were 
obtained, and on more mature consideration the buildings were not 
erected. The city adopted the generous attitude that it could better 
afford to have a few nonconforming buildings built at the last 
minute than to incur the animosity of a considerable section of the 
property owners at a time that was critical for the success of zoning. 
Many other municipalities have not followed such a liberal policy. 
On this account the courts have been appealed to on many diverse 
situations which have arisen where construction has been stopped 
by the authorities. Even in Greater New York a change of district 
would bring up questions of withdrawal of permits where builders 
had incurred preliminary expense. Thus it happens that either on 
account of a new ordinance, or the amending of an old one, the 
courts are called on to decide what degree of progress will entitle 
the builder to proceed with the construction of his nonconforming 
building. The law is not settled on this point. In different states 
and parts of states the courts appear to make different rulings. 
As the regulations are established for the health and safety of the 
community, the prohibition might be considered by the court to 
stop construction at any stage of incompleteness. Strictly speak- 
ing, no property owner has any vested rights as against a lawful 
police power requirement. Courts, however, usually have held that 
such strictness is unduly destructive to investments.2. In and near 
Greater New York the local authorities consider that if the builder 
has his permit and has laid the footing course of his cellar, he is 
entitled to complete his nonconforming building. Courts in dif- 
ferent states have exercised varying degrees of leniency.’ 


1 Bolce v. Hauser, 111 Oh. St. 402, 145 N. E. 851 (1924) 
2 Conn.—City of New Britain v. Kilbourne, 109 Conn. 422, 147 A. 124 (1929) 
D. C.—District of Columbia v. Cahill, 60 App. D. C. 342, 54 F. (2d) 453 (1931) 
Il].—Hurt v. Hejhal, 259 Ill. A. 221 (1930) 
8 Averell v. Thatcher, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, December 24, 1935 
108 


NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 


ADDITIONS TO NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS 


A nonconforming building cannot be enlarged as a matter of 
right. If it could be there might be no limit to the enlargement of 
a nonconforming factory. The new construction might destroy a 
residence district whereas the continuance of the original building 
would be comparatively harmless. The New York City building 
zone resolution provided that the Board of Appeals might in its 
discretion, as an item of original jurisdiction, issue a variance 
permit for an addition on land occupied by the original building 
and owned by the same person at the time that the resolution went 
into effect. This was intended to recognize the unfairness of forcing 
the removal of every store or factory that needed more space. It 
might be an extremely serious matter to destroy the old building 
with the good-will attached to it. It was a question of a fair balance 
between the needs of the owner and the harm to the community. 
As time went on it was found that variances might in rare cases 
be fairly issued for extensions on adjoining land not owned at the 
time the resolution was passed. This was accomplished by basing 
the appeal on practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship. Boards 
of appeals now throughout the country recognize the occasional 
fairness of variances for extensions on those two grounds, and the 
item of original jurisdiction is usually omitted in the ordinance. 
Such permits are, however, dangerous. Efforts should constantly 
be made to remove nonconforming uses into districts intended for 
them. They should not be perpetuated any longer than necessary. 


OcCUPANCY PERMITS 


Many cities require the builder to obtain a permit to begin work, 
and require an occupancy permit before the building can be used. 
The purpose is to make sure that all lawful requirements have been 
complied with before occupation and that the building is a con- 
forming building. Other cities do not require occupancy permits 
in all cases of new buildings but only where there is a reconstruction 


1N. J.—De Vito v. Pearsall, 115 N. J. L. 323, 180 A. 202 (1935) 
Dickinson v. Inhabitants of Plainfield, 13 N. J. Misc. 260, 176 A. 716, 116 N. J. 


L. 336, 184 A. 195 (1936) 
R. I.—East Providence Mills v. Zoning Board of Review of East Providence, 


51 R. I. 428, 155 A. 531 (1931) 
109 


ZONING 


or a change of use.!. A change of use is when the change is from 
one district classification to another. For instance, the change of 
a dwelling to a store is a change of use. Changing one kind of store 
to another is not considered a change of use. For example, a gro- 
cery store may be changed to a book store or a butcher shop with- 
out obtaining an occupancy permit. In New York City the change 
in a nonconforming building from one form of heavy industry to 
another form—as from a brewery to a boiler shop—is regarded as 
a_change of use and requires an occupancy permit. 


REFUSAL OF LAWFUL PERMIT 


Municipalities that are about to adopt or amend zoning ordi- 
nances are often eager to prevent new buildings that will soon 
become nonconforming. Sometimes the building inspector is told 
not to issue permits for a few weeks pending the adoption of the 
ordinance or amendment. It is usually held that the builder is” 
entitled to an order of mandamus compelling the issue of the per- 
mit,? but in a few cases the municipality has enjoined the builder 


1N. Y.—Bregman v. Reville, 131 Misc. 486, 226 N. Y. S. 285, affd. 223 App. Div. 
750) 027 Ne VuLo.e7O sO 2es) 
Horwitz v. Schwab, 130 Misc. 448, 224 N. Y. S. 41 (1927) 
Russo v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
March 1, 1934 
Seidenberg v. Burwell, 235 App. Div. 745, 255 N. Y. S. 996 (1932) 
Pa.—Appeal of Thompson, Court of Common Pleas, Allegheny County, October 
Term, 1925, and June 29, 1926 
Wis.— Wasserman v. Cooper, 201 Wis. 359, 230 N. W. 50 (1930) 
2 La.—Hundley v. City of Alexandria, 164 La. 624, 114 S. 491 (1927) 
Sansone v. City of New Orleans, 163 La. 860, 113 S. 126 (1927) 
N. J.—Holdsworth v. Hague, 9 N. J. Misc. 715, 155 A. 892 (1931) 
Horowitz v. Rath, 9 N. J. Misc. 203, 153 A. 250 (1931) 
Linwood Co. v. Gardner, 9 N. J. Misc. 139, 153 A. 99 (1931) 
Mongiello Bros., Inc. v. Board of Com’rs of Jersey City, 10 N. J. Misc. 131, 
158 A. 325 (1932) 
Pabst v. Ferner, 8 N. J. Misc. 621, 151 A. 368 (1930) 
Paffendorf v. Lyndhurst Tp., 1 N. J. Misc. 289, 129 A. 389 (1923) 
Reimer v. Dallas, 129 A. 390 (1925) 
N. Y.—Calton Court, Inc. v. Switzer, 221 App. Div. 799, 223 N. Y. S. 856 (1927) 
Matter of Hart, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
December 24, 1935 
N. Seas v. Board of Aldermen of Goldsboro, 192 N. C. 348, 135 S. E. 50 
1926 
Ohio—Hauser v. Erdman, 113 Oh. St. 662, 150 N. E. 42 (1925) 
Ice & Fuel Co. v. Kreuzweiser, 120 Oh. St. 352, 166 N. E. 228 (1929) 
Pa.—Coyne v. Prichard, 272 Pa. 424, 116 A. 315 (1922) 
Herskovits v. Irwin, 299 Pa. 155, 149 A. 195 (1930) 
Tex.—Marshall v. City of Dallas, 253 S. W. 887 (1923) 


IIo 


NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 


on the ground that a prohibitive regulation is about to be passed.! 
It would appear to be no part of the duty of the building inspector 
to anticipate whether or not a change will be made in the law. 

An owner cannot build without a permit on the ground that the 
ordinance is void. He should bring an action to compel the build- 
ing inspector to issue a permit to him and allege in the action that 
the ordinance is void.? 


ABANDONMENT 

It is usually provided that when a nonconforming building or 
use is abandoned it may not be reinstated.2 There is great variety 
in these provisions, some of them being such drastic attempts that 
courts hesitate to enforce them.* Long discontinuance of use can 
show abandonment. Intention to use no further is involved in 
abandonment although not necessarily in discontinuance. Some 
ordinances provide that discontinuance for six months shall be con- 
sidered an abandonment. It is evident that such a provision refers 
to actual use and not use as shown by form or construction. For 
instance, a one-family residence used for a store could not after a 
six months’ discontinuance as a store be reéstablished as a lawful 
nonconforming store, but a structure built as a store with a plate 
glass front could be unoccupied for six months and could still be 
established as a lawful nonconforming store. 


DESTRUCTION 
The New York City building zone resolution has always allowed 
nonconforming buildings, if destroyed, to be rebuilt, but most ordi- 
nances allow rebuilding only when the destruction 1s partial.® 


1N. J.—Commuters’ Coach Co. v. Minton, 7 N. J. Misc. 478, 146 A. 921 (1929) 
N. Y.—Voelcker v. Seaman, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, July 2, 1928 
2 Nolan v. Village of Mill Neck, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 16, 1932 
8 Conn.—Town of Darien v. Webb, 115 Conn. 581, 162 A. 690 (1932) 
La.—Van Horn v. City of New Orleans, 161 La. 767, 109 S. 484 (1926) 
4 Comstock v. City of New Britain, 112 Conn. 25, 151 A. 335 (1930) 
5N. Y.—Baum v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, April 19, 1935 
Wis.—Schaetz v. Manders, 206 Wis. 121, 238 N. W. 835 (1931) 
§ Conn.—Piccolo v. Town of West Haven, 120 Conn. 449, 181 A. 615 (1935) 
State v. Hillman, 110 Conn. 92, 147 A. 294 (1929) 


Footnote continued on page I12. 


III 


ZONING 


When a building is removed to another zoning district, it must 
comply with the regulations of the new district. 

An owner cannot tear down a nonconforming store in a residence 
district and claim as a matter of right a permit to erect another 
store in its place.? 


RETROACTIVE REGULATIONS 


There is little doubt that under zoning ordinances municipalities, 
if they wish, can succeed in ousting nonconforming uses and build- 
ings. If the police power can be invoked to prevent a new noncon- 
forming building because of its relation to the community health, 
safety, morals, convenience, and general welfare, it follows that the 
police power can be invoked to oust existing nonconforming uses. 
Theoretically the police power is broad enough to warrant the oust- 
ing of every nonconforming use, but the courts would rightly and 
sensibly find a method of preventing such a catastrophe. If a 
well-built and well-planned apartment house was erected before 
zoning, in an area which later was made a one-family residence 
district in the zoning ordinance, it could hardly be expected that the 
apartment house could be ousted with the help of the courts. The 
courts would undoubtedly hold that zoning regulations must be 
reasonable, and that the ousting of an expensive structure built in 
accordance with a proper permit would not be considered reason- 
able. This brings us to the difficult problem with which we must 
often cope in zoning—that is, the establishment of the line between 
what is a reasonable regulation and what is unreasonable. 

Not many cases have arisen in the courts on ousting existing 
nonconforming buildings. One of the earliest and best known is 
the Hadacheck case? which arose in Los Angeles before the word 


Footnote continued from page rit. 
La.—Hourgette v. City of Gretna, 18 La. A. 336, 137 S. 344 (1931) 
Ohio— Kelly v. Dissinger, Court of Common Pleas, Montgomery, County, Oak- 
wood, April 10, 1928 
Wash.—Modern Lumber & Millwork Co. v. MacDuff, 161 Wash. 600, 297 P. 
733 (1931) 
1 Bianchi v. Commissioner of Public Buildings of Somerville, 279 Mass. 136, 181 
N. E. 120 (1932) 
2 Ward’s Appeal, 289 Pa. 458, 137 A. 630 (1927) 
3 Recipe Sebastian, 165 Cal. 416, 132 P. 584, 239 U. S. 394, 36 S. Ct. 143 
1915 
112 


NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 


“zoning”’ was used in this country and before any comprehensive 
zoning ordinance had been adopted. By means of a local ordinance 
based on the home rule constitution of California, brick-kilns were 
excluded from a district largely residential. The city authorities 
accordingly proceeded to oust a brick-burning establishment which 
made bricks from clay obtained on the premises. The ousting was 
upheld by the Supreme Court of California and also by the United ~ 
States Supreme Court, although it was an existing nonconforming 
use. The taking of clay from the earth was not prohibited but 
baking it was declared to be harmful to the community. 

Two cases arose in New Orleans under a zoning ordinance which 
allowed the ousting of nonconforming uses.! One of these was a 
grocery store which was ordered to cease operating and depart after 
one year, and the other was the case of a drug store which was 
similarly decided. Both were existing nonconforming uses. The 
reasoning of the court in the New Orleans cases seems to be that 
one year is a reasonable time for amortization. 

During the preparatory work for the zoning of Greater New York 
fears were constantly expressed by property owners that existing 
nonconforming buildings would be ousted. ‘The demand was general 
that this should not be done. The Zoning Commission went as far 
as it could to explain that existing nonconforming uses could con- 
tinue, that zoning looked to the future, and that if orderliness could 
be brought about in the future the nonconforming buildings would 
to a considerable extent be changed by natural causes as time went 
on. It was also stated by the Commission that the purpose of 
zoning was to stabilize and protect lawful investments and not to 
injure assessed valuations or existing uses. This has always been 
the view in New York. No steps have been taken to oust existing 
nonconforming uses. Consideration for investments made in ac- 
cordance with the earlier laws has been one of the strong supports 
of zoning in that city. 

We now come to a field that has proved troublesome throughout 
the country. Can an existing nonconforming use of land be pro- 
hibited under the ordinary zoning ordinancer Let us assume that 
a landowner has enclosed a lot, flooded it for a skating rink, and 


1]_.a.—Dema Realty Co. v. Jacoby, 168 La. 752, 123 S. 314 (1929) 
Dema Realty Co. v. McDonald, 168 La. 172, 121 S. 613 (1929) 


113 


ZONING 


charged admission. Later the locality is placed in a residence dis- 
trict. Can the skating rink be continued forever? Isa ticket booth 
thereon such a building as may be continued as an existing non- 
conforming use? Can the use be changed to the vending of candy 
and cigars, which is a business use of the same gradeP A noncon- 
forming parking space for automobiles in the Borough of The Bronx 
was declared to be rendered unlawful by the passage of an amend- 
ment preventing such parking spaces in business districts. Mag- 
istrate Kross wrote a careful opinion distinguishing an unbuilt lot 
from a permanent structure.} | 

A few years ago miniature golf courses were the vogue. Where 
a property owner established such a golf course before zoning, could 
he continue it after the locality was placed in a residence district? 
Was the land stamped as business land so that business buildings 
could be erected on it? Could a building containing a ticket office, 
toilets, and rest-room facilities be continued as a business building 
and changed to another business such as groceries? 

Such instances made a great deal of trouble throughout the © 
country, especially in boards of appeals and the minor courts. Usu- 
ally the solution depended on the precise words of the ordinance. 
Sometimes the ordinance provided that a building’s nonconforming 
use existing before the effective date of the ordinance could con- 
tinue and could be extended throughout the structure. Where only 
the word building was employed the problem was somewhat sim- 
plified because many of the uses—like tennis courts, skating rinks, 
and miniature golf courses—applied only to the land. But some 
ordinances provided that the existing nonconforming use of a build- 
ing or premises could be continued. Sometimes the words were “‘a 
building or land.”’ Here was a situation plainly more troublesome. 
A court case arose in the town of Hempstead, N. Y., where the word 
“premises’’ was used in the ordinance. A tenant in a residence 
district began to tow ancient automobiles into his yard, carry ona 
dismantling business, and leave the parts scattered around. Before 
long he had more than a hundred old cars in his yate in various 
stages of destruction. The neighbors made a complaint on the 
ground that he had started a nonconforming use, 1. e., an automo- 
1 People v. Wolfe, Magistrates’ Court, Borough of The Bronx, N. Y., New York 

Law Journal, January 30, 1936, affd. 248 App. Div. 721 (1936) 
114 


NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 


bile dismantling industry in a residence district. The tenant alleged 
as his defense that in his barn prior to the passage of the zoning 
ordinance he had dismantled several automobiles as a business. He 
produced a mechanic who declared that he had helped to do the 
dismantling. All of this was unknown to the neighbors and the 
proof was hard to contradict. Fortunately the junk-yard tenant 
failed to pay his rent and he was dispossessed by his landlord. Thus 
the automobile junk yard was wiped out. 

It is better not to have the nonconforming clause of the zoning 
ordinance refer to “land or premises.”” The privilege of continued 
use may well be applied to existing buildings, but should not be 
applied to existing land or premises. 

An existing nonconforming building, even if a mere shack, can 
usually be retained and continued. If this can be done in the case 
of a business use in a residence district, it follows that the building 
can be assigned to a new use of the same grade. For instance, a 
candy and cigar-vending booth can be changed to a small grocery 
store. In Brooklyn, when the building zone resolution took effect, 
there was a small real estate office on Avenue J in a residence 
district. Later it was changed to a small hand laundry. The 
neighbors protested, but the corporation counsel of the city held 
that the change did not alter the nonconforming use and that the 
laundry might continue. 

There is much to be said about providing in zoning ordinances 
for the ousting of existing nonconforming uses where the buildings 
are unimportant or merely accessory to a nonconforming use of 
the land. Several ordinances in Long Island provide that bill- 
boards in residence districts must cease and be discontinued within 
five years. This provision is based on the principle that a reason- 
able time for amortization should be allowed. Similarly the oust- 
ing of automobile junk yards with accessory buildings is provided 
for, the owner being given from three to six years to amortize. 
This form of procedure can probably be applied to the unimpor- 
tant buildings connected with tennis courts, miniature golf courses, 
skating rinks, and amusement parks. How far can zoning ordi- 
nances go in ousting more permanent existing nonconforming 
buildings and uses? Very likely in just the proportion that the 
building is permanent, well constructed, and costly the courts will 


115 


ZONING 


declare that it is unreasonable to oust it. A building with a cellar 
will not be so easy to oust as a building without a cellar. A one- 
story building will probably be more easily ousted than a three or 
four story nonconforming building. 

Some parts of the country will probably go further in upholding 
the ousting of existing nonconforming buildings than others. New 
England and New York will declare drastic regulations of this sort 
unreasonable. States further west will probably be more com- 
plaisant with efforts to bring about orderliness. Each state will 
decide for itself how far it will go. 

Some state enabling acts for zoning contain a provision that no 
regulations shall be made retroactive. Most enabling acts, how- 
ever, contain no such provision and the municipality is left to 
arrange these regulations as it sees fit.1 The charter of the City of 
New York and the three zoning enabling acts of the state of New 
York omit any provision prohibiting retroactive regulations. The 
same is true of the standard form of enabling act for zoning pre- 
pared by the United States Department of Commerce. State 
legislatures ought not to prevent municipalities from using zoning 
regulations retroactively. The future development of zoning may 
show that this power to oust existing nonconforming buildings and 
uses in certain cases is most important. 

1 Cal.—Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 211 Cal. 304, 295 P. 14 (1930) 


Ky.—Standard Oil Co. v. City of Bowling Green, 244 Ky. 362, 50 S. W. (2d) 
960 (1932) ti 

Mass.—Inspector of Buildings of Watertown v. Nelson, 257 Mass. 346, 153 N. E. 
798 (1926) 

Ore.— Berger v. City of Salem, 131 Ore. 674, 284 P. 273 (1930) 


116 


CUA heal 
BOAKDIORVARE EATS 


Its COMPOSITION 


EARLY all state enabling acts give the local legislative body 

N power to establish a board of appeals, sometimes called a 

board of adjustment. The purpose of this board is to apply 

the discretion of experts to exceptional instances where permits are 

desired not strictly conforming to the regulations. The board takes 

action in such instances by granting orders known as “variances” 
or “variance permits.” 

It is a mistake to appoint on such board the building inspector 
or other person having the duty of issuing permits. The appeal to 
the board is usually from his determination, and it is best that an 
officer should not sit in the review of his own action. Local legis- 
lators should not be appointed. A board entirely so constituted 
tends to allow exceptions, as variances, which ought to be map 
changes made by the council. 

Care should be taken not to assume that an existing board of 
appeals can function after a new enabling act and ordinance have 
been passed.! 

A member of a board of appeals should not have financial interest 
in a proposed variance.” 


NoTICE OF HEARING BEFORE BOARD OF APPEALS 


The board of appeals is usually required by the enabling act to 
give public notice of the hearing before it. This notice, often printed 
in an official paper, frequently does not reach the neighbors who 
may be most affected. On this account the board often requires 
applicants to post notices on or near the premises. Aggrieved 
owners sometimes learn of the application too late to be heard or 
too late to ask for court review. Personal service of notice cannot 
1 Smith v. Kearny Zoning Board of Appeals, 6 N. J. Misc. 954, 143 A. 151 (1928) 
2 Viano v. Chandler, Supreme Court, Middlesex County, Mass., January 28, 1927 

U7 


ZONING 


well be required without placing too great a burden on the appli- 
cant.1 Sometimes an owner is overseas and his address unknown, 
or he may be an infant or an incompetent person. If surrounding 
owners were required to be given notice by service, the title of each 
surrounding parcel would need to be searched by the applicant to 
make sure of the name of the owner. The required publication of 
the notice of hearing must not be omitted.? 


HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD 


Nearly all enabling acts provide that the proceedings at a hearing 
before the board of appeals shall be a public record. This does not 
mean that a full verbatim record must be kept, or if taken by a 
stenographer that the whole is a public record. The parts that 
may be directed to be filed are a public record.’ It is not necessary 
that stenographic notes be kept, but the record of the hearing 
should contain a report of essential facts. 

The opposition should not be cut off without a fair opportunity 
to be heard. It is a good plan for the presiding officer to state for 
the record that the board or a committee thereof has viewed the 
premises. This view can, however, be made later and reported in 
the return to the court. As the board is not a court of law, the 
applicant or any one in opposition can appear personally or by a 
representative. No lawyer is necessary. 

If a public hearing is required by the state enabling act, no valid 
variance can be adopted in case the hearing is omitted.® 
1 Mass.—Kane v. Board of Appeals of Medford, 273 Mass. 97, 173 N. E. 1 (1930) 

Roman Catholic Archbishop v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 268 Mass. 416, 167 

N. E. 672 (1929) 
N. J.—Mingle v. Board of Adjustment of Orange, 6 N. J. Misc. 595, 142 A. 367 
N. yee pan v. Zoning Board of Appeals, Supreme Court, Westchester 


County, White Plains (N. Y.) Reporter, March 16, 1925 
Ottinger v. Arenal Realty Co., 257 N. Y. 371, 178 N. E. 665 (1931) 
? Buffalo Cremation Co. v. March, 222 App. Div. 447, 226 N. Y. S. 477, affd. 249 
N. Y. 531, 164 N. E. 572 (1928) 
3 Perdue v. Zoning Board of Appeals of Norwalk, 118 Conn. 174, 171 A. 26 (1934) 


* Klein v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, June 21, 1930 


5N. J.—Hendey v. Ackerman, 103 N. J. L. 305, 136 A. 733 (1927) 
Pa.—Jones v. Lewis, 7 Pa. Dist. & Co. 785 (1926) 


118 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


VOTE REQUIRED FOR VARIANCE 


In framing the building zone resolution of the City of New York 
it was considered that inasmuch as the grant of a variance permit 
allowed the applicant to do something that his neighbors could not 
do under the strict application of the law, the favorable vote of the 
board should be greater than a mere majority. The charter of New 
York originally provided for a vote of five out of seven. The same 
requirement applied to a vote of reversal. This required vote of 
more than a majority to grant a variance has been followed in most 
of the zoning enabling acts of the country. The validity of the re- 
quirement has not been criticized by the courts. Where the law 
requires a quorum of a board of appeals to be present, a variance 
will be void even if passed by the required number of votes, a 
quorum not being present.1 


RETURN TO BE MADE By BOARD OF APPEALS 


The return, if asked for by the court, should show the grounds 
on which it is made.? 

A board of appeals making a return to the court is not entitled 
to the payment of fees.’ 


RESCISSION OF DETERMINATION BY THE BOARD OF APPEALS 


When a board of appeals has made a determination it should not 
recall the case and make another determination. It has exhausted 
its power regarding that particular state of facts. The case will 


1 Gaston v. Ackerman, 6 N. J. Misc. 694, 696, 142 A. 545, 546 (1928) 
2 Garden Estates, Inc. v. Murdock, 241 App. Div. 761, 270 N. Y. S. 972, affd. 265 
N. Y. 557, 193 N. E. 319 (1934) 
3 Brewster v. Wendt, 244 App. Div. 489, 279 N. Y. S. 291 (1935) 
4Conn.—Burr v. Rago, 120 Conn. 287, 180 A. 444 (1935) 
St. Patrick’s Church Corporation v. Daniels, 113 Conn. 132, 154 A. 343 (1931) 
Del.—In re Robelen, 33 Del. 314, 136 A. 279 (1926) 
Ind.— Kaspar v. Board of Zoning Appeals, Circuit Court, Marion County, 
Indianapolis, April 30, 1926 
N. J.—Citizens’ Holding Co. v. Board of Adjustment of Newark, 7 N. J. Misc. 
61, 144 A. 329 (1929) 
Mingle v. Board of Adjustment of Orange, 6 N. J. Misc. 595, 142 A. 367 (1928) 
N. Y.—Brennan v. Walsh, 195 N. Y. S. 264 (1922) 
Church & 94th St. Realty Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, December 28, 1933 


Footnote continued on page 120. 


119 


ZONING 


then go before the court for review. But if new facts come before 
the board of appeals, or a new or altered case regarding the same 
location, it can act anew.! 

Reopening by the board of appeals and granting a variance, after 
a change of ownership but no change of facts, is unlawful.” 

Where a board of appeals has ordered a building inspector to 
issue a variance permit, the local legislative body cannot prevent 
the inspector from acting.® 


VARIANCES 


As zoning regulations differ for the several districts established, 
there is greater need of making exceptions than in most other fields 
of police power regulation. Sometimes a lot in a single ownership is 
bisected by a district line placing part of it in a business district and 


Footnote continued from page II9Q. 
Collins v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Bronx County, 
New York Law Journal, March 29, 1929, 253 N. Y. 594, 171 N. E. 797 (1930) 
Ficaro v. Walsh, 226 App. Div. 441, 235 N. Y. S. 254 (1929) 
Fox v. Kreuter, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law Journal, 
August 3, 1935 
Hall v. Walsh, 137 Misc. 448, 243 N. Y. S. 602, affd. 221 App. Div. 756, 222 
N. Y. S. 816 (1927) 
Heyman v. Walsh, 137 Misc. 278, 242 N. Y. S. 517, affd. 230 App. Div. 822, 
245 N. Y. S. 769 (1930) 
Horan vy. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
September 11, 1929, affd. 228 App. Div. 791, 239 N. Y. S. 815 (1930) 
Parkway Center Building Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, May 12, 1928 
Pirozzi v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
August 8, 1925 
Si Vv. ay of Standards and Appeals, 225 App. Div. 570, 234 N. Y. S. 
42 (1929 
Riverside St. Clair Corp. v. Walsh, 131 Misc. 652, 228 N. Y. S. 88, affd. 225 
App. Div. 655, 231 N. Y. S. 869 (1928) 
Rubel Corp. v. Murdock, 245 App. Div. 821, 282 N. Y. S. 126 (1935) 
Rutland Parkway, Inc. v. Murdock, 241 App. Div. 762, 270 N. Y. S. 971 (1934) 
Sudierfi Realty Corp. v. Connell, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, May 12, 1933, affd. 244 App. Div. 782, 280 N. Y. S. 791 (1935) 
Swedish Hospital v. Leo, 120 Misc. 355, 198 N. Y. S. 397, affd. 215 App. Div. 
696, 212 N. Y. S. 897 (1925) 
N. MeN v. Board of Adjustment of Raleigh, 195 N. C. 793, 143 S. E. 827 
1928 
1Ruth Bond & Mort. Co. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, October 29, 1935 


2N. Y.—McGarry v. Walsh, 213 App. Div. 289, 210 N. Y. S. 286 (1925) 
N. C.—Application of Broughton Estate, 185 S. E. 434 (1936) 


’Soho Park & Land Co. v. Town of Belleville, 6 N. J. Misc. 683, 142 A. 547 (1928) 
120 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


part in a residence district. Lots are sometimes of peculiar shapes. 
Different street grades sometimes justify variances in permits. Often 
a locality actually and normally residential has sporadic stores that 
were erected before zoning was established. A vacant lot next to 
such a nonconforming store or between two of them often deserves 
a variance permit, based upon its exceptional environment. It 
might be unreasonable to insist that the owner could build nothing 
but a private residence under the existing restrictions. His invest- 
ment would be a loss for he could not rent his building. But if he 
is granted a variance permitting a residence with a smaller front 
yard, or a two-family residence, or a modified business building, he 
can usually erect an economical structure that will not substantially 
injure the neighborhood. In the issue of building permits the 
regular administrative officer, usually the building superintendent 
or inspector, is supposed to follow the literal provisions of the zon- 
ing regulations. Chaos would result if sometimes he followed the 
regulation and sometimes made a variance according to his own 
discretion. By establishing the board of appeals a municipality 
furnishes a forum where an applicant can be heard who thinks he 
should be allowed some amelioration of the strict letter of the law. 
From the determination he can appeal to the courts for a judicial 
review. This board derives its powers from the state legislature, 
although its appointment is usually made by the local legislature. 
As it is a discretionary administrative body, and not a legislative 
body,! it must act in making a variance in conformity with general 
rules of conduct prescribed for it by the state legislature or the coun- 
cil.2 If the board tries to legislate, its doings are void. It can only 
pass on applications for permits. Moreover as no two applications 


1 Civil City of Indianapolis v. Ostrom Realty & Const. Co., 95 Ind. A. 376, 176 
N. E. 246 (1931) 
2Fla.—Taylor v. City of Jacksonville, 101 Fla. 1241, 133 S. 114 (1931) 
Il]l.—Welton v. Hamilton, 344 Ill. 82, 176 N. E. 333 (1931) 
La.—Bultman Mortuary Service v. City of New Orleans, 174 La. 360, 140 S. 503 
(1932) 
Hourgette v. City of Gretna, 18 La. A. 336, 137 S. 344 (1931) 
3 Full discussion of relation of local legislative body to the Board of Appeals. 
Ind.—Civil City of Indianapolis v. Ostrom Realty & Const. Co., 95 Ind. A. 376, 
176 N. E. 246 (1931) 
Mo.—Nigro v. Kansas City, 325 Mo. 95, 27 S. W. (2d) 1030 (1930) 
N. Y.—Cockcroft v. Miller, 187 App. Div. 704, 176 N. Y. S. 206 (1919) 
Sloane v. Walsh, 245 N. Y. 208, 156 N. E. 668 (1927) 


Footnote continued on page 122. 


I2] 


ZONING 


are precisely alike, each should be acted on separately. Blanket 
resolutions by boards of appeals, stating what variances they will 
make, are always futile. The building inspector cannot base permits 
on such a resolution or on a prior variance.! The legislative acts 
of a local legislature cannot be reviewed or adjusted by the courts? 
Within its jurisdiction such a body has equal standing with the 
courts and its acts are final. If, however, they conflict with the 
state or federal constitution, the courts can and do declare them 
null and void. In states that do not have zoning boards of appeals, 
“spot zoning’’ becomes the practice of local legislatures.* Instead 
of a variance—in the form of a permit which does not alter the 
zoning map—the regulations relating to a particular lot are changed 
to accommodate the needs of the applicant. The court has no 
power to review or readjust in such a case. The tendency of the 
local legislature, where there is no board of appeals, is to disregard 
comprehensive zoning, and the relation of the zoning plan to the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the community. As years 
pass by, the increase of “spot zoning” subverts the original sound- 
ness of the plan, and tends to produce conditions almost as chaotic 
as existed before zoning. 

Where state enabling acts do not recognize boards of appeals, 
or where such boards are not given adequate power, difficult situ- 
ations are sure to arise. Litigation on constitutionality is caused, 
and is followed by perplexing amendments—all of which would be 
avoided, and a speedy and adequate remedy afforded, if the usual 
board of appeals could function.+* 


Footnote continued from page 121. 
South Ozone Park Lumber & Supply Corp. v. Board of Appeals of North 
Hempstead, 229 App. Div. 726, 241 N. Y. S. 810 (1930) 
Ugast Realty, Inc. v. Kleinert, 226 App. Div. 752, 233 N. Y. S. 912 (1929) 
R. I.—Heffernan v. Zoning Board of Review of Cranston, 49 R. I. 283, 142 A. 
479, 50 R. I. 26, 144 A. 674 (1929) 
1 Stein v. Flanagan, 228 App. Div. 668, 239 N. Y. S. 753 (1929) 
2 Neddo v. Schrade, 270 N. Y. 97, 200 N. E. 657 (1936) 
3 Cal.—Brown vy. City of Los Angeles, 183 Cal. 783, 192 P. 716 (1930) 
N. J.—Guaranty Const. Co. v. Town of Bloomfield, 11 N. J. Misc. 613, 168 A. 
34 (1933) 
*Ga.—Smith v. City of Atlanta, 161 Ga. 769, 132 S. E. 66 (1926) 
Te aa Wood Products Co. v. City of Minneapolis, 35 F. (2d) 657 
1929 
Footnote continued on page 123. 
122 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


The enabling act usually allows the applicant, or any official, or 
any aggrieved neighbor to appeal to the board of appeals from any 
determination of the building inspector. If he has misinterpreted 
the ordinance, the board of appeals can reverse his decision. 

Where the building department has consulted the wrong map and 
issued a store permit in a residence district, the board of appeals 
on application of a neighbor will annul the permit? 

Usually the board of appeals will affirm the building inspector 
where the regulation is valid on its face, but there is a tendency 
of the courts to uphold a board of appeals that reverses an inspector 
on the ground of invalidity of a regulation.2 Where the literal en- 
forcement of the regulation will result in practical difficulty or un- 
necessary hardship to the applicant, the board of appeals in most 
states can make a variance in his favor and direct a permit. The 
scope of the board’s powers in making such a variance is not 
unlimited but must accord with the spirit of the ordinance. 

A contract vendee can apply for a variance, and presumably he 
may be an aggrieved neighbor.‘ 

Just what constitutes practical difficulty and unnecessary hard- 
ship has been variously interpreted by boards of appeals. Some 
lenient boards have held that if an apartment house would be more 


Footnote continued from page 122. 
Loe v. City of Minneapolis, District Court, District of Minnesota, United 
States Daily, September 22, 1927 
Miss.—City of Jackson v. McPherson, 162 Miss. 164, 138 S. 604 (1932) 
N. Y.—Hecht-Dann Const. Co. v. Burden, 124 Misc. 632, 208 N. Y. S. 299 (1924) 
Leone v. Brewer, 259 N. Y. 386, 182 N. E. 57 (1932) 
Merritt v. Isbister, 215 App. Div. 838, 213 N. Y. S. 858 (1926) 
Union Railway Company v. Village of Pelham, Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, March 13, 1925 
Voelcker v. Weber, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
February 9, 1929 
Tex.—City of San Antonio v. Zogheib, 70 S. W. (2d) 333 (1934) 
1]11.—Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 N. E. 710 
(1930) 
Mass.—Harper v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 271 Mass. 482, 171 N. E. 430 (1930) 
N. Y.—Voelcker v. Weber, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law 
Journal, February 9, 1929 


2 Breese v. Hutchins, 11 N. J. Misc. 74, 165 A. 94 (1933) 
‘T1l.—Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 N. E. 710 


(1930) 

N. J.—Dorsey Motors, Inc. v. Davis, 13 N. J. Misc. 620, 180 A. 396 (1935) 

153 East 87th St. Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, July 23, 1929, affd. 228 App. Div. 614, 237 N. Y. S. 850 (1929) 


{23 


ZONING 


profitable than a one-family house on a corner lot in a one-family 
detached-house district, the applicant would be allowed a variance 
to erect an apartment house, on the ground that refusal would cause 
unnecessary hardship. Where public garages were prohibited in 
business districts, they have been allowed by a variance permit on 
the ground that the locality is at a standstill and that it is an un- 
necessary hardship to require the owner to pay taxes and allow him 
to earn nothing on his land. The courts have, however, gradually 
concluded that the deprivation of better earning by means of a 
nonconforming use is not an unnecessary hardship within the mean- 
ing of the law. Value is not the proper criterion. But where the 
environment is such that the lot cannot profitably be used for a 
conforming use the board can properly grant a variance permit. 
If, for instance, in a one-family detached-house district a vacant 
lot is surrounded by nonconforming apartment houses built before 
the zoning, a variance for an apartment house can be made. Simi- 
larly, if a vacant lot is surrounded with garages and gasoline sta- 
tions, a public garage variance permit might properly be granted. | 
Where a lot was in a single ownership before the zoning, and is too 
small for the required yards, a variance permit may be made on 
the grounds of unnecessary hardship. Where half of a unit building 
designed to cover a block front was completed before the zoning, 
and did not conform to the roof setback requirements of the ordi- 
nance, a variance on the ground of unnecessary hardship was 
properly granted to construct the complementary half with the 
same design. 

The practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship must inhere in 
the land sought to be built upon. The needs of the surrounding 
lands or houses do not constitute a basis for the variance. The 
New York Board of Appeals granted a variance for several stores 
under a proposed apartment house on the ground that there were 


1 Colo.—City of Colorado Springs v. Miller, 95 Colo. 337, 36 P. (2d) 161 (1934) 
Mont.—Freeman v. Board of Adjustment of Great Falls, 97 Mont. 342, 34 P. 
(2d) 534 (1934) 
N. Y.—Fordham M. R. Church v. Walsh, 244 N. Y. 280, 155 N. E. 575 (1927) 
Reilly v. Carteright, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law 
Journal, April 10, 1935 
Ward v. Murdock, 247 App. Div. 808, 286 N. Y. S. 280 (1936) 
eee v. Board of Adjustment of Prospect Park, 318 Pa. 582, 178 A. 813 
1935 


124 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


no stores near, that the surrounding homes needed a business 
center, and that it was a hardship to deprive them of it. Plainly 
this was no basis for a variance. Only the local legislative body 
could change the map and allow a new business center. It was a 
legislative matter and not a situation for a variance permit.! 
Thus far the discussion has referred to appeals under the pro- 
visions of the enabling act and variances on account of practical 
difficulty and unnecessary hardship. State enabling acts have, how- 
ever, recognized that each municipality will desire to have excep- 
tional cases peculiar to itself submitted to the discretion of the 
board of appeals. Public garages, for example, were a special 
problem in New York City. They were excluded from business dis- 
tricts, but it was recognized that in some portions of business streets 
they could be allowed without substantial injury. Some discre- 
tionary body, naturally the board of appeals, should decide what 
locations were proper. Therefore the enabling act provided that 
the building zone resolution might specify situations of this sort, 
with rules of conduct; and it would then become the duty of the 
board of appeals to approve or reject applications within these sit- 
uations. Accordingly the building zone resolution provided that if 
there was already a public garage in a business district between two 
intersecting streets the board might grant a variance permit for 
another. Theoretically at least this was not an appeal, but a direct 
application to the board for a variance not on the ground of prac- 
tical difficulty and unnecessary hardship, but under the rule of con- 
duct established for that situation. The situations so specified in 
the ordinance are usually said to comprise the original jurisdiction 
of the board of appeals, as distinguished from the appellate juris- 
diction conferred upon it under the state enabling act. In practice, 
however, the application is usually made to the building inspector. 
He refuses the permit and passes the matter on to the board of 
appeals, on request of the applicant who files a paper in the nature 
of an appeal. In other words, the mechanics of invoking the original 


1Van Cortlandt Avenue, Bronx, case, Bulletin of the Board of Standards and 
Appeals, February 11, 1930 
N. Y.—Mamaroneck Commodore, Inc. v. Bayly, 233 App. Div. 741, 250 N.Y. S. 
767, affd. 260 N. Y. 528, 184 N. E. 79 (1932) 
Pa.— Matter of Johnston, Court of Common Pleas, Cambria County, Johnstown, 
December Term, 1926 


125 


ZONING 


jurisdiction is the same as in the appellate jurisdiction. This pro- 
cedure makes no trouble. It has the advantage of simplicity and 
makes it possible to join an allegation of unnecessary hardship 
with the particular grounds stated in the ordinance itself. 
Another field of original jurisdiction in the New York building 
zone resolution was that created by the 80 percent consent 
clause for public garages. After the original resolution was adopted 
complaint arose in some large residential districts, especially in the 
suburbs, that the inhabitants could not obtain storage places for 
their automobiles. This was especially the case with apartment 
house dwellers in new sections. They pointed out that there were 
no industrial districts nearby—where public garages could be built 
as a matter of right—and that their new business streets contained 
no garages built before the zoning. As a result a new field of orig- 
inal jurisdiction was introduced in the building zone resolution by 
amendment. It was provided that in any kind of district a person 
intending to erect a public garage might ask the board of appeals 
to lay out a district of possible injury around it; then if the appli- 
cant could obtain and file the consents of the owners of 80 percent 
of the street frontage in this district, the board of appeals could 
grant or refuse the application. This method has been widely 
followed in other cities. It is not open to the objection that the 
variance is granted by property owners. The power of the board 
is simply limited to cases where the 80 percent consent is filed. It 
is the determination of the board that gives effect to the variance. 
The fields of original jurisdiction enumerated in ordinances are 
not the same in all municipalities. These fields are essentially dif- 
ferent from those in which appeals are heard under the general rule 
of practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship. They are created 
by regulations which set forth the instances in which the board of 
appeals may vary the application of the strict letter of the law.? 


1 Healy v. Leo, 194 App. Div. 973, 185 N. Y. S. 948 (1920) 

2 Beinert v. Miller, 188 App. Div. 113, 176 N. Y. S. 398 (1919). This is one of the 
earliest reported cases on original jurisdiction and contains an excellent 
analysis of variance of the application of the regulation. The legal philosophy 
embodied in the words “‘vary the application”’ as used in the New York 
City charter would seem to be more fundamental than in the words “‘special 
exceptions” used in the Standard Enabling Act put out by the Department 
of Commerce. 

Footnote continued on page 127. 


126 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


It is not necessary or desirable to repeat the provisions of the 
state enabling act or to have the ordinance set forth practical dif- 
ficulty and unnecessary hardship as part of a rule of conduct. Even 
if the board of appeals is not mentioned in the ordinance, the 
municipality can appoint such a body, and it can function in all 
appeals. The relationship of the state enabling act and the munic- 
ipal zoning ordinance on these subjects is so intimate and important 
that for convenience it is well to bind the act in the same book with 
the ordinance. 

Each variance must stand on its own feet. No two cases are 
exactly alike. Accordingly, boards of appeals should not in every 
case follow an established system of precedents. A decision is not 
justified because it follows a prior decision on what was apparently 
the same environment. Courts uphold boards of appeals in dis- 
criminating regarding the merits of each case, and do not criticize 
them because two instances apparently the same are decided dif- 
ferently. In many cases the board of appeals views the premises, 
and distinctions may presumably be based on that intimate 
knowledge.! 


Footnote continued from page 126. 
Md.—North Baltimore M. P. Church v. Board of Zoning Appeals, Baltimore 
Rion: Baltimore Daily Record, June 24, 1932, 164 Md. 487, 165 A. 
793 (1933 
Mo.—Discher v. Stephens, Circuit Court, Webster Groves, March 12, 1928 
N. Y.—Adelman v. Connell, 234 App. Div. 871, 253 N. Y. S. 1079 (1931) 
Bruckner v. Walsh, 209 App. Div. go9, 205 N. Y. S. 396 (1924) 
Facey v. Leo, 110 Misc. 516, 180 N. Y. S. 553, affd. 230 N. Y. 602, 130 N. E. 
glo (1921) 
Flegenheimer v. Leo, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law 
Journal, May 8, 1918, affd. 186 App. Div. 893, 172 N. Y. S. 912 (1918) 
Just Estates v. Clarke, 226 App. Div. 812, 234 N. Y. S. 866 (1929) 
Leverich Realty Corp. v. Board of Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, March 3, 1925 
MacLean v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
August 7, 1926 
Sheldon v. Board of Appeals of New York, 234.N. Y. 484, 138 N. E. 416 (1923) 
West Side Mortgage Co. v. Leo, 174 N. Y. S. 451 (1919) 
R. I1.—Roberge v. Zoning Board of Review of East Providence, 157 A. 304 (1931) 
1 Mass.—Fandel v. Board of Zoning Adjustment of Boston, 280 Mass. 195, 182 
N. E. 343 (1932) 
N. Y.—Carl v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
November 8, 1929 
Falkenau & Hamershlag, Inc. v. Walsh, 214 App. Div. 705, 209 N. Y. S. 900, 
affd. 240 N. Y. 688, 148 N. E. 759 (1925) 
Mymaud Const. Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, July 21, 1926 


127 


ZONING 


A board of appeals is presumed to be composed of experts. Con- 
sequently, it is not necessary to take proof and base the determina- 
tion on it. But in its return the board should state the basis of its 
determination.! Proof offered must not be refused.? 

In New York City the regulation of tenement houses antedated 
zoning. Officials desiring to prevent the slightest weakening of the 
tenement house law succeeded in omitting any provision for appeals 
to the Board of Appeals from determinations of the Tenement 
House Commissioner.’ 


CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES 


Conditions may be imposed on a variance permit, and if the 
applicant builds under it the owner of the building must observe 
these conditions as long as the structure stands. The conditions 
are not limited to the scope of the police power. A common con- 
dition is that the side of a building shall be constructed with face 
brick. 

The imposition of conditions often makes a variance lawful that 
would otherwise be unlawful. No variance is lawful which does 
precisely what a change of map would accomplish. For instance, 
a variance permit in a residence district is unlawful if it allows the 
building to be used for any purpose for which it might be used if 
in a business district. [t would be contrary to the spirit and purpose 


IN. Wig ct Holding Corp. v. Walsh, 120 Misc. 467, 199 N. Y. S. 534 
1923) 
Morrone v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
August 29, 1927, affd. 223 App. Div. 746, 227 N. Y. S. 855 (1928) 
2 Rosoff v. Walsh, 230 App. Div. 789, 244 N. Y. S. 920 (1930) 
5N. aes East 57th St. Corp. v. Deegan, 226 App. Div. 507, 235 N. Y. S. 11 
1929 
Joleto Const. Co. v. Martin, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, February 21, 1927 
Seigel v. Mann, 208 App. Div. 713, 202 N. Y. S. 946 (1923) 


4N. J.—Soho Park & Land Co. v. Board of Adjustment of Belleville, 6 N. J. Misc. 
686, 142 A. 548 (1928) 
N. Y.—Butler v. Connell, 235 App. Div. 806, 256 N. Y. S. 935 (1932) 
Guardian Garage, Inc. v. Dorman, 233 App. Div. 771, 250 N. Y. S. 861 (1931) 
feratey Realty Co. v. Leo, 183 N. Y. S. 37, affd. 231 N. Y. 619, 132 N. E. 912 
1921 
Strolovitz v. Walsh, 227 App. Div. 624, 235 N. Y. S. 860 (1929) ' 
Pa.—Appeal ., Consolidated Cleaning Shops, Inc., 103 Pa. Super. 66, 157 A. 
811 (1931 
R. I.—Smith v. Zoning Board of Review of Pawtucket, 170 A. 75 (1934) 


128 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


of the ordinance. To be lawful it must go no further than the need 
for it reasonably requires. A variance permit for a store building, 
between two nonconforming stores in a residence district, may be 
issued on the condition that it shall be used for retail merchandising 
only, and that the floors above shall be used for residence. By the 
prudent use of conditions in variances boards can prevent many 
hardships which would otherwise occur at the edges of districts. 
For instance, on Peach-tree Avenue, Atlanta, near Peach-tree sta- 
tion of the Southern Railroad, a business district adjoined a one- 
family detached-house residence district. “There was no street 
between. The brick side of a store marked the division line of the 
two districts. A variance permit for a building on the plot next 
to the existing store might have contained conditions requiring a 
bank or office use of the first floor, a front yard and side yard, a 
rounded corner, and face brick on the side of the building nearest 
the private houses. Some arrangement like this would have left 
the situation far better than before. But the application for a 
variance was returned with a statement that the board was without 
jurisdiction. An extremely harmful court decision resulted which 
prevented use zoning in that state for several years.1 A board of 
appeals should always say yes or no to an application for a variance. 
Zoning regulations must be based on the health, safety, and 
general welfare of the community. But the conditions imposed on 
variance permits are not regulations. They express the protective 
adaptations necessary to secure the required vote in the board of 
appeals. They may therefore have an esthetic quality. For in- 
stance, a regulation that a gasoline station must be of colonial 
design is void because not related to health or safety. But a vari- 
ance allowing the station in a prohibited district could require such 
design where, for instance, the surrounding houses were colonial. 
Ordinances usually provide among the various items of original 
jurisdiction of the board of appeals that the board may grant vari- 
ance permits for not more than two years in undeveloped sections.” 
Up to 1931 it was generally considered that no temporary variance 
could be for more than two years. In that year the New York 


1Smith v. City of Atlanta, 161 Ga. 769, 132 S. E. 66 (1926)—City of Atlanta v. 
Smith, 165 Ga. 146, 140 S. E. 369 (1927) 
2 Burke v. Connell, 242 App. Div. 795, 274 N. Y. S. 745 (1934) 


129 


ZONING 


Court of Appeals decided that a gasoline station could lawfully be 
permitted temporarily in an open residence district on a main high- 
way, especially in view of the business depression! Since 1931, 
accordingly, the Board of Standards and Appeals of New York City, 
in appeals on the ground of practical difficulty and unnecessary 
hardship, has granted temporary permits for gasoline stations, quite 
independently of the above mentioned two-year provision, and has: 
made the period from one to eight years. The corporation counsel 
has advised the Board that it is lawful to impose a condition of a 
term of years on such variance permits. It is evident that the 
owner is able to erect a more substantial and better appearing 
building if he has eight instead of two years in which to amortize. 

A class of variances to which conditions are nearly always at- 
tached are those issued for buildings at or near boundaries of dis- 
tricts. In many cases this boundary will be between a business 
district and a residence district. Sometimes a one-story garage or 
moving picture theatre is planned to front the business street. The 
lot may be too shallow to provide sufficient depth and also the 
required rear yard. In proper cases the board of appeals can allow 
the new building to obtain additional depth by covering the whole 
of the rear yard or even extending into the residential district, on 
the condition, however, that the building shall be only one story 
high, that there shall be no opening from it other than on the busi- 
ness street, that there shall be no windows, and that light shall be 
obtained from the roof. The neighbors in the residence district will 
often prefer to have the unpierced walls of such a building near 
their homes rather than a rear yard used in connection with the 
garage or theatre, sometimes with vehicles and workmen causing 
noise and litter. Cases of this sort arise with churches, stores, 
markets, and even factories, where the conditions imposed ameli- 
orate or entirely avoid any injury to the adjoining residences or 
other uses. Of course, the board of appeals will not allow every 


1N. Y.—St. Albans-Springfield Corporation v. Connell, 257 N. Y. 73, 177 N. E. 

313 (1931) 

Eckels v. Murdock, 265 N. Y. 545, 193 N. E. 313 (1934) 

Gershenhorn v. Murdock, 241 App. Div. 873, 271 N. Y. S. 980 (1934) 

Nagaven Realties, Inc. v. Banzhaf, 149 Misc. 361, 267 N. Y. S. 729 (1933) 

Noviak Hldg. Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York 
Law Journal, August 15, 1934, 243 App. Div. 738, 278 N. Y. S. 118, 268 
N. Y. 715, 198 N. E. 572 (1935) 


130 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


variance requested. Most border-line cases involve injury to ad- 
joining residential buildings. A view of the premises by the board 
of appeals and the public hearing will usually disclose in what cases 
a variance on conditions will make the situation better instead of 
worse.! 


RULES OF CONDUCT 


The board of appeals is not a legislative body. Courts have called 
it an administrative or quasi-judicial body. It cannot make laws. 
Its main function is to make variance permits in exceptional cases, 
subject to court review. In the exercise of this discretion, however, 
the board of appeals is not left free to make any determinations 
whatever that it may prefer. It must comply with rules of conduct 
prescribed by the state legislature, or by the local legislature acting 
under a direction or permission from the state legislature. This 
method of leaving to an expert administrative body the determina- 

tion of details in conformity with rules of conduct laid down by the 
legislature has grown in this country during the last thirty years. 
Congress created an Interstate Commerce Commission but did not 


1 Jn California where variances cannot be made because of the lack of a board of 
appeals provision in the state enabling act, some other method had to be 
found to take care of these exceptional cases. The method in vogue is to 
make “spot zoning’’ changes with conditions attached. This is tantamount 
to attaching conditions to a legislative act and should be condemned. The 
owner of a nonconforming store in a residence district of San Francisco 
sought to compel a permit, for the enlargement of his store, which would 
have resulted in a further invasion of the residence district. As there was no 
board of appeals to make a variance on conditions, there was nothing for the 
owners to do but to seek a change of the map, which in such cases is usually 
called “spot zoning.’”’? The council refused to make the change and was 
upheld by the court. Incidentally the court discussed the need of gradually 
eliminating nonconforming uses. Quite regardless of whether a variance in 
this case would have been justifiable or not, the absence of a board of appeals 
shows the lack of adaptability of the California law to exceptional situations. 
Aan v. City & County of San Francisco, 218 Cal. 83, 21 P. (2d) 419 

1933). 
N. Y.—Block Holding Corp. v. Warshaw, 141 Misc. 818, 253 N. Y. S. 321, 237 
App. Div. 839, 261 N. Y. S. 914 (1932) 
Goebel v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Bronx County, 
New York Law Journal, July 17, 1929 
Homack Const. Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, August 7, 1925 
Ralph Market Peddlers Syndicate v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, April 25, 1922 
Reed v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 255 N. Y. 126, 174 N. E. 301 (1931) 
R. I.—Syrian Orthodox Charitable Society v. Zoning Board of Review of Paw- 
tucket, 53 R. I. 232, 165 A. 778 (1933) 


131 


ZONING 


in the beginning prescribe rules of conduct for its determinations. 
There was complaint that the Interstate Commerce Act had no 
teeth. Later Congress gave it the power of determining reasonable 
rates, adequate service and safe appliances, and penalties were im- 
posed for noncompliance with these regulations. The words “rea- 
sonable,” “adequate” and “safe” are the rules laid down by 
Congress. States followed the national government in creating 
public service commissions having the power to make regulatory 
determinations within the rules of conduct embodied in the terms 
“reasonable rates, adequate service, and safe appliances.”’ Con- 
sress also passed a law requiring pure foods in interstate commerce 
and preventing false branding. A bureau was set up in the Depart- 
ment of Agriculture having power to make determinations under 
the rules of conduct embodied in the requirement of pure food and 
true branding. The intricacy of modern transportation, industry, 
and merchandising makes it almost impossible for the federal or 
state legislative body to prescribe exact laws to fit the details of 
every situation. The involved schedules of freight rates could 
hardly be determined by a statute. They often need to be altered 
between legislative sessions. The legislature is not adapted to tak- 
ing evidence and passing on these details. It is undoubtedly better 
to prescribe rules of conduct for an administrative body and require 
its determinations to be obeyed. 

The board of appeals in zoning, from the beginning of the practice 
in this country, has been required to act within rules of conduct 
prescribed by the state legislature or by a local legislative body 
acting under the sanction of the state legislature. The device of 
such a board had its origin and early development in connection 
with zoning in New York City. It will be helpful to trace this 
development from the beginning, as the methods used at that time, 
and the language employed, have been the foundation of all pro- 
visions relating to boards of appeals in zoning throughout the 
country. Inasmuch as the rule of conduct involved in the words 
“practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship”’ originated in New 
York City, but has been criticized by the courts of Illinois and 
Maryland as an inadequate rule, it will not be out of place to state 
with some detail the history of the earliest adoption of the phrase. 


132 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


DEVELOPMENT OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS IN THE 
City oF New YorK 


The act of the New York legislature granting the Board of 
Estimate and Apportionment of the City of New York the power 
to adopt a zoning ordinance—under which the building zone resolu- 
tion of July 25, 1916, was adopted—is here inserted.! 


1SECTIONS OF GREATER NEW YorRK CHARTER, AS ENACTED 
BY CHAPTER 470 OF LAWS OF 1914 AND AMENDED 
BY CHAPTER 497 OF LAWS OF 1916 


Sec. 242-a. The board of estimate and apportionment shall have power to 
regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected and to regu- 
late and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces. The board 
may divide the city into districts of such number, shape and area as it may deem 
best suited to carry out the purposes of this section. The regulations as to the 
height and bulk of buildings and the area of yards, courts and other open spaces 
shall be uniform for each class of buildings throughout each district. The regula- 
tions in one or more districts may differ from those in other districts. Such 
regulations shall be designed to secure safety from fire and other dangers and to 
promote the public health and welfare, including, so far as conditions may permit, 
provision for adequate light, air and convenience of access. The board shall pay 
reasonable regard to the character of buildings erected in each district, the value 
of the land and the use to which it may be put to the end that such regulations 
may promote public health, safety and welfare and the most desirable use for 
which the land of each district may be adapted and may tend to conserve the 
value of buildings and enhance the value of land throughout the city. The board 
shall appoint a commission to recommend the boundaries of districts and appro- 
priate regulations to be enforced therein. Such commission shall make a tentative 
report and hold public hearings thereon at such times and places as said board 
shall require before submitting its final report. Said board shall not determine 
the boundaries of any district nor impose any regulation until after the final 
report of a commission so appointed. After such final report said board shall 
afford persons interested an opportunity to be heard at a time and place to be 
specified in a notice of hearing to be published for ten consecutive days in the 
City Record. The board may from time to time after public notice and hearing 
amend, supplement or change said regulations or districts, but in case a protest 
against a proposed amendment, supplement or change be presented, duly signed 
and acknowledged by the owners of twenty per centum or more of the frontage 
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty per centum of the frontage 
immediately in the rear thereof, or by the owners of twenty per centum of the 
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, such amendment 
shall not be passed except by a unanimous vote of the board. 


Sec. 242-b. The board of estimate and apportionment may regulate and 
restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed 
for specified uses, and may divide the city into districts of such number, shape 
and area as it may deem best suited to carry out the purposes of this section. For 
each such district regulations may be imposed designating the trades and indus- 
tries that shall be excluded or subjected to special regulations and designating the 
uses for which buildings may not be erected or altered. Such regulations shall 
be designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The board 
shall give reasonable consideration, among other things to the character of the 

Footnote continued on page 134. 


133 


ZONING 


It will be noted that no authority was given for the creation of a 
board of appeals. The reason was that the Heights of Buildings 
Commission, which framed the enabling act, did not foresee how 
necessary such a board would be. For many years there had been 
a Board of Examiners in the Bureau of Buildings established ac- 
cording to a charter provision. This was a discretionary board 
having power to ameliorate the harshness of the requirements of 
the building code. No rule of conduct was prescribed to govern its 
decisions, and its powers and usefulness were small. For several 
years before the building zone resolution was passed the city felt 
an increasing need for the creation of an administrative board with 
larger discretionary powers relating to buildings. Such a board, it 
was expected, might unify the administration of numerous state and 
city requirements which confused the building trade. The result 
was that the legislature of 1916 amended the city charter by making 
provision for a Board of Standards and Appeals with power to make 
rules covering general details of buildings, and also a Board of 
Appeals. The latter consisted of the appointed members of the 
first-named Board and one of its ex-officio members. This Board 
of Appeals was given power to exercise its discretion within limits 
in granting permits for buildings in exceptional situations, and to 
review the decisions of the building commissioners. The rule of 
practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship was prescribed for it 


Footnote continued from page 133. 

district, its peculiar suitability for particular uses, the conservation of property 
values, and the direction of building development in accord with a well-considered 
plan. The board shall appoint a commission to recommend the boundaries of 
districts and appropriate regulations and restrictions to be imposed therein. Such 
commission shall make a tentative report and hold public hearings thereon before 
submitting its final report at such time as said board shall require. Said board 
shall not determine the boundaries of any district nor impose any regulations or 
restrictions until after the final report of a commission so appointed. After such 
final report said board shall afford persons interested an opportunity to be heard 
at a time and place to be specified in a notice of hearing to be published for ten 
consecutive days in the City Record. The board may from time to time after 
public notice and hearing amend, supplement or change said regulations or 
districts but in case a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or 
change be presented, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty per 
centum or more of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 
twenty per centum of the frontage immediately in the rear thereof, or by the 
owners of twenty per centum of the frontage directly opposite the frontage 
proposed to be altered, such amendment shall not be passed except by a unani- 
mous vote of the board. 


134 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


as a rule of conduct. These two boards superseded the former 
Board of Examiners. 

Such was the state of affairs when the building zone resolution 
was being framed by the zoning commission, officially known as the 
Commission on Building Districts and Restrictions, which was ap- 
pointed under the authority of the enabling act. That Commission, 
appreciating that the recently constituted Board of Appeals was a 
proper body to turn to for assistance in the administration of the 
building zone resolution, introduced into the latter (1) certain use- 
district exceptions under which the Board of Appeals might exercise 
its discretion in granting permits, (2) certain area-district lot-di- 
mension requirements, subject to the approval of the Board of 
Appeals, and (3) the general principle that where in a specific case 
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying 
out the strict letter of a provision of the resolution the Board of 
Appeals should have power to vary the provision, in harmony with 
_its general purpose and intent, so that the public health, safety, and 
general welfare might be secured and substantial justice done. 

The zoning commission erroneously assumed that the Board of 
Appeals could exercise these functions as outlined because of their 
similarity to the functions which had been prescribed for that Board 
in the legislative act of 1916. However, after the building zone 
resolution was adopted July 25, 1916, one of the first court cases 
that arose was a certiorari proceeding reviewing a decision of the 
Board of Appeals regarding a new garage. Justice Russell Benedict 
of the Supreme Court, Second Department, in the following care- 
fully prepared opinion, which has been considered to state the law 
accurately in this particular, pointed out that the Board of Appeals 
could not exercise functions given it by the Board of Estimate 
unless the state legislature had authorized it to do so: 


The board of estimate having been vested by the legislature with 
the power of framing the regulations and restrictions provided for 
by the acts of 1914 and 1916, could not, in the absence of express 
legislative authority, depute to an inferior board the power to dis- 
pense in its discretion with compliance with such regulations. If 
the board of estimate had such a power to be exercised or not in 
its discretion, it could not delegate such discretion to a subordinate 
administrative or ministerial board. Burdsall v. Clark, 73 N. Y. 73; 
Phelps v. City of New York, 112 id. 216, 220; Ontario Knitting Co. 


135 


ZONING 


v. State, 205 id. 409, 416. The question has ceased to be of im- 
portance for future cases, because of the amendment made this year 
to section 242-b, which expressly authorizes the board of estimate 
to confer such power on the board of appeals. 

(Beinert v. Miller, 100 Misc. 318, at p. 326.) 

Fortunately the corporation counsel and the Zoning Committee 
foresaw the dangers which were later pointed out by Justice Bene- 
dict, and urged the legislature to make an amendment so that the 
Board of Appeals would be clothed with its proper functions re- 
garding the building zone resolution. Accordingly the state legis- 
lature in 1917 amended charter sections 242-a and 242-b by adding 
the following: 

Said regulations shall be enforced by the superintendent of buildings 
of each borough and the tenement house commissioner, under the 
rules and regulations of the board of standards and appeals. Said 
regulations of the board of estimate and apportionment may 
provide that the board of appeals may determine and vary their 
application in harmony with their general purpose and intent and 
in accordance with general or specific rules therein contained. 

(Chapter 601, Laws of New York 1917.) 

The charter provisions in relation to the powers of the Board of 
Appeals were also amended by adding the following sentence: 
They [the board of appeals] shall also hear and decide all matters 
referred to them or upon which they are required to pass under any 
resolution of the board of estimate and apportionment adopted 
pursuant to sections two hundred and forty-two-a and two hundred 
and forty-two-b of this chapter. 

(Greater New York Charter, Sec. 718-d.) 

Thus the City of New York at last obtained the Board of Appeals 
as an adjunct to its zoning plan. Because the law in its entirety 
is the growth of many decades, because it was adapted carefully to 
supplement the zoning plan, because it has been repeatedly passed 
upon by the courts, and because parts of it have been copied in the 
zoning laws of many states, it is here included in so far as it related 
(in 1920) to zoning and the Board of Appeals. 


‘CHAPTER XIV-—A OF THE CHARTER OF THE CiTy OF NEw York, AS IT 
EXISTED IN 1920 
Board of standards and appeals. 
Sec. 718. 1. Constitution and appointment. The board of standards and 
appeals is hereby established. The words ‘‘the board” when used in this chapter 
Footnote continued on page 137. 


136 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


Footnote continued from page 136. 


refer to said board. It shall consist of the fire commissioner, the superintendents 
of buildings, the chief of the uniformed force of the fire department and six other 
members to be appointed by the mayor who are hereinafter referred to as the 
appointed members. Of the appointed members first appointed by the mayor, 
two shall be appointed for terms of one year, two for terms of two years and two 
for terms of three years, and annually thereafter the mayor shall appoint two 
members for terms of three years each. At all times there shall be among the 
appointed members of the board persons qualified as follows: one, other than 
the chairman, shall have had not less than ten years’ experience as an architect; 
one, other than the chairman, shall have had not less than ten years’ experience 
as a structural engineer; one, other than the chairman, shall have had not less 
than ten years’ practical experience as a builder. The mayor shall designate one 
of the appointed members of the board as chairman and shall also appoint a 
secretary. The board shall appoint a chief clerk and such other subordinates as 
may be needed, who shall receive such compensation as may be provided pursuant 
tolaw. The clerk of the board of examiners is hereby transferred to the position 
of chief clerk of the board of standards and appeals. The chairman of the board 
shall be an architect or structural engineer of at least fifteen years’ experience; 
he shall receive such annual compensation as shall be fixed by the board of alder- 
men upon the recommendation of the board of estimate and apportionment, he 
shall act as chairman of the board and of the board of appeals, and he shall not be 
engaged in any other occupation, profession or employment. The appointed 
members of the board other than the chairman shall receive such compensation as 
may be fixed by the board of aldermen upon the recommendation of the board 
_ of estimate and apportionment for each attendance at a meeting of the board. 


2. Removal and filling vacancies. The mayor shall have power to remove any 
appointed member of the board, and the secretary of the board, and to fill 
vacancies occurring by such removal or other cause. Vacancies shall be filled 
for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant. 


3. Meetings. Meetings of the board and of the board of appeals shall be held 
at the call of the chairman and at such other times as such boards may determine. 
Such chairman or in his absence the acting chairman may administer oaths and 
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of such boards shall be open to 
the public. Each board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote 
of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating 
such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official action. 


4. Bulletin; filing and publication of decision. Every rule, regulation, every 
amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determi- 
nation of the board and of the board of appeals shall immediately be filed in the 
office of the board and shall be a public record. The board shall print and publish 
monthly or oftener at its option, a bulletin in which it shall publish every rule, 
regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof made by the board, and every 
order, requirement, decision and determination of the board of appeals, and the 
reasons therefor whenever it shall deem it practical to do so, and such other 
matters, including indices and digests, as the board may deem it advisable to 
publish. 


* * * * 


Board of appeals. 


Sec. 718-d. The appointed members of the board of standards and appeals 
and the chief of the uniformed force of the fire department, exclusive of the other 
members, shall hear and decide appeals from and review any rule, regulation, 
amendment or repeal thereof, order, requirement, decision or determination of a 
superintendent of buildings made under the authority of title two of chapter nine 

Footnote continued on page 138. 


137 


ZONING 


Footnote continued from page 137. 

of this act or of any ordinance or of the fire commissioner under the authority of 
title three of chapter fifteen of this act or of any ordinance, or of the labor law. 
They shall also hear and decide all matters referred to them or upon which they 
are required to pass under any resolution of the board of estimate and appor- 
tionment adopted pursuant to sections two hundred and forty-two-a and two 
hundred and forty-two-b of this chapter. No member of the board shall pass 
upon any question in which he or any corporation in which he is a stockholder or 
security holder is interested. 


Hearings on appeals shall be before at least five members of the board of 
appeals, and the concurring vote of five members of the board of appeals shall be 
necessary to a decision. 


The words board of appeals when used in this chapter refer to the said appointed 
members of the board of standards and appeals and the chief of the uniformed 
force of the fire department, when acting under the powers conferred by this 
section. 


Inspections. 


Sec. 718-e. Whenever the board of appeals shall deem it necessary that an 
inspection shall be made of any building, structure or vessel which is the subject 
of an appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the fire 
commissioner, the chairman of the board and not less than two members of the 
board of appeals designated by the chairman shall visit and inspect such building, 
structure or vessel, and shall report their findings to the board of appeals in 
writing. The members other than the chairman shall receive for each visit or 
inspection, and for attendance at meetings of the board of appeals, the same 
compensation as is paid to appointed members for attendance at meetings of the 
board of standards and appeals. 


Appeals. 


Sec. 719. 1. What appealable. An appeal may be taken to the board of 
appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any 
superintendent of buildings under the authority of title two of chapter nine of 
this act or of any ordinance (except an order requiring an unsafe building, staging 
or structure to be made safe, and except an order punishing, removing or dis- 
missing an employee, inspector or other subordinate), or made by the fire com- 
missioner under the authority of title three of chapter fifteen of this act or of any 
ordinance, and from any rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof relating 
to the construction, alteration, structural changes in, equipment, occupancy or 
use of any building or structure, or vaults and sidewalks appurtenant thereto. 


2. Who may appeal. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or 
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. 


3. Appeal how taken. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be 
prescribed by the board of appeals by general rule, by filing with the officer from 
whom the appeal is taken and with the board of appeals of a notice of appeal, 
specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall 
forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which 
the action appealed from was taken. 


4. Stay. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed 
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of 
appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of 
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril 
to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than 
by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by the 

Footnote continued on page 130. 


138 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


Footnote continued from page 138. 


supreme court, on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is 
taken and on due cause shown. 


5. Hearing of and decision upon appeal. The board of appeals shall fix a 
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the 
parties, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any 
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The board of appeals 
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, 
decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, 
decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and 
to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carry- 
ing out the strict letter of the law, the board of appeals shall have power in passing 
upon appeals, to vary or modify any rule or regulation or the provisions of any 
existing law or ordinance relating to the construction, structural changes in, 
equipment, alteration or removal of buildings or structures, or vaults and side- 
walks appurtenant thereto, so that the spirit of the law shall be observed, public 
safety secured and substantial justice done. The board of appeals shall not vary 
or modify the tenement house law nor any rule, regulation or ruling of the tene- 
ment house commissioner. The decision shall be in writing and shall be filed in 
the office of the board and promptly published in the bulletin of the board. Each 
decision shall so far as is practicable be in the form of a general statement or 
resolution which shall be applicable to cases similar to or falling within the 
principles passed upon in such decision. 


6. Review by board of appeals on its own motion. Any rule, regulation, 
amendment or repeal thereof and any order, requirement, decision or determina- 
tion from which an appeal may be taken to the board of appeals under the pro- 
vision of this section, may be reviewed by the board of appeals, upon motion of 
any member thereof, but no such review of a decision upon an appeal shall 
prejudice the rights of any person who has in good faith acted thereon before it is 
reversed or modified. The provisions of this chapter relating to appeals to the 
board of appeals shall be applicable to such review. 


Certiorari to review decision of board of appeals. 


Sec. 719-a. 1. Petition. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved 
by any decision of the board of appeals upon appeal or review had under section 
seven hundred and nineteen, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the 
city, or the industrial commission of the labor department of the state, may 
present to the supreme court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such 
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. 
Such petition must be presented to a justice of the supreme court or at a special 
term of the supreme court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in the 
office of the board, or its publication in the bulletin. 


2. Writ of certiorari. Upon the presentation of such petition, the justice or 
court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board of appeals to review such 
decision of the board of appeals and shall prescribe therein the time within which 
a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator’s attorney, which shall 
not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court or a justice thereof. 
Such writ shall be returnable to a special term of the supreme court of the judicial 
district in which the property affected, or a portion thereof, is situated. The 
allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, 
but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, 
grant a restraining order. 


3. Return to writ. The board of appeals shall not be required to return the 
original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or 
Footnote continued on page 140. 


139 


ZONING 


During the period while the charter provisions relating to the 
Board of Appeals were being perfected the Board of Estimate and 
Apportionment made minor amendments to the parts of the build- 
ing zone resolution which refer to the Board of Appeals. Those 
parts, as so amended, are given in the note. 


Footnote continued from page 130. 
sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such 
writ. The return must concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent 
and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and must be 
verified. 


4. Proceedings upon return. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court 
that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take 
evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the 
same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall 
constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court 
shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify 
the decision brought up for review. 


5. Costs. Costs shall not be allowed against the board, unless it shall appear 
to the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in 
making the decision appealed from. 


6. Preferences. All issues in any proceeding under this section shall have 
preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 


Penalty for non-compliance with orders, et cetera, of board, of superintendents of 
buildings and of fire commissioner. 


Sec. 719-b. Any person who shall knowingly violate or fail to comply with 
any lawful order or requirement of the board made under the authority of this 
chapter or of a superintendent of buildings made under the authority of title 
two of chapter nine of this act or of the fire commissioner made under the author- 
ity of title three of chapter fifteen of this act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; 
and shall in addition thereto, and in addition to all other liabilities and penalties 
imposed by law, ordinances, rules and regulations, forfeit and pay for each and 
every such violation and non-compliance respectively, a penalty in the sum of not 
more than two hundred and fifty dollars, as may be fixed by the court awarding 
judgment therefor. An action may be brought for the recovery of any such 
penalty or penalties in any municipal court or court of record in said city in the 
name of the city. 


1EXTRACTS FROM New YorkK City BUILDING ZONE RESOLUTION AS IT 
EXISTED IN IQIQ 


Sec. 7. Use District Exceptions. The Board of Appeals, created by chapter 
503 of the laws of 1916, may, in appropriate cases, after public notice and hearing, 
and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and vary the 
application of the use district regulations herein established in harmony with 
their general purpose and intent as follows: 


(a) Permit the extension of an existing building and the existing use thereof 
upon the lot occupied by such building at the time of the passage of this resolution 
or permit the erection of an additional building upon a lot occupied at the time of 
the passage of this resolution by a commercial or industrial establishment and 
which additional building is a part of such establishment; 

Footnote continued on page 141. 


140 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


Footnote continued from page 140. 

(b) Where a use district boundary line divides a lot in a single ownership at the 
time of the passage of this resolution, permit a use authorized on either portion of 
such lot to extend to the entire lot, but not more than 25 feet beyond the boundary 
line of the district in which such use is authorized; 


(c) Permit the extension of an existing or proposed building into a more 
restricted district under such conditions as will safeguard the character of the 
more restricted district; 


(d) Permit in a residence district a central telephone exchange or any building 
or use in keeping with the uses expressly enumerated in section 3 as the purposes 
for which buildings or premises may be erected or used in a residence district; 


(e) Permit in a business district the erection or extension of a garage or stable 
in any portion of a street between two intersecting streets in which portion there 
exists a garage for more than five motor vehicles or a stable for more than five 
horses at the time of the passage of this resolution; 


(f) Grant in undeveloped sections of the city temporary and conditional per- 
mits for not more than two years for structures and uses in contravention of the 
requirements of this article; 


(g) Permit in a business or residence district the erection of a garage provided 
the petitioner files the consents duly acknowledged of the owners of 80 per cent. 
of the frontage deemed by the Board to be immediately affected by the proposed 
garage. Such permit shall specify the maximum size or capacity of the garage 
and shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards upon the construction 
and use of the garage. 


Sec. 20. Rules and Regulations; Modifications of Provisions. The Board of 
Standards and Appeals, created by chapter 503 of the laws of 1916, shall adopt 
from time to time such rules and regulations as they may deem necessary to carry 
into effect the provisions of this resolution. Where there are practical difficulties 
or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the pro- 
visions of this resolution the board of appeals shall have power in a specific case 
to vary any such provision in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so 
that the public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial 
justice done. Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the 
street layout as shown on the use, height or area district map, the designation 
shown on the mapped street shall be applied by the Board of Appeals to the 
unmapped streets in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the 
plan for the particular section in question. Before taking any action authorized 
in this section the Board of Appeals shall give public notice and hearing. 


No garage for more than five cars may be erected or extended and no building 
not now used as a garage for more than five cars may have its use changed toa 
garage for more than five cars on any portion of a street between two intersecting 
streets in which portion there exists an exit from or an entrance to a public school; 
or in which portion there exists any hospital maintained as a charitable institu- 
tion; and in no case within a distance of 200 feet from the nearest exit from or 
entrance to a public school; nor within two hundred feet of any hospital main- 
tained as a charitable institution. This protection shall also apply to duly 
organized schools for children under 16 years of age, giving regular instruction at 
least five days a week for eight months or more each year, owned and operated by 
any established religious body or educational corporation. This limitation on the 
location of garages shall apply to unrestricted as well as business and residence 
districts; but in no case shall it apply to cases where applications for the erection 
or extension of garages or the conversion of existing buildings into garages may 
be pending before the Board of Appeals at the time of the adoption of this 
resolution. 


141 


ZONING 


INTERPRETATION OF RULES OF CONDUCT 


The rule of practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship, in the 
charter of the City of New York, was copied in the zoning enabling 
acts of a considerable number of states. In 1924 Herbert Hoover, 
then Secretary of Commerce, issued the so-called “Standard State 
Zoning Enabling Act,” under which municipalities might adopt 
zoning regulations. This form advised the use of practical difficulty 
and unnecessary hardship as the rule for boards of appeals. The 
phraseology differs somewhat from that used in the New York 
charter but the intention of the framers was that the meaning 
should be the same. The following is the rule in the Standard Act: 


To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the 
terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, 
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the 
provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and 
so that the spirit of the ordinance will be observed and substantial 
justice done. 


Following the publication of the Standard Act this rule of con- 
duct for zoning boards of appeals was adopted throughout the 
country. With the exception of the courts of Illinois and Maryland 
it has been considered adequate in all states where it has been 
passed upon. Nevertheless boards of appeals have frequently failed 
to recognize the binding force of the rule, and quite regardless of 
its proper scope have issued variance permits in cases where they 
thought that little or no harm was done thereby or where they 
thought they were doing substantial justice. Courts have repeat- 
edly pointed out that applications for variance permits must be 
decided according to the rules, and that the board of appeals, 
inasmuch as it is not a legislative body, is not at liberty to decide 
what is best for the individual or for the community. 

The zoning maps of a village near New York divided residence 
areas into A districts in which detached one-family houses could 
be built and B districts in which multi-family houses were allowed. 
To the surprise of the author when he went to this village as an 
arbitrator in a zoning dispute he was informed in response to his 
questions that no new multi-family houses had been built ina B 
district since the adoption of the zoning ordinance. It was ex- 

142 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


plained that all the builders of apartment houses wanted to place 
them in the detached one-family-house district and therefore ap- 
plied to the Board of Appeals for variance permits. In the majority 
of cases these were granted on the ground of practical difficulty and 
unnecessary hardship. The Board of Appeals erroneously con- 
sidered that if the applicant was able to show that he could earn 
a better income from the land by building a multi-family house 
that showing was enough to entitle him to a variance. Courts in 
nearly all states have held that this is a mistake. The board of 
appeals should only grant variance permits under this rule where 
the environment of the lot in question is such that its situation is 
exceptional and such that a conforming building would be unde- 
sirable or unprofitable. Added to this must be the element that 
the new building and use, although exceptional, will harmonize 
with the spirit and purpose of the ordinance. 

Departure from the strict letter of the zoning ordinance can often 
be allowed under this rule. Height regulations prescribe an enve- 
lope outside of which the structure shall not extend. Nevertheless 
variances can frequently be allowed where economies can be ob- 
tained without a sacrifice of light and air. Court and yard require- 
ments can frequently be varied where by reason of the exceptional 
location of the building, the total open spaces can be so disposed 
as to make them equivalent to the specifically required open spaces 
in their total amount and effect. Experience has shown that height 
regulations have an intimate relation to area regulations and in 
certain exceptional cases a variance may be made in one of these 
requirements and allowed for in the other. Height and area regu- 
lations control the bulk of the building and therefore are sometimes 
partly interchangeable. 

It may happen that half of a proposed building was erected be- 
fore the ordinance went into effect and it is desired to complete the 
unit later by building the other half. In cases of this sort, where 
the harmonious completion of the structure would require varia- 
tions from the original design, it has been considered justifiable to 
grant a variance permit on the ground of practical difficulty and 
unnecessary hardship. The Western Union Telegraph Company 
building on the west side of Broadway between Dey and Fulton 
Streets was designed to cover the entire block front, but only the 


143 


ZONING 


southerly half was built before the New York building zone res- 
olution went into effect. Later it was desired to build the northerly 
half, but the setback requirement of the height regulations pre- 
vented carrying out the design which had uniform height through- 
out. If the required setting back of the new half had been insisted 
upon, this structure as a whole would have been an architectural 
monstrosity. To this consideration was added the fact that St. 
Paul’s burying ground was opposite on the north which would 
probably remain as a permanent open space, giving light to the new 
northerly half of the building. It was therefore deemed justifiable 
under the rule of practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship to 
make a variance permit allowing the building to be completed as 
a harmonious whole. 

In 1931 the highest court of Illinois held that the rule of practical 
difficulty and unnecessary hardship is inadequate.! It is difficult 
to conceive of words which might be used to express what that court 
would regard as a sufficient rule. If the word “reasonable” in the 
requirement of a reasonable rate for transportation supplies an 
adequate rule, one wonders how it is that the words “practical 
difficulty and unnecessary hardship” in the field of construction 
fail to supply such a rule. After this decision was handed down 
municipalities in Illinois were at a loss how to provide for excep- 
tional situations in the issue of building permits.?, They saw no way 
other than to have their local legislative bodies alter the maps, spot 
by spot. Strictly speaking, this method does not create variances 
in the permits. A permanent change is made in the zoning of the 
land itself in order to allow the particular exceptional building. 

The illinois court also declared that it was not lawful for the 
state legislature to grant municipalities the power to submit special 
exceptions to the board of appeals in the ordinance itself. Con- 
sequently all discretionary power of varying the strict letter of the 
law in exceptional cases seems to have been taken away from the 
board of appeals in Illinois. Probably, however, the board still has 


1 Welton v. Hamilton, 344 Ill. 82, 176 N. E. 333 (1931) 
2The two following cases illustrate the ineffectiveness of regulation by court 
declarations of unconstitutionality. The Welton decision denied the power 
of boards of appeals as constituted to make variances. 
Ill.—Kirby v. City of Rockford, 363 Ill. 531, 2 N. E. (2d) 842 (1936) 
Reschke v. Village of Winnetka, 363 III. 478, 2 N. E. (2d) 718 (1936) 


144 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


the power to reverse the building inspector where he has made a 
mistake of law. 

The state legislature of Illinois later tried to remedy this situation 
by amending the state enabling act so that public hearings could 
be held before the board of appeals, even though the actual variance 
had to be made by the local legislative body. Accordingly, until 
this defective system of caring for special exceptions is remedied 
in some way, Illinois will be in the same position as California, 
Oregon, and Washington, the enabling acts of which make no pro- 
vision for a board of appeals. In those states exceptional situations 
are cared for by the spot zoning method. In operation this method 
is not satisfactory, partly because local legislative bodies, not being 
subject to court review, are prone to make irrational spot changes 
in the zoning maps, partly because neighbors are without any 
remedy to prevent unreasonable changes, and partly because the 
zoning map after it has been subjected to innumerable spot changes 
ceases to have any substantial relation to the health, safety, morals, 
and general welfare of the community. The result is unfortunate 
in comparison with the situation in states where boards of appeals 
can grant variance permits under the usual rules of conduct, and 
where necessary variance permits can be made from time to time 
without any alteration of the legal status of the land, as shown by 
the zoning maps. Los Angeles, for instance, by reason of being 
deprived of this method of permitting variances makes about eight 
times as many map changes each year as New York City. 

In 1933 the highest court of the state of Maryland! disapproved 
of the rule of practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship, following 
substantially the reasoning of the Illinois court. Accordingly, since 
that year boards of appeals in Maryland have reported desired 
variances to the local legislative body for action, thus beginning spot 
zoning in the state. In their zoning ordinances, however, munic- 
ipalities may still indicate situations wherein the board of appeals 
can make special exceptions, under rules of conduct provided in the 
ordinance itself. 

In practically all states it now seems well established that boards 
of appeals can grant variance permits under the usual rules of 


1Sugar v. North Baltimore Methodist Protestant Church, 164 Md. 487, 165 A. 
703 (1933) 
145 


ZONING 


conduct, including practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship,! 
subject to court review by proceedings in the nature of certiorar1. 
The line is sharply drawn between the zoning ordinance—which is 
exclusively passed and shaped by the local legislative body—and 


1 Conn.—Lathrop v. Town of Norwich, 111 Conn. 616, 151 A. 183 (1930) 

Ga.—Fauss v. McConnell, 172 Ga. 444, 157 S. E. 625 (1931) 

Ill.—Lucas v. Hamilton, 259 Ill. A. 148 (1930) 

Ind.—Dollman v. Osbon, Marion Circuit Court, Indianapolis, May 3, 1928 
Kaspar v. Board of Zoning Appeals, Circuit Court, Marion County, Indian- 

apolis, April 30, 1926 

Major v. Board of Zoning Appeals, Circuit Cour, Marion County, Indian- 
apolis, September 7, 1928 

lowa—Zimmerman v. O’Meara, 215 Iowa 1140, 245 N. W. 715 (1932) 

Ky.—Carrithers v. City of Louisville, Jefferson Circuit Court, Chancery Branch, 

Second Division, March 12, 1932, 250 Ky. 462, 63 S. W. (2d) 493 (1933) 

Md.—Convention of Protestant Episcopal Church v. Mayor and City Council of 

Baltimore, Baltimore City Court, Baltimore Daily Record, October 17, 1928 
—Greenway Apartment Company v. Convention of Protestant Episcopal 
Church, 280 U. S. 525, 50 S. Ct. 87 (1929) 

Jack Lewis, Inc. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 164 Md. 146, 164 
A. 220, 290 U. S. 585, 54 S. Ct. 56 (1933) 

Mass.—Amero v. Board of Appeal of Gloucester, 283 Mass. 45, 186 N. E. 61 (1933) 
Coleman v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 281 Mass. 112, 183 N. E. 166 (1932) 
Hammond v. Board of Appeal of Springfield, 257 Mass. 446, 154 N. E. 82 (1926) 
Phillips v. Board of Appeals of Springfield, 286 Mass. 469, 190 N. E. 601 (1934) 

Mich.—Beardsley v. Evangelical Lutheran Bethlehem Church, 261 Mich. 458, 

246 N. W. 180 (1933) 

Mo.—Nigro v. Kansas City, 325 Mo. 95, 27 S. W. (2d) 1030 (1930) 

Neb.—City of Lincoln v. Foss, 119 Neb. 666, 230 N. W. 592 (1930) 

N. Y.—Prevalence of odors not grounds. Arverne Bay Construction Company v. 

Murdock, 247 App. Div. 889, affd. 271 N. Y. 631 (1936) 

Brady v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law Jour- 
nal, April 26, 1926 

Dempsey v. Murdock, 241 App. Div. 64, 271 N. Y. S. 9 (1934) 

Durning v. Reville, 137 Misc. 173, 241 N. Y. S. 530, affd. 232 App. Div. 790, 
249 N. Y. S. 908 (1931) 

Esdora Realty Corp. v. Walsh, 229 App. Div. 866, 243 N. Y. S. 810, affd. 254 
N. Y. 600, 173 N. E. 883 (1930) 

Finger v. Connell, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
May 27, 1932 

Forman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
February 24, 1926 

Fort Lee Ferry Garage Co. v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, 
New York County, New York Law Journal; August 9, 1929, affd. 228 App. 
Div. 608, 237 N. Y. S. 775 (1929) 

Inconvenience, expense, and economic advantage not proper criteria in garage 
variance. 4072 Broadway Corp. v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 225 
App. Div. 97, 232 N. Y. S. 266, affd. 250 N. Y. 571, 166 N. E. 328 (1929) 

Garden Properties, Inc. v. Board of Appeals of New Rochelle, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, Westchester Law Journal, October 11, 1933 

Personal gain not grounds for garage variance. Gillman v. Walsh, 225 App. Div. 
677,231 NY WS) 75541028) 


Footnote continued on page 147. 


146 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


Footnote continued from page 146. 

Goldenberg v. Walsh, 215 App. Div. 396, 213 N. Y. S. 578, 242 N. Y. 576, 152 
N. E. 434 (1926) 

Grilli v. Gonnoll, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
February 26, 1932 

Gross v. Walsh, 213 App. Div. 878, 209 N. Y. S. 900 (1925); Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law Journal, July 8, 1925, affd. 215 App. Div. 839, 
213 N. Y. S. 884 (1926) 

Hayman v. Walsh, 223 App. Div. 722, 226 N. Y. S. 883, affd. 248 N. Y. 586, 
162 N. E. 534 (1928) 

Hendrick v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, New York 
County, New York Law Journal, June 20, 1929 

Leider v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law Journal, 
April 23, 1930 

Mamaroneck Commodore, Inc. v. Bayly, 233 App. Div. 741, 250 N. Y. S. 767, 
affd. 260 N. Y. 528, 184 N. E. 79 (1932) 

McAvoy v. Leo, 109 Misc. 255, 178 N. Y. S. 513 (1919) 

Montalbine v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
October 31, 1929 

Mymaud Const. Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, July 21, 1926 

Party must make proof before board of appeals. Nostrand Holding Corp. v. 
Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, September 
3, 1929 

Ozark Realty Corp. v. Connell, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, January 4, 1933 

Palazzolo v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
October 23, 1924 

Parry v. Walsh, 121 Misc. 631, 202 N. Y. S. 48, affd. 209 App. Div. 889, 205 
N. Y. S. 945 (1924) 

People v. Snedeker, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
December 1, 1932 

People v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
October 11, 1924 

People v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law Journal, 
July 1, 1925 

Pounds v. Walsh, 129 Misc. 676, 223 N. Y. S. 459, affd. 248 N. Y. 591, 162 
N. E. 537 (1928) 

Proc Bldg. Corp. v. Connell, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, March 11, 1933, 240 App. Div. 782, 266 N. Y. S. 903, affd. 264 
N. Y. 513, 191 N. E. 541 (1934) 

Reynolds v. Clarke, Supreme Court, Westchester County, January 29, 1925 
Rock Jay Realty Co. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, March 2, 1935, 247 App. Div. 730, 286 N. Y. S. 1021 (1936) 
Rothfield v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 

June 1, 1928 

Rutland Parkway, Inc. v. Walsh, 227 App. Div. 621, 235 N. Y. S. 874 (1929) 

St. Basil’s Church v. Kerner, 125 Misc. 526, 211 N. Y. S. 470 (1925) 

Shalex Realty Co. v. Connell, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, July 8, 1932 

Stevens v. Clarke, 216 App. Div. 351, 215 N. Y. S. 190 (1926) 

Thall v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, June 
30, 1926 

Tishman Realty & Const. Co. v. Walsh, 135 Misc. 315, 237 N. Y. S. 237, affd. 
228 App. Div. 687, 239 N. Y. S. 759 (1930) 


Footnote continued on page 148. 


147 


ZONING 


variances in exceptional permits, which can be determined only by 
boards of appeals, subject to court review. The result is excellent 
because local legislative bodies should not be burdened with detail 
adjustments of specific buildings, and the appointed discretionary 
board of appeals should not have authority to change the funda- 
mental maps. 


LIMITATION OF THE POWERS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS 
IN THE City OF NEw YorRK 


It will be noted that the charter and the building zone resolution 
of the City of New York did not make the Board of Appeals a court 
to exercise discretion over the entire field of zoning. It has the 
following powers regarding zoning and no more: 


(a) To rectify on appeals the errors of building superintendents 
and other administrative officials in passing on applications for 
permits; } 

(b) to decide border-line and exceptional cases, where specified 
in the ordinance; 

(c) To vary the literal requirements of the law in individual cases 
where unnecessary and excessive hardship is caused and the in- 
tention of the law is equally accomplished by an alternative method 
to be prescribed by the Board of Appeals. 


Observers of the Board of Appeals in action constantly complain 
that it is prone to magnify its powers under the unnecessary hard- 


Footnote continued from page 147. 
Young Women’s Hebrew Association v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 266 
N. Y. 270, 194 N. E. 751, 206 U. S. 537, 56 S. Ct. 109 (1935) 
Ohio—Neithamer v. Heyer, 39 Oh. A. 532, 177 N. E. 925 (1931) 
Pa.—Appeal of Armstrong, Court of Common Pleas, Allegheny County, October 
Term, 1924 
Gilfillan’s Permit, 291 Pa. 358, 140 A. 136 (1927) 
Kerr’s Appeal, 294 Pa. 246, 144 A. 81 (1928) 
Ward’s Appeal, 289 Pa. 458, 137 A. 630 (1927) 
R. I.—Drabble v. Zoning Board of Review of Providence, 52 R. I. 228, 159 A. 
828 (1932) 
East Providence Mills v. Zoning Board of Review of East Providence, 51 R. I. 
428, 155 A. 531 (1931) 
Harrison v. Hopkins, 48 R. I. 42, 135 A. 154 (1926) 
Heffernan v. Zoning Board of Review of Cranston, 49 R. I. 283, 142 A. 479 
(1928), 50 R. I. 26, 144 A. 674 (1929) 
jes v. Zoning Board of Review of Providence, 50 R. I. 449, 148 A. 601 
1930 
Morgan v. Zoning Board of Review of Warwick, 52 R. I. 338, 160 A. 922 (1932) 
Sundlun v. Zoning Board of Review of Pawtucket, 50 R. I. 108, 145 A. 451 


(1929) 
148 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


ship provision of the law and resolution, and to consider that it has 
a mandate to rectify everything which appeals to it as being un- 
desirable. Some go so far as to declare that under this provision 
the board can practically abolish any regulation included in the 
building zone resolution or indicated on the map whenever it 
chooses and substitute in its place its own arbitrary preference. 
Such critics advocate withholding this power of adjustment from 
a board of appeals in cases of unnecessary hardship, or even go so 
far as to assert that such a board is more dangerous than helpful 
and that a zoning plan is stronger without it. It is true that it is 
difficult for any group of fair-minded men to refrain from righting 
a wrong when they see it. On this account it is undoubtedly a 
temptation to a board of appeals to overstep its lawful function. 
In the main, however, the Board of Appeals of the City of New 
York has recognized the limitations placed upon it by the charter 
and resolution. The few cases where it has erred in this respect are 
far overbalanced by the vast number of cases where it refused to 
be drawn outside of its proper field. Legislative power in regard 
to zoning is given by the charter to the Board of Estimate. The 
function of the Board of Appeals is that of adjustment and not 
alteration. It cannot alter the building zone resolution or map. It 
is sometimes difficult to draw the line between what is an adjust- 
ment that the Board of Appeals can make under the rules laid down 
by the Board of Estimate in cases of unnecessary hardship and an 
alteration which alone can be made by the Board of Estimate. That 
Board has prescribed the following rule: 


Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in 
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this 
resolution the Board of Appeals shall have power in a specific case 
to vary any such provision in harmony with its general purpose and 
intent, so that the public health, safety and general welfare may be 
secured and substantial justice done. 


Before the Board of Appeals can make an adjustment under this 
provision it must first find that there is a practical difficulty or an 
unnecessary hardship, and after that find and prescribe an alter- 
native method that is in harmony with the purpose and intent of 
the building zone resolution. If, for instance, the Board of Estimate 
has made a certain street block a business district, it is not within 


149 


ZONING 


the power of the Board of Appeals to declare that the street is so 
depressed that it is an unnecessary hardship to prevent a lot owner 
from building a public garage which is prohibited in such a district. 
If the locality is so depressed in value as to warrant this statement, 
the Board of Appeals should refer the applicant to the Board of 
Estimate so that as the legislative authority of the city it may 
change the district from business to unrestricted. It is not for the 
Board of Appeals to endeavor to make this change—which is a piece 
of legislation—through the form of a nonconforming permit on the 
ground of unnecessary hardship. Similarly if such a locality is a 
residence district, it is not for the Board of Appeals to determine 
that stores have become so numerous that on the ground of un- 
necessary hardship it will permit another store to be built by the 
applicant. That action is alteration, not adjustment. If the dis- 
trict has become so given over to business that it is an unnecessary 
hardship to prevent a man from building a store, then it is for the 
Board of Estimate to make it a business district; the Board of 
Appeals should not try to accomplish the same result by exceeding 
its powers. The provision giving it power to make variances in 
cases of unnecessary hardship is a salutary one for situations to 
which it properly applies. These comprise architectural necessities 
in designing buildings, adaptation of buildings to irregular and un- 
usual lots or environment, completion of architectural units already 
partly built, and a multitude of adjustments that the human mind 
cannot foresee or express in words. In general what can be equally 
well accomplished by a warrantable change in the resolution or map 
is never within the power of the Board of Appeals but always within 
that of the Board of Estimate and Apportionment. It must be for 
the benefit of the community and not for the benefit of the applicant 
alone. 

The courts have had occasion to point out the proper limitation: 

But the board contends it had the power to grant this application 
under section 20 of the zone regulations without regard to any con- 
sents. This section provides, “. . . Where there are practical 
difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the 
strict letter of the provisions of this resolution the Board of Appeals 
shall have power in a specific case to vary any such provisions in 


harmony with its general purpose and intent so that the public 
health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial 


150 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


justicedone. . .”’ Apparently the board’s contention is that this 
section gives them the power to do whatever they think is right 
regardless of the provisions of the statute. But it does not grant 
any such power. The board cannot wholly disregard the provisions 
of the statute or of the regulations. It can merely “vary” them 
to do “substantial justice’ when the “strict letter” of the pro- 
visions would work hardships. The provisions of this section are 
almost identical with those of subdivision 5 of section 719 of the 
charter as added by chapter 503 of the Laws of 1916. And under 
that section it has been held that the board could not disregard the 
provisions of the statute. People ex rel. Cockcroft v. Miller, 187 App. 
Div. 704. And the zoning resolutions have the force and effect of 
a statute. Matter of Stubbe v. Adamson, 220 N. Y. 459, 465. 
Cotton v. Leo, 110 Misc. 519, 180 N. Y. S. 554. This deci- 
sion was affirmed by the higher court in 194 App. Div. 921, 184 
Pony ero. O43 (1920). 


I do not think that this provision for an appeal, with power to 
reverse any order made, means that the board of appeals has any 
general power to nullify the provisions of the Labor Law, but rather 
that its power is limited to cases ‘where there are practical diffi- 
culties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict 
letter of the law,”’ in which case it may vary or modify any pro- 
vision of “any existing law or ordinance relating to the construc- 
tion, structural changes in, equipment, alteration or removal of 
buildings or structures, or vaults and sidewalks appurtenant thereto, 
so that the spirit of the law shall be observed, public safety secured 
and substantial justice done.”’ 


Cockcroft v. Miller, 187 App. Div. 704, 176 N. Y.S. 206 (1919) 
See also Altschul v. Ludwig, 216 N. Y. 459, 111 N. E. 216 (1916) 
and Hyman v. Leo, 108 Misc. 39, 177 N. Y. S. 503 (1919). 
When the courts have been appealed to they have been alert to 
uphold the building zone resolution by preventing the Board of 
Appeals from exceeding its strictly limited powers. On the other 
hand, when a special term justice, in a case properly within the 
domain of that Board, assumed to substitute his own solutionofa 
case for that of the Board and accordingly reversed an order of the 
latter, the higher court reversed the lower court and upheld the 
Board, recognizing that within its proper jurisdiction its opinion 
was based on expert knowledge and that it should not be interfered 
with by the court except for abuse of discretion. 


Applications to vary the zoning regulations in a particular case are 
addressed largely to the discretion of the board of appeals which 


151 


ZONING 


will not be interfered with by the court except in clear cases of 
abuse of such discretion. 


Healy v. Leo, 194 App. Div. 973, 185 N. Y. S. 948 (1920) 


The tendency of the court is to support the board of appeals 
when acting within the scope of its authority: 


The board of appeals held a hearing upon the relator’s applica- 
tion, and after full discussion denied the application by a vote of 
four to three. The relator has now obtained a writ of certiorari to 
review this determination of the board of appeals. This court has 
been given express power to review the determination of the board 
of appeals and to reverse or to affirm wholly or partly or to modify 
the decision brought up for review, and may even take additional 
evidence upon the hearing. There is, however, a presumption in 
favor of the correctness of the determination arrived at by the 
board of appeals, and the court should not interfere with the dis- 
cretion vested in that body unless that discretion has been arbi- 
trarily exercised or is erroneous in law. The hearings before the 
board of appeals are not intended merely as the first step in an 
application to the Supreme Court for a permit, and the Supreme 
Court should not upon the hearing of a writ of certiorari reverse a 
determination of the board of appeals, even though the justice pre- 
siding might himself have arrived at a different conclusion if the 
application had been submitted to him in the first instance, and he 
had a right to exercise his own untrammeled discretion 
Each application must be determined upon its own merits, and 
persons aggrieved by a decision of the board of appeals have a right 
to appeal from such decision, but such decisions in nowise affect 
property holders in other sections of the city and in nowise bind 
the board of appeals when new applications are made for similar 
relief. It is true that the law presumes that the board of appeals 
will act reasonably upon all applications brought before it, and so 
far as possible will arrive at its decisions in all cases by the applica- 
tion of the same rules and methods of reasoning, but each case must 
stand or fall upon its own peculiar facts, and even though | might 
believe that in some instances the board of appeals gave greater 
weight to the interest of the applicant and less weight to the posi- 
tion of other property holders than it has done in this case, that 
fact would constitute no ground for a reversal of this decision of 
the board of appeals if upon the facts proven here that decision is 
not unreasonable as a matter of law. It follows that the writ must 
be dismissed, with costs. 

Ruth v. Leo, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 

Law Journal, March 209, 1921; affd. 197 App. Div. 942, 188 

NGRY (on OA 5 uCroat) 


152 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


See also the following cases: 


Facey v. Leo, 110 Misc. 516, 180 N. Y. S. 553, affd. 230 N. Y. 
602, 130 N. E. gto (1921) 

Flegenheimer v. Leo, Supreme Court, New York County, New 
York Law Journal, May 8, 1918, affd. 186 App. Div. 893, 172 
PNexe..O12 (1918) 

Meivetia, ealty,. Conv: Leo, n1830.N..Y. 5.37, aftd., 231 N, Ye 
619, 132 N. E. 912 (1921) 

cio) v. Walsh, 108 Misc. 193, 196, 178 N. Y. S. 192, 194 

1919 
West Side Mortgage Co. v. Leo, 174 N. Y. S. 451 (1919) 


REVIEW OF DETERMINATION OF BOARD OF APPEALS BY 
THE CourRT 


Most state enabling acts for zoning provide a brief statutory 
certiorari or statutory appeal to court in order to review and re- 
adjust, if necessary, the determination of the board of appeals.! 
Prompt application to the court is necessary inasmuch as it may 
grant a restraining order preventing the beginning of construction.” 
The court may affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision 
brought up for review.’ All states have procedure for certiorari or 
its equivalent called appeal or review. But the statutory certiorari 
procedure contained in zoning enabling acts is a separate and dis- 
tinct method. Its purpose is to make the courts part of the avail- 


1 Petition of Forbes, 316 Ill. 141, 146 N. E. 448 (1925) 
Some states have not given courts adequate power of review. 
Phelps v. Board of Appeals of Chicago, 325 Ill. 625, 156 N. E. 826 (1927) 
Luten v. Schmidt, 153 N. E. 481, 88 Ind. A. 134, 163 N. E. 536 (1928) 
Mayorand City Council of Baltimore v. Rutherford, 145 Md. 363, 125 A. 725 (1924) 
Tighe v. Osborne, 149 Md. 349, 131 A. 801, 150 Md. 452, 133 A. 465 (1926) 
2 Under the New York requirement a certiorari order must be obtained within thirty 
days or the application will be dented. 
In re Queens Park Development, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, December 28, 1926 
Layman vy. Persons, 133 Misc. 661, 233 N. Y. S. 217 (1928) 
Prescott v. Pierce, 130 Misc. 63, 223 N. Y. S. 609 (1927) 
3 Where proof of intentional omission of notice of hearing, the applicant may have 
more than thirty days. 
Pallante v. Board of Standards and Appeals of New York, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law Journal, January 2, 1935, 245 App. Div. 729, 
281 N. Y. S. 888 (1935) 
4 Ind.—Board of Zoning Appeals of Indianapolis v. Waintrup, 99 Ind. A. 576, 193 
N. E. 701 (1935) 
Wyo.—In re McInerney, 47 Wyo. 258, 34 P. (2d) 35 (1934) 


153 


ZONING 


able machinery for reasonable zoning. An aggrieved neighbor, who 
may not have attended the hearing before the board of appeals, 
may be the party who desires court review. In an application for 
a common-law writ of certiorari such a person would have no 
standing, for under that procedure the court passes on questions 
of law only, whereas under the usual zoning provision it passes also 
on the completeness of the board’s exercise of discretion. Some 
state enabling acts have failed to supply their courts with the am- 
plitude of power that is desirable, and the result is that in such 
states the courts are virtually limited to the scope of the common- 
law writ of certiorari. 

When Baltimore passed a zoning ordinance—in dependence on 
its home rule charter and before the passage of a state enabling 
act—a trial de novo by the City Court was provided for instead of 
a review by court.! 

Where the determination of the board of appeals is contrary to 
law, the court will reverse it, in whole or part. Sometimes the 
building inspector makes a mistake in interpreting the law and the 
board of appeals makes the same mistake. Here the discretion of 
the board of appeals is not reviewed by the court, but the mistake 
of law is set right. 

The law and practice in the state of New York and most other 
states recognize another field of illegality in the review of boards 
of appeals. This is abuse of discretion, or arbitrariness, by the 
board in passing on the proposed variance. States have developed 
varying methods of court review.2 Some cling to common-law 


1 Greenway Apartment Co. v. Suls, Baltimore (Md.) City Court, Baltimore Daily 
Record, March 4, 1930, also Baltimore Daily Record, June 5, 1930 
2 []].—Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 N. E. 710 
(1930) 
Mass.—Harper v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 271 Mass. 482, 171 N. E. 430 (1930) 
N. J.—Dorsey Motors, Inc. v. Davis, 13 N. J. Misc. 620, 180 A. 396 (1935) 


3 Jowa—Zimmerman v. O’Meara, 215 Iowa 1140, 245 N. W. 715 (1932) 
Mich.— Beardsley v. Evangelical Lutheran Bethlehem Church, 261 Mich. 458, 
246 N. W. 180 (1933) 
N. J.—Gadek v. Kugler, 6 N. J. Misc. 471, 141 A. 561 (1928) 
Gallo v. Moffett, 8 N. J. Misc. 39, 148 A. 153 (1930) 
Goldberg vais and Aldermen of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 564, 142 A. 
355 (1928 
Peshine Realty Co. v. Scott, 4 N. J. Misc. 977, 135 A. 80 (1926) 
N. Y.—New York Cent. R. Co. v. Leo, 105 Misc. 372, 173 N. Y. S. 217 (1918) 


Footnote continued on page 155. 


154 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


certiorari and frown on the short statutory certiorari usually pro- 
vided for in zoning enabling acts. Massachusetts regards all certi- 
orari as a review of legality rather than a review of fair discretion.! 

In a sense arbitrariness or abuse of discretion is a matter of law, 
but there is a plain difference between rectifying a mistake in inter- 
pretation of the law, and rectifying an abuse of discretion. Such 
abuse by a board of appeals does not always mean a deliberate act 
of wrongdoing. Indeed the fair line in the exercise of discretion is 
difficult, and in most cases what the courts call an abuse of discre- 
tion implies no wrongdoing whatever. A board of appeals in Boston 
might honestly say that a twenty-story building in a ten-story 
district was a fair variance and the court would uphold it in review- 
ing a matter of law.2, In New York the court might call such a 
variance an abuse of discretion. It is helpful to recognize two fields 
of court review—one for rectifying mistakes of law and another for 
preventing abuses of discretion. The usual grounds for reversing 
or modifying the determinations of boards of appeals are arbitra- 
riness and abuse of discretion. Court costs have been granted 
against boards of appeals in a few instances.‘ 


Footnote continued from page 154. 
Shary v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Bronx County, 
New York Law Journal, May 20, 1933 
Stern v. Mason, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
July 2, 1930 
N. D.—Livingston v. Peterson, 59 N. D. 104, 228 N. W. 816 (1930) 
Wis.— Wasserman v. Cooper, 201 Wis. 359, 230 N. W. 50 (1930) 
1 Mass.—Bradley v. Board of Zoning Adjustment of Boston, 255 Mass. 160, 150 
N. E. 892 (1926) 
seeded v. Building Commissioner of Boston, 263 Mass. 589, 161 N. E. 819 
(1928 
Hammond v. Board of Appeal of Springfield, 257 Mass. 446, 154 N. E. 82 (1926) 
Marcus v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 255 Mass. 5, 150 N. E. 903 (1926) 
Marinelli v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 275 Mass. 169, 175 N. E. 479 (1931) 
Norcross v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 255 Mass. 177, 150 N. E. 887 (1926) 
Prusik v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 262 Mass. 451, 160 N. E. 312 (1928) 
“Norcross v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 255 Mass. 177, 150 N. E. 887 (1926) 
‘Conn.—Appeal of Holley, 110 Conn. 80, 147 A. 300 (1929) 
Thayer v. Board of Appeals of Hartford, 114 Conn. 15, 157 A. 273 (1931) 
Neb.—Coulthard v. Board of Adjustment of Neligh, 265 N. W. 530 (1936) 
N. Y.—Anderson v. Board of Standards & Appeals, Supreme Court, New York 
County, New York Law Journal, June 22, 1928 


Footnote No. 3 continued on page 156. 


4N. Y.—Cotton v. Leo, 110 Misc. 519, 180 N. Y. S. 554, 194 App. Div. 921, 184 
N. Y. S. 943 (1920) 
Levy Brothers Realty Co. v. Walsh, 257 N. Y. 543, 178 N. E. 787 (1931) 


155 


ZONING 


It has been held that a refusal of proof by a board of appeals is 
an abuse of discretion.! 

A stay may be granted by court against a board of appeals to 
prevent the consummation of an improper variance.” 

Enabling acts usually provide that an appeal to the board of 
appeals stays all proceedings. Many persons have inferred that 
this prevents construction while the appeal is pending. It has been 
held, however, that the provision as to stay refers only to legal 
proceedings., The proceedings of a board of appeals are not of 
that nature. 

The board of appeals is not injured ae a reversal of its determina- 
tion and therefore cannot itself appeal.* 

Courts avoid substituting their discretion for that of boards of 
appeals. They declare that the function of the board is to exercise 


Footnote No. 3 continued from page 155. 

Bator Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law 
Journal, December 17, 1920, affd. 229 App. Div. 850, 243 N. Y. S. 807 (1930) 

Bee Dee Reality Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, January 14, 1930 

Biltmore Holding Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, July 5, 1929 

Block Holding Corp. v. Warshaw, 237 App. Div. 839, 261 N. Y. S. 914 (1932) 

Chisholm Realty Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, June 2, 1922 

Church & o4th St. Realty Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, May 2, 1933, and September 16, 1933 

Essanarr Garage Corp. v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law Journal, March 11, 1932, affd. 237 App. 
Div. 857, 261 N. Y. S. 937 (1932) 

Hyman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
October 6, 1927 

Matter of Ruth Bond & Mortgage Co., Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, May 2, 1933 

Nash v. Board of Appeals of North Hempstead, Supreme Court, Nassau 
County, New York Law Journal, March 29, 1930 

Rindfleisch v. Bayly, Supreme Court, Westchester County, Westchester Law 
Journal, August 9, 1933, 242 App. Div. 797, 275 N. Y. S. 657 (1934) 

Sabbarese v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings.County, New York Law Journal, 
March 6, 1926 

R. I.—Drabble v. Zoning Board of Review of Providence, 52 R. I. 228, 159 A. 
$28 (1932) 
1 Rosoff v. Walsh, 230 App. Div. 789, 244 N. Y. S. 920 (1930) 


225 Fifth Ave. Corp. v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, New 
York County, N. Y., New York Law Journal, August 1, 1929 


3 Clemons Realty Co. v. Brady, Supreme Court, New York County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, August 30, 1927 


4 Appeal of Board of Adjustment, Lansdowne Borough, 313 Pa. 523, 170 A. 867 
(1934) 
150 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


the discretion of experts, and that the court—although it might not 
arrive at the same result—will refuse to alter a determination 
wherein the board has complied with all legal requirements of notice 
and hearing and has exercised fair discretion.! 


1 ]]1.—Minkus v. Pond, 326 Ill. 467, 158 N. E. 121 (1927) 
N. J.—Harrison v. Board of Adjustment of Montclair, 6 N. J. Misc. 570, 142 A. 


353 (1928) 


N. Y.—A. P. M. Holding Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 


York Law Journal, January 19, 1931 

Apollo Bldg. Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, August 9, 1926 

Barker v. Boettger, 124 Misc. 461, 208 N. Y. S. 295 (1924) 

Batches v. Connell, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
November 21, 1932 

Beardsley Realty Co. v. Walsh, 225 App. Div. 815, 232 N. Y. S. 693, affd. 252 
Deny 85 7.1,°170 INE. 14°7/ (1920) 

Bolmar v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
August I, 1929 

Cirrito v. Board of Standards and Appeals of New York, 245 App. Div. 762, 
280 N. Y. S. 606, affd. 270 N. Y. 499, 200 N. E. 289 (1936) 

Dinerman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
April 27, 1925 

Dyer v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, July 
9, 1930 

Finger v. Connell, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
February 19, 1932, and May 27, 1932 

Handel v. Walsh, 227 App. Div. 738, 236 N. Y. S. 811 (1929) 

Ideal Roof & Skylight Works v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New 
York Law Journal, March 12, 1929, affd. 227 App. Div. 777, 237 N. Y. S. 
801 (1929) 

In re Pane, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, December 
20, 1928 

Keizerstein v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law Journal, 
May 5, 1928, affd. 225 App. Div. 805, 232 N. Y. S. 784 (1929) 

Lee v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, June 
28, 1929 

Lowlou Corporation v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, July 14, 1926 

Maslon v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
December 1, 1924 . 

Matter of Newford Realty Co., Inc., Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, March 31, 1933 

N. & H. Bldg. Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, April 8, 1926, affd. 223 App. Div. 844, 228 N. Y. S. 859 (1928) 

Parker v. Hardgrove, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
July 16, 1927 

Regina Boulevard Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, October 23, 1935 

Richardson v. Knapp, 227 App. Div. 207, 237 N. Y. S. 589 (1929) 

Roehrs v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
June 3, 1925 

Ruth v. Leo, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law Journal, 
March 29, 1921, affd. 197 App. Div. 942, 188 N. Y. S. 945 (1921) 


Footnote continued on page 158. 


157 


ZONING 


Where there is no board of appeals there can be no certiorari.! 
In such a situation the powers of the courts cannot be used for 
constructive adjustment but must be used to uphold or annihilate 
the particular zoning regulation. 

The statutory provision for certiorari usually contained in ena- 
bling acts is to the effect that the court, by taking evidence or 
appointing a referee, may fill in gaps in the return of the board of 
appeals. This procedure was designed to allow the decision of the 
court to be complete, and to avoid sending the application back to 
be heard again by the board of appeals.. Such additional taking 
of evidence was not intended to be a trial de novo.2 This provision 
has been frequently used.’ 


Footnote continued from page 157. 

Sanfer Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, July 13, 1926 

Schneider v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
July 25, 1925 

Schrage v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law Journal, 
March 8, 1928 

Socora Realty & Const. Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New 
York Law Journal, February 3, 1926 

Third Ave. R. R. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law 
Journal, April 7, 1926, affd. 220 App. Div. 760, 222 N. Y. S. g10 (1927) 

257 Madison Ave. v. Board of Appeals, Supreme Court, New York County, 
New York Law Journal, April 16, 1926 

Van Iderstine v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, June 6, 1922, affd. 208 App. Div. 740, 202 N. Y. S. 946 (1924) 

Wilkins v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
December 21, 1927, 225 App. Div. 774, 232 N. Y. S. 918, 251 N. Y. 518, 168 
N. E. 411 (1929) 

R. I.—Heffernan v. Zoning Board of Review of Cranston, 49 R. I. 283, 142 A. 
479 (1928), 50 R. I. 26, 144 A. 674 (1929) 
1 Carter v. Rosenthal, 179 Wis. 243, 191 N. W. 562 (1923) 


2N. Y.—Raskin v. Murdock, 243 App. Div. 561, 276 N. Y. S. 168 (1934) 
Rubel Corp. v. Murdock, 245 App. Div. 821, 282 N. Y. S. 126, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law Journal, August 1, 1936 


3 Ill.—Hughes v. Board of Appeals of Chicago, 325 Ill. 109, 156 N. E. 350 (1927) 
Ind.—O’Connor v. Overall Laundry, 98 Ind. A. 29, 183 N. E. 134 (1932) 
lowa—Anderson v. Jester, 206 lowa 452, 221 N. -W. 354 (1928) 

N. Y¥.—Ade Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, June 4, 1929 
Arseekay Syndicate v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, New York Law Journal, October 25, 1932, 241 App. Div. 
755, 270 N.Y o.1233,0205 Now 4159, (Ot NY BeSz isos) 
Bass v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, July 
24, 1925 
Black Belt Corp. v. Hall, Supreme Court, Chautauqua County, Jamestown 
Evening Journal, November 18, 1922 
Footnote continued on page 159. 
158 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


Harris H. Murdock, Chairman of the Board of Standards and 
Appeals of New York City, urges that courts instead of taking 
additional evidence should refer the matter back to the Board with 
directions. He points out that courts often retry the case, and 
because they do not know the needs of the locality they fail to 
protect the neighborhood or carry out the purposes of the ordi- 
nance. Mr. Murdock is undoubtedly correct in his criticism. The 
direction from the court to the board should be to amend its return 
and take additional evidence if necessary. In a fewcases the court 
has asked the board to take further evidence. The usual mistake 
is that counsel lead courts into a retrial of the case, forgetting that 
the court should do no more than review the determination of the 
board and merely fill in by new evidence such facts as are necessary 
or desirable to assist it to form a just conclusion. Submission to 


Footnote continued from page 158. 

Caponi v. Walsh, 228 App. Div. 86, 238 N. Y. S. 438 (1930) 

De Falco v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
June 24, 1930 

Dunne v. Walsh, 235 App. Div. 72, 256 N. Y. S. 119 (1932) 

Eckels v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
September 6, 1933, 242 App. Div. 690, 273 N. Y. S. 401, 265 N. Y. 545, 193 
N. E. 313 (1934) 

Gilmont Corp. v. Rogers, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law 
Journal, March 6, 1935, and June 8, 1935 

In re Seiferling, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
December 20, 1928 

LaVine v. Walsh, 214 App. Div. 805, 210 N. Y. S. 906 (1925) 

MacDonald v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
January 13, 1925 

Mazzarell v. Walsh, 231 App. Div. 748, 753, 247 N. Y. S. 855 (1930) 

Namro Realty Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, April 11, 1928 

New York and Richmond Gas Company v. Board of Standards & Appeals, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, May 9, 1932, 242 
App. Div. 691, 272 N. Y. S. 915 (1934) 

People v. Snedeker, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
December 1, 1932 

Roseth Realty Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, November 23, 1928 

Scoland Bldg. Corp. v. Board of Standards & Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, New York Law Journal, January 27, 1934 

Sifferlen v. Connell, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
February 3, 1931 

Squillacci & Torre, Inc. v. Walsh, 221 App. Div. 877, 224 N. Y. S. 920 (1927) 

Taylor v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law Journal, 
March 11, 1925 

Toback, Inc. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
December 20, 1928, affd. 230 App. Div. 764, 243 N. Y. S. 894 (1930) 

R. I.—Harrison v. Hopkins, 48 R. I. 42, 135 A. 154 (1926) 


159 


ZONING 


a referee to report facts and conclusions, under the guise of taking 
additional evidence, was not the intention of the early laws on 
this subject.? 


EXHAUSTING THE REMEDY GIVEN BY LAW 


In the earlier years of comprehensive zoning it was considered 
that the only method of testing the reasonableness of a zoning 
regulation in its bearing on a particular plot of land was through 
the board of appeals. The rule of law was invoked that an owner 
should first exhaust the remedy given him by law before attacking 
the constitutionality of the ordinance. If the board of appeals 
denied him relief, he was considered to be bound to continue the 
remedy given him by law by asking for the statutory court review. 
Courts gradually analyzed the situation and began to recognize 
that where the plaintiff in injunction or mandamus proceedings 
alleged unconstitutionality he should have his trial without first 
applying to the board of appeals.? It will be unsafe, however, for 


1N. Y.—Bribitzer v. Bevan, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law 

Journal, December 2, 1935 

Eckels v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
September 6, 1933, 242 App. Div. 690, 273 N. Y. S. gor, 265 N. Y. 545, 193 
N. E. 313 (1934) 

Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 248 
App. Div. 155 (1936) 

Hansen & Metzger, Inc. v. Connell, 243 App. Div. 795, 278 N. Y. S. 719 (1935) 

Hassall v. Murdock, 246 App. Div. 845, 285 N. Y. S. 54 (1936) 

No. 202 West 63d St. Corp’n v. Board of Standards and Appeals of New York, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, April 30, 1935 


2D. C.—Connor v. District of Columbia, 61 App. D. C. 288, 61 F. (2d) 1015 (1932) 
Il].—Cann v. Chicago, 241 Ill. A. 21 (1926) 
tale ee Fuel & Material Co. v. Park Ridge, 335 Ill. 509, 167 N. E. 119 
1929 
Md.—Applestein v. Baltimore, 156 Md. 40, 143 A. 666 (1928) 
Mass.—Godfrey v. Building Commissioner of Boston, 263 Mass. 589, 161 N. E. 
819 (1928) 
Knowlton v. Inhabitants of Swampscott, 280 Mass. 69, 181 N. E. 849 (1932) 
N. J.—Bilt-Wel Co. v. Dowling, 5 N. J. Misc. 180, 135 A. 798 (1927) 
Conaway v. Atlantic City, 107 N. J. L. 404, 154 A. 6 (1931) 
Decker v. Moffett, 6 N. J. Misc. 510, 141 A. 784 (1928) 
Eaton v. Newark, 3 N. J. Misc. 363, 128 A. 377 (1925) 
Elkay Realty Co. v. Redfern, 5 N. J. Misc. 717, 138 A. 196 (1927) 
Lutz v. Kaltenbach, 1o1 N. J. L. 316, 128 A. 421, 3 N. J. Misc. 658, 129 A. 926, 
102 N. J. L. 718, 131 A. 899 (1926) 
Marlyn Realty Co. v. West Orange, 5 N. J. Misc. 342, 136 A. 926 (1927) 
Raskind v. Dowling, 5 N. J. Misc. 715, 138 A. 103 (1927) 


Footnote continued on page 161. 


160 


i : ‘ \ 
eee Se ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


the usual plaintiff to assume that he can omit such application and 
obtain more complete relief by direct attack on the constitution- 
ality of the regulation as it affects his parcel of land.1_ The court 
in such an attack can do no more than to uphold the regulation 
or set it aside. It cannot make a variance. Moreover, if there is a 
substantial relation between the regulation and the health, safety, 
and general welfare of the community, the court will not substi- 
tute its discretion for the discretion of the local legislature which 
adopted the ordinance. The court will declare that it has a duty 


Footnote continued from page 160. 


N. 


N. 


Y.—Broadway & 96th St. Realty Co. v. Walsh, 203 App. Div. 468, 196 N. Y. S. 
672 (1922) 

Butler v. Bannister & Schell, Inc., Supreme Court, New York County, New 
York Law Journal, February 14, 1920, affd. 226 App. Div. 789, 234 N. Y. S. 
757 (1929) 

Cantoni v. Moore, 179 App. Div. 121, 165 N. Y. S. 840 (1917) 

Caponi v. Proc Bldg. Corp., Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, May 15, 1929 

Headley v. Fennell, 124 Misc. 886, 210 N. Y. S. 102, affd. 214 App. Div. 810, 
210 N. Y. S. 861 (1924) 

Hocker v. Howell, Supreme Court, Suffolk County, New York Law Journal, 
February 18, 1930 

bei v. eo 130 Misc, 158, 223 N. Y. S. 638, 130 Misc. 448, 224 N. Y. S. 
41 (1927 

Linden Estates Corp. v. Flanagan, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, April 5, 1929 

Lutz v. Courtney, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
November 16, 1927 

Matter of Heepe, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
March 14, 1924 

McNulty & Carson, Inc. v. Murphy, Supreme Court, Westchester County, 
May 22, 1929 

Owid v. Moushaty, 125 Misc. 535, 211 N. Y. S. 478 (1925) 

Plummer v. McDermott, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, June 11, 1929 

Rosiello v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
May 8, 1923 

Tishman v. 1400 Broadway Corp., Supreme Court, New York County, New 
York Law Journal, January 28, 1931 

West v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
August 30, 1926, affd. 220 App. Div. 751, 222 N. Y. S. 920 (1927) 

Westchester Asphalt Distributing Corp. v. Wyand, 234 App. Div. 881, 254 
N. Y. S. 935 (1931) 

Wulfsohn v. Burden, Supreme Court, Westchester County, Mt. Vernon Daily 
Argus, May 26, 1926 

C.—Harden v. City of Raleigh, 192 N. C. 395, 135 S. E. 151 (1926) 

State v. Roberson, 198 N. C. 70, 150 S. E. 674 (1929) 


Pa.—Taylor v. Moore, 303 Pa. 469, 154 A. 799 (1931) 


Texas Co. v. City of Bethlehem, Court of Common Pleas, Northampton 
County, April 4, 1927 


1 Rosenbush v. Keller, 271 N. Y. 282, 2 N. E. (2d) 659 (1936) 


161° 


ZONING 


to uphold the enactment, however it may feel about the wisdom 
of it. Then, too, if the court annihilates the zoning of the plaintiff’s 
land, there is nothing to prevent the local legislature from rezoning 
it at once in a different way which may be equally disturbing to 
the landowner. Where the owner desires to obtain a permit it will 
usually be better for him to prepare his plans and specifications 
and ask for a variance. Such a case, however, is not based on 
unconstitutionality but on practical difficulty and unnecessary 
hardship or on some grounds of variance provided in the ordinance 
itself. The owner cannot ordinarily carry his case to the United 
States Supreme Court because if it is based on practical difficulty 
it does not raise a question under the United States constitution. 
Since the beginning of zoning there has been a gradually grow- 
ing tendency of courts to recognize that in the generality of cases 
there is a substantial relation between the regulation and the com- 
munity health, safety, and general welfare, and to require the 
applicant to go first to the board of appeals only when his situation 
is exceptional. The mere plea of unconstitutionality will not justify 
his omitting such application. Sometimes the regulation is unlaw- 
ful on its face, like the requirement of a greater height than one 
story.!. In such a case he can always omit applying to the board 
of appeals, plead unconstitutionality, and bring his case directly 
before the court by injunction or mandamus. The court opinions 
in the different states, or even within New York state, are not 
entirely harmonious.? This is not strange considering the novelty 
of the subject. 
1 [1l.—Brown v. Board of Appeals of Springfield, 327 Ill. 644, 159 N. E. 225 (1927) 
N. J.—Dorison v. Saul, 98 N. J. L. 112, 118 A. 691 (1922) 
Romar Realty Co. v. Board of Com’rs of Haddonfield, 96 N. J. L. 117, 114 
A. 248 (1921) 
N. Y.—Oppenheimer v. Kraus, 221 App. Div. 773, 223 N. Y. S. 467, affd. 246N. Y. 
559, 159 N. E. 651 (1927) 
? I1].—Ehrlich v. Village of Wilmette, 361 III. 213,197 N. E. 567 (1935) 
Phipps v. City of Chicago, 339 Ill. 315, 171 N. E. 289 (1930) 
N. J.—Builders’ Realty Corp. v. Bigelow, 102 N. J. L. 433, 131 A. 888 (1926) 
N. Y.—Dowsey v. Village of Kensington, 257 N. Y. 221, 177 N. E. 427 (1931) 
Isbister v. Isbister, Supreme Court, Westchester County, May 8, 1925, 215 
App. Div. 838, 213 N. Y. S. 826 (1926) 
Isenbarth v. Bartnett, 206 App. Div. 546, 201 N. Y. S. 383, affd. 237 N. Y. 617, 
143 N. E. 765 (1924) 
Keiser v. Village of Mineola, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law 
Journal, March 9, 1933 


Footnote continued on page 163. 


162 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


In course of the argument of Dowsey v. Village of Kensington 
before the Court of Appeals, New York, Chief Judge Cardozo 
asked whether the regulation affected in a similar manner all 
parcels of land on the main thoroughfare and intimated that if it 
did there was no duty on the plaintiff to resort to the board of 
appeals, but on the contrary that it was the duty of the local legis- 
lature to change the zoning map if the existing zoning was unrea- 
sonable. His point evidently was that before the village could 
insist that the plaintiff should exhaust the remedy given him by 
law the village should show that the situation of the plaintiff’s 
parcel was unique and different from other parcels. The opinion 
in this case, written by Lehman, Associate Judge, does not refer 
to this point. If the rule that the plaintiff must exhaust the remedy 
given him by law applies only to the owner of an exceptional or 
unique parcel of land, it throws light on another difficult question— 
when should a municipality change the zoning map and when may 
it depend on the power of the board of appeals to make variances. 
This subject is further discussed under Injunction at page 172. 


STATUTORY ABBREVIATION OF PROPER FUNCTIONS OF 
BOARDS OF APPEALS 

The proper functions of boards of appeals are to make variances 
in cases of practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship, as pro- 
vided by the state enabling act, to make variances in proper cases 
under items of original jurisdiction contained in the ordinance, and 
to review the legality of determinations made by building inspec- 
tors. Some state legislatures have feared that boards of appeals 
will abuse their proper functions, and have tried to limit these 
functions by statute. As a rule such efforts bring about more liti- 
gation than they prevent, and the results are less satisfactory than 
if the board is given adequate power. In New Jersey the zoning 
enabling act provides that the board of adjustment can make 
variances only within one hundred and fifty feet of a district bound- 


Footnote continued from page 162. 
Maloff v. Kimmey, Supreme Court, Onondaga County, April 2, 1931 
Municipal Gas Co. of Albany v. Nolan, 121 Misc. 606, 201 N. Y. S. 582, 208 
App. Div. 753, 202 N. Y. S. 939 (1924) 
Willerup v. Village of Hempstead, 120 Misc. 485, 199 N. Y. S. 56 (1923) 


163 


ZONING 


ary line. Outside this territory it can make recommendations to 
the local legislative body which the latter is expected to approve 
and thus perfect the variance permit. The reason for this strange 
arrangement seems to be that the legislature had an impression 
that variances should be prevented so far as possible, but that 
those applied for near boundary lines were more likely to be justi- 
fiable. This arrangement has thrown the entire subject into con- 
fusion in New Jersey. Two separate boards, one discretionary and 
the other legislative, are compelled to pass on most applications of 
this type. A variance made by the board of adjustment is readily 
reviewed by the court in certiorari as a discretionary act. Legis- 
lative acts are not so readily reviewed. The question at once arises 
whether in New Jersey the act of the local legislative body in 
making a variance is discretionary or legislative. If it is legisla- 
tive, it cannot be reviewed by certiorari. Thus far the New Jersey 
courts have been inclined to consider it discretionary and therefore 
subject to court review by certiorari. Nothing is gained by this 
circuitous and puzzling procedure. A New Jersey board of adjust- 
ment is presumed to be a body of experts, yet its recommendations 
have to be reviewed by the local legislative body, which is not 
presumed to have that character. 

By an amendment of doubtful wisdom in the Town Law of New 
York,? the applicant or other party was given the right to appeal 
to the town board from every determination of the board of 
appeals. This amendment was severely criticized in its operation 
and was shortly repealed. 


ADVISING THE LOCAL LEGISLATURE 


Sometimes a street or block ought to be transferred by the local 
legislature from one district on the zoning map to another. 
Instead of bringing such a matter to the attention of the local 
legislature boards of appeals sometimes make a series of variance 


IN. J.—Essex Inv. Co. v. Board of Com’rs of Newark, 183 A. 478 (1936) 
Fonda v. O’Donohue, 109 N. J. L. 584, 163 A. 2 (1932) 
Gabrielson v. Borough of Glen Ridge, 13 N. J. Misc. 142, 176 A. 676 (1935) 
Pennington Courts, Inc. v. Board of Adjustment of Passaic, 7 N. J. Misc. 
1037, 147 A. 732 (1929) 
Schumacher v. Union City, 9 N. J. Misc. 492, 154 A. 406 (1931) 
* Matter of Meadowmere Ass’n, Inc., Supreme Court, Nassau County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, August 17, 1932 


104 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


permits. For instance, near the boundary line between business 
and residence districts, where there are already stores in the busi- 
ness district, a variance permit may perhaps justifiably be issued 
for a store on the edge of the residence district. Soon another such 
permit will be issued, and before long a third. By this time the 
trend has shown itself so clearly that it is not proper to grant 
variance permits; the board of appeals ought to make a report to 
the local legislature advising it to change the map. No one knows 
so well what ought to be done as the board of appeals.!_ Its members 
have viewed the premises and have heard testimony regarding 
the altered situation. Landowners often delay in applying to the 
local legislature to make the needed map change because they 
desire to obtain the small advantage that comes from exclusive 
variance permits. In permitting successive variances a community 
is not following the rule that land situated alike should be zoned 
alike. 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL STATES 
AND CITIES 

The main difficulty in establishing a zoning plan is to make it 
effective and at the same time avoid arbitrariness. Human wisdom 
cannot foresee the exceptional cases that can arise in the admin- 
istration of a zoning ordinance. The strict letter of the law may 
sometimes be the height of injustice. No zoning ordinance stand- 
ing by itself can provide for the proper adaptation of the spirit of 
the law to each exceptional case. On this account, in the admin- 
istration of building laws in general and especially zoning ordi- 
nances, it has been found desirable to create a board of appeals in 
order to adapt the application of the law to particular exceptional 
instances, instead of allowing it to be arbitrary or confiscatory. A 
city cannot create such a body without authority from the state 
legislature to do so. Therefore any state enabling act for zoning 
should contain a provision empowering the city to appoint a board 
of this type and outlining its functions. Merely to provide that a 
city can appoint the specified board to do what is just or lawful is 
not enough; such a statement in the law gives the board no power 
whatever. The state enabling act must either prescribe the rules 


1 Coleman v. Board of Appeal of Boston, 281 Mass. 112, 183 N. E. 166 (1932) 
165 


ZONING 


that the board must follow, or empower the city council to assign 
to it for decision certain specified classes of exceptional cases. The 
council should also prescribe a rule to be followed in deciding each 
class of cases. The New York board, as already pointed out, is 
given three distinct functions: first, to rectify errors made by the 
building inspector in granting or refusing permits; secondly, to 
pass on exceptional cases where specified in the ordinance itself, 
and third, to vary the literal requirement of the law where practical 
difficulty or unnecessary hardship is caused, and the intention of 
the law is equally accomplished by an alternative method to be 
prescribed by the board. 

Inasmuch as exceptional situations come only before a board 
of appeals there is always a presumption that the applicant, like 
all other citizens, should observe the strict letter of the zoning 
ordinance. Therefore, if an exception is to be made the vote of the 
board should be greater than a mere majority. In other words, an 
applicant desiring an exception should be able to convince a large 
proportion of the board. State enabling acts for zoning usually 
provide for this. On the other hand, it should be possible for a mere 
majority to refuse to make an exception so that there may be a 
decision of denial on which the applicant can ask for a court review. 

States and cities will not go far afield when they come to define 
the functions of the council and the board of appeals if they will 
remember that the council is the city legislature and as such has 
entire control over the zoning ordinance and map. The board of 
appeals should have no such control, but should pass on specific 
permits arising under the provisions of the ordinance and map. 
Thus the council and the board of appeals have separate fields 
which do not overlap. The council does not adjudicate in relation 
to a particular building or its use. The board of appeals passes on 
nothing but particular buildings. The council impresses a certain 
legal status on the land itself. The board of appeals in certain 
exceptional cases varies the application of the ordinance for a 
building or use which temporarily occupies the land, but cannot 
change the status of the land. 

Complaints will always be made against boards of appeals, and 
probably such boards will always abuse their discretion once in a 
while. If, however, a city administration is not able to establish 

166 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


a competent board of appeals, it probably is not able to administer 
a zoning ordinance fairly. An occasional wrong decision by sucha 
board is of less importance to the community than the unrelieved 
arbitrariness of an iron-clad ordinance which first in one particular 
application and then in another may be criticized by the courts. 
A board of appeals should be able to ameliorate the exceptional 
instances wherein alone lies the danger to the entire zoning plan. 
These cases demand the most careful attention, for the integrity of 
a zoning plan under the police power, as the courts have repeatedly 
pointed out, depends on its reasonableness, and a zoning regulation 
is not reasonable if it is arbitrary. 

There would seem to be no difficulty in finding the meaning 
of the phrase “practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships” 
(already discussed, p. 142) as a rule of conduct for the guidance of 
boards of appeals. An instructive, clear-cut opinion, which is cited 
frequently in states having boards of appeals, is that rendered by 
_ Justice Cardozo when he was chief judge of the Court of Appeals 
of New York in the case of Fordham M. R. Church v. Walsh, 244 
N. Y. 280, 155 N. E. 575 (1927). A permit was sought for a public 
garage on Aqueduct Avenue near Fordham Manor Reformed 
Church, on a site in the Borough of The Bronx, which was partly 
in a residence district and partly in a business district. This much- 
used street, proceeding north and south, the owner claimed was 
unique in its desirability for a public garage. He urged that no 
other use could be made of the plot that was equally profitable 
or suitable. On the ground of practical difficulties and unneces- 
sary hardships he based his request for a variance permit from the 
Board of Standards and Appeals. The opinion referred to made 
it clear that the words “practical difficulties and unnecessary hard- 
ships’ have a wider significance than to denote the use of a given 
plot that will be the most profitable. The environment must be 
taken into account. Structures suitable to the environment can 
be required even if they do not always give the most profitable use 
for the plot. Many other decisions interpret these words in har- 
mony with the Fordham Church case.! 


1Jnd.—Dollman v. Osbon, Marion Circuit Court, Indianapolis, May 3, 1928 
N. Y.—Bronner v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
June 26, 1928, affd. 225 App. Div. 759, 232 N. Y. S. 704 (1928) 


Fooinote continued on page 168. 


167 


ZONING 


Harris H. Murdock, Chairman of the Board of Standards and 
Appeals of New York City, has defined the word “hardship.” He 
adds his experience as an architect to his accurate observation of 
court comments on several hundred cases that have passed under 
his scrutiny. He writes: 


The question has been asked, “‘What is hardship’? The Court 
has said that an owner is entitled to a reasonable use of his land. 
What may or may not be reasonable cannot be stated in any 
general rule. It does not mean that one owner is entitled to a 
special privilege by a variation that is denied others similarly situ- 
ated or that will cause hardship to other owners. It doesn’t mean 
that in times of depression an owner is entitled to a zoning variance 
because due to the depression his property does not carry itself. 
It doesn’t mean that a variation can be justified because a non- 
conforming use will provide a greater return than a conforming use. 


Footnote continued from page 167. 

Darraugh v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
April 2, 1929, affd. 228 App. Div. 703, 238 N. Y. S. 818 (1930) 

Delpad Realty Corp. v. Connell, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York 
Law Journal, June 27, 1931 

Dunne v. Walsh, 235 App. Div. 72, 256 N. Y. S. 119 (1932) 

Falvo v. Kerner, 222 App. Div. 289, 225 N. Y. S. 747 (1927) 

Fordhof Realty Co. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York 
Law Journal, April 10, 1936 

Garden Properties, Inc. v. Board of Appeals of New Rochelle, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, Westchester Law Journal, October 11, 1933 

Gilmont Corp. v. Rogers, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York 
Law Journal, June 8, 1935 

Hoberman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 


May 14, 1929 
iy te . Hebrew Infants v. Hand R. Corp., 131 Misc. 581, 227 N. Y. S. 570 
1928 


Howard Funding Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law 
Journal, November 1, 1930 

Levy v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, April 12, 1934, 243 App. Div. 609, 276 N. Y. S. 370, 267 
N. Y. 347, 196 N. E. 284 (1935) 

Proc Bldg. Corp. v. Connell, 240 App. Div. 782, 266 N. Y. S. 903, affd. 264 
N. Y. 513, 191 N. E. 541 (1934) 

Revorg Realty Co. v. Walsh, 225 App. Div. 774, 232 N. Y.'S. 141, alidy2gt 
N. Y. 516, 168 N. E. 410 (1929) 

Stillman v. Board of Standards & Appeals, 222 App. Div. 19, 225 N. Y. S. 402, 
affd. 247 N. Y. 599, 161 N. E. 197 (1928) 

Tale v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law Journal, 

ay 6, 1930 

Werner v. Walsh, 212 App. Div. 635, 209 N. Y. S. 454, affd. 240 N. Y. 680, 
148 N. E. 760 (1925) 

Young Women’s Hebrew Association v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 266 
N. Y. 270, 194 N. E. 751, 296 U.S. 537, 56 S. Ct. 109 (1935) 


168 


BOARD OF APPEALS 


It doesn’t mean that if the district appears to be incorrectly 
zoned that the owner ipso facto is entitled to a variation. The 
best answer to the question is that unnecessary hardship is all the 
elements which taken together indicate that the property under 
appeal is unique and cannot be put to a conforming use that will 
provide a reasonable return under normal conditions. If this is 
the situation, the Board must put the application to the other 
tests to assure itself that, if granted, others will not be unduly 
injured and that public health, safety and general welfare will be 
secured and substantial justice done. 


In New York City there was much discussion in 1932 and 1933 
as to the power of the Board of Appeals in relation to temporary 
gasoline stations—whether the Board, under the provision for vari- 
ances in cases of practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships, 
could issue permits for five years. The ordinance allowed the 
Board to make certain temporary permits for not more than two 
years, as special exceptions. Although gasoline stations were not 
specified in this provision of the ordinance, it had become cus- 
tomary to grant two-year permits for them in proper cases. The 
chairman of the Board was strongly in favor of a better type of 
station and considered that a five-year permit would stimulate 
such structures.! It accordingly became the practice to issue five- 
year permits in proper cases. If this is lawful under the provision 
of practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships, it is also lawful 
for boards of appeals to place a time limit as a condition on any 
variance permit. There would seem to be no reason why that 
practice is not lawful. 

Where the state enabling act provides that a board of appeals 
must be established, the ordinance is void if the board is omitted.? 
1N. Y.—Borea Cont. Co. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York 

Law Journal, May 14, 1936 
ti ea aie Corporation v. Connell, 257 N. Y. 73, 177 N. E. 313 
aN. ies Mary’s of Mt. Virgin’s Church v. Board of Adjustment of New Bruns- 


wick, 184 A. 516 (1936) 
Somers v. Borough of Bradley Beach, 115 N. J. L. 135, 178 A. 755 (1935) 


GHAR TERRI I 
COURT PROCEDURE 


INJUNCTION AND MANDAMUS 


INCE 1916, when zoning began in New York City, the forms 
of court action employed throughout the country have 
tended to group themselves under injunction, mandamus, 

and certiorari. One will hardly find a civil action in the reported 
cases that is not one of these. Certiorari, or actions or appeals in 
the nature of certiorari, constitute the rather uniform method 
whereby courts review the determinations of boards of appeals. 
Proceedings of this sort have already been considered under ‘‘Board 
of Appeals” (page 153). 

Municipalities may employ injunction to prevent violations of 
the zoning ordinance or to cause their discontinuance. A munici- 
pality, however, does not ordinarily have the right to use this 
remedy unless the state legislature has given it the right of injunc- 
tion to prevent zoning violations, or in more general terms the right 
of equitable remedies in cases of such violation.! Injunctions pen- 
dente lite are sometimes granted. Municipalities that have the 
right to employ injunction tend to use it for test cases instead of 
causing the arrest of the offender. Criminal proceedings are usually 
1 La.—New Orleans v. Liberty Shop, 157 La. 26, 101 S. 798 (1924) 

Md.—Broening v. Haley, 156 Md. 605, 144 A. 836 (1929) 

Mass.— Building Com’r of Brookline v. McManus, 263 Mass. 270, 160 N. E. 887 
N. 1. Bekine v. Kip, 110 N. J. Eq. 486, 160 A. 676 (1932) 

N. Y.—Walsh v. Cusack Co., 196 N. Y. S. 435 (1921) 

N. C.—Elizabeth City v. Aydlett, 198 N. C. 585, 152 S. E. 681 (1930) 


Elizabeth City v. Aydlett, 200 N. C. 58, 156 S. E. 163 (1930) 

City of oy aie v. W. P. Rose Builders’ Supply Co., 200 N. C. 405, 157 S. E. 
58 (1931 

2N. Y.—Fassler v. All White Wet Wash Laundry, Inc., Supreme Court, New York 

County, New York Law Journal, August 11, 1931 

Ficaro v. Hagedorn, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
February 15, 1929 

Village of Island Park v. Armstrong, Supreme Court, Queens County, New 
York Law Journal, August 9, 1935 


170 


COURT PROCEDURE 


an unsatisfactory way to test a zoning regulation. In many juris- 
dictions the municipality cannot appeal from judgments in favor 
of the accused. Then, too, there are always difficulties in criminal 
proceedings because proof of intent is necessary. This subject 
will be discussed in the following chapter. 

It is easier and usually quicker for a municipality to enjoin a 
violation than for a neighbor to do so because the municipality 
can obtain the temporary injunction without giving a bond whereas 
an individual plaintiff will ordinarily need to give a bond. 

The city attorney will do well before preparing his injunction 
papers to review the history of the regulations in the zoning ordi- 
nance on which he relies. Sometimes he may depend on an amend- 
ment and to his surprise the defendant will show the court that it 
was never lawfully adopted. Equally often it happens that the 
original ordinance was not lawfully adopted, or that the required 
notice was not given by publication and posting. State enabling 
_acts for zoning usually require the establishment of a zoning com- 
mission to examine the needs of the municipality, frame a tentative 
ordinance and hold hearings thereon. This is required by state 
laws so that municipalities will not adopt zoning ordinances with- 
out careful investigation and a preliminary checking up with prop- 
erty owners in order to avoid too drastic or unreasonable regula- 
tions. After such an investigation the zoning commission must 
make a preliminary report to the local legislative body and hold 
a public hearing on the report. The commission must then submit 
its final report to the local legislature, which body must advertise 
and hold a public hearing on that report. All these details are 
specified in the state enabling act, and if the city attorney does 
not make sure that the several steps have been complied with he 
is likely to lose his case. In some states the zoning ordinance must 
be advertised in a specific way or else the landowner is not bound 
by its regulations and he will defend himself in any action by show- 
ing that he has not been given notice as required by law. Some 
municipalities have considered that it is enough to advertise the 
ordinance and not the map. The map, however, is always part of 
the ordinance and must be advertised.!_ Amending the ordinance 
does not require the help of the commission. 


1 See cases cited in note 3, p. 41 


V7 


ZONING 


The remedy of injunction is also open to an injured neighbor, 
If he asks for a temporary injunction, he will need to give a bond. 
He must be careful to plead special damages.! It is not enough 
that he is one of a considerable community that will be hurt ina 
general way by the violation. His damages must be separate or 
different from those which the community at large sustains. He 
will do well to examine the history of the regulation on which he 
relies, to make sure that all requirements of the state enabling act 
for zoning have been complied with. In jurisdictions requiring 
advertisement of ordinances in order to constitute notice, he must 
see that the requirements of the enabling act as to notice have been 
complied with. 

A more difficult field of injunctive remedy is that in which the 
landowner claims that the regulation, as applied to his land, is 
unreasonable and therefore unconstitutional and void. Inthe early 
days of zoning it was considered that the landowner should prepare 
his plans for a building, submit them to the building inspector, and 
if refused a permit should ask for a variance from the board of. 
appeals allowing him to erect a structure that would comply so far 
as possible with the spirit of the law, and be the least injurious to 
the community. Nearly all state enabling acts for zoning provided 
for the establishment of a board of appeals and gave this board the 
power of making variance permits in all cases of practical difficulties 


1 Conn.—Fitzgerald v. Merard Holding Co., 106 Conn. 475, 138 A. 483 (1927) 
Greenwich Gas Co. v. Zoning Board of Appeals of Greenwich, 113 Conn. 684, 
155 A. 850 (1931) 
RSA Ty | Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 III. 284, 172 N. E. 710 
1930 
Weiton v. 40 E. Oak St. Bldg. Corp., 70 F. (2d) 377 (1934) 
Md.—Bauernschmidt v. Standard Oil Co., 153 Md. 647, 139 A. 531 (1927) 
Mass.—O’Brien v. Turner, 255 Mass. 84, 150 N. E. 886 (1926) 
Neb.—Herbert v. Anderson, 122 Neb. 738, 241 N. W. 545 (1932) 
N. J.—Dinkins v. Kip, 110 N. J. Eq. 486, 160 A. 676 (1932) 
N. Y.—Atkins v. West, 222 App. Div. 308, 226 N. Y. S. 335 (1928) 
Buckley v. Baldwin, 230 App. Div. 245, 244 N. Y. S. 295 (1930) 
Cohen v. Rosevale Realty Co., 121 Misc. 618, 202 N. Y. S. 95, affd. 211 App. 
Div. 812, 206 N. Y. S. 893 (1924) 
Keenly v. McCarty, 137 Misc. 524, 244 N. Y. S. 63 (1930) 
Nagaven Realties, Inc. v. Banzhaf, 149 Misc. 361, 267 N. Y. S. 729 (1933) 
St. Basil’s Church v. Kerner, 125 Misc. 526, 211 N. Y. S. 470 (1925) 
Tishman v. 1400 Broadway Corp., Supreme Court, New York County, New 
York Law Journal, January 28, 1931 
Whitridge v. Park, 100 Misc. 367, 165 N. Y. S. 640, 179 App. Div. 884 (1917) 
Pa.— White v. Old York Road Country Club, 318 Pa. 346, 178 A. 3, 318 Pa. 569, 
179 A. 434, 185 A. 316 (1936) 


172 


COURT PROCEDURE 


and unnecessary hardships. The fact that the statute provided 
this method of protecting the community caused courts to insist 
in many cases that the landowner should first exhaust the remedy 
given him by law before seeking to annihilate the regulations on 
the ground of unreasonableness and unconstitutionality. Some 
students of zoning hoped that the development of this subject 
would be such that in all cases where the strict letter of the law 
bore oppressively on the landowner he would be able to obtain a 
variance permit that would ameliorate the harshness of the regu- 
lation and allow him to build a structure suitable for the particular 
location. Such a procedure would have preserved the ordinance 
itself intact, while still allowing a structure to be erected that was 
reasonable in the particular environment. Those who took this 
view considered that ordinances should be protected against fre- 
quent punctures on the ground of unconstitutionality and that 
better results would be obtained by adapting variance permits to 
the needs of the environment. They pointed out that these vari- 
ances would always be subject to the approval of courts, and that 
it was better for the courts to bring about a reasonable result 
through proceedings in the nature of certiorari than to declare a 
regulation unconstitutional. If this view had been continued by the 
courts it is likely that local legislative bodies would have introduced 
arbitrary features into the zoning maps, depending on the boards 
of appeals to ameliorate them in suitable cases from time to time. 

Where the zoning regulation is unreasonable or arbitrary for a 
whole street or locality, it is undoubtedly correct for the court to 
pronounce the zoning unconstitutional and not compel the injured 
landowner to prepare plans and apply to the board of appeals for 
a variance. It can probably nowbe said that courts will be inclined 
to compel the landowner to apply for a variance only where his 
particular plot is in an exceptional situation and is unique in rela- 
tion to a fair adjustment. If, however, the lot is one of many that 
are in the identical situation, the court will be likely to excuse the 
injured party from applying to the board of appeals for a variance, 
and to declare directly or indirectly that it is the duty of the local 
legislative body to alter the map so that the zoning regulations will 
be reasonable. Consequently it may now be considered that in- 
junction is available to the injured landowner whose particular lot 


173 


ZONING 


is one of a number that are unreasonably and arbitrarily zoned. 
But if his lot stands alone and the neighborhood is reasonably 
zoned, he cannot expect the court to declare the zoning void, but 
he must apply to the board of appeals for a variance in his partic- 
ular instance. In proper cases therefore the landowner will seek 
to enjoin the building inspector and other officials from enforcing 
or continuing the threat of enforcement of a regulation that affects 
a substantial area unreasonably. The laws of some states provide 
for declaratory judgments, and these may be sought in such cases 
as are here described. It is likely, however, that whether the state 
law provides for declaratory judgments or not, the same result can 
be obtained by an action of injunction against enforcing officials. 
The real basis of this action is that the existing zoning is in actuality 
unconstitutional and void, and yet is maintained by the local 
legislative body as a constant threat against the land. (See also 
discussion at page 160 ef seq.) 

Mandamus is available to the landowner to compel the admin- 
istrative officer to do his duty as required by law. Perhaps the 
most frequent group of cases where mandamus is employed by 
landowners is where the building inspector refuses a permit which 
he ought lawfully to grant. It has frequently happened that build- 
ing inspectors will postpone the issue of a lawful permit in the 
expectation that the local legislative body will soon alter the map. 
Courts frown on this temporary holding up of permits, and declare 
that they must be granted in accordance with the present law and 
not in accordance with what the building inspector expects the law 
to be at some future time. The landowner who obtains a permit 
under the circumstances may find that a change of the map made 
after he obtains his permit will still prevent him from building. 
Usually, however, if he orders material to be fabricated and fabri- 
cation is begun and the footing course of the foundation of the 
structure is laid, courts will hold—at least those in and near New 
York City—that it is unreasonable to divest him of his rights under 
his permit. In this connection it is well to recall that police-power 
regulations are not contractual but are instituted for the community 
health, safety, morals, and general welfare, and the community may 


1 Dowsey v. Village of Kensington, 257 N. Y. 221, 177 N. E. 427 (1931) 
See also cases cited in note 2, p. 162 


174 


COURT PROCEDURE 


insist that it is not concerned with money damages to the land- 
owner. 

It has been held that an owner of a structure sought to be re- 
moved for violation of a regulation is a necessary party.! 

Sometimes the local legislative body will change the map with- 
out taking the necessary preliminary steps or without heeding a 
valid 20 percent protest. Thus a zoning designation will appear on 
the map which is in fact not real, because no valid change has been 
made. The landowner who desires to erect a building that is law- 
ful under the map as it ought to be but which may be unlawful 
under the mistaken change, will resort to mandamus against the 
building inspector, requesting the court to disregard the appear- 
ance of the change and command the building inspector to issue 
a permit in accordance with the reality.? 

It is not always the builder who resorts to mandamus in cases 
like this. Sometimes a neighbor will ask the court to decide 
whether the change of map, injurious to him, was lawfully made. 
He wili ordinarily make use of injunction to prevent the builder 
from violating the zoning as it ought to be shown on a true map. 
But sometimes the neighbor is unwilling to give a bond to procure 
a temporary injunction, or will be compelled to wait too long to 
have his trial of a permanent injunction. In the meantime the 
builder may obtain his permit and put his building well under 
way. Under these circumstances courts are sometimes likely to 
waive the equities involved. If the builder has proceeded with no 
wrongdoing on his part, the court may uphold him in the particu- 
lar case. This is because courts dislike to cause builders to tear 
down what they have erected under an apparently valid permit 
from the municipality. Where, therefore, the neighbor desires to 
act promptly, he will ask the court to issue mandamus against the 
municipal legislative body and its clerk or secretary for an order 
compelling the change of the minutes so that they will declare the 
lawful result instead of the unlawful and mistaken result.’ 


1N. Y.—Morton v. Bales, 226 App. Div. 693, 233 N. Y. S. 540 (1929) 
Stegle v. Bales, 226 App. Div. 816, 234 N. Y. S. 901 (1929) 
2N. Y.—Leonard v. Tappen, 244 App. Div. 817, 280 N. Y. S. 1000, affd. 269 N. Y. 


567, 199 N. E. 674 (1935) _ 
Palmer v. Mann, 206 App. Div. 484, 201 N. Y. S. 525, affd. 237 N. Y. 616, 


143 N. E. 765 (1924) 
3 Smidt v. McKee, 262 N. Y. 373, 186 N. E. 869 (1933) 
175 


ZONING 


It is not necessary to discuss here the differences in situations 
which warrant resort to mandamus, injunction, or certiorari be- 
cause the subject of zoning does not show departures from gen- 
eral practice. There are, however, a few cases in which the different 
methods of procedure are discussed.! 

An issue of fact warrants an alternative writ of mandate and 
not a peremptory writ.” 

An alternative writ of mandamus ordinarily carries the trial 
before a jury. 

Care must be taken to join all necessary parties.* 


PROCEDURAL PROBLEMS 


The legal problems connected with zoning litigation constantly 
recur. They can nearly always be solved in accordance with prin- 
ciples established in other fields. But because practitioners so 
often make the same mistakes in analyzing zoning situations, some 
of these problems are briefly mentioned. 

In injunction and mandamus the petitioner often desires to 
allege unconstitutionality. He should state that the regulation 
violates a particular section of the state or federal constitution, 
designate the section, and give its purport. Merely to state that 
the regulation is unconstitutional is insufficient or hazardous. 

As zoning is based on the police power, litigants often expect to 
carry their issue to the United States Supreme Court. Not every 
police-power case issue can reach that body. It is possible only 


A Cau SPUR v. Arden Realty & Investment Co., 98 Colo. 522; 57 P. (2d) 
OI (193 
La.— Kreher v. Quinlan, 182 La. 721, 162 S. 577 (1935) 
Miss.—City of Jackson v. McPherson, 158 Miss. 152, 130 S. 287 (1930) 
N. J.—Gallo v. Moffett, 8 N. J. Misc. 40, 148 A. 152 (1930) 
nena: eae: and Aldermen of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 564, 142 A. 
355 (1928 
Y.—Dillon v. O’Shaughnessy, 222 App. Div. 772, 226 N. Y. S. 37 (1927) 
Fairchild Sons, Inc. v. Rogers, 246 App. Div. 555, 282 N. Y. S. 916 (1935) 
Hart v. Bailey, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, Decem- 
ber 24, 1935 
Towers Management Corporation v. Thatcher, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, September 10, 1935, 246 App. Div. 835, 286 N. Y. S. 
435, 271 N. Y. 94, 2 N. E. (2d) 273 (1936) 
2N. Y.—Matter of Peck, 136 Misc. 294, 240 N. Y. S. 634 (1930) 
Radcliffe v. Livingston, 223 App. Div. 862, 229 N. Y. S. 20 (1928) 


3 Freeland v. Sargeant, 6 N. J. Misc. 906, 143 A. 73 (1928) 
* Costa v. Dandrow, 12 N. J. Misc. 822, 175 A. 205 (1934) 


176 


COURT PROCEDURE 


when the regulation, or some other act of government, has 
deprived the appellant of his right of due process of law. At least 
this is a good rule to follow in a zoning case.! 

To bring the constitutional issue to the United States Supreme 
Court, the injured party must raise the particular constitutional 
provision in the court below and actually discuss it.? 

A rule of conduct for the guidance of boards of appeals will not 
be interpreted by the United States Supreme Court. As it was 
made by the state or a local legislature, its scope must be deter- 
mined by the state courts. 

In the early days of zoning it was customary for city attorneys 
and sometimes courts to hold that a newcomer who knowingly 
purchased into a zoning environment with full knowledge of the 
zoning regulations was in a worse position than the owner on whom 
the regulations were originally imposed. Not so. It is the land 
that is regarded and not the owner. The situation and environ- 
_ ment of the land are the same in either case.’ 

An aggrieved neighbor cannot enjoin a violation of the ordi- 
nance unless he pleads and proves special damages. It is not 
enough for him to plead damages for they might be the same as 
all his neighbors suffered.* 


1 Convention of Protestant Episcopal Church v. Mayor and City Council of Balti- 
more, Md., Baltimore City Court, Baltimore Daily Record, October 17, 
1928—Greenway Apartment Company v. Convention of Protestant Episco- 
pal Church, 280 U. S. 525, 50 S. Ct. 87 (1929) 

2 Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 268 U. S. 646, 45 S. Ct. 618 (N. Y., 1925) 

8 Forbes v. Hubbard, 348 Ill. 166, 180 N. E. 767 (1932) 


4 Conn.—Fitzgerald v. Merard Holding Co., 106 Conn. 475, 138 A. 483 (1927) 
Greenwich Gas Co. v. Zoning Board of Appeals of Greenwich, 113 Conn. 684, 
155 A. 850 (1931) 
Mice Bldg. Corporation v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 N. E. 710 
1930 
lowa—Anderson v. Jester, 206 Iowa 452, 221 N. W. 354 (1928) 
Md.—Bauernschmidt v. Standard Oil Co., 153 Md. 647, 139 A. 531 (1927) 
Rutherford v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, City Court, Baltimore 
Daily Record, October 25, 1923, 145 Md. 363, 125 A. 725 (1924) 
Mass.—Ayer v. Cram, 242 Mass. 30, 136 N. E. 338 (1922) 
N. J.—Gaston v. Ackerman, 6 N. J. Misc. 696, 142 A. 546 (1928) 
N. Y.—Edbro Realty Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, September 2, 1924 
In re Pane, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, December 
20, 1928 
Roock v. Womer, 233 App. Div. 566, 253 N. Y. S. 357 (1931) 
St. Basil’s Church v. Kerner, 125 Misc. 526, 211 N. Y. S. 470 (1925) 


Footnote continued on page 178. 


177 


ZONING 


Where a permit holder has bought his building material or 
started his foundations the courts will not cause the revocation of 
his permit on the change of district. In some cases they have held 
that he has a vested right, although it is not entirely clear how 
any one can perfect a vested right against a police-power regu- 
lation.? 

Where the building inspector purposely delays a lawful permit 
pending proposed changes in the map, the courts will by mandamus 
order him to issue the permit? 


Footnote continued from page 177. 
Sherman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
May 5, 1930 
Ohio—Howell v. Cooper, 33 Oh. A. 287, 168 N. E. 757 (1929) 
Pritz v. Messer, 112 Oh. St. 628, 149 N. E. 30 (1925) 
Pa.—Appeal of Johnson, 93 Pa. Super. 599 (1928) 

In re American Reduction Co., Court of Common Pleas, Allegheny County, 
February 12, 1924, 15 Minicipal Law Reporter 183, 72 Pittsburgh Legal 
Journal 321, 326 

R. I1.—Madden v. Zoning Board of Review of Providence, 48 R. I. 175, 136 A. 
493 (1927) 
1 Mass.—Spector v. B’l’d’g Inspector of Milton, 250 Mass. 63, 145 N. E. 265 (1924) 
Mich.—City of Lansing v. Dawley, 247 Mich. 394, 225 N. W. 500 (1929) 
N. Y.—Feitelberg v. Bales, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law 
Journal, January 4, 1928 

Fuller v. Schwab, 124 Misc. 659, 208 N. Y. S. 289 (1925) 

Kalvin v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
January 31, 1923, affd. 206 App. Div. 683, 199 N. Y. S. 943 (1923) 

nee of oa York v. Caulwal Construction Co., 261 N. Y. 578, 185 N. E. 746 

1933 
NC Me State Investing Co. v. Brady, 214 App. Div. 592, 212 N. Y. S. 605 
1925 

Ohlau v. Kleinert, 121 Misc. 386, 201 N. Y. S. 83, affd. 209 App. Div. 824, 204 
N. Y. S. 933 (1924) 

Ortenberg v. Bales, 224 App. Div. 87, 229 N. Y. S. 550, affd. 250 N. Y. 598, 
166 N. E. 339 (1929) 

Palmer v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law Journal, 
June 6, 1922 

Pelham View Apartments v. Switzer, 130 Misc. 545, 224 N. Y. S. 56 (1927) 

People v. Stanton, 125 Misc. 215, 211 N. Y. S. 438 (1925) 

Sagamore Road Corp. v. Lee, 224 App. Div. 744, 230 N. Y. S. 58, affd. 250 
N. Y. 532, 166 N. E. 313 (1929) 

* Towa—Rehmann v. City of Des Moines, 200 Iowa 286, 204 N. W. 267 (1925), 204 
Iowa 798, 215 N. W. 957 (1927) 
La.—Hundley v. City of Alexandria, 164 La. 624, 114 S. 491 (1927) 

Sansone v. City of New Orleans, 163 La. 860, 113 S. 126 (1927) 

N. J.—Atlantic Broadcasting Co. v. Wayne Tp., 109 N. J. L. 442, 162 A. 631 (1932) 

he v. Mayor and Aldermen of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 803, 142 A. 759 

192 
Commuters’ Coach Co. v. Minton, 7 N. J. Misc. 478, 146 A. 921 (1929) 
Holdsworth v. Hague, 9 N. J. Misc. 715, 155 A. 892 (1931) 


Footnote continued on page 179. 


178 


COURT PROCEDURE 


An action for damages against the municipality because of 
alleged arbitrary zoning or for non-issue of a permit will not lie. 
If the regulation is arbitrary it is unconstitutional and void, and 
the courts will so declare. If it is reasonable the courts will see 
that the applicant receives his lawful permit. A few state enabling 
acts, now fortunately repealed, provided for damages. 

Misrepresentation by the applicant for a permit is cause for 
revoking it. 

An application based on a pretended or moot case will be 
denied, or if granted will be revoked 

The power to revoke inheres in the body having power to grant 
the permit. A village board cannot revoke a lawful permit granted 
by the lawful authority under a zoning ordinance. But where the 


Footnote continued from page 178. 
Horowitz v. Rath, 9 N. J. Misc. 203, 153 A. 250 (193!) 
Linwood Co. v. Gardner, 9 N. J. Misc. 139, 153 A. 99 (1931) 
Mongiello Bros., Inc. v. Board of Com’rs of Jersey City, 10 N. J. Misc. 131, 
158 A. 325 (1932) 
Pabst v. Ferner, 8 N. J. Misc. 621, 151 A. 368 (1930) 
Paffendorf v. Lyndhurst Tp., 1 N. J. Misc. 289, 129 A. 389 (1923) 
Reimer v. Dallas, 129 A. 390 (1925) 
N. Y.—Calton Court, Inc. v. Switzer, 221 App. Div. 799, 223 N. Y. S. 856 (1927) 
Voelcker v. Seaman, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
July 2, 1928 
N. ee, v. Board of Aldermen of Goldsboro, 192 N. C. 348, 135 S. E. 50 
192 
Ohio—Hauser v. Erdman, 113 Oh. St. 662, 150 N. E. 42 (1925) 
Ice & Fuel Co. v. Kreuzweiser, 120 Oh. St. 352, 166 N. E. 228 (1929) 
Pa.—Coyne v. Prichard, 272 Pa. 424, 116 A. 315 (1922) 
Herskovits v. Irwin, 299 Pa. 155, 149 A. 195 (1930) 
Tex.— Marshall v. City of Dallas, 253 S. W. 887 (1923) 
McEachern v. Town of Highland Park, 34 S. W. (2d) 676, 124 Tex. 36, 73 S. W. 
(2d) 487 (1934) 
1N. J.—Lehigh Valley R. Co. v. Mayor, etc., of Jersey City, 7 N. J. Misc. 154, 144 
A. 578, 106 N. J. L. 248, 147 A. 555 (1929) 
N. Y.—Village of Attica v. Day, 134 Misc. 882, 236 N. Y. S. 607, affd. 230 App. 
Div. 776, 243 N. Y. S. 915 (1930) 
Caulwal Construction Co. v. Burwell, 136 Misc. 259, 240 N. Y. S. 456 (1930) 
Matter of Fontana, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
May 109, 1925 
City of New York v. Caulwal Construction Co., 261 N. Y. 578, 185 N. E. 746 
(1933) 
Stein v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, July 
15, 1929 
Dhee Santan elo v. City of Cincinnati, 25 Ohio N. P. (N.S.) 49 (1924) 
Wis.— Wasserman v. O’Brien, 201 Wis. 356, 230 N. W. 59 (1930) 
* Mo.—Myers v. Shinnick, 19 S. W. (2d) 676 (1929) 
N. J.—Muelberger v. Wisloh, 2 N. J. Misc. 962, 128 A. 924 (1924) 
8 Atlantic Broadcasting Co. v. Wayne Tp., 109 N. J. L. 442, 162 A. 631 (1932) 


179 


ZONING 


board has power to grant the permit it has the power in a proper 
case to revoke it.1_ If one does not protest against the passage of 
an ordinance on the grounds of unconstitutionality, it has been 
held in one case that he is estopped from making such an attack 
later. This seems very unreasonable.” 

A permit is not a contract between the property owner and 
municipality, but is nothing more than a step in the administra- 
tion of laws for the protection of the community. It is not based 
on a consideration. 

Permits violative of the ordinance are unlawful. They are not 
made lawful by a provision which assumes to allow temporary 
permits. 

Questions of money damages do not often arise in zoning cases 
before the courts. All claims for damages by property owners 
because zoning regulations lessen the value of their property will 
be promptly ruled out. If the regulation is reasonable it will be 
enforced under the police power and there will be no damages. If 
it is unreasonable it will be pronounced void and no damages can 
be collected. Various questions regarding damages arise, however, 
in zoning cases.5 These sometimes have to do with the imposition 
of conditions or relate to situations where an injunction is issued. 

Courts frequently inspect the land or building involved in con- 
troversy, sometimes because they desire to do so and sometimes 
on the request of a party. The court usually asks the consent of 
all parties to be entered. It is doubtful whether inspections by the 
court help substantially in arriving at a satisfactory result. Ap- 


1 Morania Sales Co. v. Anderson, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, August 9, 1930 


2 Coombs v. Larson, 112 Conn. 236, 152 A. 297 (1930) 


§’ Jowa—Rehmann v. City of Des Moines, 200 lowa 286, 204 N. W. 267 (1925), 
204 lowa 798, 215 N. W. 957 (1927) 
Pa.—Shooster v. Devlin, 305 Pa. 440, 158 A. 161 (1932) 
- aot air Board of Appeals of Ramapo, 141 Misc. 916, 253 N. Y. S. 547 
1931 
5 Cal.—Sapiro v. Frisbie, 93 Cal. A. 299, 270 P. 280 (1928) 
Mass.—Locatelli v. City of Medford, 287 Mass. 560, 192 N. E. 57 (1934) 
N. bene a v. Goldmann Realty Corp., 232 App. Div. 292, 249 N. Y 
505 (1931 
City of Utica v. Hanna, 249 N. Y. 26, 162 N. E. 573 (1928) 
Wis.—Bouchard vy. Zetley, 196 Wis. 635, 220 N. W. are (1928) 
Pera v. Village of Shorewood, 176 Wis. 261, 186 N. W. 623 (1922) 


180 


COURT PROCEDURE 


pellate courts are often confused because the entire case is not in 
the record. 

Courts dislike to hold that a legislative body has acted arbi- 
trarily because it has differed from the view of the court. In 
certiorari cases the court hesitates to substitute its opinion for the 
conclusion of experts.! 

Counsel cannot ordinarily expect federal courts to help them in 
the interpretation of zoning ordinances or to furnish substituted 
procedure for procedure through boards of appeals.? 

Problems involving detail procedure regarding constitutionality 
are constantly arising in zoning cases. Where unconstitutionality 
is alleged courts have held in some cases that there can be im- 
mediate access to court.? (See also page 172 et seq.) 

An entire ordinance will not be declared void because a part of 
it is void. The ordinance being declared void in a certiorari case, 
mandamus was granted thereafter.5 


i! Mymaud Const. Co. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, March 5, 1926 


2N. Y.—Arseekay Syndicate, Inc. v. Burwell, 53 F. (2d) 705 (1931) 
Morrison v. Pettigrew, 14 F. (2d) 453 (1926) 


8 Conn.—Appeal of Holley, 110 Conn. 80, 147 A. 300 (1929) 
Ill.—Phipps v. City of Chicago, 339 IIl. 315, 171 N. E. 289 (1930) 
Vonesh v. City of Berwyn, 324 Ill. 483, 155 N. E. 276 (1927) 
4 Cliffside Park Realty Co. v. Borough of Cliffside Park, 96 N. J. L. 278, 114 A. 
797 (1921) 
5 Mathewson v. Brockett, 127 Misc. 895, 217 N. Y. S. 353 (1926) 


181 


CHAPTER VIII 
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS 


HE violation of a zoning regulation is usually made a mis- 
demeanor and is punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. 
A penal proceeding is not a good way of testing the legality 
of a regulation, although it affords a summary method of enforce- 
ment when legality is well settled. Some of the unfortunate 
decisions of courts, which set back the progress of zoning in several 
states, were in part due to the testing of a regulation by arresting 
an alleged violator! In such a proceeding all of the presumptions 
are in favor of the violator, and in the early days of zoning, when 
the whole subject was novel, the magistrate was the more inclined 
to give the accused the benefit of the doubt. The evidence pre-- 
sented by the municipality was often ill-prepared and made a poor 
foundation if the accused appealed to higher courts. If the accused 
was successful in the trial before the magistrate, the municipality 
usually could not appeal at all.2 It is quite likely that in many 
states zoning would have been established sooner if municipalities 
had refrained from penal proceedings for test purposes and had 
begun actions of injunction. 
1La.—City of Shreveport v. Moran, 174 La. 271, 140 S. 475 (1932) 
Me.—Millett v. Hayes & Co., 132 Me. 12, 164 A. 741 (1933) 
Mass.— Building Com’r of Brookline v. McManus, 263 Mass. 270, 160 N. E. 887 
(1928) 
Minn.—State v. Burgenstein, Municipal Court, Minneapolis, Minneapolis Daily 
Star, December 11, 1924 
N. J.—Apter v. City of Newark, 6 N. J. Misc. 554, 142 A. 310 (1928) 
Durkin Lumber Co. v. Fitzsimmons, 106 N. J. L. 183, 147 A. 555 (1929) 
Sarg v. Hooper, 3 N. J. Misc. 364, 128 A. 376 (1925) 
N. Y.—People v. Sagat, 204 App. Div. 485, 198 N. Y. S. 449 (1923) 
Phillips v. Batista, City Court, New Rochelle, July 11, 1930 
Pa.—City of Bethlehem v. Goodman, Court of Common Pleas, Northampton 
County, April 4, 1927 
* However, see City of St. Louis v. Dorr, 145 Mo. 466, 41 S. W. 1094 (1897) 
N. Y.—City of New Rochelle v. Beckwith, City Court, New Rochelle, Westchester 
Law Journal, August 18, 1933, 268 N. Y. 315, 197 N. E. 295 (1935) 


City of New Rochelle v. Blossom Cleaners & Dyers, Inc., City Court, New 
Rochelle, Westchester Law Journal, October 17, 1933 


182 


CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS 


A provision making each day that a violation continues a sepa- 
rate offense is lawful.! 

A municipality cannot apply to a court for equitable relief, as for 
instance for an order or judgment of injunction, unless this remedy 
is given the municipality by statute. 

The regulations of a zoning ordinance are enforced by the build- 
ing department, or by some department or person specifically 
named in the ordinance, and cannot be enforced by another depart- 
ment such as the board of health.? 


1 Wright v. City of Guthrie, 150 Okl. 171, 1 P. (2d) 162 (1931) 
? Allen s an of Paterson, 98 N. J. L. 661, 121 A. 610, 99 N. J. L. 532, 124 A. 924 
1924 


183 


CHAP TERI 
CONTRACTUAL RELATIONS 


CONTRACTS IMPROPER 


ONTRACTS have no place in a zoning plan. Zoning, if 
Co accomplished at all, must be accomplished under the police 
power. It is a form of regulation for community welfare. 
Contracts between property owners or between a municipality and 
a property owner should not enter into the enforcement of zoning 
regulations.! 

Sometimes local legislatures state that they will make certain 
zoning changes if property owners file agreements either with one 
another or with the city. This is wrong, unnecessary, and unfair. 
The local legislative body is taking advantage of its superior posi- 
tion whenever it tries to force a property owner to enter into a 
contract in order to have a permit to which he is entitled, or before 
zoning regulations are made which are justified by well-settled 
principles. There is no consideration for such a bargain because 
the municipality cannot receive a consideration for taking steps in 
legislation. Its legislation is not and ought not to be for sale. 

Officials cannot make a valid contract with landowners regard- 
ing the street on which a building must front.? 

Zoning districts are sometimes stated by councils to follow the 
boundaries marked by certain private restrictions. No fault can 
be found with this method of denoting locations but an accurate 
map is much better. It is a mistake, however, to use the fact of 
existing private restrictions as justification for a certain kind of 
zoning. The environment should justify the zoning regardless of 
the private restrictions. Wherever municipalities have made zon- 
ing regulations dependent upon the continuation of private restric- 
tions confusion has followed.? The well-known Murray Hill restric- 
1 Sandenburgh v. Michigamme Oil Co., 249 Mich. 372, 228 N. W. 707 (1930) 


2 Williams v. City of Fargo, 63 N. D. 183, 247 N. W. 46 (1933) 


*N. Y.—Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 204 App. Div. 883, 197 N. Y. S. 940 (1922) 
Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 237 N. Y. 580, 143 N. E. 750, 268 U. S. 646, 
45 S. Ct. 618 (1925) 


184 


CONTRACTUAL RELATIONS 


tions in Manhattan never clarified the zoning regulations or 
assisted in their interpretation, although in the early days there 
were constant references to these private restrictions in the presen- 
tation of arguments based on zoning.! 

Counsel will do well when presenting a zoning case to the court 
to omit all reference to contracts between parties and contractual 
restrictions running with the land. For the same reason, when 
presenting a case based on contracts or private restrictions, counsel 
will omit references to zoning regulations. 

The doctrine of estoppel does not apply to zoning regulations 
because they are based on the police power? 


EFFECT OF ZONING ON PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS 


The New York building zone resolution contains the following 
provision in its Section 20: 

It is not intended by this resolution . . . to interfere with or 
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements 
between parties; provided, however, that where this resolution 
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises 
or upon height of buildings or requires larger yards, courts or other 
open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provi- 
sion of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations or permits 
or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of 
this resolution shall control. 

Insofar as these words refer to easements, covenants, or other 
agreements between parties, they are unfortunate and misleading. 
They have been widely copied throughout the country. It is evi- 
dent that the enforceability of a police-power ordinance cannot be 
affected by covenants of private restrictions. If the provision 
merely referred to noninterference, it would at least be harmless, 
but it goes further and states that the greater restriction shall 
control. The municipal authorities enforcing the zoning regula- 
tions have nothing whatever to do with private restrictions. Zon- 
ing regulations and private restrictions do not affect each other.’ 
1 Sheldon v. Board of Appeals of New York, 234 N. Y. 484, 138 N. E. 416 (1923) 

2 Lipsitz v. Parr, 164 Md. 222, 164 A. 743 (1933) 


3D. C.—Castleman v. Avignone, 56 App. D. C. 253, 12 F. (2d) 326 (1926) 
Ind.—Bachman v. Colpaert Realty Corp., 194 N. E. 783 (1935) 
lowa—Burgess v. Magarian, 214 lowa 694, 243 N. W. 356 (1932) 

Footnote continued on page 186. 

185 


ZONING 


No mention of private restrictions should be made in a zoning 
ordinance. For instance, let us suppose that in a business zone 
there is a private restriction against business. If the owner applies 
for a store permit, he will receive it as a matter of right. If, how- 
ever, he proceeds to erect a store, he will probably be enjoined by 
some neighbor entitled to enforce the private restriction. He can- 
not defend himself by saying that the regulations of the business 
zone prevent him from erecting anything but a store. He has the 
same right to erect a residence as a store. It is obvious that the 
zoning and the private restrictions are unrelated. One is based on 
the police power, the other on a contract. The municipality 
enforces the former by refusing a building permit or ousting a non- 
conforming use. A neighbor having privity of title enforces the 
latter by injunction or an action for damages. 

A restrictive covenant cannot be enforced by the municipality,? 
unless in the rare case where the municipality owns land subject 
to restrictive covenants and has such privity of title as will enable 
it to bring suit like a private person. 

The fact that land has been zoned for business will not be 
deemed to change the character of the locality so as to warrant the 
annulment of private restrictions prohibiting business.2 But it 


Fooinote continued from page 18. 
Mass.—Jenney v. Hynes, 282 Mass. 182, 184 N. E. 444 (1933) 
Vorenberg v. Bunnell, 257 Mass. 399, 153 N. E. 884 (1926) 
N. J.—Green v. Jones, 5 N. J. Misc. 188, 135 A. 802 (1927) 
N. Y.—Cohen v. Rosevale Realty Co., 120 Misc. 416, 199 N. Y. S. 4, 206 App. Div. 
681, 199 N. Y. S. 916 (1923) 
Fortieth St. & Park Ave. Inc. v. Fox, Supreme Court, New York County, New 
York Law Journal, January 17, 1927, 248 N. Y. 527, 162 N. E. 511 (1928) 
Kimball Co. v. Fox, 120 Misc. 701, 200 N. Y. S. 267, affd. 239 N. Y. 554, 147 
N. E. 192 (1924) 
Moos v. Duany, Supreme Court, Westchester County, Westchester Law 
Journal, January 3, 1933 
Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 204 App. Div. 883, 197 N. Y. S. 940 (1922) 
Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 237 N. Y. 580, 143 N. E. 750, 268 U. S. 646, 
45 S. Ct. 618 (1925) 
Vesell v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 137 Misc. 806, 243 N. Y. S. 518, 
affd. 225 App. Div. 742, 232 N. Y. S. 904 (1928) 
Ore.—Ludgate v. Somerville, 121 Ore. 643, 256 P. 1043 (1927) 
R. I1.—Walker v. Ursillo, 53 R. I. 120, 164 A. 559 (1933) 
Wis.— Kramer v. Nelson, 189 Wis. 560, 208 N. W. 252 (1926) 
Rosenberg v. Village of Whitefish Bay, 199 Wis. 214, 225 N. W. 838 (1929) 


1N. Y.—Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, ante 


2 Mass.—Snow v. Van Dam, 197 N. E. 224 (1935) 
R. I.—Walker v. Ursillo, 53 R. I. 120, 164 A. 559 (1933) 


186 


CONTRACTUAL RELATIONS 


has been held that the zoning map is admissible in the evi- 
dence. 

In the early days of zoning it was claimed that the regulations 
were encumbrances on land. This contention was disposed of in 
one of the first zoning cases that arose in New York City. A con- 
tract vendee refused to take a deed because of a zoning regulation 
not mentioned or excepted in the contract of sale. The court 
declared that like all other police-power regulations it would be 
enforced if reasonable, and it need not be excepted in a contract 
for the sale of land.2. Although these New York decisions have 
been followed by courts throughout the country many title com- 
panies and conveyancers continue to except zoning regulations as 
if they were encumbrances. 

Zoning is in no way hostile to private restrictions. They can 
make desirable requirements for the development of land that 
zoning cannot; they can also be based on esthetic reasons, such as 
architectural style or prevention of flat roofs, or on financial rea- 
sons, such as required cost of the house. Zoning regulations cannot 
be based on such reasons because they do not relate to the com- 
munity health and safety. Private restrictions may well supple- 
ment zoning regulations. There will never be conflict between 
the two. Courts in trying a zoning case will ordinarily exclude 
evidence of private restrictions, and in trying a private restriction 
case will exclude evidence of the zoning. This is done on the 
grounds of immateriality. 


1 Kokenge v. Whetstone, Court of Common Pleas, Hamilton County, Ohio, Decem- 


ber, 1935 
2 Lincoln Trust Co. v. Williams Bldg. Corp., 229 N. Y. 313, 128 N. E. 209 (1920) 


187 


CHAP TER CX 
DEFINITIONS IN THE ORDINANCE 


DEFINITIONS SOMETIMES Do More HARM THAN Goop 


T IS customary to include a list of definitions in a zoning 
| ordinance. Their purpose should be to give the unique mean- 
ings of certain words as used in the ordinance. If a word is 
employed in its common and ordinary meaning it is better not to 
define it. Sometimes, as in a contract, a single word is used to 
mean a phrase and in such a case the word should be placed in the 
list and defined. 

Some have thought that a standardized list of definitions for 
zoning ordinances would be desirable. This is probably not so. No 
two cities are alike. Their needs and their fields and methods of 
regulation are different. A summer resort is different in these re- 
spects from a manufacturing city; a seaport from a mining town. 
A standardized list of definitions, if used, would probably cause 
misunderstanding and increase litigation. 

Definitions so often injure an ordinance instead of helping it that 
some examples of good and bad definitions are copied from actual 
ordinances. 


EXAMPLES OF Goop DEFINITIONS 


The following definitions are helpful in the ordinances where 
they occur: 


A lot is the parcel of land on which a principal building and its acces- 
sories are placed, together with the required open spaces. 

A court is a required open, unoccupied space on the same lot and fully 
enclosed on at least three adjacent sides by walls of the building. An outer 
court is any court facing for its full required width on a street, or on any 
other required open space not acourt. An inner court is any other required 
court. 


! A Jot in zoning is the land on which one main building stands with the required 
yards. In determining the rear lot line the court will consider the manner 
in which lots have been laid out and the customs of surveyors. Bianco v. 
City Engineer of North Adams, 284 Mass. 20, 187 N. E. ror (1933) 


188 


DEFINITIONS IN THE ORDINANCE 


An accessory building is a building subordinate to the main building on 
a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main 
building. 

A family is any number of individuals living together as a single house- 
keeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises. 

A story is that part of any building comprised between any floor and 
the floor or roof next above; the first story of a wall is the lowest story 
which is 75 percent, or more, above the average level of ground adjacent 
to said wall. 

An apartment dwelling is a dwelling for three or more families, living 
independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises. 

Building is used to include a building, shed, garage, stable, greenhouse, 
or other accessory building. 

Corner plot means a plot on a corner fronting not more than fifty feet 
on one street and not more than two hundred feet on an intersecting 
street. 

Front street means the street upon which a plot abuts. Ifa plot abuts 
upon more than one street, it means the street designated as the front street 
in an application for a building permit, at the applicant’s election. 

Street grade means the established grade of the front street or other 
higher street upon which the plot abuts at the mid-point of the frontage 
of the plot thereon or if there is no established grade, street grade means 
the existing grade of such street at such mid-point. 

The street line is the dividing line between a lot and a public street, road 
or highway, or a private street, road or way over which two or more dom- 
inant estates have the right of way. 

The height of a building is the vertical distance from the curb level to 
the mean level of the slope of the main roof. The height of a wall is the 
vertical distance from the curb level to the mean level of the top of the 
wall, including any dormers or gables on the wall. 

A one-family detached dwelling is a house accommodating but a single 
family and having no party wall or walls in common with an adjacent 
house or houses. : 

A one-family semi-detached dwelling is a one-family house having on 
party wall in common with an adjacent house, the two houses together, 
however, accommodating but two families, one family living on either side 
of the party wall. 

A two-family detached dwelling is a house accommodating altogether 
but two families with one family living over the other. Such dwelling has 
moreover no party wall or walls in common with an adjacent house or 
houses. 

Building area is the aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross section 
area of the main building on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters, or 
chimneys projecting not more than eighteen inches, steps, one-story open 


1 Madden v. Zoning Board of Review of Providence, 48 R. I. 175, 136 A. 493 (1927) 
189 


ZONING 


porches, bay windows not extending through more than one story and not 
projecting more than five feet, balconies and terraces. 

Rear yard is the required open space extending along the rear lot line 
(not a street line) throughout the whole width of the lot, excluding cornices, 
eaves, gutters, chimneys projecting not more than twelve inches, and un- 
covered steps. 

Side yard is the required open space extending along the side lot line 
and extending from the street to the rear yard, excluding cornices, eaves, 
gutters and chimneys projecting not more than twelve inches, and un- 
covered steps. 

Front yard is the required open space between the street line and the 
nearest part of any building on the lot, excluding cornices, eaves or gutters 
projecting not more than thirty inches, steps, one-story open porches, bay 
windows not extending through more than one story and not projecting 
more than five feet, chimneys, open balconies and terraces. 

Single-family dwelling is a dwelling used or intended to be used or 
occupied as a residence by one family only. 

Multi-family dwelling 1s a dwelling used or intended to be used or oc- 
cupied as a residence by three or more families. 


EXAMPLES OF BAD DEFINITIONS 


The following definitions are also copied from ordinances. These 
are probably harmful. 


A lot is a parcel of land under one ownership, the location, dimensions 
and boundaries of which are determined by the latest official record. 

A corner lot is a lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more 
intersecting streets. 

Alley: A public or privately owned thoroughfare less than twenty-four 
feet in width. 

Business: The purchase, sale or storage, or other transaction involving 
the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity. It 
also includes advertising signs, billboards, office and recreational or amuse- 
ment enterprises conducted for private profit. 

Street or Public Street: Includes all lands established by dedication, 
use, or act of the Common Council, or laid out upon the City Map as 
highways, and shall be synonymous with roads, avenues, alleys, parkways, 
or terraces and other terms commonly applied to public highways. 

Retail Store: Any building or structure in which one or more articles 
of merchandise or commerce are sold. 


THE WorpD “ PREMISES” 


The word “premises”? was introduced in the New York City 
building zone resolution in provisions such as “no building or prem- 


190 


DEFINITIONS IN THE ORDINANCE 


ises shall be used.”’ It would have been better to use the word 
“land.” “Premises” has been copied in many ordinances and is 
always understood to mean land. 


1N. Y.—Borgeaud v. Fassler, 153 Misc. 546, 274 N. Y. S. 599 (1934) 
Monument Garage Corp. v. Levy, 149 Misc. 791, 268 N. Y. S. 213, 266 N. Y. 
339, 194 N. E. 848 (1935) 
City of New York v. Off-Streets Parking, Inc., 153 Misc. 150, 274 N. Y. S. 562, 
affd. 242 App. Div. 767, 275 N. Y. S. 334 (1934) 
People v. Jones, City Magistrate’s Court, First District, Borough of Queens, 


October 8, 1931 


IQI 


GAP geal 
PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


other buildings and uses. Except for that division the different 

buildings and uses are considered without any effort to group 
them. The author hopes that framers of zoning ordinances, and 
city attorneys in interpreting the text of such ordinances, will be 
helped by this discussion. 


iP this concluding chapter residences are first discussed and then 


RESIDENCES 
One-Family Detached Residences 


In New York City there is only one kind of residence use district. 
Consequently a one-family detached or attached residence, a 
two-family detached or attached residence, or a multi-family 
house may be erected in any residence district. The area regula- 
tions, however, by prescribing dimensions of yards and fixing a 
percentage for lot coverage cause a segregation of open-develop- 
ment types like one-family and two-family detached residences. 
The framers of the building zone resolution considered that the 
courts might not recognize a difference so far as health and safety 
were concerned between a detached one-family house and a de- 
tached two-family house. It was feared that the courts might de- 
clare that a two-family house on a large lot was as safe and as 
healthful as a one-family house on a small lot.1. This precaution 
was generally observed in the eastern part of this country. Early 
pressure for one-family detached-residence districts was strong in 
the west and on the Pacific coast. The courts after the Euclid 
decision were so inclined to uphold zoning that minor distinctions 
were swept aside. One-family detached-residence districts are now 
commonly employed.?, They are considered a subdivision of the 


1 Vernon v. Mayor & Council of Westfield, 98 N. J. L. 600, 124 A. 248 (1923) 


2 Cal.—Blumenthal & Co. v. Cryer, 71 Cal. A. 668, 236 P. 216 (1925) 
Miller v. Board of Public Works of Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 477, 234 P. 381 (1925) 
Colo.—Spiegleman v. Williams, District Court, Denver, May 6, 1929 
Footnote continued on page 193. 


192 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


field of use regulation, and are upheld because by and large they 
conserve open-development localities. 


Two-Family Detached Residences 


These are detached houses generally arranged for two families, 
one above the other. In an ordinance recognizing more than one 
kind of one-family detached-residence districts, differing from one 
another in respect to required yard dimensions, it is considered 
imprudent to fix smaller required yards for a two-family detached- 
residence district than are fixed for the lowest one-family detached- 
house district. Where a limitation of number of families per acre, 
or a required number of square feet per family is imposed, a one- 
family detached house should not be required to have a larger 
lot than a two-family detached house in the same district.! 


One-Family Semi-Detached Residences 


These are commonly built in pairs, a party wall separating each 
residence from the other. The rule should be one main building 
toa lot. Therefore it is not good practice to provide that two such 
houses can be built on one lot. As there are two main houses 
there should be two lots. The ordinance should require one side 
yard for each house. 


Two Family Semi-Detached Residences 


These are commonly two distinct houses separated by a party 
wall, each arranged for two families, one above the other. The 
ordinance should require one side yard for each house. 


Footnote continued from page 192. 
Ill.—Bjork v. Safford, 333 Ill. 355, 164 N. E. 699 (1928) 
Village of Riverside v. Reagan, 270 Ill. A. 355 (1933) 
Village of Western Springs v. Bernhagen, 326 III. 100, 156 N. E. 753 (1927) 
Mass.—Brett v. Building Commissioner of Brookline, 250 Mass. 73, 145 N. E. 269 
(1924) 
N. J.—Handy v. Village of South Orange, 118 A. 838 (1922) 
Kitay v. Quigley, 6 N. J. Misc. 623, 142 A. 427 (1928) 
Vernon v. Mayor & Council of Westfield, 98 N. J. L. 600, 124 A. 248 (1923) 
N. Y.—Reilly v. Carteright, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York 
Law Journal, April 10, 1935 


1 Merrill v. City of Wheaton, 356 Ill. 457, 190 N. E. 918 (1934) 
193 


ZONING 


One-Family Attached Residences 

These are sometimes called row houses and sometimes block 
houses. Each is commonly separated from the next house on 
either side by a party wall. The ordinance will not require any 
side yard. 


Two-Family Attached Residences 

These are attached houses arranged for two families, usually 
one above the other, each house being separated from the next 
one on either side by a party wall. The ordinance will not require 
any side yard. 


Group Residence Units 

In a residence district it is sometimes desired to allow a group 
of one-family units, some of which shall be separated by unpierced 
walls, the end units having side yards. It is improper to call this 
arrangement “community dwellings’ because if each unit is a 
separate dwelling, some will have side yards and some will have 
none. It is not only difficult to make provision for such yards in 
the ordinance, but if it is made it violates the statutory require- 
ment of uniformity within a district. An existing definition 
declares that a “group dwelling is a building consisting of a series 
of noncommunicating one-family sections having a common wall 
between each two adjacent sections.” 


Multi-Family Houses 

The practice is almost universal for municipalities to call a 
residence for more than two families a multi-family house. It is 
usually allowed in the densest residence district. In New York 
City it is allowed in every height, area, and use district. In some 
area districts in that city a large lot would be required, and it is 
therefore usually unprofitable to build. Experience has shown that 
the useful life of a multi-family house is increased if it occupies 
less than 50 percent of the lot. Dark rooms should be prevented 
by the zoning regulations. Multi-family houses may lawfully be 
1 Westchester Housing Corp. v. Bunnell, 130 Misc. 586, 224 N. Y. S. 326, 131 Misc. 

251,227 NAYS; 350 (1027) 
194 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


excluded from open development districts... Many municipalities 
consider that home ownership is encouraged by the prevention of 
such houses. 


OTHER BUILDINGS AND USES 
Boarding Houses 


A boarding house has for its main use the taking and care of 
boarders. It is allowed in every residence district in New York 
City. Many municipalities exclude it from residence districts hav- 
ing the largest yards and permit it in multi-family house districts.” 
Some exclude it from every residence district on the ground that 
it is conducting a business. Taking boarders should be considered 
a proper accessory use in a residence district where the main use 
of the house is its occupation by the family of the person taking 
the boarders. In such a case there should be no display sign. It 
should not be called a restaurant, for conducting a restaurant isa 
main use and is a business. 


Rooming Houses 


A rooming house has for its main use the taking and care of 
roomers. A rooming house is more generally excluded from resi- 
dence districts than a boarding house. Roomers may be taken in 
a private home, however, so long as the practice is incidental to 
the main use of the house. 

If the ordinance does not allow a rooming house in a residence 
district, it will be prohibited as a business.* 


1 Jnd.—Dollman v. Osbon, Marion Circuit Court, Indianapolis, May 3, 1928 
Mass.—Bianchi v. Commissioner of Public Buildings of Somerville, 279 Mass. 
136, 181 N. E. 120 (1932) 
N. Y.—Fox Meadow Estates, Inc. v. Culley, 233 App. Div. 250, 252 N. Y. S. 178, 
affd. 261 N. Y. 506, 185 N. E. 714 (1933) 
Ohio— Dantzig v. Durant, 21 Ohio Law Reporter 395 (1923) 
Koch v. City of Toledo, 37 F. (2d) 336 (1930) 
Morris v. East Cleveland, 22 Ohio N. P. (N S.) 549, 31 Ohio Dec. 98, 197 (1920) 
Okl.—De Lano v. City of Tulsa, 26 F. (2d) 640 (1928) 
2 Conn.—Osborn v. Town of Darien, 119 Conn. 182, 175 A. 578 (1934) 
N. J.—Downs v. Borough of Sea Bright, 12 N. J. Misc. 11, 169 A. 342 (1933) 
N. Y.—Phillips v. Batista, City Court, New Rochelle, July 11, 1930 
8 Hicks v. Stoermer, Supreme Court, Kings County, N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
December 29, 1928 


195 


ZONING 


Hotels 

A hotel in zoning regulations is not synonymous with a com- 
mon law inn. It may be what we call a family hotel or an apart- 
ment hotel. In New York City a hotel having thirty or more 
sleeping rooms is allowed in all residence districts. In many munici- 
palities hotels are excluded from residence districts having the 
largest required yards, and are permitted in multi-family house 
districts and business districts. The tendency to force hotels into 
multi-family house districts and business districts is open to objec- 
tion.! Travelers should be furnished with a quiet place to sleep if 
they want it. The attractiveness of many municipalities would be 
increased if a hotel could be built on a quiet street. It would be 
lawful to require larger yards than residences. 


Schools 


The building zone resolution of New York City allows schools, 
whether public or private, in every residence district. A few 
municipalities have endeavored to exclude them from residence 
districts having the largest required yards. It would seem unrea- 
sonable to force schools into business districts where there is noise 
and congestion and where land is most expensive. To force them 
into the more congested residence districts is equally unreasonable. 
Zoning ought not to be employed to free the highest-class residence 
district from every use that may be considered objectionable. The 
children of such a district should properly go to school in that 
district. The police power should not be invoked to deflect them 
into a neighborhood of smaller homes.? A zoning ordinance can- 
not take away from a municipality its right to locate a public 
building where it is needed. Nevertheless, if a municipality makes 
zoning regulations, it ought in fairness to observe them in its own 
new buildings. A private school operated for gain, being a form of 
business, can be excluded lawfully from residential districts by a 
specific provision to that effect in the ordinance. On the other 
hand, it would seem unreasonable to exclude a private school not 
i ene ats of Buildings of Cambridge, 270 Mass. 436, 170 N. E. 412 

1930 
2D. ue ade Ph of District of Columbia v. Shannon & Luchs Const. Co., 


57 App. D. C. 67, 17 F. (2d) 219 (1927) 
Ore.—Roman Catholic Archbishop v. Baker, 140 Ore. 600, 15 P. (2d) 391 (1932) 


196 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


conducted for gain. Such a school would be within the class 
of churches, hospitals, and other institutions not conducted for 
gain, and usually exempted from taxation. Landowners near 
schools often petition to have their locality changed from 
residence to business so that they can build stores near the school. 
It is a mistake to make the change. Schools should so far as 
possible be somewhat removed from stores and heavy traffic.! 
Larger yards may lawfully be required for a school than for 
residences. 


Dormitories 


A dormitory ought to be allowed as a matter of right in every 
residence district where a private school is allowed. A dormitory 
is not a school building. Neither is it a club or fraternity house. 
Therefore it is prudent to specify it in the ordinance.” It is lawful 
to require larger yards than for residences. 


Fraternity Houses 


Where the ordinance does not specifically exclude a fraternity 
house from a residence district, it will usually be permitted.? This 
is true even in a one-family detached-house residential district. A 
fraternity is often included in the definition of family. A frater- 
nity house may, however, be specifically excluded from a one- 
family detached-house district on the ground that it has features 
that are harmful in such districts. 


Libraries 


New York City allows a library in residence districts of every 
type, without specifying whether it is a public or private library. 
Consequently in that city a private circulating library conducted 


1 Commissioners of District of Columbia v. Shannon & Luchs Const. Co., ante 
2 Western Theological Seminary v. City of Evanston, 325 Ill. 511, 156 N. E. 778, 
331 Ill. 257, 162 N. E. 863 (1928) 
3 Neb.—City of Lincoln v. Logan-Jones, 120 Neb. 827, 235 N. W. 583 (1931) 
Pettis v. Alpha Alpha Chapter of Phi Beta Pi, 115 Neb. 525, 213 N. W. 835 
(1927) 
N. Y.—City of Syracuse v. Snow, 123 Misc. 568, 205 N. Y. S. 785 (1924) 
Pa.—Appeal of Thompson, Court of Common Pleas, Allegheny County, October 
Term, 1925, and June 29, 1926 


197 


ZONING 


for gain could be operated in a residence district. It is customary 
in all states to provide for libraries in this manner. 


Clubs 

The usual words used to permit clubs in residence districts are 
“clubs excepting clubs the chief activity of which is a service cus- 
tomarily carried on as a business.”” Although a club in a small 
municipality is usually unobjectionable in residence districts, it be- 
comes a serious problem in large cities. When a business such as 
a restaurant, night club, concert hall, or bathing beach, seeks to 
invade a residence district, it usually does so in the guise of a club. 
The word club is extremely comprehensive. A singing club with 
its accompaniments may be far more objectionable in a residence 
district than a retail store.! 


Community Houses 

Small municipalities, especially in the suburbs, often feel the need 
of a meeting place where lectures and amateur plays can be given, 
where citizens’ organizations can meet, and where public meetings 
on occasions can be held. It is not a club house. Experience has 
shown that it is best located in a residence district. It ought to 
have the advantage of quiet surroundings. 


Hospitals 
No use provided for in zoning ordinances has undergone more 
vicissitudes than the non-profit operation of hospitals. These in- 
stitutions have been founded to conserve the health of human be- 
ings and yet communities seek to exclude them from residence 
districts and even business districts on the ground that they are 
injurious to the health and safety of the community. Although the 
sick need sunshine and quiet some officials would force hospitals 
into industrial districts. Sometimes municipalities exclude them 
1N. Y.—McCarter v. Beckwith, 247 App. Div. 289, 285 N. Y. S. 151, affd. 272 
N. Y. 488, 3 N. E. (2d) 882 (1936) 
Neuschaefer v. Apawamis Beach Corp., Supreme Court, Westchester County, 
New York Law Journal, July 31, 1934 
City of New Rochelle v. Beckwith, City Court, New Rochelle, Westchester Law 
Journal, August 18, 1933, 268 N. Y. 315, 197 N. E. 295 (1935) 


Sharp v. Dalton, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
March 1, 1928, 224 App. Div. 663, 228 N. Y. S. 899 (1928) 


198 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


from all residence districts and sometimes only from the most open 
ones. They should be allowed as a matter of right in the sunniest 
and most healthful localities. Ample grounds can be required by 
the ordinance. Inasmuch as a hospital is in a different class of 
buildings from residences, the rule of uniformity within a district 
does not demand the same yard requirements for both. Every 
state should establish a department having power after a public 
hearing to fix the location of hospitals not operated for gain. It 
is probably unreasonable for a zoning ordinance to exclude such in- 
stitutions from all districts.1_ However, the courts upheld the ex- 
clusion of a mental health hospital from a village in New York.? A 
hospital conducted for gain and not authorized by a state certificate 
can be specifically excluded from a residence district on the ground 
that it is a business. 

Hospitals are also discussed in Chapter IV, under Humanitarian 
Institutions. 


Sanitariums 

The building zone resolution of New York City allows a sani- 
tarium in any residence district. A sanitarium differs from a hos- 
pital in that it is frequently conducted for gain whereas hospitals 
are usually public or else not conducted for gain. It is probably 
lawful for the ordinance to exclude a sanitarium conducted for gain 
from a residence district on the ground that it is a form of business. 
The question arises, however, whether it is wise to do this. A sani- 
tarium should be in one of the most open and least congested local- 
ities. Larger surrounding yards can be lawfully required than for 
a residence in the same district. 


Asylums or Homes 


The word “asylum” is a generic term, covering a retreat for 
orphans, old people, or incurables. It is a term which for obvious 


1Cal.—Jardine v. City of Pasadena, 199 Cal. 64, 248 P. 225 (1926) 
Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 286 P. 161, 211 Cal. 304, 295 P. 14 (1930) 
San Diego Tuberculosis Ass’n v. City of East San Diego, 186 Cal. 252, 200 P. 
393 (1921) 
Bene, and Council of Wilmington v. Turk, 14 Del. Ch. 392, 129 A. 512 
1925 
2 Jewish Mental Health Society v. Village of Hastings, 268 N. Y. 458, 198 N. E. 30, 
56 S. Ct. 592 (1936) 


199 


ZONING 


reasons is gradually giving way to the less objectionable term 
“Home.” Such an institution is usually public or else not con- 
ducted for gain. It cannot properly be excluded from any zoning 
district. It would seem unreasonable to force it into a business 
district where there is noise and where land values are high. It is 
equally unreasonable to force it into a congested or closely built 
residence district. Larger yards can lawfully be required than for 
a residence in the same district. If the institution is operated for 
profit it may be specifically excluded from a residence district.” 

Institutions of this type are also discussed in Chapter IV, under 
Humanitarian Institutions. 


Churches 


Practically all zoning ordinances allow churches in all residence 
districts.2 It would be unreasonable to force them into business 
districts where there is noise and where land values are high, or 
into dense residence districts (in cities which have established sev- 
eral kinds of such districts). Some people claim that the numerous 
churchgoers crowd the street, that their automobiles line the curbs, 
and that the music and preaching disturb the neighbors. Commun- 
ities that are too sensitive to welcome churches should protect 
themselves by private restrictions. 


Greenhouses 


A greenhouse is always allowable in a residence district as an 
accessory building or use. The question sometimes arises whether 
it is necessary to allow it as a main building in such a district. 


U, aie Title Trust Co. v. Roberge, 278 U. S. 116, 49 S. Ct. 50 (Wash., 
1928 
oh A Kansas City St. Andrews Soc. v, Kansas City, 58 F. (2d) 593 
1932 
. Y.—Mineola Home for Cardiac Children v. Village of Irvington, Supreme 
Court, Westchester County, January 3, 1925 
City of Rochester v. Rochester Girls’ Home, 194 N. Y. S. 236 (1922) 


2 City of Yonkers v. Horowitz, 222 App. Div. 297, 226 N. Y. S. 252 (1928) 


8 }1].—Phelps v. Board of Appeals of Chicago, 325 Ill. 625, 156 N. E. 826 (1927) 
Ore.— Kroner v. City of Portland, 116 Ore. 141, 240 P. 536 (1925) 
W. Va.—Howell v. Meador, 109 W. Va. 368, 154 S. E. 876 (1930) 

4 lowa—Call Bond & Mortgage Co. v, Sioux City, 219 Iowa 572, 259 N. W. 33 (1935) 
N. J.—De Vito v. Pearsall, 115 N. J. L. 323, 180 A. 202 (1935) 
N. ¥.—Jewell v. Murphy, 224 App. Div. 763, 229 N. Y. S. 754 (1928) 


200 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


The criticism is made that when a greenhouse is a main building 
it is nearly always conducted as a business. Frequently, however, 
it is a main building, standing on its own lot, and although used 
for the commercial production of flowers and plants it is not a 
place of merchandising. It needs to be in an open sunny locality. 
Forcing it into a business district is usually tantamount to prohi- 
bition. New York City has always allowed it in all residence dis- 
tricts. Some municipalities have allowed it in residence districts 
with a proviso that there should be no display signs and no sales 
at retail on the premises. 


Stores 


A store is always excluded from a residence district. Attempts 
have been made to distinguish between wholesale and retail stores, 
but probably wholesale stores cannot lawfully be segregated from 
retail stores by zoning. It is difficult if not impossible to show the 
courts that one sort is different from the other in its relation to the 
health and safety of the community. Vehicular street traffic con- 
nected with a large retail department store is as burdensome as 
that of any wholesale store. The retail zoning district in New 
York City is a misnomer, for the district is available for wholesale 
and retail stores equally. It was chosen as a name in contradis- 
tinction to light industry. A better name would have been mer- 
chandising district. If a store is permitted in a business district, 
the kind of merchandising can be changed without obtaining a 
new consent or permit from the municipality. For instance, it 
may be rented for a grocery store and later for a dry goods store. 
This is not a change of use. However, boards of appeals in mak- 
ing variances often impose as a condition the prohibition of certain 
more objectionable forms of merchandising, such as the sale of 
delicatessen or fish. 


Office Buildings 
Offices are not as objectionable in a residence district as stores, 
Goods are sold in stores but not in offices. On this account munici- 
palities are often tempted to allow an office building in a residence 
district. An early board of appeals in New York City made the 
mistake of passing a rule that an office building for architects or 
201 


ZONING 


doctors could be built in a residence district. The rule was aban- 
doned after a short period. Hartford has allowed large life insur- 
ance buildings in residence districts but has required large yards. 
Public utility buildings like telephone exchanges tend to become 
office buildings by increasing office uses. National fraternal organi- 
zations sometimes erect club houses in residence districts and 
gradually use them for office purposes. The danger in allowing 
these business uses in residence districts is that a neighboring land- 
owner will claim the right to use his land for business also. The 
courts may support his claim that the refusal of a permit is dis- 
criminatory. Boards of appeals in making variances for a building 
which is to serve as a buffer between residence and business dis- 
tricts can impose a condition that the building shall be used for 
offices on the first floor and residences above. This method is 
commendable in certain border-line cases. 


Personal Service Shops 


It is discriminatory to exclude personal service shops from busi- 
ness districts. They are no more objectionable than stores. Ordi- 
nances sometimes enumerate barber shops, beauty parlors, valets, 
and shoe polishing stands as allowable in business districts. It is 
better to use the designation “‘personal service shop”’ because in an 
enumeration some necessary and proper shop may be omitted. 


Laundries 


From the beginning of zoning the laundry has been a trouble- 
some kind of use for municipalities to control... It can assume 
many forms—the laundry package delivery office, the small hand 
laundry, and the large machine laundry. The delivery office is 
usually allowed in every business district, and the machine laundry 
in every industrial district, being excluded, however, from a busi- 
ness district. The small hand laundry always seeks a place in a 
business district and its neighbors often try to relegate it to an 
industrial district. Some municipalities have allowed it in a busi- 
ness district if not more than a specified small number of workers 
are employed. 

Before modern zoning was established several laundry cases 


1 Williams v. Blue Bird Laundry Co., 85 Cal. A. 388, 259 P. 484 (1927) 
202 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


arose in California! The opinions in these cases assisted in the 
framing of later laws. 


Storage Warehouses 

In most large cities a storage warehouse is allowed in business 
districts. Small cities frequently try to exclude it. The reasons 
usually given for exclusion are the frequency of trucks, and the 
unused character of the frontage which makes a dead spot on a 
business street and indirectly affects its attractiveness at that point. 
As a matter of fact a warehouse does not cause greater frequency 
of trucks than a store. The exclusion is mainly because of the crea- 
tion of a dead spot. Although a storage warehouse may affect 
attractiveness and land value it is difficult to see how it can affect 
the community health, safety, comfort, and general welfare more 
injuriously than a store. It would seem to be discriminatory to 
exclude a storage warehouse from any business district. Out-of- 
doors storage is usually prohibited in residence districts. The 
nature of the goods stored in business districts has been discussed 
by courts.? 


Lumber Yards 

In many municipalities a lumber yard is excluded from business 
districts. In the original building zone resolution of New York 
City it was allowed in such districts. Later an amendment exclud- 
ing it was urged by merchants who claimed that it introduced a 
fire risk. They failed to prove, however, that the risk was greater 
than in the case of a store. The real reason was probably the im- 
pression of merchants and landowners that an undesirable neighbor 
could be excluded by zoning. It is difficult to see how a lumber 
yard harms the health or safety of the community more than a 
store.2 This statement does not refer to a planing mill or to wood- 


1U. S.—Barbier v. Connolly, 113 U. S. 27, 5 S. Ct. 357 (Cal., 1885) 
Cal.—Ex parte Quong Wo, 161 Cal. 220, 118 P. 714 (1911) 
Sam Kee v. Wilde, 41 Cal. A. 528, 183 P. 164 (1919) 
2N. J.—Adelmann v. Williams, 10 N. J. Misc. 324, 159 A. 148 (1932) 
N. Y.—Matter of Meadowmere Ass’n, Inc., Supreme Court Nassau County, New 
York Law Journal, August 17, 1932 
Ohio—City Ice & Fuel Co. v. Stegner, 120 Oh. St. 418, 166 N. E. 226 (1929) 
Pa.— Kiddy’s Appeal, 294 Pa. 209, 143 A. 909 (1928) 
8 Cal.— Magruder v. Redwood City, 203 Cal. 665, 265 P. 806 (1928) 
N. J.—Durkin Lumber Co. v. Fitzsimmons, 106 N. J. L. 183, 147 A. 555 (1929) 
N. C.—Turner v. City of New Bern, 187 N. C. 541, 122 S. E. 469 (1924) 


203 


ZONING 


working machinery which may be connected with the lumber yard. 
If the lumber yard is conducted as an industry it should be excluded 
from a business district. Exceptional situations have come before 
the courts.! 


Coal Yards 

Coal yards were permitted in business districts in the building 
zone resolution of New York City. At the same time that efforts 
were made to exclude lumber yards from such districts an amend- 
ment was introduced to exclude coal yards and coal pockets. It 
was shown that there arefeatures of dust and noise that differentiate 
a lumber yard from a coal yard. On this account the amendment 
excluding coal yards was passed. Throughout the country such 
exclusion is customary.’ 


Stables 

An accessory stable for not more than a specified number of 
horses is usually permitted in a residence district. A large stable 
as a main building is usually permitted only in an industrial 
district.’ 


Garages 

The increasing need for garages in modern times was undoubtedly 
one reason for the rapid spread of use zoning. Before the adoption 
of zoning every residence and business locality was wide open to 
invasion by the public garage. Sometimes an entire block of houses 
was made undesirable by the advent of a single large garage. Zoning 
ordinances have been especially helpful in this matter. The ac- 
cessory private garage is always permitted in residence districts.‘ 
In New York City it formerly could not accommodate more than 
1 Gilfillan’s Permit, 291 Pa. 358, 140 A. 136 (1927) 


2 Mass.—Cochran v. Roemer, 287 Mass. 500, 192 N. E. 58 (1934) 
Okl.—Oklahoma City v. Dolese, 48 F. (2d) 734 (1931) 
3 Cal.—Boyd v. City of Sierra Madre, 41 Cal. A: 520, 183 P. 230 (1919) 
Parker v. Colburn, 196 Cal. 169, 236 P. 921 (1925) 
Ryan v. Andriano, 91 Cal. A. 136, 266 P. 831 (1928) 
Ill.—Gammon Co. v. Standard Trust & Savings Bank, 327 Ill. 489, 158 N. E. 810 


(1927) 
Md.—Enhrhardt v. Board of Zoning Appeals, City Court, Baltimore, Baltimore 
Daily Record, October 29, 1924 
4N. J.—Allen v. City of Paterson, 98 N. J. L. 661, 121 A. 610, 99 N. J. L. 532, 124 A. 
924 (1924) ; 
Belasco v. Mayor, etc., of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 1088, 143 A. 820 (1928) 


Footnote continued on page 205. 


204 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


five cars. Experience showed that this number should have been 
three with the privilege of renting space for one car. This change 
has now been made. In New York City a garage for more than 
five cars may be built as a matter of right in an unrestricted dis- 
trict and nowhere else. Provision is made in the resolution, how- 
ever, that the Board of Appeals may permit a garage for more than 
five cars in a business district if on the same street between two 
intersecting streets there was a garage for more than five cars when 
the building zone resolution went into effect in 1916, and in either 
a residence or business district if the acknowledged consents of the 
owners of 80 percent of the frontage affected are filed with the 
Board of Appeals.! In either case the Board of Appeals must hold 
a hearing and approve or disapprove. The result of the first rule 
has been that in business districts garages have tended to locate in 
eroups, leaving the business street as a whole free from the sporadic 
garage. The result of the second rule has been to allow hidden 
garages or garages set well back from the street in residence dis- 
tricts, especially apartment house districts, where nearby storage of 
private cars is necessary. 

The needs of different municipalities have been shown by their 
different regulations. Some allow a garage in all business districts.? 


Footnote continued from page 204. 
Klein v. Mayor and Aldermen of Jersey City, 4 N. J. Misc. 277, 132.A. 502 
(1926) 
Northern New Jersey Oil Co. v. Board of Adjustment of Newark, 6 N. J. Misc. 
698, 142 A. 557 (1928) 
Pa.—Appeal of Loux, Court of Common Pleas, Northampton County, October 
3, 1927 
Tex.— Woods v. Kiersky, 297 S. W. 518, 14 S. W. (2d) 825 (1929) 
Wis.—Sentinel-News Co. v. City of Milwaukee, 212 Wis. 618, 250 N. W. 511 (1933) 
1N. Y.—Ammanna v. Walsh, 136 Misc. 653, 241 N. Y. S. 252 (1930) 
Cotton v. Leo, 110 Misc. 519, 180 N. Y. S. 554, 194 App. Div. 921, 184 N. Y. S. 
943 (1920) 
Donegan v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
September 20, 1929 
Hacker v. Board of Appeals of Buffalo, 223 App. Div. 196, 227 N. Y. S. 627 
(1928) 
Smith v. Walsh, 211 App. Div. 205, 207 N. Y. S. 324, 240 N. Y. 606, 148 N. E. 
724 (1925) 
Spinelli v. Walsh, 229 App. Div. 745, 241 N. Y. S. 459, affd. 254 N. Y. 601, 173 
N. E. 884 (1930) 
2 111.—State Bank & Trust Co. v. Village of Wilmette, 358 Ill. 311, 193 N. E. 131 


(1934) 
N. J.—Dickinson v. Inhabitants of Plainfield, 13 N. J. Misc. 260, 176 A. 716, 116 


N. J. L. 336, 184 A. 195 (1936) 
205 


ZONING 


Some apply the name minor garage to a one-story structure in 
which repairs are forbidden and which is allowed in business dis- 
tricts. Some have employed methods of using the board of appeals. 
Open-air parking spaces have been carefully provided for. 

The sale of new cars can be carried on in all business districts. 
Such a store is not a garage.!. The keeping of second-hand dead 
cars for sale in business districts has been prohibited in some ordi- 
nances but this prohibition would seem to be of doubtful validity. 

The usual garage is also a repair shop, and as a form of industry 
it can reasonably be excluded from a business district. The garage 
proper is merely a covered storage place for cars. New York City 
has always distinguished between these two uses and has not al- 
lowed a garage to become a repair shop as a matter of right. 

The New York City building zone resolution provided that in 
any district a public garage should not be permitted within two 
hundred feet of a school or hospital. This regulation is illogical be- 
cause it is the same for all districts whereas all the other regulations 
of the ordinance vary for the several districts. This one should 
have been part of the building code for a regulation which operates 
uniformly throughout the city should not be placed in a zoning 
ordinance. But inasmuch as it depends on the police power, and 
can be enforced the same as the other regulations, the courts have 
found no fault with it. Other cities have copied it, applying it to 
gasoline stations as well as garages, and many courts have passed 
favorably upon it.2, Sometimes it has been used to protect churches 
and theatres against nearby garages and filling stations. 


1 Appeal of Alpern, 291 Pa. 150, 139 A. 740 (1927) 
2 []].—Deitenbeck v. Village of Oak Park, 331 III. 406, 163 N. E. 445 (1928) 
Troy v. Village of Forest Park, 318 Ill. 340, 149 N. E. 281 (1925) 
Ind.—In re White, 95 Ind. A. 579, 180 N. E. 873 (1932) 
Ky.—Cayce v. City of Hopkinsville, 217 Ky. 135, 289 S. W. 223 (1926) 
N. J.—Bauer v. Board of Fire & Police Com’rs of Paterson, 102 N. J. L. 235, 132 
A. 515 (1926) 
Eggie v. Board of Com’rs of Audubon, 6 N. J. Misc. 1094, 143 A. 747 (1928) 
Hartman v. Bigelow, 5 N. J. Misc. 227, 136 A. 201 (1927) 
Interstate Oil Co. v. City of Orange, 11 N. J. Misc. 89, 165 A. 99 (1933) 
Johnston v. Hague, 2 N. J. Misc. 77, 136 A. 407 (1924) 
M. & G. Construction Co. v. Board of Commissioners of Jersey City, 4 N. J. 
Misc. 864, 134 A. 776 (1926) 
Newark Athletic Club v. Board of Adjustment of Newark, 6 N. J. Misc. 528, 
142 A. 923 (1928), 7 N. J. Misc. 55, 144 A. 167 (1929) 
Footnote continued on page 207. 
206 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


An accessory garage for a small number of cars, usually three, 
should not be permitted in a residence district unless the main 
building, ordinarily a home, is already erected or will be erected 
simultaneously. Such a garage is not accessory unless there is a 
main building to which it is accessory.! 

A permit is required in most cities to make a curb cut for a 
garage entrance. Curb-cut permits can doubtless be denied in the 
discretion of the official having authority, but it has been held 
that the cutting of the curb is not in itself a violation of a zoning 
ordinance.” It is a mistake for a city to expect to enforce zoning 
regulations by refusing curb-cut permits. Limitation on curb 
cuts will not control the application of the zoning regulation. 


Footnote continued from page 206. 
fac Ne Be and Common Council of Westwood, 13 N. J. Misc. 771, 180 A. 
559 (1935 
Savitz-Denbigh Co. v. Bigelow, 4 N. J. Misc. 819, 134 A. 557, 5 N. J. Misc. 
533, 137 A. 439, 104 N. J. L. 445, 140 A. 921 (1928) 
Wittkop v. Garner, 4 N. J. Misc. 234, 132 A. 339 (1926) 
-N. Y.—Ain v. Fairchild, Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law Journal, 
July 21, 1932 
Boyd v. Walsh, 217 App. Div. 461, 216 N. Y. S. 242, affd. 244 N. Y. 512, 155 
N. E. 877 (1926) 
Castellano v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
June 7, 1921 
Daleson Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, September 16, 1929 
David Holding Corp. v. Murdock, 150 Misc. 697, 271 N. Y. S. 177, affd. 264 
N. Y. 609, 191 N. E. 588 (1934) 
Drazan v. Moore, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
January 13, 1925 
Edlar Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, July 8, 1930 
Sondern y. Walsh, 108 Misc. 193, 196, 178 N. Y. S. 192, 194 (1919) 
Webkan Holding Corp. v. Walsh, 230 App. Div. 717, 243 N. Y. S. 770 (1929) 
N. C.—Burden v. Town of Ahoskie, 198 N. C. 92, 150 S. E. 808 (1929) 
1N. Y.—Benedict v. Milleman, 128 Misc. 367, 218 N. Y. S. 256 (1926) 
Pa.—Appeal of Loux, Court of Common Pleas, Northampton County, October 3, 
1927 
2N. Y.—Cedar Ave. Realty Co. v. Flynn, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New 
York Law Journal, February 24, 1933 
Monument Garage Corp. v. Levy, 149 Misc. 791, 268 N. Y. S. 213, 266 N. Y. 
339, 194 N. E. 848 (1935) 
3N. Y.—Borgeaud v. Fassler, 153 Misc. 546, 274 N. Y. S. 599 (1934) 
Empire State Lines v. Levy, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, October 1, 1935 
Ganbarg v. Fassler, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law 
Journal, August 12, 1935 
Monument Garage Corp. v. Levy, 149 Misc. 791, 268 N. Y. S. 213, 2660 N. Y. 
339, 194 N. E. 848 (1935) 
Smith v. Levy, 264 N. Y. 575, 191 N. E. 571 (1934) 


207 


ZONING 


Groups of small garages, of a size permissible as main buildings 
in a business district, are tantamount to a single prohibited public 
garage. These were called garage villages in New York City.! 
They have now been brought under control by amendments to 
the building zone resolution. 

Open-air parking places are virtually open-air garages and should 
be subject to the same regulation as garages.2 To treat them 
otherwise is to place an unfair handicap on garage buildings. In 
New York City open-air parking places became prevalent where 
obsolete business structures were torn down. The building zone 
resolution has recently been amended to put such parking places 
on the same basis as garages.* The subject of curb-cut permits 
was analyzed by courts in connection with the establishment of 
open-air parking places.* 

It is discriminatory for a town council to allow some garage 
permits and not others.® 

A garage is not a nuisance per se.® 


1Conn,—Blake v. Board of Appeals of Hartford, 117 Conn. 527, 169 A. 195 (1933) 
N. Y.—Ashley v. Walsh, 213 App. Div. 155, 210 N. Y. S. 178, 241 N. Y. 527, 150 
N. E. 540 (1925) 
Lourose Realty Corp. v. Putnam, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, December 7, 1923 
Multiplex Garages, Inc. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York 
Law Journal, June 28, 1924, 213 App. Div. 155, 210 N. Y. S. 178, 241 N. Y. 
527, 150 N. E. 540 (1925) 
sana get Patrick’s Church Corporation v. Daniels, 113 Conn. 132, 154 A. 343 
1931 
N. mCiey & Co. v. Incorporated Village of Garden City, 247 App. Div. 893 
193 
Monument Garage Corp. v. Levy, 266 N. Y. 339, 194 N. E. 848 (1935) 
City of Mt. Vernon v. Travis Realty Corp., Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, New York Law Journal, March 4, 1935, affd. 246 App. Div. 727, 284 
N. Y. S. 1015 (1935) 
Seidman v. Tilrose Camp Operating Co., 153 Misc. 510, 274 N. Y. S. 606 (1932) 
3 People v. Wolfe, Magistrates’ Court, Borough of The Bronx, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, January 30, 1936, affd. 248 App. Div. 721 (1936) 
4N. Y.—Cameron v. Murdock, Supreme Court; Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, July 3, 1936 
Empire State Lines v. Levy, Supreme Court, New York County, New York 
Law Journal, October 1, 1935 
Weil v. Reveille, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
July 7, 1936 
5 N. J.—Keavey v. Randall, 1 N. J. Misc. 311, 122 A. 379 (1923) 
N. Y.—Hoffer v. Schwab, 126 Misc. 289, 213 N. Y. S. 659 (1926) 
6 Mass.—Polish Political Club v. Cloper, 260 Mass. 559, 157 N. E. 705 (1927) 
N. Y.—Rotterdam Holding Co. v. Hunt’s Point Garage Co., Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, New York Law Journal, December 22, 1916 


208 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


Gasoline Filling Stations 


In most municipalities a gasoline filling station is allowed only 
in industrial districts as a matter of right.1. The board of appeals 
is often given discretionary power to permit it as a variance in 
business districts.2 The principles of zoning are not adapted to 
compel the distribution of stations at proper intervals. However 
beneficial this proper distribution would be, specific regulations in 


1 Ala.— Bloch v. McCown, 223 Ala. 348, 135 S. 633 (1931) 
Leary v. Adams, 226 Ala. 472, 147 S. 391 (1933) 
Fla.—Aiken v. E. B. Davis, Inc., 106 Fla. 675, 143 S. 658 (1932) 
Ga.—Reynolds v. Brosnan, 170 Ga. 773, 154 S. E. 264 (1930) 
lowa— Marquis v. City of Waterloo, 210 lowa 439, 228 N. W. 870 (1930) 
Kan.—Simmonds v. Meyn, 134 Kan. 419, 7 P. (2d) 506 (1932) 
Ky.—Cayce v. City of Hopkinsville, 217 Ky. 135, 289 S. W. 223 (1926) 
La.—Giangrosso v. City of New Orleans, 159 La. 1016, 106 S. 549 (1925) 
Manhein v. Harrison, 164 La. 564, 114 S. 159 (1927) 
Me.—Millett v. Hayes & Co., 132 Me. 12, 164 A. 741 (1933) 
N. J.— Keller v. Board of Com’rs of Irvington, 7 N. J. Misc. 977, 147 A. 646 (1929) 
_N. Y.—McNamara v. Bayly, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York 
Law Journal, September 19, 1934 
Ward v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
May 25, 1935, 247 App. Div. 808, 286 N. Y. S. 280 (1936) 
Young Women’s Hebrew Association v. Board of Standards and Appeals, 266 
Dey. 270, 1904.N..E0751; 206 U: S. 537, 56S. Ct. 109 (1935) 
Tex.—Lombardo v. City of Dallas, 47 S. W. (2d) 495 (1932), 124 Tex. 1, 73 S. W. 
(2d) 475 (1934) 
Scott v. Champion Bldg. Co., 28 S. W. (2d) 178 (1930) 
City of Texarkana v. Mabry, 94 S. W. (2d) 871 (1936) 


2 Colo.— Milton v. Azpell, District Court, City and County of Denver, July 2, 1925 
Conn.—Lathrop v. Town of Norwich, 111 Conn. 616, 151 A. 183 (1930) 
N. Y.—Baum v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, April 19, 1935 
Bribitzer v. Bevan, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law 
Journal, December 2, 1935 
Church & 94th St. Realty Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, May 2, 1933 
Eckels v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law Journal, 
September 6, 1933, 242 App. Div. 690, 273 N. Y. S. 401, 265 N. Y. 545, 193 
N. E. 313 (1934) 
Finger v. Connell, Supreme Court, Bronx County, New York Law Journal, 
May 27, 1932 
Garden Properties, Inc. v. Board of Appeals of New Rochelle, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, Westchester Law Journal, October 11, 1933 
Hegarty v. Murdock, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law 
Journal, May 25, 1934 
Jacob Morgenthaler Sons v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Queens County, New 
York Law Journal, May 16, 1935 
Levy v. Board of Standards and Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, April 12, 1934, 243 App. Div. 609, 276 N. Y. S. 370, 267 
N. Y. 347, 196 N. E. 284 (1935) 


Footnote continued on page 210. 


209 


ZONING 


the ordinance are not a proper means for its accomplishment.! 
The refusal of a variance permit by a board of appeals, however, 
is sometimes based on the fact of oversupply. It is difficult to 
justify this because it involves discrimination. On the other hand, 
courts recognize a considerable degree of latitude in the exercise 
of discretion by a board of appeals. If stations are on three cor- 
ners it would usually be unduly discriminatory for a board of 
appeals to exclude a station from the remaining corner. Undoubt- 
edly the board can take into account the nearness and location of 
other stations. The exercise of its discretion is necessarily influ- 
enced by every element of the environment.? 


Footnote continued from page 209. 
Matter of Ruth Bond & Mortgage Co. Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, May 2, 1933 
Noviak Hldg. Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York 
Law Journal, August 15, 1934, 243 App. Div. 738, 278 N. Y. S. 118, 268 
N. Y. 715, 198 N. E. 572 (1935) 
Novick Holding Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Queens County, New 
York Law Journal, May 16, 1935, 246 App. Div. 745, 283 N. Y. S. 762 (1935) 
128 32d St., B’klyn, Corp. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, March 20 & March 28, 1934 
Proc Bldg. Corp. v. Connell, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, March 11, 1933, 240 App. Div. 782, 266 N. Y. S. 903, affd. 264 N. Y. 
513, 191 N. E. 541 (1934) 
Rindfleisch v. Bayly, Supreme! Court, Westchester County, Westchester Law 
Journal, August 9, 1933, 242 App. Div. 797, 275 N. Y. S. 657 (1934) 
Ruth Bond & Mort. Co. v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, October 29, 1935 
St. Albans-Springfield Corporation v. Connell, 257 N. Y. 73, 177 N. E. 313 (1931) 
Okl.—Weaver v. Bishop, 174 Okl. 492, 52 P. (2d) 853 (1935) 
Pa.—Franklin Street Methodist Episcopal Church v. Crystal Oil & Gas Co., 309 
Pa. 357, 163 A. 910 (1932) 
Walker v. Delaware County Trust Co., 314 Pa. 257, 171 A. 458 (1934) 
Tex.—City of San Antonio v. Zogheib, 70 S. W. (2d) 333 (1934) 
i aay Vv. seat Council of South Toms River, 13 N. J. Misc. 852, 181 A. 630 
1935 
2N. J.—Hirschorn v. Castles, 113 N. J. L. 277, 174 A. 211 (1934) 
N. Y.—Village of Babylon v. Freund, Supreme Court, Suffolk County, New York 
Law Journal, March 25, 1935 
Bribitzer v. Bevan, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York Law 
Journal, January 18, 1936 
Cohen v. Murdock, Supreme Court, Queens County, New York Law Journal, 
May 11, 1935 
Gilmont Corp. v. Rogers, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New York 
Law Journal, June 8, 1935 
Scoland Bldg. Corp. v. Board of Standards & Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, New York Law Journal, January 27, 1934 
Werner v. Walsh, 212 App. Div. 635, 209 N. Y. S. 454, affd. 240 N. Y. 6809, 
148 N. E. 760 (1925) 


210 


- — 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


Many statements before made regarding garages, and also many 
of the court decisions cited, apply equally to gasoline stations. 

A gasoline station needed in a park or parkway to supply 
pleasure cars is a lawful recreational use.! 

Regulations preventing stations within a certain distance of 
schools and churches have usually been upheld.? 


Restaurants 


A restaurant is a business.? Constant efforts are made to invade 
residence districts with restaurants as a main use. A boarding 
house permitted in a residence district cannot lawfully exhibit an 
exterior sign marked restaurant. A club allowed in a residence 
district can operate what in common parlance is called a restau- 
rant, but it must be incidental only. The club must not exhibit 
an exterior restaurant sign. This would be an invitation to the 
public to use the tables, and would cause the accessory use to come 
to an end. The restaurant would constitute a business and could 
be ousted on complaint of a neighbor. 


Public Utility Buildings 

This term includes railroad stations, transformer stations, power 
plants, water pumping plants, water towers, telephone exchanges, 
and similar buildings. The peculiarity of each of these is that the 
building as well as the site is affected with a public interest, and 
the site is often determined by the system of distribution. A water 
tower can be low if on a hill. A telephone exchange seeks the site 
of the wire center. The site of a railroad station is often fixed by 
matters of grade, track tangents, and accessibility. Each may 
properly be excluded from a residence district and some from a 


1 Village of Peekskill v. State Department, Supreme Court, Westchester County, 
N. Y., July, 1932 
2 Md.— Kramer v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 166 Md. 324, 171 A. 70 
(1934) 
Pa.—Duty v. Vacuum Oil Co., 317 Pa. 15, 175 A. 522 (1934) 
Wis.—Newman v. Pagels, 212 Wis. 475, 250 N. W. 430 (1933) 
3 Neb.—City of Lincoln v. Foss, 119 Neb. 666, 230 N. W. 592 (1930) 
N. Y.—People v. Milray Corp., Municipal Term of Court of Special Sessions, 
Part I, July 11, 1928, affd. 225 App. Div. 860, 233 N. Y. S. 860 (1929) 
Stockton Tea Room, Inc. v. Copeland, Supreme Court, New York County, 
New York Law Journal, April 19, 1922 
Whitridge v. Park, 100 Misc. 367, 165 N. Y. S. 640, 179 App. Div. 884 (1917) 


211 


ZONING 


business district, but if such exclusion conflicts with public needs, 
the zoning regulation must give way. Boards of appeals have 
power to grant variance permits in proper cases and it is remark- 
able how uniformly throughout the country they have recognized 
public needs in this regard. The public utility building may be 
excluded from residence districts because it is a business or indus- 
try; ordinarily it should not be allowed in such districts as a 
matter of right. If it were allowed there the owners, with no public 
justification whatever for the invasion, might locate it where it 
would do great injury to the district. The only reason for the 
invasion might be that the utility company could save a few 
dollars by buying its lot in a residence district instead of in the 
business district. Practically all ordinances allow railroad passen- 
ger stations in residence districts. Some ordinances allow telephone 
exchanges in certain residence districts, if they are without office 
and industrial accessories. 

In proper cases permits for nonconforming public utility build- 


ings will be allowed as variances by boards of appeals. Sometimes — 


the ordinance provides for the granting of the variance under an 
item of original jurisdiction, but where there is no such item in 
the ordinance the variance is sometimes granted under the provi- 
sion of the enabling act for cases of practical difficulty and unneces- 
sary hardship.! 


Public Buildings 

The municipality which ordains should be the first to obey its 
own ordinance. New York City has been scrupulous in doing this 
under the building zone resolution. In proper cases it has applied 
to the Board of Appeals for a variance permit. It amended the 
ordinance so that fire houses are now permissible in residence dis- 
tricts. While comity and fairness should prompt a municipality 
not to do in this regard what it forbids a private citizen from 
doing, yet no zoning ordinance can prevent the municipal, 
state, or federal government from erecting buildings in the form 
and on the site needed by the public.” 


1 Greenwich Gas Co. v. Zoning Board of Appeals of Greenwich, 113 Conn. 684, 155 A. 
850 (1931) 
2 See discussion and cases at page 31. 
212 


ee, 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


Undertaking Establishments 


Nearly every municipality before zoning had one or more mor- 
tuaries in buildings which had been private homes with ample 
grounds surrounded by residences. There was an appropriateness 
in such a location from the point of view of the owner and people 
attending funerals. The neighbors, however, objected. When 
zoning ordinances were adopted, new mortuaries were relegated to 
business districts. However inappropriate a crowded and noisy 
business district may be for funerals, there is no doubt that the 
mortuary is a business. Courts have said that the constant occur- 
rence of funerals produces an atmosphere of depression in residence 
districts. This is especially the case with children, old people, and 
invalids. The courts have rather uniformly upheld the exclusion. 


1 Ala.—White v. Luquire Funeral Home, 221 Ala. 440, 129 S. 84 (1930) 
Ariz.—City of Tucson v. Arizona Mortuary, 34 Ariz. 495, 272 P. 923 (1928) 
Cal.—Brown v. City of Los Angeles, 183 Cal. 783, 192 P. 716 (1920) 

Ex parte Ruppe, 80 Cal. A. 629, 252 P. 746 (1927) 

Sapiro v. Frisbie, 93 Cal. A. 299, 270 P. 280 (1928) 
Fla.—Skillman v. City of Miami, 101 Fla. 585, 134 S. 541 (1931) 

Stephens v. City of Jacksonville, 103 Fla. 177, 137 S. 149 (1931) 

~ Ga.—McCord v. Ed Bond & Condon Co., 175 Ga. 667, 165 S. E. 590 (1932) 
Ind.—Albright v. Crim, 97 Ind. A. 388, 185 N. E. 304 (1933) 
lowa— Kirk v. Mabis, 215 lowa 769, 246 N. W. 759 (1933) 

Kan.—Fink v. Smith, 140 Kan. 345, 36 P. (2d) 976 (1934) 
La.—Bultman Mortuary Service v. City of New Orleans, 174 La. 360, 140 S. 
503 (1932) 
Md.—Cook v. Howard, 155 Md. 7, 141 A. 340 (1928) 
Jack Lewis, Inc. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, City Court, Balti- 
more Daily Record, June 25, 1932, 164 Md. 146, 164 A. 220, 290 U. S. 585, 
54 S. Ct. 56 (1933) 
Mass.— Building Com’r of Town of Brookline v. McManus, 263 Mass. 270, 160 
N. E. 887 (1928) 
Phillips v. Board of Appeals of Springfield, 286 Mass. 469, 190 N. E. 601 (1934) 
Minn.—Gunderson v. Anderson, 190 Minn. 245, 251 N. W. 515 (1933) 
N. J.—Apter v. City of Newark, 6 N. J. Misc. 554, 142 A. 310 (1928) 
Keiser v. Inhabitants of Plainfield, 10 N. J. Misc. 496, 159 A. 785 (1932) 
N. Y.—Bond v. Cooke, 237 App. Div. 229, 262 N. Y. S. 199 (1932) 
Lovett v. Walsh, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law Journal, 
July 2, 1926, affd. 220 App. Div. 756, 222 N. Y. S. 846 (1927) 
Matter of Fairchild Sons, Inc., Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York 
Law Journal, February 15, 1935, 246 App. Div. 555, 282 N. Y. S. 916 (1935) 
Potter v. Rothschild, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law 
Journal, June 30, 1927 
Okl.—In re Dawson, 136 Okl. 113, 277 P. 226 (1929) 
R. I.—Drabble v. Zoning Board of Review of Providence, 52 R. I. 228, 159 A. 
828 (1932) 
Tenn.—City of Memphis v. Qualls, 16 Tenn. A. 387, 64 S. W. (2d) 548 (1933) 
Spencer-Sturla Co. v. City of Memphis, 155 Tenn. 70, 290 S. W. 608 (1927) 
Tex.— King v. Guerra, 1 S. W. (2d) 373 (1927) 


215 


ZONING 


It is unusual to relegate undertaking establishments to industrial 
districts.? 


Bakery and Confectionery Shops 


From time immemorial small shops for selling baked goods and 
candy made on the premises have existed in business districts. 
Although the industrial feature is prominent, municipalities almost 
uniformly permit such shops in business districts. The danger is 
that the shop may grow to be a large factory. This is frequently 
sought to be prevented by a requirement that the selling shall be 
at retail and on the premises, or by a limitation placed upon the 
number of employees. 


T beatres 


A theatre is a business building and is usually excluded from 
residence districts. A moving picture house is considered to be a 
theatre.” 


Newspaper Printing Offices 

Strictly speaking the newspaper-making establishment is an in- 
dustry and should be excluded from business districts. But because 
of its special needs, one of which is location in the business center, 
it is usually permitted in such districts. This permission was in the 
original building zone resolution of New York City. 


Open-Air Uses 

Amusement parks, fairgrounds, airports, race tracks, stadiums 
and other similar uses of a private nature are classified as business, 
but because large areas are needed, ordinances frequently allow 
them in residence districts on approval of the board of appeals. 
This board will usually impose conditions in the permit. When a 
ball ground is lawfully nonconforming it cannot be compelled to 
obtain an occupancy permit in order to continue, but if it has not 
charged admission fees it cannot begin to do so. By that act it 
1 Matter of Fairchild Sons, Inc., Supreme Court, Nassau County, New York Law 


Journal, February 15, 1935, 246 App. Div. 555, 282 N. Y. S. 916 (1935) 


2 Goelet v. Moss, Supreme Court, New York County, N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
August I, 1936 

’ Brenner v. Ricca, Supreme Court, Westchester County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, July 26, 1935 


214 


a 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


would create a business use. In Jacksonville, Fla., a method that 
cannot be approved was employed to establish a racing course for 
dogs. A special statute was passed for the purpose instead of 
adhering to the provisions of the zoning ordinance.! 

If they are in public parks these open-air uses are allowed in 
residence districts. Public parks are areas devoted by law to rec- 
reation exclusively. This being the case they should not be zoned 
for use. 

Open-air parking places are discussed under “Garages,” p. 204. 


Factories 


A factory is a place where manufacturing is carried on—that is, 
where the form of articles or forces is changed. The development 
of zoning has produced the terms light and heavy industry. Light 
industry—such as the needle trades, weaving, or paper box making 
—often employing women, is differentiated from heavy industry — 
like boiler making, smelting, or iron working—which causes more 
noise, smoke, or fumes. 


Earth-Product Operations 


Zoning cannot be employed to prevent an owner taking earth 
products from his land.? But if his sand pit or quarry is in a 
residence district he may be prevented from treating the product 
in that place. 

Where oil is known to underlie the surface of the land the land- 
owner cannot be prevented from drilling on the ground that the 


1 Landis v. Valz, 117 Fla. 311, 157 S. 651 (1934) 


2 Cal.—People v. Hawley, 272 P. 1076, 207 Cal. 395, 279 P. 136 (1929) 
lowa—Anderson v. Jester, 206 Iowa 452, 221 N. W. 354 (1928) 
N. J.—Lamb v. A. D. McKee, Inc., 10 N. J. Misc. 649, 160 A. 563 (1932) 
N. Y.—Bartsch v. Ragonetti, 123 Misc. 903, 207 N. Y. S. 142, affd. 214 App. Div. 
799, 210 N. Y. S. 825 (1925) 
Cordts v. Hutton Company, 146 Misc. 10, 262 N. Y. S. 539, affd. 266 N. Y. 399, 
195 N. E. 124 (1934) 
Leach v. Kenyon, 146 Misc. 571, 261 N. Y. S. 676 (1933) 
City of New York v. Holzman, Supreme Court, Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, August 7, 1924 
People v. Linabury, 209 N. Y. S. 126 (1924) 
Ventres v. Walsh, 121 Misc. 494, 201 N. Y. S. 226 (1923) 
Ohio—Village of Terrace Park v. Errett, 12 F. (2d) 240 (1926) 
R. I.—Morris v. Zoning Board of Review of Pawtucket, 52 R. I. 26, 155 A. 654 


(1931) 
215 


ZONING 


land is in a residence district on the zoning map.! Although this 
may be stated as a general rule there is a growing tendency to 
recognize exceptional situations.” 

Large wells for water, used in connection with power pumps, 
prevail in California. One decision declares that in a residence dis- 
trict a water company cannot dig large wells, but a city can do so. 


Sawmills 
A carpenter shop with a swing saw is a sawmill.4 


Driveways 

These are sometimes treated as if they were uses of land. It is 
rather evident that a driveway in a residence district leading to a 
garage, gasoline station, or factory in an unrestricted district can 
be harmful. 


1 Cal.—Del Fanta v. Sherman, 107 Cal. A. 746, 290 P. 1087 (1930) 
Tyee seas a Assn. v. City of Huntington Beach, 196 Cal. 211, 237 P. 538 
1925 
2U. S.—Gant v. Oklahoma City (Okla.), 289 U. S. 98, 53 S. Ct. 530 (1933) 
Me caste Land Co. v. City of Los Angeles, 36 F. (2d) 242, 47 F. (2d) 
528 (1931 
Mich.—City of North Muskegon v. Miller, 249 Mich. 52, 227 N. W. 743 (1929) 
Okl.—American Oil & Refining Co. v. Beveridge, 58 P. (2d) 337 (1936) 
Anderson-Kerr, Inc. v. Van Meter, 162 Okl. 176, 19 P. (2d) 1068 (1933) 
Beveridge v. Harper & Turner Oil Trust, 168 Okl. 600, 35 P. (2d) 435 (1934) 
Beveridge v. Westgate Oil Co., 171 Okl. 360, 44 P. (2d) 26 (1935) 
Blevins v. Harris, 172 Okl. 90, 44 P. (2d) 112 (1935) 
Courter Oil Co. v. Oklahoma City, 167 Okl. 633, 31 P. (2d) 596 (1934) 
Cromwell-Franklin Oil Co. v. Oklahoma City, 14 F. Supp. 370 (1930) 
Hubbard v. Oklahoma City, 58 P. (2d) 547 (1936) 
K. & L. Oil Co. v. Oklahoma City, 14 F. Supp. 492 (1936) 
Keaton v. Brown, 171 OKl. 38, 45 P. (2d) 109 (1935) 
Morgan Petroleum Co. v. Oklahoma City, 167 Okl. 632, 31 P. (2d) 594 (1934) 
Reinhart & Donovan Co. v. Refiners’ Production Co., 175 Okl. 522, 53 P. 
(2d) 1116 (1936) 
Van Meter v. H. F. Wilcox Oil & Gas Co., 170 Okl. 604, 41 P. (2d) 904 (1935) 
Van Meter v. Westgate Oil Co., 168 Okl. 200, 32 P. (2d) 719 (1934) 


3 Sunny Slope Water Co. v. City of Pasadena, 1 Cal. (2d) 87, 33 P. (2d) 672 (1934) 
“ Gillespie v. Olena, 258 N. Y. 535, 180 N. E. 321 (1931) 


5 Ind.—In re White, 95 Ind. A. 579, 180 N. E. 873 (1932) 
N. H.—Faulkner v. City of Keene, 85 N. H. 147, 155 A. 195 (1931) 
N. Y.—Village of Great Neck Estates v. Bemak & Lehman, Inc., 223 App. Div. 
853, 228 N. Y. S. 917, affd. 248 N. Y. 651, 162 N. E. 562 (1928) 
Va.—Wood v. City of Richmond, 148 Va. 400, 138 S. E. 560 (1927) 


216 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


Cemeteries 


Cemeteries should ordinarily be allowed in residence districts.! 
It is shocking to the sensibilities of the living to bury their relatives 
in business or industrial districts. Modern cities and villages do 
not establish new cemeteries within their boundaries. Appropriate 
spots in unincorporated areas or in farming communities should 
be selected and these will usually be in residence districts on the 
zoning maps. A crematory has been held to be a cemetery use.” 
In New York the county board of supervisors has exclusive 
authority to determine the location of a cemetery.® 


Gasoline Tanks 


Gasoline tanks usually store a larger amount of gasoline than a 
filling station, and are often subjected to more rigorous regulation.’ 


Skating Rinks 
A skating rink is not a nuisance per se and cannot be excluded 
from an amusement park which Is in a proper district. 


Standard and Miniature Golf Courses 


A miniature golf course will not be permitted under a provision 
for golf courses in residence districts.® 

Standard golf courses are usually permitted in residence districts 
as incidental to country clubs.’ 


1 Kan.—City of Wichita v. Schwertner, 130 Kan. 397, 286 P. 266 (1930) 
Md.—Gordon v. Commissioners of Montgomery County, 164 Md. 210, 164 A. 
676 (1933) 
. Y.—Town of Babylon v. Wellwood Cemetery Ass’n, Inc., Supreme Court, 
Suffolk County, New York Law Journal, November 25, 1935 
Pa.—Fierst v. William Penn Memorial Corporation, 311 Pa. 263, 166 A. 761 (1933) 
2 Moore v. U. S. Cremation Co., 158 Misc. 621, 286 N. Y. S. 639 (1936) 
3 Town of Babylon v. Wellwood Cemetery Ass’n, Inc., Supreme Court, Suffolk 
County, N. Y., New York Law Journal, November 25, 1935 
4N. Y.—Beckmann v. Talbot, 239 App. Div. 835, 264 N. Y. S. 193 (1933) 
Town of Greenburgh v. Secord, Supreme Court, Westchester County, White 
Plains Daily Reporter, May 5, 1928 
Lees v. Cohoes Motor Car Co., 122 Misc. 373, 203 N. Y. S. 65 (1924) 
5 Manos v. City of Seattle, 173 Wash. 662, 24 P. (2d) 91 (1933) 
6 Ala.—Drennen v. Mason, 222 Ala. 652, 133 S. 689 (1931) 
N. Y.—Brebra Realty Corp. v. Cooper, Supreme Court, Westchester County, New 
York Law Journal, August 13, 1930 
7 Golf, Inc. v. District of Columbia, 62 App. D. C. 309, 67 F. (2d) 575 (1933) 


217 


ZONING 


Ice Making and Handling Establishments 


Ordinances properly discriminate among the various methods 
of handling ice.! Stores in business districts often need to handle 
small quantities in their retail trade. Ice storage houses are some- 
times permitted in business districts but more often are restricted 
to industrial districts. Ice making on a commercial scale is an 
industry and should be limited to industrial districts. 


Junk Yards 


Junk yards should be limited to industrial districts. A noted 
junk-yard case caused the downfall of use zoning in St. Louis 
before zoning was reéstablished under a state enabling act.? 


Milk Stations 


Milk bottling and distributing stations are usually excluded 
from business districts. It is evident that there are many varieties 
possible between the station handling milk in tight containers and 
the station where bottling is carried on. These gradations have 
been discussed by boards of appeals in many cases, but few cases 
have been carried to court.’ 


Slaughter Houses 


Slaughter houses are usually excluded from all except unre- 
stricted districts or those zoned for heavy industry. Chicken 
slaughter houses present difficult problems in large cities where 


1Ga.— Morris v. Lunsford, 176 Ga. 49, 167 S. E. 297 (1932) 
La.—Hayes v. City of New Orleans, 154 La. 289, 97 S 446 (1923) 
Md.—Lipsitz v. Parr, 164 Md. 222, 164 A. 743 (1933) 
Mich.—Adams v. Kalamazoo Ice & Fuel Co., 245 Mich. 261, 222 N. W. 86 (1928) 
WARS ee v. Polar Wave Ice & Fuel Co., 319 Mo. 337, 4 S. W. (2d) 776 
(1928 
N. Y.—Woodford v. Rubel Coal & Ice Corp., Supreme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, May 15, 1930 
Ohio—City Ice & Fuel Co. v. Stegner, 120 Oh. St. 418, 166 N. E. 226 (1929) 
2 City of St. Louis v. Evraiff, 301 Mo. 231, 256 S. W. 489 (1923) 
5 Fourcade v. City of San Francisco, 196 Cal. 655, 238 P. 934 (1925) 
‘N. J.—Srager v. Mintz, 109 N. J. Eq. 544, 158 A. 471 (1932) 
N. Y.—Benfish Const. Co. v. Department of Health, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, New York Law Journal, April 21, 1931 
Livoti v. Connell, Supreme Court, New York County, New York Law Journal, 
May 22, 1931, affd. 235 App. Div. 611, 254 N. Y. S. 1082 (1932) 


218 


PARTICULAR BUILDINGS AND USES 


rabbis kill chickens according to the Mosaic law. There is con- 
stant pressure to allow this practice, in limited form, in business 
districts. Variances, with conditions, have sometimes been granted. 


Tanneries 
Tanneries are assigned to heavy industry districts.} 


Transformer Stations 


Transformer stations of public utilities come under the defini- 
tion of industrial use because they change the form of the product, 
electricity. They do not always contain moving parts. All of them 
need to be in the right locations in relation to their distribution 
systems, and there is much to be said in favor of their being 
exempted from use regulations, or else provided for in the ordi- 
nance in an item of original jurisdiction of the board of appeals.? 


Circus and Other Tents 

Circus tents and other large tents for lectures, auctions, and 
similar purposes often offend home owners in residence districts. 
If they are to be permanent, they should be prevented the same 
as new business buildings.’ 


Pouliry Markets 


Markets for selling live poultry are sometimes excluded from 
business districts.* 


Brick-Making Plants 


A. brick-making plant jis usually assigned to an industrial 
district.® 


1 Mass.—La Montagne v. Kenney, 288 Mass. 363, 193 N. E. 9 (1934) 
Minn.—State v. Taubert, 126 Minn. 371, 148 N. W. 281 (1914) 


2 Taylor v. Walsh, 140 Misc. 25, 248 N. Y. S. 753 (1926) 


8 Peck v. Westchester Country Club, Inc., Supreme Court, Westchester County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, August 3, 1934 


‘Greenstein v. Bigelow, 5 N. J. Misc. 124, 135 A. 661 (1927) 
® Colby v. Board of Adjustment, 81 Colo. 344, 255 P. 443 (1927) 


219 


ZONING 


Signs 
If a building and its use are lawful, a sign calling attention to 
that use is considered a customary accessory use.! 
1 I1].—Illinois Life Insurance Co. v. City of Chicago, 244 Ill. A. 185 (1927) 
Mass.—Town of Lexington v. Govenar, 3 N. E. (2d) 19 (1936) 
N. Y.—Towers Management Corporation v. Thatcher, Supreme Court, Kings 


County, New York Law Journal, September 10, 1935, 246 App. Div. 835, 
286 N. Y. S. 435, 271 N. Y. 94, 2 N. E. (2d) 273 (1936) 


220 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
OF ZONING IN THE UNITED STATES, 
1903-1936 


COMPILED IN THE LIBRARY OF THE SCHOOL OF CITY PLANNING, HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
By KATHERINE McNaAmMarRA, LIBRARIAN 


ACKERMAN, F. L. Population expectations, zoning, appraisals and debt. (American 
City, Oct. 1934; vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 49-50.) 


Preliminary to city planning—zoning. (Journal of the American Institute of 
Architects, Jan. 1920; vol. 8, pp. 15-18.) 
A protest against zoning under our present system of land development. 


Apams, T. Objections to zoning considered: being a reply to an address by William 
P. Gest of Philadelphia. (National Municipal Review, Feb. 1925; vol. 14, pp. 
74-77:) 

Town planning terms: the use of the word “‘zoning.”” (Garden Cities and 

Town Planning, Aug. 1921; vol. 11, pp. 183-184. diagr.) 

Also in American City, Sept. 1921; vol. 25, p. 213. 


AMERICAN ACADEMY OF POLITICAL AND SOCIAL ScIENCE. Zoning in the United 
States. Philadelphia, May 1931. 230 pp. (Annals, vol. 155, part 2.) 

Contents: Part I. Historical and legal aspects; papers by G. Whitnall, W. L. 
Pollard, E. M. Bassett, F. A. Delano, F. B. Williams, H. R. Pomeroy. Part II. 
Procedure of zoning; papers by E. O. Mills, A. E. Williamson, C. H. Diggs, 
C. B. Whitnall, H. Bartholomew, R. Whitten, C. J. S. Williamson, L. D. 
Tilton. Part III. Economics and zoning; papers by D. M. Baker, C. Aronovici, 
W. W. Horner, C. H. Cheney, E. P. Goodrich, G. LeR. Schmutz. Part IV. 
General; papers by J. M. Gries, R. Van N. Black, J. L. Crane, Jr., W. B. 
Munro, H. H. Culver; Bibliography, by K. McNamara. 


AMERICAN Civic AssociaATION. Zoning as an element in city planning, and for 
protection of property values, public safety and public health. Washington, 
The Association, 1920. 48 pp. (Series 2, no. 15, June 30, 1920.) 

Contents: What zoning is, by A. W. Crawford; The principles of zoning, by 
E. M. Bassett; Zoning, by L. Purdy; The Illinois Chapter of the American 
Institute of Architects on the need for zoning; Legal considerations, by A. W. 
Crawford; The legality of zoning, by H. S. Swan; Provisions of the St. Louis 
zone ordinance, by H. Bartholomew; Zoning experience in American cities, by 
H. Bartholomew; What zoning does, by H. S. Swan. 


ANDERSON, N. Zoning and the mobility of urban population. (City Planning, 
Oct. 1925; vol. 1, pp. 155-159.) 

, and E. C. LinpemMaNn. Occupational areas. (Ju their Urban sociology, 
New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1928, chapter 4, pp. 67-89.) 

Aronovici, C. Business districts in subdivision planning. (National Municipal 
Review, July 1930; vol. 19, pp. 464-470.) 

Aucur, T. B. Zoning in Michigan: digest of legislation, Michigan court decisions, 
and a summary of zoning progress. Ann Arbor, Mich., Michigan Planning 
Conference, [1932]. [12]pp. (Bulletin no. 1.) 


223 


ZONING 


Baker, N. F. The constitutionality of zoning laws. (Illinois Law Review, Nov. 
1925; vol. 20, pp. 213-248.) 


Legal aspects of zoning. Chicago University Press. 1927. 182 pp. 


BALL, C. B. The health value of city zoning. (National Real Estate Journal, 
Apr. 10, 1922; vol. 23, pp. 20-25.) 
From an address before the American Public Health Association. 


BARTHOLOMEW, H. Urban land uses, amounts of land used and needed for various 
purposes by typical American cities: an aid to scientific zoning practice. Cam- 
bridge, Harvard University Press, 1932. 174 pp. illus., maps, charts, tables. 
(Harvard City Planning Studies, IV.) 


What is comprehensive zoning? (Jn Proceedings of 20th National Con- 
ference on City Planning, 1928, pp. 47-71; with discussion pp. 71-72. map, 
tables, diagrs.) 


Zoning in the location of public parks. (Park International, July 1920; 
vol. 1, pp. 56-59. illus.) 

Bassett, E. M. The board of adjustment. (City Planning, Apr. 1930; vol. 6, 
PP. 142-143.) 

The board of appeals in zoning. Published by Zoning Committee of New 

York, 1921. 25 pp. 
Summarized in American City, Jan. 1922. 


Control of building heights, densities and uses by zoning; a discussion of 


zoning law and practice in the New York region. New York, Regional Plan of © 


New York and Its Environs, 1931. Volume 6, Monograph 3, pp. 352-399. illus. 


Farming. (City Planning, Jan. 1933; vol. 9, pp. 33-34.) 


Present attitude of the courts toward zoning. (Jn Proceedings of 15th 
National Conference on City Planning, 1923, pp. 115-135; with discussion, pp. 


135-144.) 
What land can be zoned? (City Planning, Oct. 1932; vol. 8, pp. 240-241.) 


Zoning. (In Nolen, J., ed. City Planning, 1929, pp. 404-430.) 


Zoning. Reprinted and revised. New York, National Municipal League, 
1932. 31 pp. 
First edition published as supplement to National Municipal Review, May 
1920; 1922 edition published as National Municipal League Technical Pam- 
phlet no. 5. 


Zoning and the courts. Washington, U. S. Department of Commerce, 
Division of Building and Housing, Apr. 1931. Mimeographed. 12 pp. 


Zoning versus private restrictions. (National Real Estate Journal, Jan. 2, 
1922; vol. 23, no. I, p. 26.) 


Prevention of blighted districts. 


, ed. Zoning roundtable. (City Planning, regular department, Apr. 1925, 
vol. 1, to Oct. 1934, vol. 10.) 


, and F. B. WiLiiams. Zoning cases in the United States. New York, 
Regional Plan of New York and Its Environs, 1931. 59 pp. (Appendix to vol. 
6 of the Regional Survey.) 


A classified and alphabetic index to cases. Originally issued in 1928 as a 
separate publication. 


224 


Sane ne oe ee ee 


ee ee ee eee ee 


rm 
TY ee 


_ _— 


a ee eee a 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bassett, E. M. (Cont.) 

, and others. Model laws for planning cities, counties, and states, including 
zoning, subdivision regulation, and protection of official map, by E. M. Bassett, 
F. B. Williams, A. Bettman, and R. Whitten. Cambridge, Harvard University 
Press, 1935. 137 pp. (Harvard City Planning Studies, VII.) 

BepForpD, S. E. W. Zoning. (Ju his Readings in urban sociology, New York, 
D. Appleton and Co., 1927, chapter 3, part 3, pp. 125-132.) 

Quotations from L. Purdy, R. H. Whitten, and others. 

BeTTMAN, A. The constitutionality of zoning. (American City, Sept. 1922; vol. 
27, pp. 212-216.) 

The decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the Euclid 

Village zoning case. (University of Cincinnati Law Review, Mar. 1927; vol. 1, 

pp. 184-192.) 

Extent of powers of boards of appeals. (City Planning, Apr. 1927; vol. 3, 

pp. 157-160.) 

With comments by E. M. Bassett. 

The fact bases of zoning, a report to American City Planning Institute. 

(City Planning, July 1925; vol. 1, pp. 86-93.) 

New legal aspects of zoning. (Jn National Association of Real Estate 

Boards.. Annals of real estate practice, 1927, vol. 3, pp. 361-380.) 

A general survey. 


The present state of court decisions on zoning. (City Planning, Jan. 1926; 
vol. 2, pp. 24-35.) 
Paper at Ohio State Conference on City Planning, Oct. 1925. 

The village of Euclid and Harry W. Stein, appellants, vs. Ambler Realty 

Company appellee: appeal from the District Court of the United States for 

the Northern District of Ohio, Eastern Division. Motion for leave to file 

attached brief, Amici Curiae. (No. 665 in the Supreme Court of the United 

States, October term, 1925.) 137 pp. 

Includes valuable array of arguments for zoning. 

, comp. Planning (including zoning) law and legislation. (American Society 
of Planning Officials. News Letter, Sept., Nov. 1935, vol. 1, nos. 8, 10 to date, 
regular department.) 

Brack, R. V. N. Better zoning for easier administration. (City Planning, Oct. 
1931; vol. 7, pp. 225-233.) 

Can intelligent zoning be done without a comprehensive city plan? (Amer- 

ican City, Apr. 1928; vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 108-109.) 

Further discussion zz Housing, Mar. 1920. 


BiucuHer, W. H. County zoning. Chicago, American Society of Planning Officials, 
Dec. 26, 1935. Mimeographed. 1 p. (Bulletin no. 26.) 


Boarps OF APPEALS IN ZONING: a symposium (foreword by E. M. Bassett). (City 
Planning, Jan. 1927; vol. 3, pp. 63-72.) 
Includes experience of Kansas City, Mo.; Baltimore, Md.; Denver, Colo.; 
Pittsburgh, Pa.; Milwaukee, Wis.; Providence, R. I.; Springfield, Mass.; 
Boston, Mass. (For New Bedford, Mass., see City Planning, July 1927.) 


Boston, Mass. City PLANNING Boarpb. Zoning for Boston: a survey and a com- 
prehensive plan. Law enacted by Massachusetts legislature, Chapter 488, Acts 
of 1924, in effect June 5, 1924. Boston, 1924. 64 pp. illus., maps (part folded), 
plans (part folded). 


225 


ZONING 


BurbELL, E. S. A method of investigating the administration of the zoning ordi- 
nance in Columbus, Ohio, 1923-31. [Columbus, O.], Ohio State University 
Press, 1935. PP. 33-49. 

Reprinted from Abstracts of doctors’ dissertations, no. 17. 


BuTTENHEIM, H. S. Spaciousness in the city plan: its economic and civic impor- 
tance. (American City, Nov., Dec. 1929; vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 129-131; no. 6, 
pp. 123-126. illus., plans, chart.) 


CALIFORNIA LEADS ZONING HiGHways BY CouNnTy ACTION; value of program 
demonstrated by results in San Mateo County. (Roadside Bulletin, [1935], vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 1, 6.) 


CarRMALT, L. J. Rural zoning in suburban metropolitan areas. (Planners’ Journal, 
Jan.-Feb. 1936; vol. 2, pp. 7-8; with discussion, Mar.-Apr., May-June, 1936; 
vol. 2, pp. 43-45, 75-77-) 


CEDAR Rapips, IA., City PLAN CoMMISSION. Comparative zoning statistics for 
various cities. (/n their Comprehensive city plan for Cedar Rapids, lowa, 
1931, pp. [114}-[117]. tables. H. Bartholomew and Associates, consultants.) 


CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE UNITED States. Civic DEVELOPMENT DEPART- 
MENT. Zoning: a statement of principles and procedure. Washington, June 
1929. 26 pp. 

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE UNITED States. Civic DEVELOPMENT DEPART- 
MENT, comp. City planning and zoning accomplishments. Washington, The 
Chamber, 1928-29. Mimeographed. 7 pp. + supplements of 95 pp. and 28 pp. 
charts, tables. 

Report compiled in response to inquiries received from member organizations 
and designed merely to present facts without advocacy. 


CHAMBERLAIN, J. P. Zoning progress. (American Bar Association Journal, Sept. 
1929; vol. 15, Pp. 535-539.) 


, and S. Pierson. Zoning laws and ordinances. (American Bar Association 
Journal, Mar. 1924; vol. 10, pp. 185-187.) 


CHENEY, C. H. How zoning standardizes values. (National Real Estate Journal, 
Nov. 1919; vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 21-24. illus.) 


CuicaGo REAL Estate Boarp. Studies on building height limitations in large 
cities with special reference to conditions in Chicago. Proceedings of an investi- 
gation of building height limitations conducted under the auspices of the Zoning 
Committee of the Chicago Real Estate Board, compiled by C. M. Nichols. 
Chicago, The Chicago Real Estate Board Library, 1923. 299 pp. illus., maps. 


CuHIcaGo REGIONAL PLANNING ASSOCIATION. Problems of zoning: a symposium. 
Chicago, The Association, 1930. 12 pp. 
Contents: How much property should be zoned for business, by L. V. Sheri- 
dan; To what extent are apartments justified in suburban villages, by F. 
Woodbury; What power has the zoning board of appeals, by J. L. Crane, Jr. 


CHILD, S. Restricted traffic district proposed, a suggestion for solving the problem 
of extreme traffic congestion in the central portions of cities, by an extension of 
the zoning principles. (American City, Apr. 1927; vol. 36, pp. 507-510. illus.) 


Cote, F. B. Zoning from an industrial viewpoint. (Jn League of California Munici- 
palities. Dept. of City Planning. Proceedings of the thirty-fourth annual con- 
vention, 1932, pp. [36-38].) 


226 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Comey, A. C. Transition zoning. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1933. 
150 pp. illus., plans, diagrs., tables. (Harvard City Planning Studies, V.) 
Preliminary discussion under title, The edges of zones, 1m Proceedings of 23d 
National Conference on City Planning, 1931. 
CONTROLLING DENSITY OF POPULATION BY ZONING Laws. (Housing, Sept. 1930; 
vol. 19, pp. 237-240.) 
A discussion of three decisions. 
Cover, V. D. The legal status of boards of zoning appeal. (Journal of Land and 
Public Utility Economics, Nov. 1932; vol. 8, pp. 352-363.) 
Crane, J. L., Jk. A message to city planners. (National Municipal Review, Apr. 
1930; vol. 19, pp. 230-234.) 
Excerpt from a lecture at the Harvard School of City Planning, Jan. 6, 1930. 
Contains section: Tendencies in zoning. Substantially same article zm Journal 
of Land and Public Utility Economics, Feb. 1930. 
Powers of boards of appeals. (City Planning, Oct. 1930; vol. 6, pp. 289-290.) 
Illinois experience. 
Davis, E. H., comp. Zoning. St. Louis, July, 1917. [38] pp. plans. (St. Louis 
Public Library Monthly Bulletin, n. s. vol. 15, no. 7.) 
A compilation showing the advance of the movement in the United States 
up to 1917. 
Dorau, H. B., and A. G. Hinman. Urban land zoning (J their Urban land eco- 
nomics, New York, Macmillan Co., 1928, chapter 19, pp. 298-321.) 
A general elementary exposition of the subject. 


Downs, M. D. The coordination of tax assessments and zoning. (Planners’ 
Journal, July-Aug. 1935; vol. 1, pp. 23-24. map; with discussion, Sept.-Oct. 
1935; vol. 1, pp. 63-64.) 

Eiot, C. W., 2Np. Promotion vs. prohibition in city planning: taxation and zon- 
ing policies. (City Planning, Apr. 1928; vol. 4, pp. 83-87.) 

Discussion by W. H. Blucher under title, Taxation policies, in July issue. 


EXCEPTIONS BY COUNCIL VERSUS VARIANCES BY BOARD OF APPEALS. (City Plan- 
ning, July 1928; vol. 4, pp. 235-238.) 

FACTORS IN THE ZONING OF CITIES: a symposium. (Jn Proceedings of American 
Society of Civil Engineers, Feb. 1925; vol. 51, pp. 153-217; with discussion, 
Mar. 1925, pp. 434-446. tables.) 

Contents: Zoning and health, by G. C. Whipple; Zoning for use, by E. A. 
Fisher; Area zoning, by H. Bartholomew; The purpose of zoning ordinances 
and methods of administration, by M. Knowles; Height limitations in zoning, 
by J. L. Crane, Jr.; Housing density regulation, by R. Whitten; Building line 
zoning, by L. V. Sheridan and J. C. Hoffman. 

FisHer, C. F. Zoning as a traffic safety measure, creation of blind corners pre- 
vented by special provision for ‘‘vision clearance.”’ (American City, Feb. 1924; 
vol. 30, pp. 144-145. illus.) 

Forp, G. B. Zoning can help the farmer. (National Municipal Review, Dec. 1929; 
vol. 18, pp. 742-744.) 

Summarized in American City, Dec. 1929. 

, ed. New York City building zone resolution, completely revised for third 

edition: restricting the height and use of buildings and prescribing the minimum 

sizes of their yards and courts. With explanatory notes that will be helpful to 
owners, builders and architects. New York, New York Title and Mortgage Co., 

1929. 44 pp. + 4+ 9 plates. illus., maps, plans, diagrs. 

227 


ZONING 


Forp, G. B. (Cont.) 


, assisted by A. B. RANDALL and L. Cox. Building height, bulk, and form: 
how zoning can be used as a protection against uneconomic types of buildings 
on high-cost land. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1931. 180 pp. illus., 
plans, diagrs., tables, charts. (Harvard City Planning Studies, II.) 


Fox, J. P. Public garages and filling stations: their proper location and lega 
control. (American City, Aug. 1929; vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 134-136.) 


Discusses proper location of public garages and filling stations. See also 
article on antiquated garage and zoning laws im Pacific Municipalities, Sept. 
1920. 
FREUND, E. Power of zoning boards of appeals to grant variations. (National 
Municipal Review, Sept. 1931; vol. 20, pp. 537-539.) 
Discussion of Illinois decision. 


Some inadequately discussed problems of the law of city planning and 
zoning. (Jn Proceedings of 21st National Conference on City Planning, 1929, 
pp. 79-96; with discussion, pp. 96-101.) 

A discussion of police power, general welfare, and amenity. 

GoopricnH, E. P. The place of the garage in city planning. (Architectural Record, 
Feb. 1929; vol. 65, p. 198.) 

Reprinted in American City, Mar. 1929. 

Grant, W. W., Jr. The administration of the zoning ordinance. (Ju Proceedings 
of 22nd National Conference on City Planning, 1930, pp. 103-109; with discus- 
sion, pp. 109-115.) 

GRINNALDS, J. C. The relation of parks to zoning. (Jn Proceedings of American 
Society for Municipal Improvements, 1924, pp. 175-180.) 


Series of articles on zoning and its advantages. (Municipal Journal, Balti- 
more, Oct. 8, 1920—Oct. 7, 1921.) 


Haic, R. M. The assignment of activities to areas in urban regions. (Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, May 1926; vol. 40, pp. 402-434.) 
Also reprinted as part 2 of Toward an understanding of the metropolis. 
HALDEMAN, B. A. The control of municipal development by the “‘zone system” 


and its application in the United States. (Ju Proceedings of 4th National Con- 
ference on City Planning, 1912, pp. 173-188; with discussion, pp. 188-191.) 


Condensed in American City, Sept. 1912. 


The relation of zoning to the housing problem. (J Proceedings of Ameri- 
can Society of Civil Engineers, Feb. 1922; vol. 48, pp. 213-218.) 


Economic and social advantages. 


Haut, E. S. Influence of zoning on housing development. (Octagon, Sept. 1932; 
vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 8-9.) 

A typical “public information’”’ article, sponsored by the Chicago Chapter 

[of American Institute of Architects], and published in the Chicago Daily News. 


HAMMERSLEY, C. E. Dangers in amending zoning ordinances. (National Municipal 
Review, Jan. 1930; vol. 19, pp. 7-8.) 
Address delivered at the third annual convention of the Wisconsin City and 
Regional Planning Association. 
Hanson, P. Relation of zoning to appraisals. (National Real Estate Journal, 
Apr. 13, 1931; vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 49-50. portrait.) 
228 


j 
. 
‘ 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Hartman, E. T. Zoning and planning. (Massachusetts Federation of Planning 
Boards. Bulletin, Feb. 1936, no. 33, whole number.) 


Zoning decisions: decisions of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts, 1928— 
1932. (Massachusetts Federation of Planning Boards. Bulletin, Feb. 1933, 
no. 29, whole number.) 

Earlier review published in the Bulletin, July 1928, no. 22. 


HeEnprickson, C. I. Rural zoning. (Jn American Planning and Civic Association. 
American planning and civic annual, 1935, pp. 204-207. table.) 


Rural zoning. Washington, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Land 
Economics, Aug. 1935. Mimeographed. 38 pp. tables. 


HERBERT, P. A. Michigan enacts a rural zoning law. (Journal of Land and Public 
Utility Economics, Aug. 1935; vol. 11, pp. 309-310.) 


Herroip, G. H. The planning of undeveloped areas. (Jn Proceedings of 20th 
National Conference on City Planning, 1928, pp. 164-170. illus., plan, tables.) 


HeypeEckeErR, W. D. What zoning ought to be. (City Planning, Jan. 1929; vol. 5, 
pp. 25-33. illus.) 
Based on studies made in collaboration with E. P. Goodrich for the Regiona 
Plan of New York. 


How Zoninc HAs PrRovipED ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT FOR A RAPIDLY GROWING 
City. (American City, Jan. 1929; vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 132-133. plans.) 
_ Experience of University City, Mo. 


Howarop, E. A. Planning for Milwaukee County. (City Planning, Oct. 1929; vol. 
5, pp. 214-221. illus., plan.) 


The Milwaukee County zoning ordinance is one of the first county zoning 
ordinances adopted in the United States, and probably the first one based 
upon a state enabling act. 


Howarth, H. A. S. The manufacturer’s interest in zoning. Philadelphia, Phila- 
delphia Housing Association, [1929]. [4] pp. 


HussBarp, H. V., M. McCuintock, and F. B. WILLIAMS, assisted by P. MAHONEY 
and H. K. Menuinick. Airports: their location, administration and legal basis. 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1930. 190 pp. illus., plans, maps, tables, 
charts. (Harvard City Planning Studies, I.) 

Regulation of location by zoning discussed, pp. 121-122. 


HusBarp, T. K., Annual survey of city and regional planning in the United States. 
(City Planning, Apr. issues 1925-1929 and 1932, July issue 1930.) 
Earlier surveys published in Landscape Architecture, 1912-1923, and in. 
National Municipal Review, 1913-1923 (1913-1917 by C. M. Robinson). 
, and H. V. HusBarp. Our cities today and tomorrow: a survey of plan- 
ning and zoning progress in the United States. Cambridge, Harvard University 
Press, 1929. 389 pp. illus. plans, charts, tables. 


A review of city and regional planning and zoning based on a field study of 
120 municipalities and 15 regions in 42 states. See especially Chapter 11, 
Zoning, pp. 162-191, and Appendix J, Comments on benefits of zoning, pp. 
332-333. 

, and K. McNamara. Manual of planning information, including Manual 
of information on city planning and zoning, 1923, by T. Kimball, and supplement, 
Planning information up-to-date, by T. K. Hubbard and K. McNamara. Cam- 
bridge, Harvard University Press, 1928. 188 pp. + 103 pp. For 1928-1935 
supplement see entry under McNamara, K. 

Contains an extensive classified bibliography. 


220 


ZONING 


IHLDER, J. City zoning is sound business. (Nation’s Business, Nov. 1922; vol. 10, 
no. 12, pp. 19-20.) 
Also reprinted. 


THE INFLUENCE OF ZONING ON THE DESIGN OF PuBLic UTILITIES: a symposium. 
(In Proceedings of American Society of Civil Engineers, Feb. 1925; vol. 51, pp. 
219-261; with discussion, Mar. 1925, pp. 447-455. map [folded], tables, diagrs.) 


Contents: The relation of zoning to the design of drainage and sewerage 
systems, by P. Hansen; The influence of zoning on the design of the street 
system, by T. G. Phillips; The influence of zoning on the design of a telephone 
plant, by A. P. Allen; The influence of zoning on the design of public recreation 
facilities, by C. E. Brewer; The influence of zoning on the design of transpor- 

tation services, by J. R. Bibbins; Zoning and water supply, by H. M. Pirnie. © 


Jaquetu, H. H. Zoning of summer colonies at Lake Tahoe. (City Planning, Apr. 
1932; vol. 8, p. 122.) 


KIMBALL, T. Helps in conducting publicity campaigns for zoning. (Landscape 
Architecture, July 1922; vol. 10, pp. 274-277.) 


KINGERY, R. Determining the size of retail districts in zoning cities and villages. 
(American City, Feb. 1927; vol. 36, pp. 246-248. table.) 
Chicago regional planning experience. Retail business frontage diagrams may 
be found in City Planning, Apr. 1928. 


Koun, R. D. Better housing through better zoning. (Jn National Municipal 
League, pub. Planning, New York, The League, 1936, pp. 89-94.) 
You and Your Government Series XIII, Lecture no. 15, delivered Jan. 7, 1936, 
over a nation-wide network of the National Broadcasting Company. Also 
preprinted separately. 


LANDELS, E. D. Use of the police power in city planning and zoning. (City Plan- 
ning, July 1929; vol. 5, pp. 163-167.) 
Paper prepared for the State-wide City Plan Conference, at Fresno, Feb. 
14-15, 1929. 
Zoning: an analysis of its purposes and its legal sanctions. (American Bar 
Association Journal, Mar. 1931; vol. 17, pp. 163-167, 203.) 


Lewis, H. M., and others. Land values: distribution within New York region and 
relation to various factors in urban growth, by H. M. Lewis, W. D. Heydecker, 
R. O’Hara, with an introduction by T. Adams. New York, Regional Plan of 
New York and Its Environs, 1927. 72 pp. illus., plans. (Engineering Series 
Monograph no. 3.) 


LinDHOLM, S. G. Experiences with zoning in Washington, D. C., 1920-1934. 
Washington, The Zoning Commission of the District of Columbia, [1935]. Litho- 
printed. 35 pp. map, tables. 


LouMAnNN, K. B. Zoning the region; land classification; controlling subdivisions 
outside urban areas. (Jn his Regional planning, Ann Arbor, Mich., Edwards 
Brothers, Inc., 1936, pp. 63-77. maps, plans, tables.) 


Los ANGELES County, CALIF. REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION. Guide to Los 
Angeles county zoning ordinance. Los Angeles, Aug. 1929. 28 pp. diagr., 
charts. 


ZONING Stupy Group. The standardization of zoning symbols for use in 
the county of Los Angeles. (City Planning, Jan. 1929; vol. 5, pp. 34-42. plans, 
chart [colored].) 


230 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


McBain, H. L. City planning, building heights and zoning. (Jn his American city 
progress and the law, New York, Columbia University Press, 1918, chapter IV, 
PP. 92-123.) 

Law-making by property owners. Shall the exercise of the police power be 


made to depend on property owners? (Political Science Quarterly, Dec. 1921; 
vol. 36, pp. 617-641.) 


Includes a discussion of the validity of clauses in zoning ordinances requiring 
the consent of property owners. 


Macpona_p, A. F. Zoning. (/n his American city government and administration, 
New York, Crowell Co., 1929, chapter 21, pp. 480-504.) 


MacLaurin, R. D. Where zoning fails. (National Municipal Review, May 1928; 
vol. 17, pp. 257-260.) 
See also answer by C. Herrick in June 1928 issue, pp. 359-360, and further 
reply by R. D. MacLaurin in Sept. 1928 issue, pp. 504-507.) 


McMicuaeL, S. L., and R. F. BiIncHAM. Zoning and private restrictions as affect- 
ing the use of property. (/” their City growth essentials, Cleveland, S. McMichael 
Publishing Organization, 1928, chapter 28, pp. 359-377.) 


McNamara, K. Bibliography of planning, 1928-1935: a supplement to Manual of 
planning information, 1928, by T. K. Hubbard and K. McNamara. Cambridge, 
Harvard University Press, 1936. 232 pp. (Harvard City Planning Studies, X.) 


, comp. Some recent references to arguments for zoning. (City Planning, 
July, 1925; vol. 1, pp. 135-140.) 

McNirtt, R. L., and G. WuITNALL. Building lines or front-yard requirements. (Jn 
Proceedings of 20th National Conference on City Planning, 1928, pp. 79-84.) 


Martin, R. C. The new status of zoning in Texas; Texas Supreme Court upholds 
comprehensive zoning ordinance. (National Municipal Review, Feb. 1935; vol. 
24, pp. 110-113.) 


MASSACHUSETTS. SPECIAL COMMISSION ESTABLISHED TO STUDY AND REVISE THE 
Laws RELATIVE TO ZONING, TOWN PLANNING AND THE REGULATION OF BILL- 
BOARDS AND OTHER ADVERTISING Devices. Final report, January 1933. Boston, 
State Printers, 1933. 185 pp. (House Document no. 1240.) 

Contents; Part I. Zoning and planning; Part II. Billboards. Part I, Appendix 
D contains Forms for community planning legislation, by F. B. Williams in 
association with E. M. Bassett and R. Whitten. This Appendix is superseded 
by Bassett, E. M., and others. Model laws for planning cities, counties, and 
states. 


Mawson, J. W. Legal, economic and social basis of zoning. (Community Plan- 
ning, Oct. 1934; vol. 3, pp. 30-33.) 


Extracts from address delivered under auspices of the Town-Planning Insti- 
tute and Institute of Architects [of New Zealand]. 


MetzeNnsBAuM, J. The law of zoning. New York, Baker, Voorhis & Co., 1930. 
569 pp. 


Moomaw, D. Administration of the zoning ordinance. (Jn Proceedings of 23d 
National Conference on City Planning, 1931, pp. 85-89; with paper on same 
subject by A. Mangiante, pp. 89-92.) 


Morrow, C. E., and C. Herrick. Blighted districts, their cause and cure. (City 
Planning, Oct. 1925; vol. 1, pp. 160-172.) 
F. B. Williams City Planning Prize Essay, 1925. 


231 


ZONING 


MuLvIHILL, F. J. Does zoning retard building operations? (Jn Proceedings of 
American Society of Municipal Engineers, 1930-1931, pp. 61-74. diagr., tables.) 


NaTIONAL Housinc AssociATION. Recent books and reports on housing, zoning, 
and town planning. New York, The Association, Oct. 1930. 34 pp. (Publication 
no. 62.) 


Also earlier editions. Supplements 1928 and 19209 lists (publications no. 58 
and no. 59). 


Ne vsBacu, G. J. Health and zoning. (Jn Proceedings of 1oth National Conference 
on Housing, Housing problems in America, 1929, pp. 325-328.) 


New ENGLAND REGIONAL PLANNING ComMIssIoNn. Municipal planning and zoning 
in New England. Prepared with the assistance of the six N. E. state planning 
boards. Boston, The Commission, Mar. 1936. Mimeographed. [23] pp. map, 
tables, charts. 


New York (City). COMMISSION ON BUILDING DISTRICTS AND RESTRICTIONS. Final 
report, June 2, 1916. New York, Board of Estimate and Apportionment, Com- 
mittee on the City Plan, 1916. 100 pp. illus., plans. 


A compendious record of New York procedure, and a valuable work of reference 
on zoning. 


HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS COMMISSION. Report to the Committee on the 
height, size and arrangement of buildings of the Board of Estimate and Appor- 
tionment of the City of New York. Dec. 23, 1913. 295 pp. illus. 


An historic document. Comprehensive information on zoning to 1913 in 
Europe and America, compiled for the promotion of zoning in New York. 


New York STATE PLANNING BOARD. SUBCOMMITTEE ON ZONING. Report of the 
Subcommittee on Zoning to the Rural Land Planning Committee of the New 
York State Planning Board. [Albany, N. Y.], The Board, [1935]. Mameographed. 
7 pp. tables. 


Nicuots, J. C. The planning and control of out-lying shopping centers. (Journal 
of Land and Public Utility Economics, Jan. 1926; vol. 2, pp. 17-22.) 
Reprinted in National Real Estate Journal, Mar. 22, 1926; and zm Proceedings 
and reports of Home Builders and Subdividers Division, Association of Real 
Estate Boards, Annals of real estate practice, 1926, vol. 3. 


OxtmsTED, F. L. Open-development zoning. (Jn Regional Plan of New York and 
Its Environs. Regional survey of New York and its environs, 1929; vol. 7, pp. 
320-325.) 

Principles which should control limitations in bulk of buildings. (City 

Planning, Jan. 1931; vol. 7, pp. 22-24.) 


PHILADELPHIA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. RESEARCH AND STATISTICAL BUREAU. 
Report on zoning with special reference to use of buildings; a brief study based 
upon ordinances of zoned cities and reports of leading authorities on zoning. 
Philadelphia, Dec. 1, 1929. Lithoprinted. 42 pp. tables. 


PoLLarpD, W. L. _Determining the amount, character, and location of business 
property a subdivision needs. (Jn National Association of Real Estate Boards. 
Annals of real estate practice, 1928, pp. 621-632.) 


Also reprinted. 
Economic effects of zoning a city. (Im National Association of Real Estate 
Boards. Annals of real estate practice, 1929, pp. 501-512.) 

Also reprinted by the Association. 


232 


—. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Pomeroy, H. R. Zoning and zoning administration. (Jn League of California 
Municipalities. Dept. of City Planning. Proceedings of the thirty-fourth annual 


convention, 1932, pp. [39-43].) 


PRESIDENT’S CONFERENCE ON HoME BUILDING AND HOME OWNERSHIP. COMMIT- 
TEE ON CiTy PLANNING AND ZONING. Report. (/n volume I of Proceedings: 
Planning for residential districts, edited by J. M. Gries, and J. Ford, yak I, 
pp. 1-45. Washington, The Conference, 1932.) 


Purpy, L. The zoning of cities. (Jn Proceedings of 6th National Conference on 
Housing, Housing problems in America, 1917, pp. 214-228.) 


Rasuck, A. J. The administration of zoning ordinances. Zoning ordinances must 
be enforced literally to prevent abuses; board of appeals should not attempt to 
legislate. (Municipality [League of Wisconsin Municipalities], July 1935; vol. 
30, pp. 126, 135.) 

The benefits of municipal zoning ordinances; the purposes of zoning and 


the advantages to private citizens and the community outlined. (Municipality 
{League of Wisconsin Municipalities], June 1935; vol. 30, pp. 107-108, 118.) 


A zoning manual for Wisconsin cities and villages including a skeleton 
zoning ordinance. (Supplement to Municipality [League of Wisconsin Munici- 
palities], May 1934; vol. 29, pp. 82-96.) 


RANDALL, A. B. The question of size: a re-approach to the study of zoning. (Archi- 
tectural Forum, Jan. 1931; vol. 54, pp. 117-122.) 


Comments on salient features of the problems of building height and bulk 
based on research conducted by George B. Ford for the Harvard University 
School of City Planning. 


RANKIN, E. S. The relation of zoning to the work of the city engineer. (Jz Pro- 
ceedings of American Society for Municipal Improvements, 1920, pp. 70-72.) 


Also abstracted in several engineering magazines, including Engineering News- 
Record, Nov. 4, 1920. 


REGIONAL PLAN AssocIATION. Zoning bulletins, [No. 1], Dec. 18, 1933 to date. 
Mimeographed. Information on recent zoning decisions. 


RELATION OF ZONING ORDINANCES AND TAX LAws To REAL ESTATE ASSESSMENT. 
(American City, Jan. 1930; vol. 42, no. I, pp. 114-116.) 


A symposium. 


Rog, C. T. The effect of zoning on real property values. (In New York [State]. 
Dept. of Taxation and Finance. Proceedings of the Seventh Conference of Local 
Assessors and Fourteenth State Tax Conference, Albany, New York, March 4, 
5 and 6, 1930, Albany, N. Y., State Printers, 1930, pp. 178-188.) 


Row .anps, W. A. Relocating the isolated settler. (National Municipal Review, 
Jan. 1935; vol. 25, pp. 20-22.) 
Emphasizes need of zoning of new settlements. Radio address delivered 
Dec. 17, 1935, in You and Your Government Series. 


St. Louis, Mo. City PLAN Commission. Zoning for St. Louis: a fundamental 
part of the city plan. St. Louis, Mo., The Commission, 1918. 30 pp. 
See also Present status of zoning in Missouri by H. Bartholomew, zn National 
Municipal Review, Dec. 1924, and Planning progress in St. Louis, by the same 
author zm City Planning, July 19209. 


233 


ZONING 


SANTA BARBARA CouNTY, CALIF. PLANNING CoMMISSION. Preliminary report upon 
highway and zoning problems, Montecito. [Santa Barbara, Calif.], The Commis- 
sion, 1930. Mimeographed. 64 pp. illus., plans (part folded), charts, cross sec- 
tions (part folded), tables. 

Concerns zoning and its relation to highway plans with constant reference to 
esthetic considerations for preservation of community character. 


A SEARCH FOR IDEAL PROVISIONS FOR SPACIOUSNESS IN ZONING ORDINANCES: 
a symposium. (American City, Dec. 1929; vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 144-145.) 
SHERIDAN, L. V., and J. C. HorrMan. Building line zoning. (Jn Proceedings of 
American Society of Civil Engineers, Feb. 1925; vol. 51, pp. 214-217.) 
Substantially same in Proceedings of National Conference on City Planning, 
1925. 
STEGNER, C. M. To make zoning administration less costly and more efficient. 
(American City, Aug. 1931; vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 84-86.) 


SUMNER, C. K. The board of adjustment as a corrective in zoning practice. 
(National Municipal Review, Apr. 1924; vol. 13, pp. 203-206.) 


Some principles to guide community zoning. (National Municipal Review, 
Dec. 1926; vol. 15, pp. 693-698.) 


Swan, H.S. The law of zoning; a review of the constitutionality of zoning regu- 
lations which control buildings in accordance with a general plan of municipal 
development. (Supplement to National Municipal Review, Oct. 1921; vol. 10, 
Ppp. 519-536.) (Technical Pamphlet Series, no. 11.) 


The non-conforming building in zoning. (American Architect, Nov. 13, 
1918; vol. 114, pp. 592-594.) 

UNITED City PLANNING COMMITTEE OF CINCINNATI. Statement and evidence sub- 
mitted on pending zoning ordinance to City Council of Cincinnati on the 24th 
day of January, 1924. 61 pp. 


U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE. ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ZONING. Municipal 
zoning ordinances, a brief comparison of the use and height regulations in sixteen 
cities. Washington, The Committee, 1924. Muimeographed. 26 pp. tables. 


There is also a 1925 supplement. 


A standard state zoning enabling act under which municipalities 
may adopt zoning regulations. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1926. 
13 pp. 

Also earlier editions. 


Zoning, a selected bibliography. Prepared by T. Kimball. April 
10, 1922. Mimeographed. 12 pp. 


A zoning primer. Revised edition. Washington, Government 
Printing Office, 1926. 10 pp. illus. 


AERONAUTICS BRANCH. COMMITTEE ON AIRPORT ZONING AND EMINENT 
Domain. Report, December 18, 1930. Washington, Government Printing Office, 
1931. 14 pp. 
Reprinted in Air Commerce Bulletin, Jan. 2, 1931, and in part 7m American 
City, Feb. 1931. 


BUREAU OF STANDARDS. Zoned municipalities, by population groups. 
Washington, The Bureau, 1929-1933. Mimeograpbed. 


Bulletins issued Apr. 1929 and May 19, 1933. 
234 


' 
‘ 

a 

; 

= 
’ 

c 

1 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


U. S. DEPARTMENT OF CoMMERCE (Cont.) 


Zoned municipalities in the United States. Prepared by N. L. 
Knauss. Washington, The Dept., May 5, 1933. Mimeographed. 53 pp. tables. 


Also earlier editions, some under title, Zoning progress in the United States. 


DivISION OF BUILDING AND HousinG. Survey of zoning laws and 
ordinances in 1927. Washington, Mar. 1928. Mimeographed. 14 pp. 


See also later compilations by N. L. Knauss covering the years 1928-1933. 


DivIsION OF BUILDING AND Housinc. ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CiTy PLAN- 

NING AND ZONING. The preparation of zoning ordinances; a guide for municipal 

officials and others in the arrangement of provisions in zoning regulations, July 1, 

1931. Washington, Government Printing Office, July 1, 1931. 28 pp. (U.S 

BH 16). Commerce, Bureau of Standards. Building and Housing Publication 
16. 


Van Hecke, M. T. Zoning ordinances and restrictions in deeds. (Yale Law Journal, 
Feb. 1928; vol. 37, pp. 407-425.) 

VEILLER, L. Districting by municipal regulation. (Jn Proceedings of 8th National 
Conference on City Planning, 1916, pp. 147-176.) 


Mistakes to be avoided in zoning. (National Real Estate Journal, July 2, 
1923; vol. 24, no. 14, pp. 32-35.) 

—— Protecting residential districts. (Jn Proceedings of 6th National Confer- 
ence on City Planning, 1914, pp. 92-132.) 


Watts, R. S. Zoning for cities and towns. Ames, Iowa, State College, May 10, 
1922. 15 pp. (Engineering Extension Department, Bulletin no. 52.) 


Wa ter, D. H. Rural planning and zoning for land use. (Pennsylvania Planning 
and Zoning, Aug. 1935; vol. 2, no. 2, whole number.) 


Weisman, H.L. Zoning administration in New York City. (St. John’s Law SO 
May 1928; vol. 2, pp. 105-176.) 
Based on paper prepared for Seminar in Administrative Law conducted by 
Professor Frankfurter in Harvard Law School, 1926-1927. 


WERNER, H. M. The constitutionality of zoning regulations. Urbana, IIl., Univer- 
sity of Illinois, 1926. 57 pp. (University of Illinois Studies in the Social Sciences, 
vol. 12, no. 4.) 


Harris Political Science Prize Essay, 1925, revised to 1926. 


WESTCHESTER COUNTY PLANNING FEDERATION. Planning and zoning problems: 
papers presented at the 1931 conferences of the Federation held at White Plains, 
N. Y. White Plains, N. Y., The Federation, 1931. 53 pp. 


Contains the following papers on zoning: Zoning—its accomplishment and 
administration, by R. Van N. Black; The challenge of the gasoline filling sta- 
tion: have zoning boards of appeals failed to meet it? by P. A. Bankson; The 
legal and discretionary powers of zoning boards of appeals, by E. M. Bassett. 


Wuirp.e, G. C. Zoning and health. (Jn Proceedings of American Society of Civil 
Engineers, Feb. 1925; vol. 51, pp. 154-164.) 
Reprinted in Bulletin of Massachusetts Federation of Planning Boards, 
no. 18, Mar. 31, 1925. 


WHITNALL, C. B. What about apartments? (Parks and Recreation, Jan.-Feb. 
1929; vol. 12, pp. 105-112. illus.) 


Zoning river valleys. (Civic Comment, Nov. 1929; no. 26, pp. 11-13.) 


235 


ZONING 


WHITTEN, R. Business centers. (/” his The economics of land subdivision, pub- 
lished as part 3 of monograph 3, of The regional plan of New York and its 
environs, vol. 7, 1929, pp. 340-341.) 

Original publication of study under the joint auspices of Syracuse University 
and Regional Plan of New York. 


Combined zoning and planning control of unsubdivided areas. (In Pro- 
ceedings of 18th National Conference on City Planning, 1926, pp. 57-64; with 
discussion, pp. 64-65.) 


The Providence zone plan: report outlining a tentative zone plan. Provi- 
dence, R. I., Joint Standing Committee on Ordinances, 1923. 31 pp. illus., 
folded plan, charts. 


See also A year of zoning in Providence, by C. F. Fisher, zz American City, 
Nov. 1924, and article by A. Mangiante, zm City Planning, Jan. 1927. 


Regional zoning. (Jn Proceedings of 15th National Conference on City 
Planning, 1923, pp. 85-114; with discussion, pp. 135-144.) 
WlrturaMs], F. B. Effect of zoning on land values. (City Planning, Jan. 1934; 
vol. 10, pp. 36-37.) 
Wictiams, F. B. Esthetic regulation in city planning. (City Planning, July 1928; 
vol. 4, pp. 189-198.) 
Adapted from a lecture at Harvard University. 


Planning the private features: Building regulation and zoning; Zoning in 
Europe; Zoning in Canada and the United States. (Jn his Law of city planning 
and zoning, New York, Macmillan Co., 1922, part 4, pp. 191-355.) 
Continued by his Zoning and planning notes, published regularly in the 
American City, and in the American City Municipal Index; and, until Oct. 
1934, by his Legal notes published in City Planning. 


The street as the basis of districting. (American City, Dec. 1913; vol. 9, 
Pp. 517-518.) 
Address at first Massachusetts City and Town Planning Conference, Boston, 
1913. 
Wit.iamson, A. E. Relative proportion of business to population. (Community 
Builder, June 1928; vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 7-16. diagr.) 
Also reprinted. 


WISCONSIN TAXPAYERS ALLIANCE. [Several articles on county zoning.] (Wiscon- 
sin Taxpayer [Madison, Wis.], Nov. 15, 1935; vol. 3, no. 22, whole number. 
map, table.) 

Woopsury, C. Some suggested changes in the control of urban development. 
(Journal of Land and Public Utility Economics, Aug. 1929; vol. 5, pp. 249-259.) 

Arguments for admission of group-house construction in single-family dis- 
tricts, as well as for changes in subdivision control. 


WooprurfF, J. T. Looking zoning in the face. (Jn American Planning and Civic 
Association. American planning and civic annual, 1935, pp. 270-271.) 


Springfield, Mass., uses zoning as a basis for assessment. (American City, 
Feb. 1933; vol. 48, no. 2, p. 65. map.) 


Nah of city planning efficiency. (City Planning, Jan. 1928; vol. 4, pp. 
68-72. 


Discusses theory of zoning. 


236 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ZONING: [a symposium]. (Jn Proceedings of 9th National Conference on Housing, 

Housing problems in America, 1923, pp. 217-257; with discussion, pp. 337-359.) 

Contents: What the citizen thinks of zoning, by L. Purdy; What the banker 

thinks of zoning, by J. S. Edie; What the city engineer thinks of zoning, by 

E. P. Goodrich; What the architect thinks of zoning, by H. W. Corbett; What 

one realtor thinks of zoning, by J. W. Cree, Jr. Partially reprinted in National 
Municipal Review, Dec. 1923. 


ZONING Aips Lanp Va.Lues. (Housing, Dec. 1929; vol. 18, pp. 302-304.) 


ZONING AND TAXATION. (City Planning, Oct. 1933; vol. 9, pp. 195-198.) 
Question by R. J. Bartley; answer by E. M. Bassett. 


ZONING AND THE Courts: THE BOARD OF APPEALS CoMES A CropPER. (Housing, 
Dec, 1929; vol. 18, pp. 314-320.) 
A review of the Illinois decision. (Welton v. Hamilton.) 


ZONING IN Practice. (Jn Proceedings of 17th National Conference on City Plan- 
ning, 1925, pp. 432-497; with discussion, pp. 498-508.) 
Contents: Fundamentals of American zoning with special reference to the 
vital importance of court review, by E. M. Bassett; The influence of zoning 
on high buildings and street traffic, by E. P. Goodrich; Front yard and build- 
ing lines, by L. V. Sheridan and J. C. Hoffman; Zoning and the street system, 
by T. G. Phillips and T. B. Augur. 


ZONING REVISION TO Limit BULK OF BUILDINGS PROPOSED FOR NEw York CITy 
Business Districts. (Regional Plan Association, Inc. Information Bulletin, 
Mar. 23, 1936, no. 29, pp. I-11. illus., maps.) 


[ZONING SymposiuM.] (Jn Proceedings of 9th National Conference on City Plan- 
ning, 1917, pp. 168-227; with discussion, pp. 289-208.) 
Contents: Districting and zoning of cities. Introductory remarks, by H. D. 
Ashley; Districting and zoning of cities, by L. Purdy; Districting progress 
and procedure in California, by C. H. Cheney; Building heights in Washing- 
ton, D. C., by R. B. Watrous; Constitutional limitations on city planning 
powers, by E. M. Bassett. 


ZONING’S GREATEST DANGER, LAwLess Acts BY BOARDS OF APPEALS. (American 
City, Aug. 1927; vol. 34, pp. 231-234.) 
Reprinted with comment from article 7m Housing Betterment, July 1927. 


237 


Br 


Wy 


of 


INDICES 


INDEXZORCASES 


A PAGE 
A. P. M. Holding Corp. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
Peary TOsAOFT AA eres ts. s Selec 
Actlaw Realty Corp. v. Wilkus, 
Supreme Court, Queens County, 
New York Law Journal, June 17, 
1926, affd. 220 App. Div. 720, 
PER Fa 7O3 ssc ois dhe ee oad 
Adams v. Kalamazoo Ice & Fuel 
ee 245 Mich. 261, 222 N. W. 


157 


30 


iss ce a ae 105, 218 
Ade Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
MAIS I OZO Sg os iia es sie bine sis s 158 
Adelman v. Connell, 234 App. Div. 
Bee SANG O.tO70..o 8s 6 2 aks. 127 
Adelmann vy. Williams, 10 N. J. 
MisGeiaa 150A. 148..50.6.60. 203 
Aiken v. E. B. Davis, Inc., 106 Fla. 
SG ey aot Le ee er a 209 


Ain v. Fairchild, Supreme Court, 
Nassau County, N.Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 21, 1932...... 

Aitken v. Borough of Hasbrouck 
ae? 5 N. J. Misc. 433, 136 


207 


90 
Albright v. Crim, 97 Ind. A. 388, 

“aby seal dh 6 (0 Pan a 93, 
Alexe v. ehetcr. Supreme Court, 

Westchester County, May 20, 

1925, 215 App. Div. 838, 213 

N. Y.S. 754 
Allen v. City of Paterson, 98 N. J. L. 

661, 121 A. 610, 99 N. J. L. 532, 

12 "A. AMES Ae oh atthe al 183, 204 
Allerad Realty Corp. v. Fire Com’r 

of New York, 138 Misc. 232, 244 

OS TE Se S52 9 1 i 45 
Alpern, Appeal of, 291 Pa. 150, 139 


213 


ETE Ak een eae 206 
Alshap Realty Corp. v. Kleinert, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law ‘Journal, July 16, 
1926, 218 App. Div. 862, 219 
EO TOO oa a yalite leone didlos 
Altschul v. Ludwig, 216 N. Y. 450, 


111 N. E. 216 


107 


se eer ee eee eee e eevee 


PAGE 


America Land Co. v. City of Keene 
(NSH Satis (ad) 484 tee a 
American Oil & Refining Co. v. 


Beveridge, 58 P. (2d) 337 (Okl.).. 216 


American Reduction Co., In re, 
Court of Common Pleas, Alle- 
gheny County, Pa., February 12, 
1924, 15 Municipal Law Re- 
porter 183, 72 Pittsburgh Legal 
Journal 321, 326 

American Wood Products Co. v. 
City of Minneapolis (Minn.), 35 
HOCQI POST owe Aen ae nee 

Amero v. Board of Appeal of Glou- 
ae 283, Mass. 45, 186 N. E. 


Ammanna v. Walsh, 136 Misc. 653, 
SAVING AS82532 Vee «ite eee 
Anderson v. Board of Standards & 
Appeals, Supreme Court, New 
York County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, June 22, 1928..... 
Anderson v. Jester, 206 Iowa 452, 
D2 ING W £3 54 aur cs. rs 158, 177, 
Anderson v. Steinway & Sons, 178 
App. Div. 507, 165 N. Y. S. 608, 
22 VINEY. O305 117 No Bip 75p i 
Anderson-Kerr, Inc. v. Van Meter, 
162 Okl 176,19 Px (2d) 1008.24 
Andrews v. Barrett, 100 Cal. A. 
SOTRIGTIE ATO coe tertersle tre chee es bats 
Andrews vy. City of Piedmont, 100 
Cala 700; 2G DPAIG Gans ais 
Apollo Bldg. Corp. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
AUgusto; | O2Gmenine noire, 
Applestein v. Baltimore, 156 oe 


AON TAS OOO None. Vat ee 
Apter v. City of Newark, 6 N. i 
Misc. 554,142 A. 310.3. 0... 182, 


Arkansas State Highway Commis- 
sion v. Anderson, 184 Ark. 763, 
Ag OMW LAG Na SOR to hmak nee 

Armourdale State Bank v. Kansas 
City, 131 Kan. 419, 292 P. 745... 

Armstrong, Appeal of, Court of 
Common Pleas, Allegheny 
County, Pa., October Term, 


178 


122 


216 


157 
160 


213 


36 


ZONING 
PAGE PAGE 
Arseekay Syndicate v. Board of N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
Standards and Appeals, Supreme March 25, 1935... ..:.). one 210 


Court, Queens County, New York 
Law Journal, October 25, 1932, 
241 App. Div. 755, 270 N. Y. S. 
232,205. IN, Yo150; 1OLUN ey 
OTL are di, Weta teh wat erates 158 
Arseekay Syndicate, Inc. v. Bur- 
wellles-FU (od) Osa Ni Ya)onuee 181 
Arthur v. Virkler, 144 Misc. 483, 
ZSS/NGY TC OvOsO an ue te oa ae 04 
Arverne Bay Construction Co. v. 
Murdock, 247 App. Div. 889, 286 
N.Y. S. 785, affd. 271 N. Y. 631, 146 
Ashley v. Walsh, 213 App. Div. 
156s 1OUN Ys ot tor 24 ley 


S27NLSOIN Abb dO eee ees 208 
Atkins v. West, 222 App. Div. 308, 

220 NGY29/.335 cae ne laine 172 
Atkinson v. Piper, 181 Wis. 5109, 

IGS NGW3 54402 eee eee 40, 57 
Atlanta, City of, v. Smith, 165 Ga. 

146;/1140 SAE A200 Coe 46, 64, 1 


Atlantic Broadcasting Co. v. Wayne 

i payiogaN. taal 442 162 5A) 

OF a cites J Aken Phe tae 178, 179 
Atticn Village of, v. Day, 134 Misc. 

882, 236 N. Y.S. 607, affd. 230 

App. Dive776;:243 uNIAY 9529159179 
Aufderheide v. Polar Wave Ice & 

Fuel Co., 319 Mo. 337, 4 S. W. 

(30) 077600 yee ae rene 16, 218 
Aurora, City of, v. Burns, Supreme 

Court, Springfield, February 17, 

1025 eG IOI o4 AO TUN ek. 

[OA ae en 46, 47, 54, 64, 65, 66 
Austin, City of, v. Nelson, 45 S. W. 

(2d). 602 (Cliexi) a) oases 
Averch v. City of Denver, 78 Colo. 


ZAG 2A POAT annie ee 54 
Averell v. Thatcher, Supreme 

Court, Kings County, N. Y., 

New York Law Journal, Decem- 

DEK 24, GZS era 108 
Ayer v. Cram, 242 Mass. 30, 136 N. 

Bei 338 cee eee Selene See 97, 177 


B. & L. Enterprises, Inc. v. Schnei- 
der, Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, December 30, 1933.... 101 

Babylon, Village of, v. Freund, Su- 
preme Court, Suffolk County, 


Babylon, Town of, v. Wellwood 
Cemetery Ass’n, Inc., Supreme 
Court, Suffolk County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, Novem- 
ber-25, 1935. 5 0) eee 217 

Bachman v. Colpaert Realty Corp., 
194.N.. E783 (Ind.). 2 ae 185 

Ballard v. Roth, 141 Misc. 319, 253 
Nw Y.. 6.2. . o8 cee 43, 89 

Baltimore, Mayor and City Council 
of, v. Linthicum, 183 A. 531 
(Md.) a ob eb wtdele yuh 31 

Baltimore, Mayor and City Council 
of, v. Rutherford, 145 Md. 363, 


125) AS 725 0. ce oe 15, 153 
Banner Grain Co. v. Houghton, 142 

Minn.'28, 170 N. W, 653 canes 27 
Barbier v. Connolly, 113 U. S. 27, 

5S. Gt.35'7/(Cal)) “0 ae 203 
Barker v. Boettger, 124 Misc. 461, 

208 N. Y.'S, 265. >: soe 157 
Barker v. Switzer, 209 App. Div. 

151, 205.N: Y..S.10Sscaeen 28, 49, 86 
Bartkus v. Albers, 189 Wis. 539, 

208 N: W.260.". o). 3 105 


Bartsch v. Ragonetti, 123 Misc. 
903, 207 N. Y. S. 142, affd. 214 
App. Div. 799, 210 N. Y. S. 825. 215 

Bass v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 24, 1925..... 158 

Batches v. Connell, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, November 21, 1932 157 

Bator Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Bronx County, 
New York Law Journal, Decem- 
ber 17, 1929, affd. 229 App. Div. 
850, 243 .N. YS. 8075.72 156 

Bauer v. Board of Fire & Police 
Com’rs of Paterson, 102 N. J. L. 
235,:132 A. 515)... 400 206 

Bauernschmidt v. Standard Oil Co., 

153 Md. 647, 139 A. 531..15, 172, 177 

Baum v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 


Journal, April 19, 1935...... IlI, 209 
Bauman v. Underwood, 122 Oh. St. 
260, 171,N. E..336. 5. 7 eee 14 
Baxley v. City of Frederick, 133 
OKI. 84; 271 P.257.. oes 69 
Beane v. H. K. Porter, Inc., 280 
Mass:, 538, 182°N. E..823. 0. 93 


242 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Beardsley v. Evangelical Lutheran 
Bethlehem Church, 261 Mich. 
eo saG No W808 2 hk 146, 154 
Beardsley Realty Co. v. Walsh, 225 
App. Div. 815, 232 N. Y. S. 693, 
affd. 252 N. Y.571, 170 N. E. 147 157 
Beckmann v. Talbot, 239 App. Div. 
aeeOA: Now) 4c. 193 Ac panicles o's 217 
Bee Dee Realty Corp. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


Haiuary ft dt19302). s/o. os. ys wale 156 
Beem v. Davis, 31 Ida. 730, 175 P. 
Sole SUN Oe ee ae en aa 22 


Be, Houghton, 164 Minn. 146, 
BodeiNs. Ww.) 500, 2°73: U._S. 671, 
PION ATA oa a 5. aie Peni 46, 65 

Beinert v. Miller, 100 Misc. 318, 

165 N. Y. S. 602, 188 App. Div. 
Piet TO UN YS. 3909-5 2). 126, 136 

Belasco v. Mayor, etc., of Jersey 

City, 6 N. J. Misc. 1088, 143 A. 


nt. file ee eee a 204 
Benedict v. Milleman, 128 Misc. 
BOP IGIN NY © 9.2500, Os cies: 207 


Benfish Const. Co. v. Department 

of Health, Supreme Court, Kings 

County, N. Y., New York Law 

MOMTRAlS ADI 21; 1931 sce) s ee 218 
Bennett v. Board of Appeal of Cam- 

bridge, 268 Mass. 419, 167 N. E. 

Corer feels Nee we ged es 1743 
Bennett v. Inspector of Buildings 

of Cambridge, 270 Mass. 436, 170 

ON TSS YEE Se a eae 196 
Benton, City of, v. Phillips, 191 

Ark. 961, 88 S. W. (2d) 828.... 41 
Berger v. City of Salem, 131 Ore. 

674, 284 P. 273 
Berrata v. Sales, 82 Cal. A. 324, 255 

ROGAN Wiese esos ed how 36 
Best & Co. v. Incorporated Village 

of Garden City, 247 App. Div. 

Osa OOINUNY 3S. O80) 3.05 (ok 208 
Bethlehem, City of, v. Goodman, 

Court of Common Pleas, North- 

pape County, Pa., April 4, 


927 
Better Built Home & Mortgage Co. 
v. Davis, 302 Mo. 307, 259 S. ae 
80 


Better Built Home & Mortgage Co. 
v. McKelvey, 301 Mo. 130, 2568. 
BRMAGS CNC IA. AEs aalels is neat le 15 
Beveridge v. Harper & Turner Oil 
Trust, 168 Okl. 6090, 35 P. (2d) 435 216 


Beveridge v. Westgate Oil Co., 171 
kKIN3600/44. Pi(2d) 26a wer eee 216 
Beverly Hills, City of, v. Anger, 110 
Gala A462042041P2 A700 alee 52 
Bianchi v. Commissioner of Public 
Buildings of Somerville, 279 
Mass. 136, 181 N. E. 120..64, 112, 195 
Bianco v. City Engineer of North 
Adams, 284 Mass. 20, 187 N. E. 


TO Deueyee ss geil antares oe cote ee ta 188 
Biggs v. Steinway & Sons, 229 N. Y. 
LORI 2OUN Ee Ete Ld rom ere ee cle 32 


Biltmore Holding Corp. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


Pulvesi 1 O20 sea. eet ae aes 156 
Bilt-Wel Co. v. Dowling, 5 N. J. 
Misc1S0,4135 As 7Gam ee. roe 160 
Binder v. Hejhal, oF ONE SEN G8 hye) 
INE OO Eos srt en senate ee 32, 59 
Biscay v. City of Burlingame, 127 
CalpAv2I3y 16 Pa(2d) 984. 105 
Bismarck, City of, v. Hughes, 53 
NSDe8s35208:NAWa7 EE oon 46, 65 


Bizzell v. Board of Aldermen of 
Sey pt 192 N. C. 348, 135 S. 


FSO tartare sree eis We 110, 179 
Bian a Safford, 333 Ill. 355, 164 
NER 60 (utterances 64, 86, 193 
Black Belt xe v. Hall, Supreme 
Court, Chautauqua County, 
Jamestown (N. Y.) Evening 
Journal, November 18, 1922.... 158 


Blake v. Board of Appeals of Hart- 
ford, 117 Conn. 527, 169 A. 195. 208 
Blevins v. Harris, 172 Okl. 90, 44 P. 
(SORT IO ee are ae 216 
Bloch v. McCown, 223 Ala. 348, 135 


55033 
Block pricing Corp. v. Warshaw, 
TATIVISCHS1G,1253 WNwey eos 2 ty 
ah App. Div. 839, 261 N. Y. S. 
O14 Sate ce ae eee ieee cna 131, 156 
Blumenthal & Co. v. GORE 70 Cal: 
A. 668, 236 P. 216.... 52,64, 105, 192 
Boland v. Compagno, 154 La. 460, 


O75) OO LN See aw et irne ates 47, 91 
ne v. Hauser, 111 Oh. St. 402, 
BU NE OS bs tama mie cerning 108 


Baas v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, August 1, 1929... 157 

Bond v. Cooke, 237 App. Div. 229, 
2629NG Yocon16 

Borea Cont. Co. v. Murdock, Su- 
preme Court, Bronx County, 


243 


ZONING 


PAGE 


N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
May 14, 1936 
Borgeaud v. Loe 153 Misc. 540, 
274N.Y.S. 5 
Bouchard v. Tae 196 Wis. ae 
220: N.\ Wi 200s. cians 46, 57, 62, 
Bove v. Donner-Hanna Coke Corp., 
142 Misc. 329, 254 N. Y. S. 403, 
236 App. Div. 37,258N. Y. S.229 
Bowen v. City of Atlanta, 159 Ga. 
LAS a5 OE OOn as ete cee is 
Boyd v. City of Sierra Madre, 41 
CalsAs'S20N 1832307 nie 
Boyd v. Walsh, 217 App. Div. 461, 
216 NYY, 242,,alia. 244°NiiY¥e 
§12,/155 Ny) Eb. 877 
Bradley v. Board of Zoning Adjust- 
ment of Boston, 255 Mass. 160, 
L5OrN Ey GODe iat wi eee ee a ee 
Brady v. Northwestern Ins. Co., 
11 Mich. 42 
Brady v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
New York County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, April 26, 1926 
Brebra Realty Corp. v. Cooper, 
Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, August 13, 1930....... 
Breese v. Hutchins, 11 N. J. Misc. 
TS LOSI? Od Me aerate einer yt 
Bregman v. Reville, 131 Misc. 486, 
226 N. Y. S. 285, affd. 223 App. 
Div..756, 227 N. Y: S. 776 
Brennan v. Walsh, 195 N. Y. S. 264 
Brenner v. Ricca, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, July 26, 1935 
Brett v. Building Commissioner of 
Brookline, 250 Mass. 73, 145 
N. E. 26 
Brewster v. Wendt, 244 App. Div. 
450, ) 270 WAY Wo) 2 O lis pean 
Bribitzer v. Bevan, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, December 2, 
LOZ Be Nar on Sea es 160, 
Bribitzer v. Bevan, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, January 18, 
LQSO 8 he 4 UE eile faite erat 
Brightwaters, Village of, v. Di 
Blasi, Supreme Court, Suffolk 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, May 22, 1926......... 
Britting  v. Hartman, Supreme 
Court, Queens County, Nii Ys, 


ooceoereoere eee see eevee 


eocereer ee eevee 


eececesreeveer eve 


oeeerer cee eee reece 


Cae eK 


94 


204 


207 


155 


22 


146 


Zi 


123 


110 
119 


214 


ANY MTS Race ants aa 64, 193 


119 


209 


210 


54 


PAGE 
New York Law Journal, August 
19, 1933, modified New York 
Daily News, November 21, 1933 98 
Broadway & 96th St. Realty Co. v 
Walsh, 203 App. Div. 468, 196 
NU YV*S..672 002 02 161 
Brocoris Realty Corp. v. Village of 
Scarsdale, 241 App. Div. 735, 269 
NiwYaion 746 
Broening v. Haley, 156 Md. 605, 
144A. 836708 es nee 56, 170 
Bronner v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, June 26, 1928, affd. 225 
App. Div. 759, 232 N. Y. S. 704. 
Brookings, City of, v. Martinson, 
60S. D: 168, 246 Ni Wao1Gh aa 
Brookline, Building Com’r of, v. 
McManus, 263 Mass. 270, 160 
NiED S87 urine cue 170, 182, 213 
Brougher v. Board of Public Works 
of San Francisco, 205 Cal. 426, 
271.P.\487, .107 Cal. Age ragigoc 


167 


Piil4Ose nik OO ae ee ee 55,57 
Broughton. Estate, Application of, 
185 S. E. 434 (N. Ci) Vee 120 — 


Brown v. Board of Appeals of 
Springfield, 327 Ill. 644, 159 N. E. 
226 Wl OAS 58, 162 
Brown v. City of Los Angeles, 183 
Cali783,31029R.07 1 Ore 122;0233 
Bruckner v. Walsh, 209 App. Div. 
909, 205 N. Y. S. 396 
Buckley v. Baldwin, 230 App. Div. 
245,244, Ni Y.5;2 
Buffalo Cremation Co. v. March, 
222 App. Div. 447, 220 N. Y. S. 
477; \affd. 249 \N. Y.0 §3ijnkee 
Ne Bi.572 7, 118 
Bugher v. Gottwals, 60 App. D. C. 


340, 54 F. (2d) 451...... + sala 54 
Builders’ Realty Corp. v. Bigelow, 


172 


eee ree eee 


oe ee ee eevee e eee eer 


102 N. J..L..433, 131 A. S88eeeensos 
Bultman Mortuary Service v. City 

of New Orleans, 174 La. 360, 140 

We BOD nip ule Wil ate Uns ee ee 121,213 
Burden v. Town of Ahoskie, 198 

N.C, 92, 150.5. £800.45 eee 207 
Burg v. Ackerman, 5 N. J. Misc. 96, 

135 Ay O72 0.0). S cadh 0 ce cen 59 
Burgess v. Magarian, 214 lowa 694, 

243 NUW.3560 025. eee ee 185 
Burke v. Connell, 242 App. Div. 

795, 274 NtY¥.'S, 745 cc 0 a eee 129 
Burr v. Rago, 120 Conn. 287, 180 A. 

MAA wih rsh Panacea Rik hy ial ae 119 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Butler v. Bannister & Schell, Inc., 
Supreme Court, New York 


County, New York Law Journal, 

February 14, 1929, affd. 226 App. 

Minmyoo, 234 NF Y.5.07576 5/05: 161 
Butler v. Connell, 235 App. Div. 

BoowesO NEY 2155935) 48 128 
Butvinik v. Mayor and Aldermen 

of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 803, 

BATONS Oe cele rs em aie co. ofo niece oe a8 178 


(C 


Cadillac Co. v. Christopher, 317 


Mo. 1179, 298 S. W. 720...... 15, 65 
Cahn v. Guion, 27 Oh. A. 141, 160 
PO Hal lt es tga ses 47, 88 


Cain v. as 343 Ill. 217, 175 
N. E. 39 
Call Bond 6 Mortgage Co. v. Sioux 
City, 219 lowa 572, 259 N. W. 
Sh in er A 106, 200 
Calton Court, Inc. v. Switzer, 221 
Ppa iva. 700,. 223. N. Y./S. 
Ree ene ss So ws vs 110, 179 
Cameron v. Murdock, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, July 3, 
“LAE SSS aes a 208 
Cann v. Chicago, 241 Ill. A. 21... 160 
Cannady v. Town of Montclair, 7 
Der verynisc,. 1045, 147 A. 737~% . 105 
Cantoni v. Moore, 179 App. Div. 
POTOSI Y 1S. O40. i a. 161 
Caponi v. Proc Bldg. Corp., Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


MMRUTH O20 2 crise cil ee veo 101 
Caponi v. Walsh, 228 App. Div. 86, 
PROSE 1D. ARO. Mesa es tha 159 


Carl v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, November 8, 1929 127 

Carrithers v. City of Louisville, 
Jefferson Circuit Court, Chancery 
Branch, Second Division, March 
12, 1932, 250 Ky. 462, 63 S. W. 


oe ee Pees eae 146 
Carter v. Harper, 182 Wis. 148, 196 

op AEE SS Se ae 27, 105 
Carter v. Rosenthal, 179 Wis. 243, 

MEPIS er, aia ta Balsa oe 158 
Castellano v. Walsh, Supreme 

Court, Kings County, N. Y., 


New York Law Journal, June 7, 
Ree Me Atle aidisteis saa 3% Hed 207 


PAGE 
Castleman v. Avignone, 56 App. 
Dy Gr253,°12 Fa(od) 3205.60, 61,5155 
Caulwal Construction Co. v. Bur- 
well, 136 Misc. 259, 240 N. Y. S. 
A ROR Ee tf Ah Meee each ALS 179 
NEE v. City of Hopkinsville, 217 
Ky. 135, 289 S. W. 223 
88, 89, 206, 209 
Cedar Ave. Realty Co. v. Flynn, 
Supreme Court, Bronx County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
PeDrilary 240 10st eee ene ie 207 
Charbonnet v. City of New Orleans, 
17Oilsd OLGGO Lay D034 5 were Lt 105 
Charleston v. Reed, 27 W. Va. 681, 
BSVAM Nessa ee Miao es 22 
Cherry v. Isbister, 201 App. Div. 
856, 193 N. Y. S. 57, affd. 234 
NERY S007 (13 Gn Nine AOS cm ees 107 
Chicago, City of, v. Nord, Munici- 
a mnie Chicago, Ill., January, 


Chighoim Realty Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
VON Gl2 I O22 0 en ee ee as ne 156 
Chudnov v. Board of Appeals of 
Bloomfield, 113 Conn. 49, 154 A. 
LO Nema tie ies eee ee ly OR 103 
Church & 94th St. Realty Corp. v. 
Murdock, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, May 2, 1933, September 
16, 1933, and December 28, 
Cone ee icra Sel a 119, 156, 209 
Cincinnati, City of, v. Struble, 30 
Ohiocv Nake (Nao oodan.e ee 53, 69 
Cincinnati, City of, v. Wegehoft, 
ProjOhySt136, 162 N2 E3360. 3 1 
Cirrito v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals of New York, 245 App. 
Div. 762, 280 N. Y. S. 606, affd. 
27OVN Y A060, 2001N. E5280 9 fen 57, 
Citizens’ Holding Co. v. Board of 
Adjustment of Newark, 7 N. J. 
Misc. 61, 144 A. 329 
City Ice & Fuel Co. v. Stegner, 120 
Oh. St. 418, 166.N. E. 226. .203,. 218 
Civello v. City of New Orleans, 154 


Lal Ovl.O7 oe 44008 eee 19, 47, 66, 97 
Clements v. McCabe, 210 Mich. 
ZOT RUT TAN AW e722 treito crate 13,14 


Clemons Realty Co. v. Brady, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
AURUSE30,.51027 stated tata 156 


245 


ZONING 


PAGE 


Cliffside Park Realty Co. v. Bor- 
ough of Cliffside Park, 96 N. J. 
L. 278, 114 A. 79 

Clifton-Highland Co. v. City of 
Lakewood, 41 Oh. A. 9, 179 N. E. 
198, 124 Oh. St. 399, 178 N. E. 837 

Cobb, In re, 128 Misc. 67, 217N. Y. 


Di 5OF EM en Ce ee, 
Cochran v. Preston, 108 Md. 220, 
FO HAS TIES te chavs Sth encore me Re Ae a 
Cochran v. Neaay 287 Mass. 500, 
IOZINAENCE Sy ea are ae ee 
Cockcroft v. Miller, 187 App. Div. 
FOAL OUND Bi 200, eG lof; 


Cohen v. Murdock, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, May 11, 1935 .... 

Cohen v. Rosevale Realty Co., 120 
Misc. 416, 199 N. Y. S. 4, 206 
App. Div. 681, 199 N. Y. S. 916. 

Cohen v. Rosevale Realty Co., 121 
Misc. 618, 202 N. Y. S. 95, affd. 
211 App. Div. 812, 206 N. Y. S. 
SOR eae AES SRA ere Les gs 

Colby v. Board of Adjustment, 81 
Colo. 344, 255 P. 443....14, 47, 

Coleman v. Board of Appeal of 
Boston, 281 Mass. 112, 183 N. E. 
TOO Te re cee Ue MM eae 146, 

Coley v. Campbell, 126 Misc. 860, 


SISTING 3,070 ie eee eae en 43 


Collins v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Bronx 
County, New York Law Journal, 
March 209, 1929, 253 N. Y. 594, 
P71 NASER 

Collins v. Moore, 125 Misc. 777, 
21M NY 4.0!-437, alld. 215sApp- 
Divy7O0n213, ING INcon 7o2 wae oe 

Colorado Springs, City of, v. Miller, 
95, C0l01337, 30.b, (2d) Glee 

Commonwealth v. Dillon, 277 Mass. 
1900;176 NO Bas 21s. 59, 62, 

Commuters’ Coach Co. v. Minton, 
7N. J. Misc. 478, 146 A. 921.111, 

Comstock v. City of New Britain, 
LiaiConnt2s.fsrAnsss-.2 eee 

Conaway v. Atlantic City, 107 
Ni SE A04e tsa ANG. Ce fate 

Connor v. District of Columbia, 61 
App. D. C. 288, 61 F. (2d) 1015.. 

Consolidated Cleaning Shops, Inc., 
Abe of, 103 Pa. Super. 66, 157 

Contras v. Mayor and Aldermen of 
Jersey City, 4 N. J. Misc. 680, 


eeceoer eee eee eee eee 


210 


219 


120 


128 


PAGE 


134 A. 122, 5 N. J. Misc. 59, 135 
A 


Convention of Protestant Episcopal 
Church v. Mayor and City Coun- 
cil of Baltimore (Md.), Baltimore 
City Court, Baltimore Daily Rec- 
ord, October 17, 1928, 280 U. S. 
525; 50 2, Gt. 07) Oe 146, 

Cook v. Howard, 155 Md. 7, 141 A. 
340 sic vein e Sash so sea 

Coombs v. Larson, 112 Conn. 236, 
152 A. 297 

Corbett v. Carson, Mayor of Port- 
land (Ore.), Circuit Court, Au- 
gust, 19 

Cordts v. Hutton Company, 146 
Misc. 10, 262 N. Y. S. 539, affd. 


eeecer ecw eee eee ewe eee ce 


eer eee e eee eee ee see ee 


266..N. Y. 390, 165 ING Baie 
aX, 55» 
Costa v. Dandrow, 12 N. J. Misc. 


$22,175 A2205. 3) J..4 50 eee 
Cotton v. Leo, 110 Misc. 519, 180 
N. Y. S. 554, 194 App. Div. 921, 
ISA NAYS) 04300. ee 151, 155, 
Coulthard v. Board of Adjustment 


177 


215 


205 


of Neligh, 265 N. W. 530 (Neb.).. 1 


Courter Oil Co. v. Oklahoma City, 


167 Okl. 633,31 P. (2d) S060 
Coyne v. Prichard, 272 Pa. 424, 116 
AL315:). a 200 wien 110, 


Creighton v. Burns, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, October 9, 1025.08. 

Cromwell v. American Bible So- 
ciety, 202 App. Div. 625, 195 
NaYeSi2t 

Cromwell-Franklin Oil Co. v. Okla- 
homa City (Okl.), 14 F. Supp. 


Cusack Co. v. City of Chicago (IIl.), 
242,U.:S. 526, 37 5S. Cts 100s 


eeoereceecsrece ere eee ee ee 


D 


Daleson Realty Corp. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
September 16, 1926: . J.) yaaa 

Dallas, City of, v. Burns, 250 S. W. 


arg ng (Tex.) oats ans ol tle ee 47, 


Dallas, City of, v. McElroy, 254 
S. W. 599 (Tex.) aa tS a Sire 
Dallas, City of, v. Mitchell, 245 
». Wig44 Cl ex:): sativa 


246 


179 


32 


64 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Dallas, City of, v. Urbish, 252 S. W. 
REIN Te eAPok a oy cee siya odors 65 
Dantzig v. Durant, 21 Ohio Law 
PRE DOE ETS O50 6 oa ce cles wcare ous 64, 195 
Darien, Town of, v. Webb, 115 
SSonnsol,.102'A.'690. 0 es 11! 


Darraugh v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, April 2, 1929, affd. 228 
App. Div. 703, 238 N. Y.S.818.. 168 

David Holding Corp. v. Murdock, 
Bs0rmisc,007,.271 N.Y. S. r77, 
affd. 264 N. Y. 609, 191 N. E. 

AOE ce GS An Sa ae 207 

Davis v. Philbert, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, April 16, 1925..... 32 

Dawley v. Collingwood, 242 Mich. 


AT INO MEW 700. oS. ea ns es 16 
Dawson, In re, 136 OKI. 113, at i 

A eet se os aes vs att 
Darker v. Moffett, 6 N. J. Mise. 

chile eo Na ay Ge i, 160 


Deerfield Realty Co. v. Hague, 8 
Noe eeviasc.. 637, 151A. 373, 9 
N. J. Misc. 857, 155 A. 893...... 54 
De Falco v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, June 24, 1930..... 159 
DeFine v. Board of Health, 125 
Diise..767, 211 N.Y. S.-717; affd. 
217 App. Div. 753, 216 N. Y. S. 


Se ihe s vicis ona ee oS 105 
Deitenbeck v. Village of Oak Park, 
331 Ill. 406, 163 N. E. 445 
43, 88, 206 
De Lano v. City of Tulsa (Okl.), 26 
CES AES 64, 195 
Del Fanta v. Sherman, 107 Cal. 
Gey 10 Bg Urey eae 216 


Delpad Realty Corp. v. Connell, 
Supreme Court, Bronx County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
LUE TE oY ag ER a 168 
Dema Realty Co. v. Jacoby, 168 
Dame 2123 0.3140. os bees 19, 113 
Dema Realty Co. v. McDonald, 
Mirieae tos) 1219,,013.,. 6.54 19, 113 
Dempsey v. Murdock, 241 App. 
Div. 64,271 N. Y.S.9 
Des Moines v. Gilchrist, 67 lowa 
210, 25 N. W. 136, 56 Am. R. 


3 

Des Moines, City of, v. Manhattan 
Oil Co., 193 lowa 1096, 184 N.W. 
BeOS NW. O21 .is-.)5.05'. 43, 54, 89 


PAGE 
De Vito v. Pearsall, 115 N. J. L. 
23 LOO Wir 202 soniye aie bee 109, 200 


Deynzer v. City of Evanston, 319 

Ill. 226, 149 N. E. 790.. ..47, 54, 57, 65 
Dickason v. Harris, 158 La. 974, 

105 S. 33 
Dickinson v. Inhabitants of Plain- 

field, 13 N. J. Misc. 260, 176 A. 


7IOWrI LOAN Go) il 40, od aA 

LO Sree per Pn See ens 109, 205 
Dickson v. Harrison, 161 La. 218, 

LOG Sard Uo ateel mente hoetecden eet: 87, 90 
Dillon v. O’Shaughnessy, 222 App. 

Diy.i772; 226 NG Yon 7h eenon. 176 


Dinerman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 


Law Journal, April 27, 1925..... 157 
Dinkins v. Kip, 110 N. J. Eq. 486, 
LOO 'AUO70 ce ec ater ae 170, 172 


Discher v. Stephens, Circuit Court, 
Webster Groves, Mo., March 12, 
120) MR tte Meee eee eet) 127 

District of Columbia v. Cahill, 60 
ADDAV Oe Gne4d2 a S4ucb (20) 

AGS Seat Maree ey ei eieral testa 107, 108 

District of Columbia, Commission- 
ers of, v. Shannon & Luchs Const. 
eee 57 App: D.C. 67,117, F: oy) 


219 
Dollman v. Osbon, Marion Circuit 
Court, Indianapolis, Ind., May 3, 
L2G ener 52, 64, 146, 167, 195 
Donegan v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, September 20, 1929 205 
Dorison v. Saul, 98 N. J. L. a . 


TID AR OO bce e te th lesen Saree 162 
Dorsey v. Gotwals, 61 App. D. is 
Ales Vea (20) A407 vine) eee 54 


Dorsey Motors, Inc. v. Davis, 13 
N. J. Misc. 620, 180 A. 396... 123, 154 
Downey v. Sioux City, 208 lowa 
12°73; 2271NY Wal252 oon 16, 43, 87 
Downham v. City Council of Alex- 
andria (Va.), 58 F. (2d) 784....55, 88 
Downs v. Borough of Sea Bright, 
12 N. J. Misc. 11, 169 A. 342..... 195 
Dowsey v. Village of Kensington, 
ZG7EN aay we22 eh 77 Nt oa 427: 
53, 55, 82, 92, 162, 174 
Drabble v. Zoning Board of Review 
of Providence, 52 R. I. 228, 159 
ALS20 satin. nee: 148, 156, 213 
Drazan v. Moore, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, January 13, 1925... 207 


247 


ZONING 


PAGE 
Drennen v. Mason, 222 Ala. 652, 
1331S 4089 Huse orem Mains © z 57 
Dunne v. Walsh, 235 App. Div. 72, 
S5OIN TYG at LO at eae eemeeets 159, 168 


Durkin Lumber Co. v. Fitzsim- 
mons, 1060 N. J. L. 183, 147 A. 
CLA Pars Ware neh, dee Lis ind 182, 

Durning v. Reville, 137 Misc. 173, 
241 N. Y. S. 539, affd. 232 App. 
Div..796;240 NOY <5. GOS .0L ss 

Duty v. Vacuum Oil Co., 317 Pa. 
ie Oy £7 Wal wo Dat Uo ako 08 fete 

Dwyer v. City Council of Berkeley, 
200: Gal®s505,1253 Rio32n soni 

Dyer v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 9, 1930....... 


B 


E. & M. Land Co. v. Board of Ad- 
justment of Newark, 4N. J. Misc. 
407, 133 A. 413, affd. 103 N. J. L. 
AGT MAS As QU7 lari cue ana 

East Providence Mills v. Zoning 
Board of Review of East Provi- 
dence, 51 R. I. 428, 155 A. 531 

109, 

Eaton v. Klimm, 217 Cal. 362, 18 
PH(20)- O75. Nate) aenaaes avate 

Eaton v. Newark, 3 N. J. Misc. 
BOS HIZO ATT Ae eee a el 

Eaton v. Sweeny, 257 N. Y. 176, 
LPT INABA LD anne each oie aes 

Eckels v. Murdock, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, September 6, 1933, 242 
App. Div. 690, 273 N. Y. S. 401, 
265 N. Y. 545, 193 N. E. 313 

130, 159, 160, 

Edbro Realty Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
september 2). 1024s0(h ge oe ee on 

Edlar Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
JUySiio20 0 ch ei nar ee 

Eggie v. Board of Com’rs of Audu- 
me 6 N. J. Misc. 1094, 143 A. 

Eka v. Bundlie, District Court, 
Second Judicial District, Ramsey 


203 


146 
211 


36 


157 


57 


148 


93 
160 


55 


209 


177 


207 


206 


PAGE 


ee St. Paul, Minn., July 23, 
Ehrhardt v. Board of Zoning Ap- 
peals, City Court, Baltimore, 
Md., Baltimore Daily Record, 
October 20, 1924. / 4... a eee 
Ehrlich v. Village of Wilmette, 361 
Ill. 213, 197 N. E. 567 
Eichenlaub v. St. Joseph, 113 Mo. 
sae 21 S.:W. 8, 8: Rea 
Eben v. City of Milwaukee, 
Wis. 633, 209 N. W. 860........ 
Elizabeth City v. Aydlett, 
N. Go585, 152.9... 08 (aes 
Elizabeth City v. Aydlett, 200 
N.-€,.58;,150,.S) E2163 lene 
Elizabeth City v. Aydlett, 201 
N.C. 602, 161 5. E76 nope 
Elkay Realty Co. v. Redfern, 5 
N.-J. Misc. 717, 138A, 190. 
Ellish v. Zoning Board of Appeals 
of Ramapo, 141 Misc. 916, 253 
Neale riba 9, 
Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank 
v. Board of Standards and 


Appeals, 248 App. Div. 155, 
(N. Y.) 


eeoererezree eee eee ee sees 


ceo eo ee eee eee eee ee eeereee 


Empire City Racing Assn. v. City 
of Yonkers, 132 Misc. 816, 230 
Nw ¥5 9.45745 ssa 0a ence 

Empire State Lines v. Levy, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
October 1,,1035.4ic nee 207, 

Esdora Realty Corp. v. Walsh, 229 
App. Div. 866, 243 N. Y. S. 810, 
afid. 254 N. Y. 600, 173 N. EB 
883 Fee eS Oe 

Essanarr Garage Corp. v. Board of 
Standards and Appeals, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, March 11, 1932, 
affd. 237 App. Div. 857, 261 
N: Ye S.93°7.5550.707 Se 

Essex Inv. Co. v. Board of Com’rs 
of Newark, 14 N. J. Misc. 181, 
183, Al 4700. aie vs 0 oe 

Estabrook v. Chamberlain, 240 App. 
Div. 899, 1006, 267 N. Y. S. 425, 
268 N. Y.'S)1015).. ose ee 

Eubank v. City of Richmond (Va.), 
226. U.S, 137,.33.5. Ct. 70; aaa 

Euclid, Village of (Ohio), v. Ambler 
Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 47 S. 


204 


oS ecleame 54, 162 


208 


146 


156 
164 


39 


Cte Liaeaees 17, 28, 46, 47, 54, 55 


248 


INDEX OF CASES 


F 


Facey v. Leo, 110 Misc. 516, 180 
Die. 57553; alld. 230 Ni: Y. 602, 
130N. 

Fairchild Sons, Inc., Matter of, 
Supreme Court, Nassau County, 
New York Law Journal, Febru- 
ary 15, 1935, 246 App. Div. 555, 
282 N. Y.S. 916 

Fairchild Sons, Inc. v. Rogers, 246 
wee Divi5 55,0202 (NYS, 
CODA on Meg SNL A ie ee 

Falkenau & Hamershlag, Inc. v. 
Walsh, 214 App. Div. 705, 209 
Ni Y. ) 900, affd. 240 N. Y. 688, 
148 N. E. 75 

Falmouth, Inspector of Buildings 
of, v. General Outdoor Advertis- 
ing Co., 264 Mass. 85, 161 N. E. 
CEE 6c ys 50 wos: Sins o/s be 

Falvo v. Kerner, 222 App. Div. 
280, 225 N. Y.S. 7 

Fandel v. Board of Zoning Adjust- 
ment of Boston, 280 Mass. 195, 
182 N. E. 343 

Fassler v. All White Wet Wash 
Laundry, Inc., Supreme Court, 
New York County, N#&Y:; New 


Cr 


PAGE 


EO TOM uc. ds Sieur. 127, 153 


SREY Gobet Zines tA 


127 


5.11757, ,a1ds 250) N.Y; '613;4190 
INGE 35 Sarat soe etree cet ee 
Finger v. Connell, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, February 19, 1932, 


and May 27, 1932..... 146, 157, 
Fink v. Smith, 140 Kan. 345, 36 
PAGd O76 Ne pul neiiess ay hea 93, 


Fischer v. Borough Council of South 
Toms River, 13 N. J. Misc. 852, 
TOTP AM OS Oc ony i een ne a 93; 

Fitzgerald v. Merard Holding Co., 
106 Conn. 475, 138 A. 483, 110 
Conn. 130, 147 A. 513..107, 172, 

Fitzhugh v. City of Jackson, 132 
Missy 5520704: 1002 snr ce bn 

Flegenheimer v. Leo, Supreme 
Court, New York County, New 
York Law Journal, May 8, 1918, 
affd. 186 App. Div. 893, 172 
Nwxyaios Ole 

Fleming v. Board of Adjustment of 
Prospect Park, 318 Pa. 582, 178 
A. 81 


127. Fonda v. O’Donohue, 109 N. J. L. 


toy. bah La a Vo Bonaire. | ARAN Aachen 
Fontana, Matter of, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 


on Law Journal, August 11, Law Journal, May t0, 1925..... 
a SA ee a ee 170 Forbes, Petition of, 316 Ill. 141, 146 
peclinesy, City of Keene, 85 N. H. INV AAG Ltrs Loma uny aheieiatiee 
PAPERS NO5. foie as Sd Weleda ks 216 Forbes v. Hubbard, 348 Ill. 166, 
Fauss v. McConnell, 172 Ga. 444, iSO. NAEI 7670 vn oa 54, 82, 97, 
M2 Ge Fis sh bole tale 19,146 Ford v. City of Hutchinson, 140 
Feiss v. City of Cleveland, Court Kanes0 70371. (20) 300k nee 


of Common Pleas, Cuyahoga 
County, Ohio, September, 1924, 
Baltimore (Md.) Daily Record, 
Types ely fo aa ae eee 
Feitelberg v. Bales, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, N, Y., New York 


Fordham M. R. Church v. Walsh, 

244 N. Y. 280, 155 N. E. 575 

124, 

91 Fordhof Realty Co. v. Murdock, 
Supreme Court, Bronx County, 

N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


Law Journal, January 4, 1928.... 178 ADriliO. 193656 ae ees, eh as 
Fendley v. City of Anaheim, 110 Forman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
ales 1.204, FP: 700. s... 2s 93 Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Feraut v. City of Sacramento, 204 Law Journal, February 24, 1926.. 
PN Oe aa) hil yi ee 82, 92 Fort Lee Ferry Garage Co. v. Board 
Ficaro v. Hagedorn, Supreme Court, of Standards and Appeals, Su- 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York preme Court, New York County, 
Law Journal, February 15, 1929.. 170 New York Law Journal, August 
Ficaro v. Walsh, 226 App. Div. 441, 9, 1929, affd. 228 App. Div. 608, 
gute LY a ea 120 may. NG Veo. 77h citeet we eateries 
Fierst v. William Penn Memorial Fortieth St. & Park Ave., Inc. v. 
Corporation, 311 Pa. 263, 166 A. Fox, Supreme Court, New York 
SPM os kk ova ke och os ee by County, New York Law Journal, 


Fimiani v. Board of Appeals of Buf- 
falo, 233 App. Div. 552, 253 N. Y. 


January 17, 1927, 248 N. Y. 527, 
162 N. E. 511 


249 


O19 0 Qe of (6:0 8 Slee a ee ¢.@ 


PAGE 


209 


213 
210 


177 
47 


153 


124 
164 


179 
153 
177 

36 


167 


168 


146 


146 


ZONING 


PAGE 
40th St. & Park Ave., Inc. v. Walker, 
133 Misc. 907, 234 N. Y.S. 708... 38 
444 East 57th St. Corp. v. Deegan, 
ay App. Div. 507, 235 N. Y. S. 


yess hecneton Ave., Inc. v. Burden, 
Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, N. Y., June Q, 1925...46, 590 
4672 Broadway Corp. v. Board of 
Standards and Appeals, 225 App. 
Div. 97, 232 N. Y. S. 266, affd. 
250. Nuys 7 ft 1O0 Nw 3201002 140 
Fourcade v. City of San Francisco, 
106’ GaliGs5Ss235iPaosa ere 218 
Fowler v. Obier, 224 Ky. 742, 7 
SW (202 Ln eee a ea 16, 54, 55, 88 
Fox v. Kreuter, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, August 3, 
EP TSA Mi kans Soi Dik Me egy 120 
Fox Lane Corp. v. Mann, 216 App. 
Div. 813, 215 N. Y. S. 334, affd. 
243 N. Y. 550, 154 N. E. 600..... 107 
Fox Lane Corp. v. Moore, 216 App. 
Divt$13) 216 NYY2)S) 832,/ alld: 
243\NiYs\550, 154:N Bs600)2-%. 62107 
Fox Meadow Estates, Inc. v. Culley, 
233 App. Div. 250, 252 N. Y. S. 
178, aid: 261 Ni VY i506, 155 
IN CEU EAU) othe mnte 28, 55, 64, 195 
Francisco v. Department of Insti- 
tutions and Agencies, 13 N. J. 
MiscxO03 180 ASS43 in Daur as 04 
Frankel v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, April 21, 1925..... 107 
Franklin Street Methodist Epis- 
copal Church v. Crystal Oil & 
Gas \Co)) 309'sPay 35711163 Al 


QI 
Frax Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 123 
Miscv455,205.No.¥.9.720. 03 
Freetand v. Sargeant, 6 N. J. Misc. 
906, 143 A. 73 
Freeman v. Board of Adjustment of 
Great Falls, 97 Mont. 342, 34 P. 


(2G) 6a A URN hg dnt Lae ate 124 
Freeman v. Hague, 106 N. J. L. 

IST NATZASS SA Aca set anon 107 
Freint v. Borough of Dumont, 108 

Ne JAS ae 7 Aviso2 eens 38 


Friedlander v. 465 Lexington 
Avenue, Inc., Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, Mt. Vernon 
Argus, January 6, 1927, 222 App. __- 
Div. 689, 224 N. Y.S.800..... 40, 41 


PAGE 


Friedman Realty Co. v. De Stefan, 
127 Misc. 608, 217 N. Y. S. 142, 
220 App. Div. 661, 222 N. Y. S. 
BILL. dsislt eas ot eo 

Friend v. City of Chicago, 261 IIl. 
16,103 N. E..609..). 

Fuller v. Schwab, 124 Misc. 659, 
208.N)Y.S. 286 22h.) aah 


G 


Gabrielson v. Borough of Glen 
Ridge, 13 N. J. Misc. 142, 176 
A. 676, 29... ci a 

Gadek v. Kugler, 6 N. J. Misc. 471, 
141A. 561. ..0... da eee 

Gailo v. Moffett, 8 N. J. Misc. 39, 
148 A. 15 

Gallo v. Moffett, 8 N. J. Misc. 40, 
TAS AD 1526025) A ee 

Gammon Co. v. Standard Trust & 
Savings Bank, 327 Ill. 489, 158 
NS Es Srongec4. Serr 

Ganbarg v. Fassler, Supreme Court, 
New York County, N. Y., New 
mou Law Journal, August 12, 


ee 0,0 © @ © © wo & 0 @ © 0) 9 Che) ener ener 


93 
Gant v. Oklahoma City (Okla.), 
289 ULS..98, 53 S.Ct. 530s eee 
Garden Estates, Inc. v. Murdock, 
241 App. Div. 761, 270 N. Y. S. 
972, affd. 265 N. Y. 557, 193 
NED 
Garden Properties, Inc. v. Board of 
Appeals of New Rochelle, N. Y., 
Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, Westchester Law Jour- 
nal, October 11, 1933...146, 168, 
Gaston v. Ackerman, 6 N. J. Misc. 
694, 142 A. 545, 6 N. J. Misc. 
696,'142°AN 546.421). eee 110, 
General Outdoor Advertising Co. v. 
Department of Public Works, 
289 Mass. 149, 193 N. E. 799.... 
Gershenhorn v. Murdock, 241 App. 
Div. 873,271 N.Y. S. 080.cyam 
Giangrosso v. City of New Orleans, 
159 La. 1016, 106 S. 549...54, 91, 
Gilfillan’s Permit, 291 Pa. 358, He 
As T2600 305, Rt betel ee 
Gillespie v. Olena, 258 N. Y. Be 
180. NE. 3212 ..02 5). Voy 
Gillette v. Tyson, 219 Ala. 511, 122 


Gillman v. Walsh, 225 App. Div. 
671,23 DN. Y15/755 -4 eee 


250 


178 


164 
154 


154 
176 


204 


207 


216 


119 


4 
j 
g 
q 
, 
{ 
t 
by 


INDEX OF} CASES 


PAGE 
Gilmont Corp. v. Rogers, Supreme 
Court, Westchester County, N.Y., 
New York Law Journal, March 6, 
1935, and June 8, 1935..159, 168, 210 
Glens Falls, City of, v. Standard 
Oil Company, 127 Misc. 104, 215 
Dah 54. soo iu eves. 41, 43, 89 
Godfrey v. Building Commissioner 
of Boston, 263 Mass. 580, 161 
Sy B.S A AA ae Ae 155, 160 
Goebel v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Bronx 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
MOUthal eUuly. 17, 1029. ... 662... 131 
Goelet v. Moss, Supreme Court, 
New York County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, August 1, 


193 
Goldberg v. Mayor and Aldermen 

of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 564, 

RM SG eee as wee 154, 176 
Goldenberg v. Walsh, 215 App. 

Div. 396, 213 N. Y. S. 578, 242 

Pies yor 152° NE. 434 
Goldman v. Crowther, 

BPE Fit5Os viele 13, 14, 46, 54 
Goldsboro, City of, v. W. P. Rose 

Builders’ Supply Co., 200 N. C. 

405, 157 S. E. 58 
Goldstein v. Conner, 212 Mass. 57, 

RR FON eo gaelic bole ves 22 
Golf, Inc. v. District of Columbia, 

62 App. D. C. 309, 67 F. (2d) 575 217 
Gordon v. Board of Appeals, 131 

Misc. 346, 225 N. Y. S. 680... . 46, 59 
Gordon v. Buster, 113 Tex. 382, 257 

Va li, 60 Tee Se 103 
Gordon v. Commissioners of Mont- 

gomery County, 164 Md. 210, 


BM TO A. hobs kbs ote ale oh B17 
Gorieb v. Fox, 274 U. S. 603, 47 S. 
POMPEU VA). bh. d Saale’ 46, 57, 60 


Grantwood Lumber Co. v. Schweit- 
zer, 7 N. J. Misc. 1016, 147A. 741 36 
Granville, Village of, v. Krause, 131 
Misew 7547 225 'N: Y..S. 204... 4. 55 
Great Neck Estates, Village of, v. 
Bemak & Lehman, Inc., 223 App. 
Mivs053, 220-N: Y.:S. of7, aftd. 
Pas ey 051,162 N..E. 562... 216 
Green v. Jones, 5 N. J. Misc. 188, 


MMMEAMEEATD Pa s8. sc ace 2 eich 186 
Greenburgh, Town of, v. Secord, 
Supreme Court, Westchester 


County, White Plains (N. Y.) 
Daily Reporter, May 5, 1928... 217 


PAGE 
Greenfield v. Board of City Plan- 
ning Com’rs of Los Angeles, 6 
Cal. A. (2d) 515, 45 P. (2d) 219. 104 
Greenstein v. Bigelow, 5 N. J. Misc. 
IZA SG A OOlGe tee, cs A eRe 
Greenway Apartment Company ° V. 
Convention of Protestant Epis- 
copal Church, 280 U. S. 525, 50S. 
te OTECNI ote eine taney 146, 177 
Greenway Apartment Co. v. Suls, 
Baltimore (Md.) City Court, 
Baltimore Daily Record, March 
4, 1930, also Baltimore Daily 
RECOrd Sy Une 5 1 O30Np wien 154 
Greenwich Gas Co. v. Zoning Board 
of Appeals of Greenwich, 113 
Conn. 684, 155 A. 850. .172, 177, 212 
Grilli v. Gonnoll, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, February 26, 1932. 147 
Gross v. Walsh, 213 App. Div. 878, 
209 N. Y. S. 900; Supreme 
Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, July 8, 1925, affd. 
215 App. Div. 839, 213 N. Y. S. 
rat nV ALORA Le herbi, GA ss ets LAR, 147 
Grossman v. Mayor and Aldermen 
of Jersey City, 6 N. J. Misc. 688, 
TASHA SS GO mie rake Che oe aie Syn Fe 107 
Guaranty Const. Co. v. Town of 
Bloomfield, 11 N. J. Misc. 613, 
[OSEA TAD Pte neh tet e he 84, 122 
Guardian Garage, Inc. v. Dorman, 
23a ADD DIVAT Tp e5OUNalrLor 
C90 Tost Tea aie ides ches MEN eta) oly 128 
Gumm v. City of Lexington, 247 
Ky #130; 50;/o.,Ws (2d) 7703855 8, 38 
Gunderson v. Anderson, 190 Minn. 
ZAG 12 GINGA 5 biG cle ete 213 


H 


Haber v. Paramount Ice Corp., 239 
App. Div. 324, 267 N. Y. S. 340, 
264 N. Y. 98, 190 N. E. 163... .94, 95 
Hack v. Scales, 6 N. J. Misc. 307, 
141 A. 
Hacker v. Board of Appeals of 
Buffalo, 223 App. Div. 196, 227 
INSRYEA02173 an eae eae ere 205 
Hadacheck v. Sebastian, 165 Cal. 
410,011.32 0b 6554923940 Po sO4, 
36 oe CURL At ae eine 14,22, 112 
Hall v. Walsh, 137 Misc. 448, 243 
N. Y. S. 602, affd. 221 App. Div. 
TSOMI22VIN IS YO LOR ae ee 120 


© 2 ere. 0. 6) 6) 6 6's) 0. ¢ © 9\"0) ¢ 5a: Si 9) oe 


251 


ZONING 


PAGE 
Haller Baking me ’s Appeal, 295 Pa. 
257, TABI T Tide aie te cen ree 
Hamlett v. au UE ie 20 App. Div. 
E8253 NY ion OOONy aes mien: 70 


Hammond v. Beer of Appeal of 
Springfield, 257 Mass. 446, 154 
NE O2 i teu et ne RCe myers 146, 155 

Handel v. Walsh, 227 App. Div. 

O38, 1230iING LY. SUBSTI Mee ee 157 

Handy v. Village of South Orange, 
TISIANS35 (Ni) 2) see een 64, 193 

Hansen & Metzger, Inc. v. Connell, 

243 App. Div.795,278N.Y.S.719 160 

Harden v. City of Raleigh, 192 
NU-Guaos igs cabo he wees 161 

Hardy v. Superior Court of King 
County, 155 Wash. 244, 284 P. 93 105 

Harmon v. Tyler, 273 U. S. 668, 47 
S)Gtia7 i al roan yan 50 

Harper v. Board of Appeal of Bos- 
yee a7 Mass. 402,170) NOE: 

SO LAL nee cot et 123,/4154 

Harrie v. Ball, 23 Oh. A. 33, 155 
INGE 1OO i.e cet teae tie ste 46, 57, 62 

Harris v. Village of Dobbs Ferry, 
208 App. Div. 853, 204 N. Y. S. 


SOG ee res es ts gu Naty oat g! 
Harris v. City of Piedmont, 5 Cal. 

AN (od)eia0, 42) P.0(2d)93 5607 ea 55 
Harris v. Poulton, 99 W. Va. 20, 

I27. ON BOAT heals Oat esate tee 22 


Harrison v. Board of Adjustment of 
Montclair, 6 N. J. Misc. 570, 142 


ALA Sei ater te Ly aie ew aieae 157 
Harrison v. Hopkins, 48 R. I. 42, 
135 VAL C54 altel ota ues kale 148, 159 


Hart, Matter of, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, December 24, 1935 

Hart v. Bailey, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, December 24, 1935 

Hartford, City of, v. Katz, Superior 
Court, Hartford County, Conn., 
July 30,1025 etorue phi we ee 66 

Hartman v. Bigelow, 5 N. J. Misc. 
227 ALGO As 2Ole ime teat. 206 

Hartsin Construction Corp. v. Mill- 
hauser, 136 Misc. 646, 241 N. Y. 
re be 3 IP nA Vibe ¢ Whey Noy abe hd nn dy 33 

Harvey v. City of Seymour, 14 
Sawe(2d) 001 ULext) Anema 04 

Hassall v. Murdock, 246 App. Div. 
SARUZSSEN Secor 6a lu che Ny ie 160 

Hauser v. Erdman, 113 Oh. St. 662, 
WSO No Rd ooe eaaamenitaet 110, 179 


L ad 


10 


— 


76 


PAGE 
Hayden v. Clary, Supreme Court, 
Onondaga County, N Y., Jan- 
uary..6,.1922. 4... 07 gI 
ec Hoffman, 192 Wis. 63, 211 


Hayes v. City of New Orleans, 1 54 
La. 280, 97°S.:446.. 4) ee 218 
Hayman v. Walsh, 223 App. Div. 
722, 226 N. Y. S. 883, affd. 248 


N. Y.°§86, 462: N,. EB. 6340s 147 
Hazard v. Blessing, 55 App. D. C. 
114; 2.F. (2d) ‘9160.0 eee 43 


Headley v. Fennell, 124 Misc. 886, 

210 N. Y. S. 102, affd. 214 App. 

Div.:810, 210.N. Y, SSG ieee 161 
Healy v. Leo, 194 App. Div. 973, 

—1i95: NOY /5, 6480725 126, 152 
Hecht-Dann Const. Co. v. Burden, 

124 Misc. 632, 208 N. Y. S. 299. 123 
Hedgcock v. Arden Realty & In- 

vestment Co., 98 Colo. 522, 57 


P? (2d) 891.02 176 
Hedgcock v. Reed, 91 Colo. 155, 
13 P. (2d)'2040 50, 60 


Heepe, Matter of, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, March 14, 1924... 161 

Heffernan v. Zoning Board of Re- 
view of Cranston, 49 R. I. 283, 

142 A. 470, 50 Ri 1326) a4gnes 
og 2 WER Sih 3) 122, 148, 158 

Hegarty v. Murdock, Supreme 
Court, New York County, N. Y., 
ae York Law Journal, May 2 a 

Haier v. Du Bose, 99 Fla. 812, iy 
Cy GN oy 16, 31 

Helvetia Realty Co. v. Leo, 183 
INeey eo. 37+ eat 231 N. Y. 6109, 

132: Nwke O12..\/0. 0 128, 153 

Hendey v. Pee, 103 Noe rs 
305; 136:A.733. 07 0, eee 36, 118 

Hendrick v. Board of Standards 
and Appeals, Supreme Court, 
New York County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, June 20, 


1620 RCo te edt ee 147 
Henry v. City of Miami, 117 Fla. 


594, 1589.82. 24), J.) go 
Herbert v. Anderson, 122 Neb. 738, 

241 N. W. 545 
Herman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 

Kings County, N. Y., New York 

Law Journal, December 7, 1926 61 
Herring v. Stannus, 169 Ark. 244, 

2759. Wi321, 82 ws On ee 88 


252 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Herskovits v. Irwin, 299 Pa. 155, 
BPN AUT SNS oh e Gise sw AES a 110, 179 


Heyman v. Walsh, 137 Misc. 278, 
242 N. Y. S. 517, affd. 230 App. 
aiva2 2; 2A5iIN. Yo: 700... ..'.. 120 
Hicks v. Stoermer, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, December 29, 1928. 195 
Hill v. Storrie, 236 S. W. 234 Ce 65 
Hirschorn v. Castles, Rig Neils 
Ch EIS a Ye ee a 210 
Hoberman v. Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, May 14, 1929. 168 
Hochfelder v. City of New Orleans, 
Paya O53, 132.9..786 25 3... 2 105 
Hocker v. Howell, Supreme Court, 
Suffolk County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, February 18, 1930 161 
Hoel v. Kansas City, 131 Kan. 290, 
DUM ETONN GS 6 Se oa ese ee 82 
Hoffer v. Schwab, 126 Misc. 289, 
213N. Y.S. 659 
Holcombe v. City of Lake Charles, 
Ps aeeea AA S,.502\ .... 5. 19, 36 
Holden Co. v. Connor, 257 Mich. 
Benga tie WO15.).- tunis. + 50, 60 
Holdsworth v. Hague, 9 N. J. Misc. 
RESUS G AT OO2. oes «aise a ces « PIOM178 
Holley, Appeal of, 110 Conn. 8o, 
POOR 5 6 vy 's vie es 155, 181 
Holzbauer v. Ritter, 184 Wis. 35, 
PMN 352 vee shea s CLI Sse ws 
Homack Censt. Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
oo, Ge 131 
Home for Hebrew Infants v. Hand 
RevGorp., 131 Misc. 581, 227 
NM ZO Ne ocay is ia his ek /e 8 es 168 
Horan v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, September 11, 1929, 
aila..226 App. Div. *7o1, 239 
N. Y.S. 815 
Horowitz v. Rath, 9 N. J. Misc. 
BOTAN. 250 ees ies ee es 110, 179 
Horwitz v. Schwab, 130 Misc. 158, 
223 N. Y. S. 638, 130 Misc. 448, 
DME OLAL Al... Ce roids s 110, 161 
Hourgette v. City of Gretna, 18 
fe 330,197 9: 344. ..0. 2, 112,121 
Howard Funding Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Bronx County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
November 1, 1930............. 168 


PAGE 
Howden v. Mayor and Aldermen of 
Savannah, 172 Ga. 833, 1590S. E. 
AO DHE EEN OLAV eR aia 8 19, 47, 65 
Howell v. Cooper, 33 Oh. A. ta, 
168 N. E. 75 
Howell v. Meador, 109 W. Va. ck 


Ce 


154. Ee O70 teks ts teats alte yk 68, 200 
Hubbard v. Oklahoma City, 58 P. 
(2d) sam Tieton cote e saa 216 


Hughes v. Board of Appeals of 
eae 325 Ill. 109, 156 N. E. 
SON DUAN. We Runner ae Ns 158 
Bi Eval v. City of Alexandria, 164 ; 
142624341 4:5. 4018, on. 107, 6110, 5175 
Hurst v. City of Burlingame, 207 
Calin ATO TPs Og aaukawann a 36 
Hurt v. Hejhal, 259 Ill. A. 221..107, 108 
Hyman v. Leo, 108 Misc. 39, 177 
Sh die Sales Maire i Une ie, Le 151 
Hyman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, October 6, 1927.... 156 


I 


Ice & Fuel Co. v. Kreuzweiser, 120 

Oh. St. 352, 166 N. E. 228... 110, 179 
Ideal Roof & Skylight Works v. 

Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx 

County, New York Law Journal, 

March 12, 19209, affd. 227 App. 

Dive737, 237N. Vero cO tara 157 
Ignaciunas v. Town of Nutley, 99 

N. J. L. 389, 125 A. 121..15, 47,64, 66 
Ikard v. City of Henrietta, 33 S. W. 

(20) 1578 (Pex) Stren gameciela 32 
Illinois Life Insurance Co. v. City 

of Chicago, 244 Ill. A. 185...102, 220 
Indianapolis, Board of Zoning Ap- 

peals of, v. Waintrup, 99 Ind. A. 


B70 TGS IE TCH as eee pug ee ciee 153 
Indianapolis, Civil City of, v. 

Ostrom Realty & Const. Co., 95 

ind-Ans 76, V7OiNe Ee 2A0nes esos 121 


Ingersoll v. Village of South Orange, 
3.N. J. Misc. 335, 128 A. 393, 102 


Sa Pel hook Redd eae ey ow EA ee 58 
Interstate Oil Co. v. City of Orange, 
11 N. J. Misc. 89, 165 A.99..... 206 


Isbister v. Isbister, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, May 8, 
1925, 215 App. Div. 838, 213 
NAYS noe Oneiamtes aeiare toed 82, 162 

Isenbarth v. Bartnett, 206 App. 
Div. 546, 201 N. Y. S. 383, affd. 
237.N. Y. 617, 143 N.E. 765 ..82, 162 


253 


ZONING 


PAGE 
Island Park, Village of, v. Arm- 
strong, Supreme Court, Queens 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, August 9, 1935........ 170 
Islip, Town of, v. Newton, Supreme 
Court, Suffolk County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, Novem- 
Der HOMIO33 At se cetera 84, 106 
Islip, Town of, v. Summers C. & L. 
COMG 257 INDY BiG Zan bey aN wees 
AOO Sah eee AP ee an nae ees 62 


Jack Lewis, Inc. v. Mayor and City 
Council of Baltimore, City Court, 
Baltimore Daily Record, June 
25, 1932, 164 Md. 146, 164 A. 
220, 290 U. S. 585, 54 S. Ct. 56 
ge at EEE IDE) sain 15, 146, 213 

Jackson, City of, v. McPherson, 


15S:Miss. 152) 130 5.287240.05).. 176 
Jackson, City of, v. McPherson, 
162 Miss. 164,11355. 004.1... 9 123 


Jacob Morgenthaler Sons v. Mur- 
dock, Supreme Court, Queens 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, May 16, 1935.......... 209 

Jannarone v. Board of Adjustment 
of Nutley, 9 N. J. Misc. 210, 153 


AN Z5G Cee WR Nae Celie) eee 19 
Jardine v. City of Pasadena, 199 

CaO 4 2400042 2 ber te. se 75, 199 
Jenney v. Hynes, 282 Mass. 182, 

TOAIN SEP AAA re fy sca banana fp 186 
Jennings v. Suggs, 180 Ga. 141, 178 

OM tev Ryan WAreheah Muar UMMM e LU 36 
Jewell v. Murphy, 224 App. Div. 

703) 220 IN AY WA ae es 200 


Jewish Consumptives’ Relief So- 
ciety v. Town of Woodbury, 230 
App. Div. 228, 243 N. Y. S. 686, 
aiid 2560, NIGY -2O1O.g17 7 LNean, 

ELLUM a SPO a PMR TBs put fa ko tees 78 

Jewish Mental Health Society v. 
Village of Hastings, 268 N. Y. 
ASS, 100 WNig 8B, 50, at: 

BOD ARMs Peay ein ee eta 79 199 


SOO CANE ey nn aN ren eee 178 
Johnston, Matter of, Court of Com- 

mon Pleas, Cambria County, 

Johnstown, Pa., December Term, 

1020) ARRON earns a ee eka 125 
Johnston v. Hague, 2 N. J. Misc. 

TI SASONSAOT eine sen Ate late eta 206 


PAGE 
Joleto Const. Co. v. Martin, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
February 21, 1027 .. 2. ae 128 
Joleto Construction Corp. v. Walsh, 
223 App. Div. 764, 226:IN ae 


282 66s ate ee 30, 96 
Jones v. Lewis, 7 Pa. Dist. & Co. 
OS. 2 otto ar es 4 37, 118 


7 
Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 286 
P. 161, 21,1.Cal. 3044 265 ah ee 
78, 116, 199 
Julian v. Golden Rule Oil Co., 112 
Kan, 6071)212 P..084\20 eeee 16, 90 
Junge’s Appeal, 89 Pa. Super. 543, 
54 46, 57, 59 
Just Estates v. Clarke, 226 Wie 
Div. 812, 234.N. Y.S. '866....... i27 


K 


K. & L. Oil Co. v. Oklahoma City 
(OkL.), 14.F. Supp: 402245 e eee 216 
Kahn Bros. Co. v. City of Youngs- 
town, 25 Ohio N. P. (N.S.) 30... 97 
Kalvin v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, January 31, 1923, affd. 
206 App. Div. 683, 199 N. Y. S. 


ey 


943 
eee v. Board of Appeals of Med- 
ford, 273 Mass. 97, 173 N. E. 1 
37, 40, 41, 118 
Kannensohn Holding Corp. v 
Walsh, 120 Misc. 467, 199 N. Y. 


9.53405 ses oda a ee 128 
Kansas City v. Liebi, 298 Mo. 560, 

252:9.-Wi 4046)... eee 19,297,446 
Kantorowitz v. Bigelow, 102 N. J. 

L213, 130 A.811 .... ee 15 


Karke Realty Associates v. Mayor, 
etc., of Jersey City, 104 N. J. L. 
1'73, 139 Ax 55: sss) see 58 
Kaspar v. Board of Zoning Appeals, 
Circuit Court, Marion County, 
Indianapolis, Ind., April 30, 1926 
119, 146 
Katz v. Higson, 113 Conn. 776, 155 
A507 sca ct Sad: ee 
Kaufman v. City of Akron, Court of 
Common Pleas, Summit County, 
Ohio, January 6, Yo2 721s 46, 62 
Kaufman v. Stein, 138 Ind. 49, 37 
Nj E.333; 46 Am. 5, RR. 360. 22 
Kazwell v. Reynolds, 250 Ill. A. 


a 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Keaton v. Brown, 171 Okl. 38, 45 
Beer ad OO es ro, neko eo ee 216 
Keavey v. Randall, 1 N. J. Misc. 
RAPA STOR. pate Ces os foals 208 
Keenly v. McCarty, 137 Misc. 524, 
“WARM Coles Op As 94, 172 


Keiser v. Village of Mineola, Su- 
preme Court, Nassau County, 
N. Y., New York Law ae 


March Go 8 tay ot arts oe 55, 162 
Keiser v. Inhabitants of Plainfield. 
10 N. J. Misc. 496, 159 A. 785.... 213 


Keizerstein. v. Walsh, Supreme 
Court, Queens County, New York 
Law Journal, May 5, 1928, affd. 

225 App. Div. 805, 232 N.Y. S. 784 157 

Keller v. Board of Com’rs of Irving- 
ton, 7 N. J. Misc. 977, 147 A. 


4 

Kelly v. Dissinger, Court of Com- 
mon Pleas, Montgomery County, 
Oakwood, Ohio, April 10, 1928... 112 

Kelmenson v. Mann, 207 App. Div. 
494, 202 N. Y. S. 358, affd. 237 


brercors, 43 N. b.765 i. 06%. 46, 59 
Kend v. Crestwood Realty Co., 210 
Mise220,240 NOW. 311... 2. 2) 32 


Kennedy v. City of Evanston, 348 
Wsoiot IN, E3126 8 ss 
Kensington-Davis Corp. v. Schwab, 


Pao ey 54,145 N. E2738.) 25) 88 
Kerr’s Appeal, 294 Pa. 246, 144 A. 

Ree eo. kare 97, 148 
Kiddy’s Appeal, 294 Pa. 209, 143 

MME et laa go's oe 203 
Kilgour v. Gratto, 224 Mass. 78, 

EMC MAOO GE |. ois Saale oo 8 90 


Kimball Co. v. Fox, 120 Misc. 7o1, 
2001) 5.-267, afid) 239 N.Y: 


Mee INe Cc lODask sees ee ats 186 
King v. Guerra, 1 S. W. (2d) 373 
ind k's Alle URE Ay AGES stn Ean Al 213 
Kirby v. City of Rockford, 363 III. 
Saas (2d) 842.040 225 kaos 144 
Kirk v. Mabis, 215 lowa 769, 246 
BME SON Gk oe i catila eh lds oles 21 


759 
Kirkpatrick v. Zoning Board of 
Appeals, Supreme Court, West- 
chester County, White Plains 
(N. Y.) Reporter, March 16, 1925 
40, 118 
Kirkwood Bros. v. City of Madison- 
sg 230 Ky. 104, 18 S. W. (2d) 


OET@) LOM 16. @ ile) 6 a, 6.0 4 6 6 )6) 6 0 eis 6 6 6, sa Le 


142 A. a ep eke Cue Pa ee EE AP Pee 193 


PAGE 
Klein v. Mayor and Aldermen of 
jersey (City, 4° Nv]. Misc.. 2°77; 

TBAT OZ ihe tte oe te ee 205 
Klein v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
New York County, N. Y., New 

York Law Journal, June 21, 1930 118 
Klever Shampay Karpet Kleaners 
v. Chicago, 323 Ill. 368, 154 N. E. 


he Gta ter tae SUPA EY ea ie i Bia 22 
Klumpp v. Rhoads, 200 N. E. 153 
(LIL are ie OE eg. Pee oer Sie 106 
Knickerbocker Ice Co. v. Sprague, 
A.ReSupp.400 (NaY ose 84, 106 
Knowlton v. Inhabitants of Swamp- 
scott, 280 Mass. 69, 181 N. E. 
SAO TD MTS are Niamane cite wae tats 160 
Koch v. City of Toledo (Ohio), 37 
Pitod) 330 mares ae et ene 64, 195 
Kokenge v. Whetstone, Court 


of Common Pleas, Hamilton 

County, Ohio, December, 1935... 187 
Koos v. Saunders, 349 Ill. 442, 182 

N. E. 415 43, 
Koplin v. Village of South Orange, 

6N. J. Misc. 489, 142 A. 235, 105 

Na) Pi AG2 ida Nx020)0 tees os), 19 
Kramer v. Mayor and City Council 

of Baltimore, 166 Md. 324, 171 


PV STOMES SU MaMa seh erated clash )oe'h ZI 
Kramer v. Nelson, 189 Wis. 560, 

ZOOS, NEW 6 oe aera AnY dora 186 
Kramer v. Schwartz, 336 Mo. 932, 

So auVe CC) Osis We ara ee ele wicks 89 
Kreher v. Quinlan, 182 La. 721, 162 

AL iy deo UNDA hs UAE Ge mune UTD ne 176 
Kroner v. City of Portland, 116 

Ore. 141, 240 P. 536...... 47, 64, 200 
Kubach Co. v. McGuire, 199 Cal. 

215, 2AGI G70 es We mie ween eee 31 


L. & M. Inv. Co. v. Cutler, 125 Oh. 


Stilts LOOMING E270 aren Lea wene 62 
Vacey, .Ex7p-73108.Gale 326.0 41aP; 

AVIS A AMA OUR GF ere ten curr 22 
Lachtman v. Houghton, 134 Minn. 

226, 158 N. W. 1017.. SEG MNA'Z 
La Crosse, City of, v. ' Elbertson, 

205 Wis. 207, 237°'Ni W.OOr sion ea 55 
Lamb v. A. D. McKee, Inc., 10 

N. J. Misc. 649, 160 A. 563...... 215 
LaMontagne v. Kenney, 288 Mass. 

S05 S1OSUNG EO cee aie oe 106, 219 


255 


ZONING 


PAGE 


Land Development Co. v. City of 
New Orleans, 164 La. 72, 113 S. 


Lansdowne Borough, Appeal of 
Board of Adjustment, 313 Pa. 
SII NITOWAL SOT Maeda ate ee 

Lansing, City of, v. Dawley, 247 
Mich. 394, 225 N. W. 500....... 

Larchmont, Village of, v. Town of 
ora 239 N. Y. 551, 147 


eee) Be 56 App. D.C. 121, 
10 F. (2d) 986 
Lash Realty Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
New York Law Journal, October 
31, 1924, affd. 213 App. Div. 815, 
206 NOY S. O20 1 tev) ae ate ee eee 
Lathrop v. Town of Norwich, 111 
Conn/ 616,151 Anito3awa 146, 
LaVine v. Walsh, 214 App. Div. 
SOS HZTOIN YS SyGOOun ng outa 
Law v. City of Spartanburg, 148 
Sir Gn220hT46 OF Eb tees ie an an 
Layman v. Persons, 133 Misc. 661, 
ZO RUINGEN one Lal chs ca. ten aoe 
Leach v. Kenyon, 146 Misc. 571, 
2ODIN YES. O70 7A mete chart 
Leary v. Adams, 226 Ala. 472, 147 
ORO LT alate meee tuceter take a beh ee 
Lee v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, June 28, IOZ0 Te. 
Lees v. Cohoes Motor Car Co., 122 
Mise.i3'737 203 Ne Ye orOsucrant 
Lehigh Valley R. Co. v. Mayor, 
etc., of Jersey City, 7 N. J. Misc. 
154, 144 A. 578, 100 N. J. L. 248, 
147 A. 555 
Leider v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, April 23, 
IOSD nd/aticleslps 2 wai ea oie makati 
Leonard v. Tappen, 244 App. Div. 
817, 280 N. Y. S. 1000, affd. 269 
INVY A507; 1OQUN E O74ire ane 
Leone v. Brewer, White Plains 
(N. Y.) Daily Reporter, Decem- 
ber 30, 1927, 222 App. Div. 773, 
225 N. Y.S.856 
Leone v. Brewer, 259 N. Y. 386, 
TS2 UN Ae G9 Ate trey dames 
Leverich Realty Corp. v. Board of 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings 


eo eee eee ee ree eee 


eeocecerseoeoeesrscecec ees ee 


178 


209 


159 


215 


209 


157 


217, 


179 


147 


175 


97 


123 


PAGE 
County, N. Y., New York Law 

Journal, March 3, 1925 
Levy v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, New York Law Journal, 
April 12, 1934, 243 App. Div. 
609, 276 N. Y. S. 370, 267 N. Y. 

347, 1906'N, El o84a0y ae 168, 209 
Levy v. Mravlag, 96 N. J. L. 367, 
115°A.)350.), o.¢onls ce eae 
Levy Brothers Realty Co. v. Walsh, 


257.N. Y. 543) 178 N: El yOyoee 155 
Lewis v. Board of Com’rs of Avon- 

by-the-Sea, 7 N. J. Misc. 27, 143 

A: 865.2540 0. ee 20), ©, ee 19 
Lexington, Town of, v. Bean, 272 

Mass.'547, 172 N: E..867,-7 seco 106 
Lexington, Town of, v. Govenar, 3 

NE. (2d) 19 (Mass:)y sue 220 


Liberty Lumber Co. v. City of 
Tacoma,142 Wash. 377, 253 P.122 107 

Lieberman vy. Kleinert, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., 
Ne York Law Journal, July 31, 


Al619'e 65 -Ue does ae 
Lightman v. City of Nashville, 166 


Tenn. 191, 60S. W. (2d) Gita 37 
Lima v. Woodruff, 107 Cal. A. 285, 
290 P..480.5.4... 00S ee 


Lincoln, City of, v. Foss, 119 Neb. 
666, 230 N. W. 592... ...0. AO 
Lincoln, City of, v. Logan-Jones, 
120 Neb. 827, 235 N. W. 583..... 
Lincoln Trust Co. v. Williams Bldg. 
ea 229 N. Y. 313) wer E. 
Ne Aye t Aa ga OE FL. 32, 46, 187 

Lind v. City of Rockford, sat Il. 
377, IS0.N. E. 44625. Soa 82 
Linden Estates Corp. v. Flanagan, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
April 5, 1020.20). We 
Linden Methodist Episcopal Church 
vy. City of Linden, 113) Nogpae 
188,' 173 A. 593) ..:. 02> ene 84 
Linwood Co. v. ease oN. J. 
Misc. 139,153 A.'00..1en eae 110, 179 

Lipsitz v. Parr, UH Nd. 223) 164 
Eee Way ny Oiaiee By inh 15, 54, 185, 218 

Little v. Board of Adjustment of 
Nunc 195 N. C, 793, 143 Skee 


197 


2 2 8 66. @ ae ie 4 6 & 016 816 A & (6) a) Be) eee 


Little Rock, City of, v. Pfeifer, 169 
Ark. 1027, 277 S. W. 8831) 


256 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 


Livingston v. Peterson, 59 N. D. 
104, 228 N. W. 816 
Livoti v. Connell, Supreme Court, 
New York County, New York 
Law Journal, May 22, 1931, affd. 
235 App. Div. 611, 254 N. Y. S. 


Locatelli v. City of Medford, 287 
Mass. 560, 192 N. E. 57.. 
Loe v. City of Minneapolis, District 
Court, District of Minnesota, 
United States Daily, September 
APOE Te ic als cio Sales ah a0 J's 
Lombardo v. City of Dallas, 47 
Deo (2d)e405, 124: Tex: 1, 73 
BLOAT 5 Ue cee ands os 65, 
London v. Robinson, 94 Cal. A 
ee aT Wo. 8S a he se 2 
Longley v. Rumsey, 130 Misc. 492, 
eee ee FOG a) aa od wo ee 
Longshore v. City of Montgomery, 
22 la... 020,119 9. 6996... 52 
Lourose Realty Corp. v. Putnam, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
PaeeenOele?, 1923. 6. oa em 
Loux, Appeal of, Court of Common 
Pleas, Northampton County, Pa., 
SOOT 1027 eins! ass. 205, 
Lovett v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
New York County, New York 
Law Journal, July 2, 1926, affd. 
220 App. Div. 756, 222 N. Y. S. 
SSS: he A 
Lowell, Building Inspector of, v. 
Stoklosa, 250 Mass. 52, 145 N. E. 
oC lad Baas 43, 46, 47, 66, 
Lowlou Corporation v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
WMISERAMIO2O So es oe eo eee els 
Lucas v. Hamilton, 259 Ill. A. 148... 
Ludgate v. Somerville, 121 Ore. 
643, 256 P. 104 
Luten v. Schmidt, 153 N. E. 481, 88 
Ind. A. 134, 163 N. E. 536 
Lutz v. Courtney, Supreme Court, 
Nassau County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, November 16, 
Ji? Joe oe eR a a 
Lutz v. Kaltenbach, 1o1 N. J. L. 
316, 128 A. 421, 3 N. J. Misc. 658, 
129 A. 926, 102 N. J. L. 718, 131 
PETIT R Ke Sacre se ak wes 
Creok v. Harkness, Supreme 
Court, Nassau County, Nia 


oer eer eee eee ee ee 


218 


. 180 


123 


209 
107 
88 
43 


208 


207 


213 


89 


157 
146 


186 


153 


161 


160 


PAGE 
New York Law Journal, January 


27, AQTAL nla ol re cape hatchet 98 


M. & G. Construction Co. v. Board 
of Commissioners of Jersey City, 
4N. J. Misc. 864, 134 A. 776..... 206 
MacDonald v. Walsh, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, January 13, 
1925 
MacEwen v. City of New Rochelle, 
149 Misc. 251, 267 N. Y.S. 36..55, 86 
MacLean v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, August 7, 1926.... 
Madden v. Zoning Board of Review 
of Providence, 48 R. I. 175, 136 
POA SHE oneness Sete rdy 178, 189 
Madison, Town of, v. Kimberly, 
118 Conn. 6, 169 A. OOO Fine Sagan 32 
Madsen v. Houghton, 182 Minn. 
Pit PP Bish beh e eae An ae 27, 45 
Magruder v. Redwood City, 203 
Cia OO Sao Gr OOO a tines abel ica. 
Major v. Board of Zoning Appeals, 
Circuit Court, Marion County, 
Indianapolis, Ind., September 7, 
1928 61, 146 
Maloff v. Kimmey, Supreme Court, 
Onondaga County, N. Y., April 
PRL OT Ree MAL Waco 92, 163 
Mamaroneck Commodore, Inc. v. 
Bayly, 233 App. Div. 741, 250 
INDE too 7O7 sale 2OOe Ney t 


127 


OW er | a) 18! (o' 6) 6 6: 61, 6 10),¢ 2 els s @ 60 "6 0 Te: 


Ba OAT Mn tudOaitnece ae lees 125, 147 
Manhein v. Harrison, 164 La. 564, 
RIAN ABO Wieieteriia ale & 10, ee 209 
Manning v. nae 3 N. J. Misc. 
SQONIZS VST Ger leale ae tek oe 
Manos v. City of Seattle, 173 Wash. 
662 24, PHC) OF enim m aaron 217 
Marblehead Land Co. vy. City of 
Los Angeles (Cal.), 36 F. (2d) 
242247 Fe (2d) 5200s cw, Meare ne 216 


Marculescu v. City Planning Com- 
mission of San Francisco, 7 Cal. 
AS20371 46.hs (2d AOpen es 36 

Marcus v. Commissioner of Public 
Safety, 255 Mass. 5, 150 N. E. 


QOR i LE see see ernie ated ard ange 155 
Marinelli v. Board of Appeal of 
Boston, 275 Mass. 169, 175 N. E. 

AZO) te teh Mot saree ache eae te Ne Leet ete 155 


ZONING 


PAGE 


Marlyn Realty Co. v. West Orange, 
5 N. J. Misc. 342, 136A. 926..... 
Marquis v. City of Waterloo, 210 


lowa 439, 228 N. W. 870. .43, 89, 209 


Marshall v. City of Dallas, 253 
De, W S07 CLEX Ele eae ety, 110, 
Marshall v. Holbrook, 276 Mass. 
3412177 Nib a5O 
Martin v. City of Danville, 148 Va. 
BAT ALO SUE O2Oy ates sale trees 
Maslon v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, December 1, 1924.. 
Mathewson v. Brockett, 127 Misc. 
BOSLPETINDYS OUS53 necaa eau ts 
Mazzarell v. Walsh, 231 App. Div. 
748, 753,247 N. Y.S. 855 
McAvoy v. Leo, 109 Misc. 255, 178 
Niawyiioes 
McCabe v. Zoning Board of Review 
of Providence, 50 R. I. 449, 148 
AL OORWEMM Ir ie cule netemen ty meats 
McCarter v. Beckwith, 247 App. 
Div. 289, 285 N. Vines: 151, 
alids272°Ne Y.1485,'31N? (2d) 
retol si hau eda Me OAM MY Rre ren lana 
McCord v. Ed Bond & Condon Co., 
175 Ga. 667, 165 S. E. 590... .19, 
McCown v. Gose, 244 Ky. 402, 51 
Pe PANUE TE Be iu CAR Doce a Man eg 


oeoesr eee ees e se 


ee eee eee sree eer ee eee 


43, 
McCurley v. City of El Reno, 138 


179 
93 


157 


159 


213 


89 


Oki92,250 Bl 467/02 ay 30, 88, 96 


McEachern v. Town of Highland 
Park, 34 S. W. (2d) 676, 124 Tex. 
BON 7319.1 Wit 2) AST we date ike 

McGarry v. Walsh, 213 App. Div. 
250, 210 Na re oeOO. ee ease. 

McInerney, In re, 47 Wyo. 258, 34 
Pad) S56 i ee hie eee eee 

McNamara v. Bayly, Supreme 
Court, WestchesterCounty,N.Y., 
New York Law Journal, Septem- 
DELI OSIG3A Sa oa ae eee 

McNulty & Carson, Inc. v. Murphy, 
Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, N. Y., May 22, 1929.... 

Meadowmere Ass'n, Inc., Matter of, 
Supreme Court, Nassau County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


AURUSU I 7 (O82) cease ene 164, 
Mehl v. Stegner, 38 Oh. A. 416, 175 
IN OE ARIZ alae nee rat ine tee 


Melita v. Nolan, 126 Misc. 345, 213 
NeYtS.074 arena eereeee 
Memphis, City of, v. Qualls, 
Tenn. A. 387, 64S. W. (2d) 548. 


209 


161 


203 


82 


213 


PAGE 


Menzel v. Niles Co., 86 Colo. 320, 
281 P3064 25... os oe er 
Merrill v. City of Wheaton, 356 
Ill. 457, 190 NE. of8 eee 
Merritt v. Isbister, 215 App. Div. 
838, 213 N. Y. S.858 
Metropolis Pub. Co. v. City of 
Miami, 100 Fla. 784, 129 S.913.. 
Michigan-Lake Bldg. Corporation 
v. Hamilton, 340 Ill. 284, 172 


Nits 71O race 53, 57, .Oanuiaae 
154, 172, 
Mill Neck, Village of, v. Nolan, 259 
N: Y.:596,.182 N. Es 19672 
Miller v. Board of Public Works of 
Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 477, 234 P. 
SO TW ds 5 ccttea nk acer 54, 64, 
Millett v. Hayes & Co., 132 Me. 12, 
164;A. 741 2a ON oe 182, 
Milton v. Azpell, District Court, 
City and County of Denver, Colo., 
july 2,:1025.70 . So ee 
Mineola Home for Cardiac Children 
v. Village of Irvington, Supreme 
Court, WestchesterCounty,N.Y., 
January 3, 51925 27 Sian 74, 
Mingle v. Board of Adjustment of 
Orange, 6 N. J. Misc. 595, 142 A. 
BOF piishoncs Maite eee eee 40, 118, 
Minkus v. Pond, 326 Ill. 467, us 


© ele © © 56. 618 66 


Modern Lumber & Millwork ra e 
sie 161 Wash. 600, 297 P. 
Mongiello Bros., Inc. v. Board of 
Com’rs of Jersey City, 10 N. J. 
Misc. 131,158 A325 ae 110, 
Monroe v. Hoffman, 29 La. Ann. 
651,29 Am: R: 345). .... 3 eee 
Montalbine v. Walsh, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, October 
31510297 L.8s Sec). ae 
Montebello Land Co. v. Frank 
Novak Realty Co., 167 Md. 185, 
172, A..QU1A 6 ..c's0/0 © a oa 
Monticello v. Bates, 169 Ky. 258, 
183°SW.'555 0.2.5 oe ee 
Monument Garage Corp. v. Levy, 
149 Misc. 791, 268 N. Y. S. 213, 
266 N. ‘Y:.’339, 104)) Namie 
BAG Weta oe et tele ae 191, .207, 
Moore v. U. S. Cremation Co., 158 
Misc. 621, 286.N. Y- 5S. 639. sauee 
Moos v. Duany, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., West- 


258 


193 


123 


177 
37 


89, 192 


209 


209 


200 


119 
» 157 


1i2 


179 


22 


147 
38 


22 


208 


217 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
chester Law Journal, January 3, 

DS 0 as a am a 186 
Morania Sales Co. v. Anderson, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 

ICSU TORO. Vike, Were slat’ en's. 180 
Morgan v. Zoning Board of Review 
of Warwick, 52 R. I. 338, 160 A. 


9 
Morgan Petroleum Co. v. Oklahoma 
City, 167 Okl. 632, 31 P. (2d) 594 216 
Morrill Realty Corp. v. Rayon Hold- 
ing Corp., 254 N. Y. 268, 172 
ek sede veo eels 
Morris v. East Cleveland, 22 Ohio 
NevP: ae 5.40, 31 ae Dec. 


ROPER eres oo ee bad , 04, 195 
MS tris: cf Lunsford, 176 Ga. AG es 


BEES R Gd cisly slajes's cles es 21 
Morris v. Zoning Board of Review 
of Pawtucket, 52 R. I. 26, 155 
ULLAL Ss are 21 
Morrison v. Pettigrew, 14 F. (2d) 
PER AMCANAS NRG 5S bac bois suse ss 181 
Morrone v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, New York Law 
Journal, August 29, 1927, affd. 
223 App. Div. 746, 227 N. Y. S. 
IS ok chee ear 128 
Morrow v. City of Atlanta, 162 Ga. 
Se taal ey 46, 64 
Morton v. Bales, 226 App. Div. 
Baar eas NAYS. 540..2......5. 175 
Moss v. Rubenstein, 117 Misc. 385, 
BeEMPRL OTAGO sos wir vases sss 25532 


Mt. Vernon, City of, v. Travis 
Realty Corp., Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, March 4, 
1935, affd. 246 App. Div. 727, 
NES LO] 5 coc ea. cso das 0 3 208 

Mt. Vernon First Nat. Bank v. 
Sarlls, 129 Ind. 201, 28 N. E. 434, 


28 Am. S. R. Ee Repel Re aN ISHS 22 
Muelberger v. Raslont 2N. J. Misc. 

ONY O24... ba.) s siete lees 179 
Mulcahy v. Pancoast, 6 N. J. Misc. 

MAME ARCA. O25 i.5 «he sis oie ache a's. > 19 
Mulleady v. City of Trenton, 9 

N. J. Misc. 1102, 156A. 843..... 61 


Multiplex Garages, Inc. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, Bronx County, 
New York Law Journal, June 28, 
1924, 213 App. Div. 155, 210 
ine oel75,241 Ni Y.'527, 150 
PAG Petree sh ate srchaysint «sols 208 


PAGE 
Municipal Gas Co. of Albany v. 
Nolan, 121 Misc. 606, 201 N. Y.S. 
582, 208 App. Div. 753, 202 
INDY 2030 
Myers v. Shinnick, 19 S. W. (2d) 
O7O4M OR Wiss orld emo ne tera 179 
Mymaud Const. Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, KingsCounty,N.Y., 
New York Law Journal, July 21, 
LO20 aa oes a oeeah ae nes 127,147 
Mymaud Const. Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
Marchisvig26000 5. sare ee. 181 


N. & H. Bldg. Co. v. Walsh, Sue 
preme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, April 8, 1926, 
affd. 223 App. Div. 844, 228 
NeYG5S.850 

Nagaven Realties, Inc. v. Banzhaf, 
i4Qu Misc 36ip 2070 Nei) aro: 

VPP Alas ware Sores Mann ga SALA 130, 172 

Nailor v. C. W. Blakeslee & Sons, 
Inc., 117 Conn. 241, 167A. 548... 93 

Namro Realty Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 

N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
ADH TilO2S scan ais Laced See 159 

Nash v. Board of Appeals of North 
Hempstead, Supreme Court, Nas- 
sau County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, March 29, 1930.... 156 

Nationwide Petrol Corp., In re, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 

N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
ADI de LOs5coh een neon en 107 

Nectow v. City of Cambridge 

er 277 ah 03 tA on ol 
Ty At aca A 28, 53, 54, 69 
Neda Vopociraden 270" Nanny «07, 


ZOOIN: BeOS at tan tee Ne eet tes 122 
Neithamer v. Heyer, 39 Oh. A. 532, 

L77 NRE 025 Too ae eee 59, 148 
Nelson v. Town of Belmont, 274 

Massi35; 174 N2Bi3 20.27 96 
Nelson Bldg. Co. v. Greene, 5 N. J. 

Misca33.0 IAG: AvsOtsean once wee 86 
Neuschaefer v. Apawamis Beach 

Corp., Supreme Court, West- 

chester County, N. Y., New York 

Law Journal, July 31, 1934...... 198 
Newark, City of, v. Lippmen, 13 

N. J. Misc. 248, 177 A. 556...... 19 


259 


ZONING 


PAGE 


Newark Athletic Club v. Board of 
Adjustment of Newark, 6 N. J. 
Miser. 520.5 142 ¢Aeo2a, 07) Nee 
Mise: "44 AlO7ii so lata oe 

New Britain, City of, v. Kilbourne, 
109 Conn. 422, 147 A. 124. ..107, 

Newford Realty Co., Inc., Matter 
of, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
March siifosai stuart, ake 

Newman v. Pagels, 212 Wis. 475, 
ZEGINY Wi AsO nu ser oe enscate nen 

Newman v. Scott, 5 N. J. Misc. 514, 
137 A. 924 

New Orleans v. Liberty Shop, 157 
LasaG Or S878 Wh cate wane rene 

New Rochelle, City of, v. Beck- 
with, City Court, New Rochelle, 
Westchester Law Journal, August 
Be 1933, 268 N. Y. 315, 197 N. E. 


eseeeecreeree eer eee eevee 


295 
New Rochelle, City of, v. Blossom 
Cleaners & Dyers,«, inc.) City 
Court, New Rochelle (N. Yan 
Westchester Law Journal, Octo- 
DELVE IGSI 1 yee eae 85, 
New York, City of, v. Caulwal 
Construction Co., 261 N. Y. 578, 
ISG INGE AG Ye) SP ee at 178, 
New York, City of, v. Holzman, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
AVUSUSE FIIO2Aay oon ta emit: 
New York, City of, v. Off-Streets 
Parking, Inc., 153 Misc. 150, 274 
N. Y. S. 562, affd. 242 App. Div. 
797,275 NY Ome B Ate suis tecnters 
New York and Richmond Gas Com- 
pany v. Board of Standards & 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, New York Law Journal, 
May 9, 1932, 242 App. Div. 691, 
27 IN OLD 
New York Cent. R. Co. v. Leo, 105 
Misei 372 sp7sN ay S247 ae 
New York State Investing Co. v. 
Brady, 214 App. Div. 592, 212 
NOY Si OOS Were ie gene ia 
Nichols v. O’Brien, 149 Misc. 280, 


BOT ING: Sire tee Melee ey en ae 
Nigro v. Kansas City, 325 Mo. 95, 
27S. W(20) T0300. ns eee: 121, 


Nolan v. Village of Mill Neck, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


July'16,1932 2500) Goes ale tine 


15 


198 


182 


179 


215 


1g! 


PAGE 
Noland v. Bowen, 39 Ga. A. 813, 
148.5, B596. ss... oe ee 
Norcross v. Board of Appeal of Bos- 
ton, 255 Mass. 177, 150 N. E. 
BSF web eb. ek Se 
North Baltimore M. P. Church v. 
Board of Zoning Appeals, Balti- 
more (Md.) City Court, Balti- 
more Daily Record, June 24, 
1932, 164 Md. 487, 165 A.703..15, 127 
North Muskegon, City of, v. Miller, 
249 Mich. 52, 227 N. W. 743..... 216 
North Pelham, Village of, v. Ohliger, 
216 App. Div. 728, 214 N. Y. S. 
253, affd. 245 N. Y. 593, 157 
N. Ee Sere. oe. aes ee 46, 62 
Northern New Jersey Oil Co. v. 
Board of Adjustment of Newark, 
6N. J. Misc. 698, 142 A. 557..... 205 
Norton, City of, v. Hutson, 142 
Kan. 305, 46 P. (2d) 630........ 
Nostrand Holding Corp. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
September 3, 1929. /-. ayes I 
Noviak Hldg. Corp. v. Murdock, 
Supreme Court, Queens County, 
New York Law Journal, August 
15, 1934, 243 App. Div. 738, 278 
N. -¥. S. 118, 268 N: Yeeviseios 
NS Be §'72uhct tl. 130, 210 
Novick Holding Corp. v. Murdock, 
Supreme Court, Queens County, 
New York Law journal, May 16, 
1935, 246 App. Div. 745, 283 
Nj YsS. 762)... 5 Be 
No. 202 West 63d St. Corp’n v. 
Board of Standards and Appeals 
of New York, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, April 30, 1935..... 
Nusbaum v. City of Norfolk, 151 
Va. 801, 145 S. E. 


160 


O 


Ober v. Metropolitan Life Insur- 
ance Company, 157 Misc. 869, 
284'N. Y..;5.960..). oh 9. 0 Gee 

Ober v. Metropolitan Life Insur- 
ance Company, 157 Misc. 872, 
294 N. Y.'S.,.900! a, \ sine 33 

O’Brien v. Town of Greenburgh, 
Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, Westchester Law Jour- 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
nal, January 31, 1933, 239 App. 
ive 655, 200 N. Y.S.5173, aftd: 

266 N. Y. 582, 195 N. E.210..... 31 
O’Brien v. Turner, 255 Mass. 84, 
BREMEN MSCs 4 as ek be sy cle «ls 172 
O’Connor v. Overall Laundry, 98 
Han2Or1a3 NO EN134.206.. 334 158 
Ohlau v. Kleinert, 121 Misc. 386, 
201 N. Y. S. 83, affd. 209 App. 


Piya 2AeZOA NY, .O:.033 06 creas 178 
Oklahoma City v. Dolese, 48 F. 

Gaaa4(Okl) s,s. vise) 204 
Olean, City of, v. Conkling, 157 

Natee Oar ass N.Y. 526600) 0653) 88 


111 John St. Corp. v. Connell, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
New York Law Journal, May 8, 
1931, affd. 235 App. Div. 611, 254 
DOES TOCY oe es acs wees a's 58 

128 32d St., B’klyn, Corp. v. Mur- 
dock, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Ah one March 20 & March 28, 

PMT tess ie Ghee Pay a aca ey: 210 

I a Bait 87th St. Corp. v. Walsh, 
Supreme Court, New York 
County, New York Law Journal, 
July 23, 1920, affd. 228 App. Div. 
iA Tan Me V9. O50. ike eed es 123 

Opinion of Justices, 124 Me. 501, 
Peete ck oc chp eles os 49 

Opinion of Justices, 234 Mass. 597, 
RPMS 25 ss chal nieg soe das 17, 97 

Oppenheimer v. Kraus, 221 App. 
IV -731223 NN: Y.S. 467, affd. 

246 N. Y. 559, 159 N. E. 651 ..58, 162 

Ortenberg v. Bales, 224 App. Div. 

87, 229 N. Y. S. 550, afid. 250 
Peay 50a) 100 N. E330... 66. 178 

Ortman v. Burwell, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 3, 1929....... 105 

Osborn v. Town of Darien, 119 
Be O2n 175 A.5 70. as «ese oe 195 

Oster v. Mayor and Common Coun- 
cil of Westwood, 13 N. J. Misc. 
WTTIDO AG 550. veces esd nee es 207 

Ottawa Hills Co. v. Village of 
Ottawa Hills, 41 Oh. A. 276, 180 
N. E. 903 47, 55 

Ottinger v. Arenal Realty Co., 257 
iNerea7l, t700N: BE. 6605's... . 40, 118 

Owid v. Moushaty, 125 Misc. 535, 
AMEN OP ATOT Ost cs sin ok coe 161 

Ozark Realty Corp. v. Connell, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 


oeoese eer eee ses ere ee eo 


261 


PAGE 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


JANUATY, 42. 1G54 Cop seis acy ects 147 


Pabst v. Ferner, 8 N. J. Misc. 621, 
ESAS IOS has Hoe ee ink ae 110, 179 
Pacific Palisades Assn. v. City of 
Huntington Beach, 196 Cal. 211, 
237 P. 538 
Paffendorf v. Lyndhurst Tp., 1 N.J. 
Misc. 289, 129 A. 389....... 110, 179 
Palazzolo v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, October 23, 1924... 147 
Pallante v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals of New York, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, January 2, 1935, 
245 App. Div. 729, 281 NAYES 
pas ace BaD Teh UIA a AL tents a AEM AY uP ah 153 
Palma v. City of New Orleans, 161 
Wait103) 1060'S, 616.2005 19, 47, 66 
Palmer v. Mann, 206 App. Div. 
AOAS 2OLVING Y 759.525, afid. 237 
Waiyn010; 143 NER 965 oo 30, 175 
Palmer v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, June 6, 1922.. 178 
Pane, In re, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, December 20, 1928..157, 177 
Park Ridge Fuel & Material Co. v. 


Park Ridge, 335 Ill. 509, 167 

IND EE ET OM Aer Gar no eneey ae ence 160 
Parker v. Brennan, 2 N. J. Misc. 

DOO Ne cnet hee ete Metso te aha nee I 
Parker v. Colburn, 196 Cal. 169, 

Z3O PEO? Riley SA a eave arte 204 
Parker v. Hardgrove, Supreme 


Court, Nassau County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, July 16, 


1927 
Parkway Center Building Corp. v. 
Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journals May\12)1928.io00.5 120 
Parry v. Walsh, 121 Misc. 631, 202 
N. Y. S. 48, affd. 209 App. Div. 
889, 205 N. Y. S.945 
Peck, Matter of, 136 Misc. 294, 240 
N. Y. S. 634 
Peck v. Westchester Country Club, 
Inc., Supreme Court, Westchester 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, August 3, 1934........ 219 


ZONING 


PAGE 


Peekskill, Village of, v. State De- 
partment, Supreme Court, West- 
chester County, N. Y., July, 
LO FQ as ry tape a eae tenes 

Pelham View Apartments v. Swit- 
zer, 130 Misc. 545, 224 N. Y. S. 

EE aL HERE anh inait hy igus OMA AE aE 

Pennington Courts, Inc. v. Board 
of Adjustment of Passaic, 7 N. J. 
Misci1037 5147 Alviso tas teen 

Penrose Inv. Co. v. McKelvey, 301 
Mo2t 7250 Da Wad74e gectaere 

People v. Cuneo Eastern Press, 257 
NeW 2008177 IN. LU A22 ee 

People v. Hawley, 272 P. 1076, 207 
413057270 HlsO wl ee ene 

People v. Jones, City Magistrate’s 
Court, First District, Borough of 
Queens, N. Y., October 8, 1931... 

People v. Kelly, 255 N. Y. 396, 175 
INE TOS Sis eu ee ee rar ene 100, 

People v. Linabury, 209 N. Y. S. 


People v. Miano, 234 App. Div. 94, 
ZEAIN DY Sor 1OS a sur aera dey 
People v. Milray Corp., Municipal 
Term of Court of Special Sessions, 
Part I, July 11, 1928, affd. 225 
App. Div. 860, 233 N. Y. S. 860.. 
People v. Sagat, 204 App. Div. 485, 
LOG INDY 355440 ae oe eee 
People v. Siems, County Court, 
Nassau County, N. Y., May 2, 
LORS Se ees ened ats oe hope 
People v. Snedeker, Supreme Court, 
Nassau County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, December 1, 1932 
147, 

People v. Stanton, 125 Misc. 215, 
DLL INGY 255430 nee ea ee 
People v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, October 11, 1924... 
People v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
New York County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, July 1, 1925.. 
People v. Wolfe, Magistrates’ Court, 
Borough of The Bronx, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, January 


30, 1936, affd. 248 App. Divs 
72 bested ariel lees ape Mare ad 114, 
Pera v. Village of Shorewood, 176 


Wis/'201,/186.N2W./62320 a Pang 
Perdue v. Zoning Board of Appeals 
of Norwalk, 118 Conn. 174, 171 
AS 20 VO le rae FES Ui eA 


211 


191 
102 
215 


105 


211 


182 


PAGE 


Perlmutter v. Greene, 259 N. Y. 
327,102 Nobis 
Perrin’s Appeal, 305 Pa. 42, ioe 


oe © © 60 6 6's 6 6 8 © So wus 


eoeere eee eee eee wee ee ee ee ow 


30 
Peshine Realty Co. v. Scott, 4 N. iit 
Misc. 977,.135 A: 80. 4.0.) eee 
Peters v. Gough, 86 S. W. (2d) 515 
(Tex,) 3 A 
Pettis v. Alpha Alpha Chapter of 
Phi Beta Pi, 115 Neb. 525, 213 
N. W.8 


@ © ee © © 6 0.0) 6 6 (6) 6 6. 8 esl ens US 


4 

Phelps v v. Board of Appeals of Chi- 
cago, 325 Ill. 625, 156 N. E. 
826 68, 153, 
Phillips v. Batista, City Court, New 
Rochelle, N. re July 11, 1930 
182, 

Phillips v. Board of Appeals of 
Springfield, 286 Mass. 469, 190 
NSE360 ris ee 146, 
Phipps v. City of Chicago, 339 ai 
315, 171 N. E. 289...53, 54, 162, 
Piccolo v. Town of West Haven, 
120 Conn. 449, 181 A. 615....... 
Piper v. Ekern, 180 Wis. 586, 194 
N. W.1 
Pirozzi v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, August 8, 1925.... 
Pleasant Ridge, City of, v. Cooper, 
267 Mich. 603, 255 N. W. 371.... 
Plummer v. McDermott, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, June 11, 1929. 
Polish Political Club v. Cloper, 260 
Mass. 559, 157 N. E. 705..... 95, 
Potter v. Rothschild, Supreme 
Court, New York County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, June 30, 


oc ec ee eee eee ee wee wee 


Ce er rd 


192 
Pounds v. Walsh, 129 Misc. 676, 
223 N: Y..S: 450, affid, 2430Na ys 
691, 162 N.-E.537. cel. 7 
Pratt v. Litchfield, 62 Conn. 112, 


25:A; 401i. 8's 2) 
Prescott v. Pierce, 130 Misc. se 
223)N:Y \S,O00G7.7ah eee 
Pressel v. Ferris, 148 Misc. 910, 36 
Nz VY¥G09.5 17. cic eee 


Pritz v. Messer, 112 Oh. St. 628, 
L4G, NATE 30 4 aoe 46, 59, 
Proc Bldg. Corp. v. Connell, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, March 11, 


5Q sche oe 46 


200 


195 


213 
181 


II! 


93 


120 


82 


161 


208 


Pao} 


147 
22 
153 
40 
178 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 


1933, 240 App. Div. 782, 266 
N. Y. S. 903, affd. 264 N. Y. 513, 
191 N. E. 541 147, 168, 
Providence, City of, v. Stephens, 
47 R. 1. 387, 133 A. 614 
Provident Institution for Savings v. 
Gastles, 11 N: J. Misc..773, 168 
A. 16 
Prusik v. Board of Appeal of Bos- 
ton, 262 Mass. 451, 160 N. E. 
312 
Puhr v. Kansas City, 142 Kan. 704, 
51 P. (2d) o11 
Pye v. Peterson, 45 Tex. 312, 23 
Am. R. 608 


ee) 6 ee wae 


seme ee wne 


b) [0cesieue le ie Oe "O76 6 6) 6 6 0 6.6 3) © fo le: \s 


Cr 
GH Oe 816 Sia 6:6) 6 ev le. 4) 1s (e c0 


ose eer eee eee eee ee ere 


Queens Park Development, In re, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
December 28, 1926............ 

Quong Wo, Ex parte, 161 Cal. 220, 
118 P.714 157922; 


cee ee ese eee ees 


R. B. Const. Co. v. Jackson, 
Md. 671, 137 A. 278 
Radcliffe v. Livingston, ee App. 
Div, 362,229 N. Y.S.2 
Ralph Market Peddlers Syndicate 
v. Walsh, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
PoUIoae ADT 25,°1922...0.....'. 
Raskin v. Murdock, 243 App. Div. 
BOAO 1.9; 108.55) seca ks 
Raskind v. Dowling, 5 N. J. Misc. 
7 eS Cyt a (ay i aaa ar 
Reed v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, 255 N. Y. 126, 174. N. E. 
Regina Boulevard Corp. v. Mur- 
dock, Supreme Court, Kings 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, October 23, 1935 
Rehfeld v. City & County of San 
Francisco,’218 Cal. 83,21 P.-(2d) 
419 
Rehmann v. City of Des Moines, 
200 lowa 286, 204 N. W. 267, 


152 


cee ve ee 


eee eae e 


See 6S (0.16 0 o 6: © ¢ 476 ‘eo ‘ele © 80 © 6 & © 


204 lowa 708, 215 N. W. 957.. 178, 


Reilly v.Carteright, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, April to, 


OE Ge OR 


210 


155 


203 


15, 46, 59 


176 


157 


180 


193 
263 


PAGE 

Reimer v. Dallas, 129 A. 390 (N. J.) 
110, 

Reinhart & Donovan Co. v. Re- 
finers’ Production Co., 175 Ok. 
62253 aod) TlOwer ee eg 
Reschke v. Village of Winnetka, 
S03 M110475;2 NOEAd) 7s. alas 
Retoske v. Boettger, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, August 2, 1935 
Revorg Realty Co. v. Walsh, 225 
App.s Div.7747 232 Ney. oo idl; 
ak 251 Ni 5 16, 1000 Noise 
Reariaide v. Brosnan, 170 Ga. 773, 
1545. E. 264 64, 
Reynolds v. Clarke, Supreme Court, 
Westchester County, N. Y., Jan- 
UAaTy2OKtO25 ance eee espe 
Rhode Island Episcopal Conven- 
tion v. Providence City Council, 
52 R. 1. 182, 159 A. 647 
Ricci v. Meyer, 5 N. J. Misc. 102, 
135 A. 666 
Rice v. Van Vranken, 225 App. Div. 
179, 232 N. Y. S. 506, affd. 255 
N. Y. 541, 175 N. E. 304 
Richard v. Zoning Board of Review, 
47 R. 1. 102, 130 A. 802 
Richardson v. Knapp, 227 App. 
DiVG207;237,Npie eb OOlns teh 
Richmond, City of, v. Deans, 37 
ESS dyr7 toca wae eee eee 
Riker v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, ae App. Div. 570, 234 
INDY So: 


179 


216 


37 


168 


209 


Ces eae olen s pw lee! We Omi ie 


147 


39 
60 


o) esl oO hs. 00.01 © 


107 


86 


eee ee wwe 


Srie) 6 fe: 0 @ BY 


157 


50 


5 PAAR Nee tee PUBL ta 120 
Rinieeen i v. Bayly, Supreme 
Court, Westchester County, 
Westchester Law Journal, August 
9, 1933, 242 App. Div. 797, 275 
No Y. S26 6, 210. 
Riverside, Village of, v. gee 
270 Ill. A. 355 
Riverside St. Clair Corp. v. Walsh. 
13 BF Miscs.053, 2200INs kev: Loo: 
affd. 225 App. Div. 655, 231 
Nave a756 
Sanaa In re, 33 Del. 314, 136 A. 
Raley v. Zoning Board of Re- 
view of East Providence, 157 A. 
304 CRUD Mery Mere ar ras oe 
Roberts v. City of New Orleans, 
162 [a:262; T10 5S, 20172.10;°47, 65, 66 
Rochester, City of, v. Rochester 
Girls’ Home, 104 N. Yaoa230..70 7200 


193 


120 


@. B. 6.00) 0) 2) 41 0: 10: oo, 6) 4 ©, Offa) 416 


119 


127 


ZONING 


PAGE 


Rock Jay Realty Co. v. Murdock, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
New York Law Journal, March 
2, 1935, 247 App. Div. 730, 286 
NiY25. O23 Danita meme. ce ete 

Roehrs v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, June 3, 1925...... 

Roerig v. City of Minneapolis, 136 
Minn. 470, 162 N. W. 47 

Rohrs v. Zabriskie, 102 N. J. L. 473, 
P33 ACO Sate de ae reetcen tt ete 

Rollins v. Armstrong, 251 N. Y. 
349, 167 N. E. 466 

Roman Catholic Archbishop v. 
Baker, 140 Ore. 600, 15 P. (2d) 


eeceesee 


eee eresveeeeveee 


eeceerecee reece eres eee ee eee 


3 
Roman Catholic Archbishop v. 
Board of Appeal of Boston, 268 
Mass. 416, 167 N. E.672..... 36, 
Romar Realty Co. v. Board of 
Com’rs of Haddonfield, 96 N. J. L. 
TELIA ALAS tune an wen pears 58, 
Roock v. Womer, te App. Div. 
SOGIZE SING LMOns OT teat tas 
Roos v. Kaul, 302 ill. 317, 1SANae 
AOR aay ee eta eG cers 69, 88, 80, 
Rosenberg v. Village of Whitefish 
Bay, 199 Wis. 214, 225 N. W. 
rae to haiti phi, Mu lama be an Tap Gr lhe IS 
eee Keller, 271 N. Y. 282, 
2 NPE k2), OS One aceon aele ote 
Roseth Realty Co. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
November 23202800). eevee 
Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 
204 App. Div. 883, 197 N. Y. S. 
GAO er pe eer Ne detonate 184, 
Rosevale Realty Co. v. Kleinert, 
23°71 Ni bOO nL 43 Nar Ese 5C; 
2089.02" S. 6405) 45 0S, CERO1S 
177, 184, 
Rosiello v. Kleinert, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 


Law Journal, May 8, 1923...... 
Rosoff v. Walsh, 230 App. Div. 780, 
244 NE YS O20 Tae enter 128, 


Rothfield v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, June i, 1928 sarees 

Rotterdam Holding Co. v. Hunt’s 
Point Garage Co., Supreme Court, 


147 


157 
32 
45 
61 


, 196 


118 


162 
177 
gI 


186 
161 


159 


186 


186 


Bronx County, N. Y., New York | 


Law Journal, December 22, 
fe) La mage ave tne Re Sign AAT Ast bh 


PAGE 


Rubel Corp. v. Murdock, 245 App. 
Div. 821, 282 N. Y. S. 126, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, New 
York Law Journal, August 1, 
1930. 620.5) 20). 120, 

Ruppe, Ex parte, 80 Cal. A. 629, 


252 P9746 00, 52.44 08 
Russell, In re, 


43, 88, 
Russell v. Murphy, 58 P. (2d) 560 


(OKL) oe). ak ce ee 
Russo v. Murdock, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, March 1, 1934..... 
Ruth v. Leo, Supreme Court, New 
York County, New York Law 
Journal, March 29, 1921, affd. 
ae App. Div. 942, 188 N. Y. S. 
Red) (ae 152, 
Ruth Bond & Mortgage Co., Matter 
of, Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
May.2)10332.4).2 se ae 156, 
Ruth Bond & Mort. Co. v. Murdock, 
Supreme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
October 29,°1035. -. saa 120, 
Rutherford v. Mayor and City 
Council of Baltimore (Md.), City 
Court, Baltimore Daily Record, 
October 25, 1923, 145 Md. 363, 
125° At7255 vrs eee 15, 
Rutland Parkway, Inc. v. Mur- 
dock, 241 App. Div. 762, 270 
Nu '¥: SeQ7y rio. . ae 
Rutland Parkway, Inc. v. Walsh, 
227 App. Div. 621, 235 N. Y. S. 
BIA es Usa sy nays heen 
Ryan v. Andriano, 91 Cal. A. ar ° 
266.P 583 0 0. ve ae 105, 


Sabbarese v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, March 6, 1926..... 

Sagamore Road Corp. v. Lee, 224 
App. Div. 744, 230 N. Y. S. 58, 
affd.250N. Y. 532, 166 N. E. 313 

St. Albans-Springfield Corporation 
v. Connell, 257 N. Y. 73, 177 
N. E. 313 

St. Basil’s Church v. Kerner, 125 
Misc! -526,)t21t) Ne SY eS. 

147; 17as 


158 


157 


210 


210 


177 


204 


156 


178 


13 Saved shoe 130, 169, 210 


177 


I ee a ee OE ee Ne: 


* a: 
se a) re 


aaa mii tie rma 


oe < S 


—— 


ae 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
St. Bernard Oil Co. v. City of New 
Orleans, 165 La. 665, 115 S.817.. 
St. Louis, City of, v. Dorr, 145 Mo. 
BTL Ds WLOG4 2. 2s dies 2 90, 182 
St.Louis, City of, v.. Evraiff, 301 
Mo. 231, 2568S. W. 489. ..13, 14, 218 
St. Louis Poster Advertising Co. v. 
City of St. Louis (Mo.), 249 U. S. 
one (0 SSN Oh Be i 7 a a 
St. Mary’s of Mt. Virgin’s Church 
v. Board of Adjustment of New 
Brunswick, 184 A. 516(N. J.).... 169 
St. Patrick’s Church Corporation 
V. 9 toe 113 Conn. 132, 154 
Oh Sy 0 a ee ea ea ea 119, 208 
Salt Cate City v. Western Foundry 
& S. R. Works, 55 Utah 447, 187 


107 


Rs 3 a A 
Salvation Army v. Frankenstein, 

Paes Ou%53 IN. b.277..... 3 O4 
Sam Kee v. Wilde, 41 Cal. A. 528, 

“ekg 8 | GY ps 7 gl 203 
Sampere v. City of New Orleans, 

HOG 1845770, 1175.827; .. . 46, 62, QI 


San Antonio, City of, v. Robert 
Thompson & Co., 30 S. W. (2d) 
RPMI ERT: 2 i pe xe ks she's 32 

San Antonio, City of, v. Zogheib, 
Bee 20) 333 (1 ex.) )..5 2.123, 210 

Sandenburgh v. Michigamme Oil 
Co., 249 Mich. 372, 228 N. W. 
OA) i> oh egeeeenes idanaasiers 3 

San Diego Tuberculosis Ass’n_ v. 
City of East San Diego, 186 Cal. 
oa pei UE Ne 0p ee 78, 

Sanfer Realty Corp. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
NY Ceo GON ii ar 

Sansone v. City of New Orleans, 
Posmed, G00; 113'9.126. 0... 110, 178 

Santangelo v. City of Cincinnati, 
meni by.(N, 5.) 49 .:)4.-:: 47, 179 

Sapiro v. Frisbie, 93 Cal. A. 299, 
EEOC ot iy. 5 bo lea ale a ae 180, 213 

Sarg v. Hooper, 3 N. J. Misc. 364, 
RTO ony. fey eee spat bs 182 

Savitz-Denbigh Co. v. Bigelow, 4 

N. J. Misc. 819, 134 A. 557, 5 

N. J. Misc. 533, 137 A. 439, 104 

Peelers, 140A. 90215... .. 2: 

Say-Phil Realty Corp. v. de Ligne- 
mare, 131 Misc. 827, 228 N. Y. S. 
Ee oi A ae Phat oe 33 

Schaetz v. Manders, 206 Wis. 121, 
AUNT. O35 5 fs he's as dejo ie ws 


199 


PAGE 


Schierloh v. Wood, 230 App. Div. 
VEST IAAINGY  OcOG Leconte 
Schneider v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 25, 1925...... 
Schofield v. City of Los Angeles, 
120 Cal A, 240,72; (2d).1070... 
Schrage v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, March 8, 1928..... 
Schumacher v. Union City, 9 N. J. 
Misci402,. 054° A A400 emo. 
Schwahn v. City of Eau Claire, 
Circuit Court, Eau Claire kaon 
Wis., June 24, 1929.. 
Schwartz. v. Brownlow, 50 “App. 
eG 707 270) lO tO ee 
Scoland Bldg. Corp. v. Board of 
Standards & Appeals, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, N. Y., 
New York Law Journal, dante 
27, 1934 
Scott v. Champion Bldg. Co., Ve 
SW MOTTO LeXssonanis yamtt 
Seattle Title Trust Co. v. Roberge, 
27a) Uo uEL LO AG ost. bO 
CWash) ited ale ee AASG7 7; 
Seidenberg v. Burwell, 235 App. 
Divi 745,255 N> ¥2'9.90602). 502" 
Seidman v. Tilrose Camp Operating 
Co., 153 Misc. 510, 274 N. Y. S. 
OOO Sarat ele, ahd, ree hates 
Seiferling, In re, Supreme Court, 
Nassau County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, December 20, 1928. 
Seigel v. Mann, 208 App. Div. 713, 
202 N. Y. S. 946 
Sentinel-News Co. v. City of Mil- 
waukee, 212 Wis. 618, 250 N. W. 
PH SeU RDO Mat Oar beds OAT dl ge hae tO? 
Shackelford v. Denver Board of 
Adjustment, District Court, Den- 
ver (Colo.) Rocky Mountain 
Newsy [ulyi26; 10254 42-0. nee. 
Shad v. Fowler, 90 Fla. 155, 105 S. 


eee ee we we ee we we wm ww wee 


4.Se Feiler Bee ol (0: <6 8 ol) 9) a ey el) © 


@: 6 eek @! 6: e161 wi 6 ele 6) 18) 14) \e \6y @hie, tpi a) fe. %) \6) 


753 

Shalex Realty Co. v. Connell, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
N. Y., New York Law Journal, 
JULY S132. er ae ea: eee 

Sharp v. Dalton, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, March 1, 1928, 224 App. 
Div. 663, 228 N. Y. S. 89 

Shary v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, Supreme Court, Bronx 


158 


164 


93 
43 


147 


ZONING 
PAGE PAGE 
County, N. Y., New York Law Snow v. Van Dam, 197 N. E. 224 
Journal, May 20, 1933......... 155 (MaSs.)..) cc .citite se an 186 
Sheets v. Armstrong, 307 Pa. 385, Socora Realty & Const. Co. v. 
LOVASS SOuchc cen Mabe een 42 Walsh, Supreme Court, Bronx 


359 
Sheldon v. Board of Appeals of 
New York, 234 N. Y. 484, 138 
NSB ALO youn ear adere 127, 185 
Sherman v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 


Law Journal, May 5, 1930...... 178 
Shontz Co. v. Laffay, 225 App. Div. 

263,232 NEY SSiOla re cae 33 
Shooster v. Devlin, 305 Pa. 440, 158 

ATOM aoumehelnam eel unbecte 180 
Shreveport, City of, v. Dickason, 

160 Car 663 )\107 90427 4 ee 107 
Shreveport, City of, v. Moran, 174 

Laer dO S475 iio es one ale 182 


Siegemund v. Building Com’r of 
Boston, 259 Mass. 329, 156 N. E. 
852, 263 Mass. 212, 160 N. E. 


795 
Sifferlen v. Connell, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, February 3, 1931... 159 
Silverman v. Goldmann Realty 
Corp., 232 App. Div. 292, 249 


Naya ss 506 caus igus Teen ete anaes 180 
Simmonds v. Meyn, 134 Kan. 419, 
PIPE LZA) GOO Larne niet t te 36, 209 


Sinclair v. Superintendent of Pub- 
lic Buildings of Waltham, 274 
Massi338;174 NoE.§10...2' 20 
Skillman v. City of Miami, ror Fla. 
SOS 134 54 1G ene y rie aa at 89, 213 
ack v. Building Inspector of 
Wellesley, 262 Mass. 404, 160 
NES BGA natu teeta wed 46, 57, 62 
Sloane v. Walsh, 245 N. Y. 208, 156 


NGEVO08 Te an Ser a eens 121 
Smidt v. McKee, 262 N. Y. 373, 186 
Nakns6g sieve by ones 30, 175 


Smith v. City of Atlanta, 161 Ga. 
700;:132, 070 Orn 140, (04 aan ZO 
Smith v. Collison, 119 Calva: 180, 
Lo basal 1a ede I Mletiale a ek LD lal 47, 66 
Smith v. Kearny Zoning Board of 
Appeals, 6 N. J. Misc. 954, 143 


ALLS Eig t On Wa Cia adeals weet iw by, 
Smith v. mabe 264 N. Y. 575, 191 
Ng Ba SZ e see amet e. 207 


Smith v. arate 211 App. Div. 205, 

207 N. Y. S. 324, 240 N. Y. 606, 

LAS NE 2A eA es a eee 205 
Smith v. Zoning Board of Review 

of Pawtucket, 170 A. 75 (R.1.)... 128 


County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, February 3, 1926....... 158 
Soho Park & Land Co. v. Board of 
Adjustment of Belleville, 6 N. J. 
Misc. 686, 142 A. 548). 128 
Soho Park & Land Co. v. Town of 
Belleville, 6 N. J. Misc. 683, 142 
AS 547.0 0), ot Sale als oe Ue 120 
Borough of Bradley 
Beach, 115 N. J. L. 135, 178 A. 
EET ro Se deals 169 
Sondern v. Walsh, 108 Misc. 193, 
196, 178 N. Y. S. 192, 194....5153, 207 
South Orange, Village of, v. Heller, 
g2.N. J. Eq. 505, 113 A. 697... 50 
South Ozone Park Lumber & Sup- 
ply Corp. v. Board of Appeals of 
North Hempstead, 229 App. Div. 
726, 241.N: Y, 5.8102, 7 ee 122 
Spann v. City of Dallas, 111 Tex. 
350, 235 S. W. 513........ 13, 47, 65 
Spector v. Building Inspector of 
Milton, 250 Mass. 63, 145 N. E. 
265) we te eee 47, 66, 178 
Spencer-Sturla Co. v. City of Mem- 
phis, 155 Tenn. 70, 290 S. W. 608 213 
Spiegleman v. Williams, District 


Court, Denver, Colo., Hii 6, 

19629).2 13530 ee 4, 64, 192 
Spies v. Board of Appeals, le: Il. 

507, 109 N. E. 220.0) eee 43 


Spinelli v. Walsh, 229 App. Div. 
745, 241 N. Y. S. 459, affd. 254 
N. Y..601,'173'N..E. 884 sieeeee 205 
Squillacci & Torre, Inc. v. Walsh, 
221 App. Div. 877, 224 N. Y. S. 


O20 sai. bn a ee ee se 159 
Srager v. Mintz, 109 N. J. Eq. 544, 

ISS A. 471: oi. de del 218 
Srigley v. Woodworth, 33 Oh. A. 

406; 169 Nv E..713.0. Soe 88, 97 


Standard Oil Co. v. City of Bowling 
Green, 244 Ky. 362, 50 S. W. 
(2d) 960 sels alae £4 601 116 
Standard Oil Co. v. City of Char- 
lottesville, 42 F. (2d) 88 (Va.).... 37 
Standard Oil Co. v. City Commis- 
sioners, Circuit Court, Mont- 
Satan (Ala.) Journal, January 
Standard Oil Co. v. Combs, 129 Oh. 
St. 251,194 N, E1875 4.0 ee 43 


266 


\ 
aaa 


-, A ee ae Oe 


SY ke ad oe ee eS eS NP oe 


” 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
State v. Borough Garage, Inc., Re- 
corder’s Court, Borough of Glen 
Rock, N. J., December 10, 1930.. 19 
State v. Burgenstein, Municipal 
Court, Minneapolis (Minn.) Daily 


Star, December 11, 1924........ 182 
State v. Hillman, 110 Conn. 92, 147 
MMT ees), hl. La sis aie 11! 
State v. Roberson, 198 N. C. 70, 
CUSTLESS Oy BG Se 161 
State v. Taubert, 126 Minn. 371, 
WAPI ZOR ES a oiee ws 2c ed alee 219 


State Bank & Trust Co. v. Village 
of Wilmette, 358 Ill. 311, 193 
PER siya cle wc scg's es oo 205 

Steck v. Mayor of Buffalo, Supreme 
Court, ene Co., N. Y., -Balti- 
more (Md.) Daily Record, March 
Ok nn. I A Saar aa ee ae aan 56 

Steerman v. Oehmann, Washington 
Law Reporter, Vol. 53, No. 28, 


Eo GO OF Fe eee 47, 66, 67 
Stegle v. Bales, 226 App. Div. 816, 

eMENPRYE ON OOU. c. bs 6 sc. cle oe 8 175 
Stein v. Flanagan, 228 App. Div. 

Ommes OU Nery 0, 753.< eye ses oe wn 122 


Stein v. City of Long Branch, 2 
N. J. Misc. 121, 100 N. J. L. 413, 
OO Ce i a 52 
Stein v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 


Law Journal, July 15, 1929...... 179 
Stephens v. City of Jacksonville, 
BOA 77, 13-7.0..140. oc 16, 213 


Stern v. Mason, Supreme Court, 
Nassau County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 2, 1930....... 155 

Sterpost, Inc. v. Gennerich, Su- 
preme Court, Westchester 
County, N. Y., New York Law 


Poumato UY, '7; 19345: vss ss 38 
Stevens v. Clarke, 216 App. Div. 
REASON TY POT O0. 6 hii a bas 147 


Stevenson v. Tilley, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, September  1o, 

en CE OIL Se tpn 

Stillman v. Board of Standards & 
Appeals, 222 App. Div. 19, 225 
INS: eee affd. 247 N. Y. 599 
161 N. E. 19 

Stockton, City Ole Vv. Frisbie Da 
Data} (al, A. 277, 2°70. P. 
Tio Ae Sieg AS le a PA 88, 89 

Stockton Tea Room, Inc. v. Cope- 
land, Supreme Court, New York 


oe eee eee eee ee eee es 


PAGE 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, April 19, 1922...... IOI, 211 


Strochak v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Queens County, N. Y., New 
York Law Journal, May 6, 1930.. 168 

Strolovitz v. Walsh, 227 App. Div. 
O2403 4 SIN1 YarouooOde loin eee 128 

Sudierfi Realty Corp. v. Connell, 
Supreme Court, New York 
County, New York Law Journal, 
May 12, 1933, affd. 244 App. Div. 
Fos eIOOUNG IC OS TOL Aare Meets oe 120 

Sugar v. North Baltimore Metho- 
dist Protestant Church, 164 Md. 


AST A LOGIN 703 tee cay tok tu ul alae 145 
Sundeen v. Rogers, 83 N. H. 253, 
PA A2 ee cee rare en 104 


Sundlun v. Zoning Board of Review 
of Pawtucket, 50 R. I. 108, 145 
Poa LD Vales con met TG at Tie CN AO ba yn eae 148 
Sunny Slope Water Co. v. City of 
Pasadena, 1) Cal’ (2d) 87,33, P. 
tere DM Carpe be UA ia I eae ae! 216 
Swedish Hospital v. Leo, 120 Misc. 
SSS LOOHING IY tion 307 1ad, 215 
App. Div. 696, 212 N. Y. S.897.. 120 
Syracuse, City of, v. Snow, 123 
Misc5053205 NiYaon7855. 00 197 
Syrian Orthodox Charitable Society 
v. Zoning Board of Review of 
Pawtucket, 53 R. I. 232, 165 A. 


Tigh es A eis AER ION ea RL LDA Rat 131 


Taylor v. Haverford Tp., 299 Pa. 


AOD TAQ Ay O36, tactician ae 82 
Taylor v. City of Jacksonville, 1o1 
Planre4r slag ok t4t en ee 12] 
Taylor v. Moore, 303 Pa. 4690, 154 
A700 2A er detest. SU eres 50, 161 
Taylor v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
New York County, ee New 
mon Law Journal, March rr: 
Bares RUN PA AN See A 5h 159 
Tylor v. Walsh, 140 Misc. 25, 248 
INK YS O07 5a Liahebtn nes tales Oneece: 219 
Tenez Const. Corp. v. Garner, 4 
N. J. Misc. 485, 133 A.396...... 59 
Terrace Park, Village of, (Ohio) v. 
Errettici2i\F? (2d) 240 oa ies 215 
Tews v. Woolhiser, 352 Ill. 212, 185 
NB 82570) 2 conte ea eee ate 54, 69 
Texarkana, City of, v. Mabry, 94 
SYWA20) OI LEX) eee wren 209 


267 


ZONING 
PAGE PAGE 
Texas Co. v. City of Bethlehem, Townsend’s Petition, 21 Pa. Dist. 
Court of Common Pleas, North- & €C0.'340. 0,420 92 


ampton County, Pa., April 4, 1927 161 
Thall v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, June 30, 1926..... 147 
Thayer v. Board of Appeals of 
Sag 114 Conn. 15, 157 aw 
Be Ua NL UN Men pO na 155 
Thille v. Board of Public ce ef 
Los Angeles, 82 Cal. A. 187, 255 
PR2G4 ane ens ev etree 14, 57 
Third Ave. R. R. v. Walsh, Su- 
preme Court, New York County, 
New York Law Journal, April 7, 
1926, affd. 220 App. Div. 760, 
Z2ZiINa VY Os O10 
Thompson, Appeal of, Court of 
Common Pleas, Allegheny 
County, Pa., October Term, 1925, 
and June 29, 1926...... 67, 110, 197 
Thorofare Developing Corp. v. Dee- 
gan, 134 Misc. 592, 235 N. Y. S. 
544, affd. 226 App. Div. 871, 235 
INS YR OuSO0 Reite fat aye ee 93 
Tighe v. Osborne, 149 Md. 349, 131 


AS80155 1501: Md. 452.0133 uA. 

PAG 5 erin be ee esis Outer, 15, 153 
Tingley v. Gurda, 209 Wis. 63, 243 

IW eT eeaN Meee. ary 53, 69 


Tishman v. 1400 Broadway Corp., 
Supreme Court, New York 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, January 28, 1931...161, 172 

Tishman Realty & Const. Co. v. 
Walsh, 135 Misc. 315, 237 N.Y.S. 
237, affd. 228 App. Div. 687, 239 
Naas 

Toback, Inc. v. Walsh, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, December 20, 1928, 
affd. 230 App. Div. 764, 243 
NSY 35) 804 BE CS oe earl ee 159 

Tonson Realty Corp. v. Fried, Su- 
preme Court, Kings County, 

N. Y., New York Law Journal, 


Wine 1726 98 cere eee gare ee 107 
Tortorella v. H. Traiser & Co., 284 
Massc4G7uleo Nabi s4 nee aoe 93 


Towers Management Corporation 

v. Thatcher, Supreme Court, 

Kings County, New York Law 

Journal, September 10, 1935, 246 

App. Div. 835, 286 N. Y. S. 435, 

27 IWIN YL eOAr 2 Neth) (2d)e2'73 
102, 176, 220 


Troy v. Village of Forest Park, 318 
Ill. 340, 149 N. E. 281. 88, 89, 206 
Tucson, City of, v. Arizona Mortu- 
ary, 34 Ariz. 495, 272 P. 923.. .88, 213 
Turner v. City of New Bern, 187 
N.C..§41, 1225. E. 400/27 eee 203 
25 Fifth Ave. Corp. v. Board of 
Standards and Appeals, Supreme 
Court, New York County, N. Y., 
ot York Law Journal, August 


1929 
Twin City Bldg. & Inv. Co. v. 
Houghton, 144 Minn. 1, 174 
N. W. 885, 176 N. W. 159....... 47 
257 Madison Ave. v. Board of Ap- 
peals, Supreme Court, New York 
County, N. Y., New York Law 
Journal, April 16, 1926......... 158 
Tyler v. Harmon, 158 La. 439, 104 
5.200, 160, La.°943, 107s 5 aa 
273 U.S, 668;47 S.Ct 47a 50 


U 


Ugast Realty, Inc. v. Kleinert, 226 
App. Div. 752, 233 N: Yo Seoi2vatan 
Union Railway Company v. Village 
of Pelham, Supreme Court, West- 
chester County, N. Y., March 13, 
1925.3. i hs hae 123 
University Heights, Village of, 
(Ohio) v. Cleveland Jewish Or- 
phans’ Home, 20 F. (2d) 743, 275 
U. 5.569, 48 5. Ct. 141 eee Fi 
Utica, City of, v. Hanna, 202 App. 
Div. (610, 195 N:} Yous 
43, 46, 53, 55, 89 
Utica, City of, v. Hanna, 249 N. Y. 
26, 162 N. E. 573 os aia shee 180 


V 


Valicenti’s Appeal, 298 Pa. 276, 148 
A.'308 oi 34 sos ble er 61 

Van Auken v. Kimmey, 141 Misc. 
105, 11'7, 252 N. Y. S. 320, 343 

Van Duyne v. Senior, 105 N. J. L. 


257) 143 A. 437.0)... 2) ee 58 
Van Horn v. City of New Orleans, 
161'La:767, 109 5, 48445 2 eee 111 


Van Iderstine v. Walsh, Supreme 
Court, Kings County, New York 
Law Journal, June 6, 1922, affd. 

208 App. Div.740, 202 N.Y.S.946 158 


268 


, “ty sn 
OP AO tee 


ee ee eee ee eS 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Van Meter v. H. F. Wilcox Oil & 
at Co., 170 Okl. 604, 41 P. (2d) 


PSE we S KO Met ss. ip, #! wd, amie "eo "e's, le 6, @. a6 


Ven. Meter v. Westgate Oil Co., 168 


eerie 200: g2.F (ad) 71923.) 2.0). 216 
Vatter v. Kaltenbach, 3 N. J. Misc. 
665, 129 A. 926, 102 N. J. L. 470, 
BOO Be Err 0d Niele eels 60 
Ventres v. Walsh, 121 Misc. 494, 
OLLIE Sie 1 215 


Vernon v. Mayor & Council of 
Westfield, 98 N. J. L. 600, 124 A. 
ag OURS a a 64, 192, 193 
Vesell v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, 137 Misc. 806, 243 
N. Y. S. 518, affd. 225 App. Div. 
pase yD. 004 Ws.) a4 bane. 186 
Viano v. Chandler, Supreme Court, 
Middlesex County, Mass., Janu- 
RA ERA e eB A A ee 117 
Voelcker v. Seaman, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 2, 1928...111, 179 
Voelcker v. Weber, Supreme Court, 
Nassau County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, February 9, 1929.. 123 
Vonesh v. City of Berwyn, 324 IIl. 
483, 155 N. E. 276 
Vorenberg v. Bunnell, 257 Mass. 
PENN SA UN TEL OOAS eile sc oracles 186 
Vorlander v. Hokenson, 145 Minn. 


Meme SN W095. 05... eines + s 47 
Vowinckel v. Clark & Sons, 216 
Male sonia -b.. (2d) 733.0)... 93 


W 


W. P. Rose Builders’ Supply Co., 
Inve, 202; N.C. 490, 163. S.E. 
OOD. EAE, Oe Non ep raenn ary ere 107 
Wadleigh v. Gilman, 12 Me. 403, 
PMMA SID LOO ely ig oy «cate ait 22 
Walker v. Delaware County Trust 
or 4i4.ba.257,.171 A. 455. ...- 210 
oe Ursillo, 53 R. I. 120, 164 
co OES, USS sie Sen 186 
ee v. Cusack Co., 196 N. Y. S. 
els 5 5 SA eta aes 170 
Ward v. Murdock, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, May 25, 1935, 247 App. 
Div. 808, 286 N. Y. S. 280. ..124, 209 
Ward’s Appeal, 289 Pa. 458, 137 A. 
Oe Ney SAE OEE re 112, 148 


PAGE 
Ware v. City of Wichita, 113 Kan. 
153,214 P99. ...... 246, 47, 54, 66 
Ware v. City of Wichita, District 
Court, Sedgwick County, 1924, 
Dio, Kank 265 92341040755 .00aeee 59 
Wasilewski v. Biedrzycki, 180 Wis. 
633;(102: NA W.08G we 2 ore 
Wasserman v. Cooper, 201 Wis. 
3502 30Na WhO ae ore 110, 155 
asserman v. O’Brien, 201 Wis. 
350,230. NAWeS5Otea si hae nica: 179 
Watertown, Inspector of Buildings 
of, v. Nelson, 257 Mass. 346, 153 


NUEVOS: eS aeeiee sa nomad 116 
Weaver v. Bishop, 174 Okl. 492, 52 
Pa(2d7.O53 Wier ee tee 210 


Webkan Holding Corp. v. Walsh, 
230 App..Dive 717; 243. NinY.o.- 


FIOM eacleb erate Meine: Penk ee ode 207 
Weil v. Reveille, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, July 7, 1936....... 208 
Weisman v. Spoerer, 11 N. J. Misc. 
73 PLO AS 2 UFR at ie kee 106 
eiss v. Guion, 17 F. (2d) 202 
(ODIO Rear Ste ee fay Ue 46, 62 


Welch v. City of Niagara Falls, 210 
App. Div. 170, 205 N. Y.S.454.. 105 
Welch v. Swasey, 193 Mass. 364, 


70 UNecE..745 1214, U 5.9, oy 29 


DEES OT een meey Sale siis Aine, [S22 8O7 
Welton v. 40 E. Oak St. Bidg. 

Gorn Oh (20) 3770 Lee 172 
Welton v. Hamilton, 344 IIl. 82, 176 

IND E333 Soe aes ee 121, 144 


Werbelowsky & Lavine Realty 
Corp. v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, N. Y., New York 
Law Journal, January 13, 1925... 106 

Werner v. Walsh, 212 App. Div. 
635; 200 N.Y oS. 454; alld 2400 5 
N. Y. 689, 148 N. E. 760... . 168, 210 

Wertheimer v. Schwab, 124 Misc. 
S226210 Ne YR 120 96 

West v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Bronx County, New York Law 
Journal, August 30, 1926, affd. 
a2 App. Div. 751, 222 N. Y. S. 


West. v. City of Wichita, 118 Kan. 
265923410) O75 vi eae ey ee 46 
Westchester Asphalt Distributing 
Corp. v. Wyand, 234 App. Div. 
SSip 254 Nx. 9103 5 on eee 161 
Westchester Housing Corp. v. Bun- 
nell, 130 Misc. 586, 224 N. Y. S. 


269 


ZONING 


PAGE 
see 131 Mice Bele ANI ANO. 


West End Investment Co. v. Oster- 
man, 5 N. J. Misc. 335, 136 A. 
G20 5 Sr iN A Tele (lees ranean 15 

Western Springs, Village of, v. 
Bernhagen, 326 Ill. 100, 156 N. E. 
7G Bie hah RON Meat wah Peel casero tered 64, 193 

Western Theological Seminary v. 
City of Evanston, 325 Ill. 511, 
LSOUN Bre ss ihi25 7162 

. E. 86 


RAD MN on iene seme 197 
Westminster Presbyterian Church 
v. Edgecomb, 108 Neb. 859, 189 
INS W itp ie a Oi cai sarees ee 46, 62 
West Side SAS Co. v. Leo, 174 
NYRI 2 AG tee casa eee chk 127, 153 
West Benda Town of, v. Mayo, 
265 Mass. 41, 163 N. E. 653... .37, 41 
Wheat v. Barrett, 210 Cal. 193, '290 
P1033 h cloe Renta, aan Oat eae 107 
White, Ex parte, 195 Cal. 516, 234 
PSO Gann ae aaa 70 
White, In re, 95 Ind. A. 579, 180 
N. E. 73 SM eRe nS 206, 216 
White v. Luquire Funeral Home, 
SIU ALAUAAO N20 ONO 4 ue ed aes 213 


White v. Old York Road Country 

Club, 318 Pa. 346, 178 A. 3, 318 

Pa. 569, 179 A. 434, 185 A. 316 
94, 172 

White’s Appeal, 287 Pa. 259, 134 


ALAOG RAO ia enw then ioe 61 
Whitridge v. Park, 100 Misc. 367, 

165 N. Y. S. 640, 179 App. Div. 

ave Bae Lows FeAELS, Mah Dain By aL 172,924 
Wichita, City of, v. Schwertner, 130 

Kanigo7/286, 2200 su nrn ae oi 


Wichita, City of, v. Ware, District 
Court, 18th Judicial District, Di- 
vision No. 2, July 10, 1922, 113 
Kansl 53214 Oma aienee, 27, 45 

Wichita Falls, City of, v. Continen- 
tal Oil Co., 5 S. W. (2d) 561, 42 
Sa W720). 236 exit een 

Wickham v. Becker, 96 Cal. A. 443, 
27M BOTA cal eke ae ted 

Wiegan v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, Supreme Court, New 
York County, New York Law 
Journal, August 6, 1929, 229 App. 
Div. 320, 241 N. Y. S. 456, affd. 

254 N. Y. 590, 173 N. E. 883..... 54 

Wightman v. Foster, Supreme 
Court, Westchester County, 
Westchester Law Journal, Au- 


PAGE 
gust 23, 1932, 237 App. Div. go6, 
261.N.:Y.'S., 1002... 9. 105 

Wikstrom v. City of Laramie, 37 
Wy0.'3890, 262 P: 22,0255 epee 107 
Wilkins v. Walsh, Supreme Court, 
Kings County, New York Law 
Journal, December 21, 1927, 225 
App. Div. 774, 232 N. Y. S. 918, 
25r.N. Y. 618,168 N. Bai igeee 158 
Willerup v. Village of Hempstead, 
120 Misc. 485, 199 N. Y. S. 56 
ee 55, 163 
Williams v. Blue Bird Laundry Co., 
35 Cal. A..388, 259 P. 48420 ee 202 
Williams v. City of Fargo, 63 N. D. 
183, 24°0N W460 ee ee 184 
Wilmington, Mayor and Council 
of, v. Turk, 14 Del. Ch. 392, 129 
AGt5 LA ee aaa oee 46, 54, 78, 199 
Wilson v. Edgar, 64 Cal. A. 654, 
22%, P2623 5 i554. po ie 105 
Windsor, Town of, v. Whitney, 95 
Conn: 357, 111A. 354. seen 46, 
Winship v. Inspector of Buildings 
of Wakefield, 274 Mass. 380, 174 
Ni Esg764. 42. oo 103 
Wittenberg v. Board of Appeals of 
West Allis, Circuit Court, Mil- 
waukee County, Wis., December 
6; 1929 :3..0. S45 62 
Wittkop v. Garner, 4 N. J. Misc. 
234, 132 A. 339 
ohl v. Leo, 109 Misc. 448, 178 
N. Y. S. 851, affd. 201 App. Div. 
857,192 IN. Y.'9. 0454 one 84, 106 
Women’s Kansas City St. Andrew 
Soc. v. Kansas City (Mo.), 58 F. 
(2d)15 63 (went anne 54, 55, 78, 200 
Wood v. Building Com’r of Boston, 
256 Mass. 238, 152 N. E. 63...62, 63 
Wood v. City of Richmond, 148 Va. 
400, 138.S..E./560.. 5c). sic. a ee 216 
Woodbury, Town of, v. Nicoll, 236 
App. Div. 752, 258 N. Y. S. 970, 


affd. 261 N; Ys 507; 135" Nieee 

VALTER ns cae 78 
Woodford v. Rubel Coal & Ice 

Corp., Supreme Court, Kings 

County, N. Y., New York Law 

Journal, May 15, 1930......... 218 
Woods v. Kiersky, 297 S. W. 518, 

14S. W. (2d) 825 (Tex.).. 205 
Wright v. City of Guthrie, 150 OKI. 

P7 Ll Pet2d 162.) sh, en 183 
Wright v. Wardman, 55 App. D. C. 

318,/5:\Fo (2d) 3803080. ae eee 43 


270 


INDEX OF CASES 


PAGE 
Wulfsohn v. Burden, 241 N. Y. 288, 
DRONE ol 2O ws keg #5 40, 57, 59 
Wulfsohn v. Burden, Supreme 
Court, Westchester County, Mt. 
Vernon (N. Y.) Daily Argus, 


PRR VIO TIO ini ieies be ose Hew 161 
Wynn v. Margate City, 9 N. J. 
MAISEH 3245157. 50501. 0 05.2% 30 
Ve 


Yeager v. Traylor, 306 Pa. 530, 160 
A. 108 


Yonkers, City of, v. Horowitz, 222 
App. Div. 297, 226 N. cs 
EO Re ile os aida « Sixtae ole 78, 200 

York Harbor Village Corporation v. 
Libby, 126 Me. 537, 140 A. 
Joh 4 eater GA Sea 82, 97 


PAGE 
Young Women’s Hebrew Associa- 
tion v. Board of Standards and 
Appeals, 266 N. Y. 270, 194 N. E. 
GOREN Se OLE LOO ee ail 148, 168, 209 


Youngstown, City of, v. Kahn 
Bros. Bldg. Co., 112 Oh. St. ec 
LAS INS EGA Tee Velen tele 707 
Yuba City v. Cherniavsky, 117 Cal. 
Ags0orais (20) 200.0 een are 107 
Mh 


Zahn v. Board of Public Works of 
Los Angeles, 195 Cal. 497, 234 P. 
388, 274 U. S. 325, 47 S. Ct. 594 


47, 54, 66 
Zimmerman v. O’Meara, 215 lowa 
LIAOS24G: NOW 7150 ee 146, 154 


271 


INDEX OF 


Abandonment, II! 
Accessory Uses, 82, 100, 189 
Additions, 109 

Advertising, roadside, 98 
Advertising hearing, 36 
Agricultural Districts, 48, 98 
Air, 86 

Airports, 214 

Alleys, 190 

Alterations, structural, 106 
Amenity, 97 

Amortization, 113, 115 
Amusement parks, 115, 214 
Animals, 102 

Antiquity shops, 101 
Apartment houses, 189 
Architecture, 98 

Area regulations, 59, 143 
Art jury, 98 

Artificial light, 57 

Asylums, 76, 199 

Atlanta, Ga., Board of Appeals in, 129 
Automobile repair shops, 206 


Bakery and confectionery shops, 85, 214 

Balconies, 190 

Ball grounds, 214 

Baltimore, Trial de novo in, 154 

Barber, 101 

Barber shops, 202 

Bay windows, 190 

Beauty parlors, 202 

Benedict, Russell, 135 

Bettman, Alfred, 47 

Billboards, 59, 98, 115 

Block ordinances, 90 

Blum, Edward C., 7 

Board of Adjustment, 117 

Board of Appeals, 117 

Boarding houses, 101, 195 

Boiler shops, 110, 215 

Boston, first city to employ height zon- 
ing, 14, 23 

Boundaries of districts, 81, 95, 184 

Boundaries, political, 92 

Breweries, 110 

Brick-making plants, 13, 113, 219 

Brown, Edward W., 7 

Building area, 62, 189 

Building Code, regulations how differ 
from zoning, 26 . 


SUBJECTS 


Building Districts and _ Restrictions 
Commission and Report, 7, 20 

Bulk regulations, 143 

Business center, 125 

Business districts, 63 

Buying into zoning, 177 


Canyons between buildings, 57 

Cardozo, Benjamin N., Chief Judge of 
New York Court of Appeals, 163, 167 

Carpenter shops, 216 

Cellar, 107 

Cemetries, 217 

Certiorari, 153 

Change of use, 110 

Chesebrough, William H., 7 

Chicken raising, 102 

Chimneys, 189 

Churches, 70, 200 

Circus tents, 219 

Clonin, James E., 7 

Clubs, 198 

Coal yards, 204 

Cokeley, William A., 7 

Comey, Arthur C., 50 

Commercial districts, 85 

Community houses, 198 

Conditions in variances, 128 

Consent, 42, 88 

Consent, 80 percent, 42, 126 

Consideration, zoning not based on a, 
180 

Constitutions, of states, 13; amend- 
ments for zoning, 17; amendments 
omit vacant land, 17; pleading, 162, 
172,) 177, tol 

Contagion, 86 

Contracts, 184 

Cooking, 87 

Corner, treatment of, 60; plots, 189 

Counties, 48 

Court, 188 

Cows, 103 

Curb cuts, 207 


Dairies, 102 

Damages, 180; special must be pleaded, 
ewes bg dy 

Declaratory judgments, 174 

Definitions in ordinance, 188 


agp 


INDEX OF 


Delaware, constitutional amendment for 
zoning, 18 

Density of population, 28, 49, 86 

Dentists, 100 

Destruction, I11 

Discrimination, 91, 93 

Disease, 67; contagious, 57, 73 

Doctors, 100 

Dogs, 103 

Dormitories, 197 

Dressmakers, 100 

Driveways, 216 

Duck raising, 102 

Dust, 66 


Earth-product operations, 215 

Easements, 185 

Eaves, 189 

Eidlitz, Otto M., 7 

Elkus, Abram I., 7 

Eminent Domain—How it differs from 
police power, 26 

Encumbrance, zoning no, 32, 187 

Engineers, 36 

Envelope, building, 143 

Esthetics, 58, 59, 64, 97, 129, 187 

Estoppel, 185 

Europe, zoning precedents in, 21 


Factories, 215 

Fairgrounds, 214 

Families, per acre, 28, 49, 86; per 
building, 63; definition of, 189 

Farm zoning, submarginal, 11 

Farming localities, 98 

Fenner, Burt L., 7 

Fifty percent petition, 37 

Fine, 182 

Fire departments, 58 

Fire houses, 31 

Fire limits, 45 

Fire risk, 57, 86, 92 

Flies, 67 

Footing course, 107, 108 

Ford, George B., 8 

Fox, John P., 8 

Fraternity houses, 67, 197 

Freeways, 83 

Front of building, 60, 189 

Fumes, 57, 215 

Garages, 204; private, 204; public, 
124, 125 

Gasoline, filling stations, 130, 169, 209; 
tanks, 217 

Georgia constitutional amendment for 
zoning, 18 


SUBJECTS 


Golf courses, 217; miniature, 114 
Greenhouses, 189, 200 
Gutters, 189 


Hardy, Edward R., 7 

Hearings, 36, 117, 118 

Height of building, 143, 189 

Heights of Buildings Commission and 
Report, 72/2001 34. 

Hewlett, J. Monroe, 7 

Higbie, Robert W., 7 

Home Rule Charters, 14 

Hoover, Herbert, 28, 142 

Horses, 103 

Hospitals, 70, 198 

Hotels, 102, 196 

Hotels, apartment, 196 

Housekeeping units, 87 


Ice making and handling establish- 
ments, 218 

Imprisonment, 182 

Industrial districts, 63 

Industry, light, 84 

Injunction, 170 

Inns, 196 

Insects, 86 

Inspection of premises by court, 180 

Interim ordinances, 87 

Interstate Commerce Commission, 131 


Junk yards, 115, 218 


Kober, Dr. George M., 66 
Kross, Anna M., 114 


La Farge, C. Grant, 7 

Laundries, 85, 115, 202 

Laundry equipment, 87 

Lawrence, Richard W., 7 

Lawyers, 100 

Lehman, Irving, Associate Judge of 
New York Courtof Appeals, 163 

Lewis, Nelson P., 7 

Libraries, 197 

Light, 86 

Litter, 66 

Los Angeles, first municipality to adopt 
use zoning, 13, 22 

Lot, corner, 190; definition of, 188, 190; 
lines, 95 

Louisiana constitutional amendment for 
zoning, 18 

Lumber yards, 203 


McAneny, George, 7 
Man, Alrick H., 7 


273 


ZONING 


Mandamus, 170; alternative writ, 176; 
peremptory writ, 176 

Manicure parlors, 101 

Map, is part of ordinance, 41; must be 
advertised, 171 

Marling, Alfred E., 7 

Massachusetts constitutional amend- 
ment for zoning, 17 . 

Merchandising, 85 

Metzenbaum, James, 47 

Milk stations, 218 

Milliner, 100 

Minutes of legislative body, 175 

Misrepresentation, grounds for revoca- 
tion, 179 

Moot, 179 

Mortimer, George T., 7 

Mortuary establishments, 213 

Moving picture houses, 214 

Multi-family houses, 64, 142, 190, 194 

Murdock, Harris H., 159, 168 

Murray Hill, 184 

Music, studios, 102; teachers, 100 


National Conference on City Planning, 


47 

Needle trades, 215 

Neighbors, aggrieved, 117, 123, 154 

New Jersey, constitutional amendment 
for zoning, 18, 19; courts once held 
use zoning unconstitutional, 15 

New Orleans, 113 

Newspaper printing offices, 214 

New York City, Board of Appeals in, 
133, 148; Board of Examiners in, 134; 
first city to adopt height, area and 
use zoning, 20; official map of streets, 
30; Tenement House Commissioner, 
128; zoning provisions of charter, 133 

New York Home Rule Amendment to 
Constitution, 16 

Noise, 57, 86, 215 

Nonconforming buildings and uses, 105 

Notary, 100 

Nuisance, 93 

Nutley, N. J., 65 


Office buildings, 201 

Offices of doctors, 82; of lawyers, 82 

Oil wells, 215 

One-family attached residences, 194 

One-family detached residences, 189, 192 

One-family residences, 63 

One-family semi-detached residences, 
189, 193 

Open-air parking spaces, 206 

Oxygen, 97 


Parking spaces, 206 

Parks, public, 69, 215 

Party wall, 189 

Penalties, 182 

Permits, building, 110, 174; misrepre- 
sentation constitutes grounds for 
revocation of, 179; Occupancy, 109; 
temporary, 129, 169 

Personal service, 40 

Personal service shops, 202 

Piecemeal ordinances, 90 

Planing mills, 203 

Planning Commission, 35 

Plate glass front, 84, 106, 111 

Plumbing shops, 101 

Porches, 61 

Posting of notice, 40; 
City, 40 

Poultry markets, 219 

Power plants, 211 

Premises, 114, 190 

Private restrictions, 54, 184, 185 

Privity of title, 186 

Public buildings, 31, 212 

Public record, 118 

Public utility buildings, 211 

Purdy, Lawson, 7, 52 


in New York 


Quarries, 215 
Quorum, 38, 119 


Race tracks, 214 

Racial zoning, 49 

Railroad stations, 211 

Railroads, 69; as boundaries of dis- 
tricts, 96; land of, should be zoned, 30 

Rapid transit, inception of New York 
City zoning related to, 11 

Rescission of act of Board of Appeals, 119 

Residential districts, 63 

Restaurants, 101, 195, 211 

Retroactive regulations, 112, 116 

Rezoning, 56 

Roadside zoning, 11 

Robinson, Allan, 7 

Rooming houses, 195 


St. Louis, 65 

Salt meadows, 68 

Sand pits, 215 

Sanitariums, 199 

Saw mills, 216 

Schools, 70, 196; private, 82 
Schwarzler, August F., 7 
Setbacks, 59, 61 


Sewers, 58 


Shoemaker, 101 


274 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Shoe polishing stands, 202 

Signs, 220 

Skating rinks, 113, 217 

Slaughter houses, 218 

Smelting, 215 

Smith; J)... 7 

Smoke, 215 

Smoke-houses, 100 

Spot zoning, 122, 131, 145 

Stabler, Walter, 7 

Stables, 100, 189, 204 

Stadiums, 214 

Standard form of state enabling act 
prepared by Department of Com- 
merce, 29, 116, 142 

Storage warehouses, 203 

Stores, 66, 201; book, 94, 110; butcher, 
110; candy, 85, 214; clothing, 84; 


Oragiis; erocery, T10; 113, 115; 
jewelry, 84; retail, 190 
Story, 189 


Streets, broad, 82; definition of, 190; 
grade of, 189; land in is not zoned, 
29; traffic, 83 

Sunlight, 57 

Surface cars, 81 

Swan, Herbert S., 8 


Tanneries, 219 

Telephone exchanges, 211 
Tennis courts, 114 

Tents, 219 

Terraces, 190 

Theatres, 214 

Ticket booth, 114 

Tomlin, Franklin S., 7 
Transformer stations, 211, 219 
Trees, 72 

Trial de novo, review by, 154, 158 
Tuberculosis, 78 


Tuttle, George W., 8 

Twenty percent protest, 38, 42 

Two-family attached residences, 194 

Two-family detached residences, 189, 193 

Two-family semi-detached residences, 
193 


Undertaking establishments, 213 

Uniformity of regulations, 50 

Use regulations, 63 

Use zoning first employed in Los An- 
geles, 13, 22 


Vacant land, 40, 115 
Valet, 202 

Variances, 120, 124 
Vegetation, 97 

Veiller, Lawrence, 7 
Vested rights, 108, 178 
Vision clearance, 58, 99 


Water, land under water can be zoned,30 
Water pumping stations, 211 

Water towers, 211 

Waterways, 96 

Weaving, 215 

Wells, 216 

Western Union Telegraph Building, 143 
Whipple, George C., 7 

White, Gaylord S., 7 

Whitten, Robert, 8 

Willcox, William G., 7 

Williams, Frank B., 8 


Yards, 59, 63, 143; front, 190; side, 190 


Zone, derivation of the word, 21 

Zoning Commission, 20, 34, 89 

Zoning Committee, formed for New 
York City, 8 


275 


* 
$ 


Date Due re 
4 


