



0^^ 



3? 



^"^ 



\> 



.^ 



v^^ 



^ 



A 



3 1924 050 134 323 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924050134323 



THE 
RIGHTS, REMEDIES AND LIABILITIES 



OF 



LANDLORD AND TENANT, 



IWCLTJDIWG 



THE LAW AND PRACTICE 



SUMMARY PRO OEEDINGS, 



UNDBB THE STATUTE PBCULIAK TO THAT RELATION. 



DAVID McADAM, 

ONE OF THE JUSTICES OF THE MARINE COURT OF THE CITY 
OF NEW YORK. 



WITH NUMEROUS FORMS. 



NEW-YOEK : 

DIOSSY & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS, 

86 Nassau Street, itbar Pulton-. 
1876. 



Entered, according to act of Congress, in the year 1875, 

By DAVID McADAM, 

In the office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington. 



TOBITT & BUNCB, 

Frinlert, 

131 William Street, N. Y, 



PREFACE. 



The Statutory changes in the law regulating the Rights 
and Remedies of Landlord and Tenant made within 
the past few years, induced the author to comply with 
numerous requests to compile the present Treatise. The 
work treats, first, of the Rights belonging to the re- 
spective parties growing out of the relation of Landlord 
and Tenant ; next, the Remedies for the enforcement of those 
rights ; and lastly, the Liabilities incidental to these rem- 
edies. The forms required in the various remedies have 
also been inserted in their appropriate place in the book, 
with the Remedy to which they belong. 

Other forms affecting the relation, have also been 
inserted. 

The general design has been to make the work one of 
practical, as well as of easy reference. It is hoped that the 
design has been accomplished. 

DAVID McADAM; 
New York, December 6, 1875. 



ERRATA. 
The following corrections should he made : 

Page 44, bottom line, for "Keys," read "Key." 
" 103, line five, for "L. R. Eq.," read "L. & Eq. R." 
" 103, the title at top of page should read " Rights and Disa- 
bilities." 
" 195, line 13, for " possessions," read "possession." 
" 215, bottom line, for "31," read " 33." 
" 387, line seven, for "contents" read "contests." 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

PASE 

The tenure of real property 1 

CHAPTER n. 

The creation and division of estates. Estates of inheritance. Es- 
states for life. Estates for years, and estates at will and by 
sufferance, and monthly tenancies 5 

CHAPTER HI. 

Determination of particular estates by service of notice to quit. 

Tenancies at will and sufferance 13 ' 

CHAPTER IV. 

Of the definition, nature, and validity of leases. Covenants. 
Renewals. Power of agents. Rights of lodgers. Effect 
of occupation under void lease. Legal meaning of certain 
terms. Recording leases. Effect of possession as notice 19 

CHAPTER V. 

Validity of lease as affected by fraud. Remedy in case of fraud. 

Election to affirm. Effect of lessee taking possession 34 

CHAPTER VI. 

Rights of landlord. Time of payment of rent. Mode of pay- 
ment. Tender of payment. Plea of tender. Effect of ten- 
der. Appropriation of payments 47 



ERRATA. 

The following corrections should ie made : 

Page 44, bottom line, for "Keys," read ''Key." 
" 103, line five, for " L. R. Eq.," read " L. & Eq. R." 
" 103, the title at top of page should read "Rights and Disa- 
bilities." 
" 195, line 13, for " possessions," read "possession." 
" 215, bottom Une, for "31," read " 83." 
" 387, line seven, for "contents" read "contests." 



TABLE OF OONTEJSTTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

The tenure of real property 



CHAPTER n. 

The creation and division of estates. Estates of inheritance. Es- 
states for life. Estates for years, and estates at will and by 
sufferance, and monthly tenancies 5 

CHAPTER m. 

Determination of particular estates by service of notice to quit. 

Tenancies at will and sufferance 13 ' 

CHAPTER IV. 

Of the definition, nature, and validity of leases. Covenants. 
Renewals. Power of agents. Rights of lodgers. Effect 
of occupation under void lease. Legal meaning of certain 
terms. Recording leases. Effect of possession as notice 19 

CHAPTER V. 

Validity of lease as affected by fraud. Remedy in case of fraud. 
Election to affirm. Effect of lessee taking possession 34 

CHAPTER VI. 

Rights of landlord. Time of payment of rent. Mode of pay- 
ment. Tender of payment. Plea of tender. Effect of ten- 
der. Appropriation of payments 47 



VI CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER Vn. 

PAQB 

Remedies of the landlord and of Ms grantees and assignees. Var- 
ious remedies of the landlord. Rents dependent upon life of 
another. When rent has a preference over certain claims 
against deceased tenant. Enforcing compliance of condition. 
Enforcing forfeiture for breach of condition. Nuisances upon 
adjoining premises. Remedies of executors. Effect of judg- 
ment upon other remedies 56 

CHAPTER Vm. 

Rights of tenant. Right of possession and damages for with- 
holding. Damages to evicted tenant. Assigning lease and 
under-letting. Who are assignees. Liability of assignee. 
Discharge of assignee by further assignment. Sale of 
leasehold estate. Right of tenant to remove fixtures. Rights 
of the under-tenant. "Right of sub-tenant to pay original 
landlord. Sub-lease and sub-lessee 81 

CHAPTER IX. 

Remedies of the tenant, and of his assignees and personal repre- 
sentatives. Rescission for fraud or mistake. Other remedies 
of the tenant. Remedies of joint tenants. Tenant's remedy 
for wrongful entry 91 

CHAPTER X. 

Certain rights and disabilities growing out of the relation. Ten- 
ant estopped from disputing landlord's title. Certain attorn- 
ments void. Certain provisions affecting tenant's possession. 
Leases to infants. Married woman. IJarfcners and corpora- 
tions 97 

CHAPTER XI. 

Of the obligation to repair. Right of action for breach. Extent 
of landlord's liability 104 

CHAPTER XH. 
Covenants running with the land Ill 

CHAPTER Xm. 

Surrender. Agent's power to accept surrender. Accepting new 

lease '.. 115 



CONTENTS. . Vll 

CHAPTER XIV. 

PAGK 

Eviction. Effect of eviction. Eminent domain. What the evic- 
tion affects 121 



CHAPTER XV. 

The statute relating to untenantable premises. Construction of 

the act 129 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Of excavations. Excavations as affecting adjoining premises. 
The effect of adjoining excavations upon the relations be- 
tween landlord and tenant of the house inconvenienced by 
them 133 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Party walls. Party wall not an incumbrance. Provisions of the 
building law upon the subject of party walls. Increasing 
the thickness of party and other walls. Diminishing thick- 
ijess of party wall. Increasing height and depth of party 
wall. Repairing party wall. Taking down party wall. Re- 
building party wall 145 

CHAPTER XVni. 

Other easements. Definition of easement. Rights of way. 
Rights under covenant as to character of adjoining build- 
ings 161 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Liability to third persons. Of tenant and of landlord. Open- 
ings on sidewalk. Liability of third person to landlord .... 165 

t 

CHAPTER XX. 

The statutory remedy of forcible entries and detainers 174 

CHAPTER XXI. 

The statutory remedy known as summary proceedings to recover 
the possession of demised premises 182 



VIU CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

PAHB 

The law and practice on proceedings for forcible entries and de- 
tainers. Officers having jurisdiction. Proceedings, how in- 
stituted and conducted, with the various forms required 
therein 197 

CHAPTER XXm. 

The law and practice on summary proceedings. The object, de- 
sign, and application of the statute 311 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

The rules of construction applicable to the statutes, jurisdiction, 

and proceedings thereafter . . . , 316 

CHAPTER XXV. 
Judicial officers having jurisdiction 319 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Proceedings for non-payment of rent 331 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
Proceedings for holding over 330 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

The affidavit in said proceedings, and its requisites, with forms, 337 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

The summons, its form. The service and proof of service 351 

CHAPTER XXX. 

Practice upon return day. Objections to sufficiency of papers. 
Filing counter affidavit. Amendments. Demanding trial 
by jury. Adjournments, with forms 363 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

Proceedings upon trial. The jury. Evidence. Judges charge. 

Deliberations of the jury. Verdict and its efiEect 874 



CONTENTS. IX 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

PASS 

Final determination and ita efiect. Warrant. Staying execu- 
tion of warrant. Redemption. Forms, &c 284 

CHAPTER XXXin. 
Injunctions to enjoin summary proceedings 299 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Proceedings under the statute relating to bawdy houses and 

illegal trades, with the forms required in said proceedings. . 303 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

Certiorari to review proceedings on forcible entry and detainer, 
and to review adjudications under the statute relating to 
summary proceedings with the forma, required thereupon , . 314 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Review of summary proceedings by the county court upon appeal 
from adjudication of justices of the peace. Law and practice 
j upon such appeals, with forms 324 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 
Squatter act and proceedings thereunder, with forms 346 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Liabilities incidental to remedies. Liability of justice and of 

parties 360 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

Chapter of forms ... • 857 

ii 



CONTENTS. 



APPENDIX. 



I'AOK 

Party walls 878 

AfiBdavit upon appeal 876 



INDEX OF F0EM8. 

No. rAQB 

1. One mouth's notice to quit 16 

3. All the forms in forcible entry and detainer proceedings 

will be found in Chapter XXII. page 197 to 310 

3. Demand for rent by service of three days' notice 334 

4. AfBdavits in summary proceedings 345 to 349 

5. Summons in summary proceedings 358 to 358 

6. Endorsement thereon 358 

7. Proof of service of summons 360 and 361 

8. Counter affidavit, in summary proceedings 2>59 

9. Venire for jury, summary proceedings 371 

10. Juror's summons, summary proceedings 372 

11. Affidavit to adjourn trial 373 

13. Oath to jurors 378 

13. Oath to'officer having charge of jury 382 

14. Judgment 285 

15. Bonds under various sections of the act 289 to 393 

16. Warrant 393 to 395 

17. Affidavits in case of bawdy house 309 to 311 

18. Stimmons in like cases 311 

19. Affidavit in case of illegal trades 312 

20. Summons in like case 318 

31. Endorsement thereon 3ly 

23. Judgment and warrant in such cases 318 

23. Petition for certiorari Sl.'j 

34. Certiorari to remove proceedings 816 

35. Bond on allowance of certiorari 316 

36. Return of justice to certiorari 317 

27. Petition for certiorari. Summary proceedings 330 

28. Order directing certiorari. Summary proceedings 321 



0ONTE]SrT8. X) 

No. PAQK 

29. Writ of certiorari to review summary proceedings Sal 

80. Return of justice. Summary proceedings 832 

81. Order of reversal. Summary proceedings 833 

82. Writ of restitution. Summary proceedings 828 

38. Docket of justice of the peace. Summary proceedings 834 

84. Warrants by justices of the peace. Summary proceedings. . 335 

85. Notice of appeal to county court. Summary proceedings . . 338 

86. Security upon such appeal. Summary proceedings 380 

87. Return of justice in summary proceedings 335 

88. Order for amended return 387 

89. Notice to quit under squatter act 847 

40. Complaint under squatter act 348 

41. Warrant under squatter act 348 

42. Index to chapter of forms 357 

48. AfBdavit for appeal to county court 876 



FASK 



INDEX TO THE OHAPTEE OF F0EM8. 

(Chap. 89, post, p. 857.) 

No. 

1. Subpoena.,.., 357 

3. Proof of service 858 

8. Order for attachment against witness 358 

4. Attachment against -witness 359 

5. Complaint in ordinary civil action against tenant for rent, 859 

6. Complaint in ordinary civil action against surety of tenant 

for rent 860 

7. Lease, with covenants 861 

8. Other covenants for lease 863 

I). Security lor rent to be endorsed on lease 368 

10. Assignment of lease 364 

11. Mortgage on lease, interest, and insurance clause 865 

13. Bond to accompany said mortgage 867 

13. Party wall agreement (two forms) 368 869 

14. Permission to insert beams in adjoining house 870 

15. Builder's contract 37I 

16. Dillerent forms of acknowledgment 373 



THE 



Eights, Eemedies, and Liabilities 



OF 



LANDLORD AND TENANT. 



CHAPTER T. 



THE TENURE OF EEAL PEOPEETT. 

The constitution of the State declares that " The 
people, in their right of sovereignty are deemed to pos- 
sess the original and ultimate property in and to all 
lands within the jurisdiction of this State ; and all 
lands the title to which fails from a defect of heirs, 
reverts or escheats to the people " {Const. 1846, art. 1, 
§ 11), and " all feudal tenures with their incidents are 
declared abolished" (76. art. 1, § 12), and "all lands 
within the State are declared to be allodial, so that, 
subject only to the liability to escheat, the entire and 
absolute property is vested in the owners, according to 
the nature of their respective estates" {lb. art. ], § 13). 
Various statutes, prior to the Constitution of 1846, 
contained similar provisions (1 Jones & VaricTc, 44 ; 1 
B. A 70 ; 1 R. 8. 714, § 1 ; 1 Edm. R. 8. p. 666, §§ 1, 3). 
The ancient English principle of feudal tenures is sup- 
posed to have (theoretically at least) existed in this 
State during its colonial existence, but Judge Stobt 
1 



2 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

says: *'In all the colonies, the lands within their 
limits were by the very terms of their original grants 
and charters, to be holden of the Crown in fee and 
common socage, and not in capite or by knights ser- 
vice. They were all holden, either as the manor of 
East Greenwich in Kent, or of the manor of Hampton 
Court in Middlesex, or of the castle of Windsor in 
Berkshire. All the slavish and military part of the 
ancient feudal tenures was thus effectually prevented 
from taking root in the American soil ; and the colon- 
ists escaped from the oppressive burdens, which, for a 
long time, affected the parent country, and were not 
abolished until after the restoration of Charles the 
Second.* Our tenures thus acquired a universal sim- 
plicity : and it is believed that none but freehold 
tenures in socage ever were in use among us. f No 
traces are to be found of copyhold, or gavelkind, or 
burgage tenures. In short, for most purposes, our 
lands may be deemed to be perfectly allodial, or held 
of no superior at all ; though many of the distinctions 
of the feudal law have necessarily insinuated them- 
selves into the modes of acquiring, transferring, and 
transmitting real estates" {Story on the Const, vol. 1, 
§ 172). 

The early history of English tenures discloses many 
important features of distinction between the ancient and 
present condition of lessees of land, properly so called. 

* By an act of parliament of April 25th, 1660, all military tenures 
■were abolished. 

t By socage tenure is meant a fixed rent or service, not military 
nor liable to change by the will of the lord. Tenure in socage cm- 
braced those who were the actual workers, the men who plowed and 
tilled the grounds which they occupied. The etymology of the word 
socage has been the subject of dispute. Littleton derives it from the 
Latin word soca, a plow. His theory is that a great number of tenants 
of the lord were bound to lajjor a certain number of days in the year, 
in plowing and sowing the domains of the lord ; and, because their 
services were performed with the plow, their tenure was called tenure 
in socage ; other law writers have derived the word socage from the 
Saxon word soc, which was used to express liberty or privilege ; and 
upon that theory, have claimed that the word socage was used to in- 
dicate a free or privileged tenure. 



TENURE OF REAL PEOPEETT. 3 

At first, the tenant appears to have been regarded 
rather as a bailiff or servant of the lord, and account- 
able for the profits, than as having any direct property 
in the laud. By degrees, however, he assumed a more 
independent position, and acquired a defined, though 
limited, interest in the soil itself, rendering provisions, 
grain, or other agricultural produce, as a recompense 
for the enjoyment ; a circumstance to which we may 
now refer the adoption in modern leases of the words 
"and to farm let ;" the word /arm orfearme being an 
old Saxon term, signifying provisions (1 Piatt on 
Leases, p. 2), or as Woodfall translates it, "Farm, 
ferme, fearme, flrma, is derived of the Saxon word 
' feorman ' to feed or relieve ; because in ancient time 
they reserved upon their leases cattle and other victual 
and provision for their sustenance " {WoodfalVs L. 
& T. p. 5). 

In England, the subject to whom the king granted 
lands, as they were to be holden of him by some pie- 
scribed service, was called his tenant; the lands or 
possessions, the tenement ; and the manner in which 
they were held the tenure, although literally, the word 
tenure simply signifies a holding. 

By the statute of this State, tenancies are divided 
into estates of inheritance, for life, for years, and at 
will, and by sufferance, and although the word " ten- 
ancy " implies a holding from some superior lord, yet 
the more ordinary use of the word is intended to de- 
signate some estate or interest in lands, less than a fee, , 
held by one person called a lessee, of another called the 
lessor, subject to some rent and accompanied by cer- 
tain obligations of the lessor and lessee respectively. 
Upon such a holding arises the ordinary relation of 
landlord and tenant referred to in the modern books ; 
and it is to the rights, remedies and liabilities belong- 
ing to and growing out of such a relation, that the 
present treatise is addressed. 



4 LANDLOED AND TEITANT. 

It is a fundamental principle in the English law, derived from 
the maxims of the feudal tenures, that the king is the original pro- 
prietor, or lord paramount of all the land in the kingdom, and the 
true and only source of title (2 SZ. Com. 43-104), and any reader desir- 
ing to master the intricacies of the ancient system of tenures, 
may be gratified by reading the history of their military origin 
as explained by Sir William Blackstone, in his Commentaries 
(Book 2, p. 42-104), in which the reasons which gave rise to 
the rule that all land is held of the sovereign are fully ex- 
plained. In entering, however, upon a view of the American law of 
real property, it can serve no practical purpose, to go into all intrica- 
cies of the feudal law. The early settlers of this country left that 
law behind them ; or, if any relic of it survived till the revolution, 
all was then swept away. The feudal law was a political system 
which never made any part of American institutions (1 SUliard on 
Seal Prop. 36). After the separation of the colonies from the mother 
country, it was after much discussion settled in and by the articles of 
confederation, between the thirteen States, that the people of those 
States respectively in their right of sovereignty, were deemed to pos- 
sess the original and only source of title to lands within their domain 
(Hildreth's U. 8., vol. 8, p. 395-400, articles of Confed., 3-9). In the 
territories ceded to the Federal Government, after the signing of the 
articles of Confederation, the people of the United States, in their 
right of sovereignty, are deemed to possess the original and only 
source of title, so that in the Territories of the West, and in States 
formed out of such Territories, the source of title, as a rule, is by 
grant evidenced by warrant or patent from the United States, issued 
by that department of the Federal Government known as the Land 
Office, pursuant to acts of Congress making provision for the sale of 
public lands. 



CEHATIOK AND DIVISION OF ESTATES. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE CREATION AND DIVISION OP ESTATES. 

By statute (1 Edm. p. 670, § 1), estates in land are 
divided into 

1. Estates of inheritance ; 

2. Estates for life ; 

3. Estates for years ; and 

4. Estates at will and by sufferance ; and the nature 
and quality of these estates will be considered in the 
order stated. 

I. 

Of estates of inheritance. 

In this State, estates of inheritance are divided into 
fees simple, or absolute fees, and defeasible or condition- 
al fees (1 Edm. B. p. 670, § 2), and a fee simple is the' 
highest estate in land, and a conditional fee is one which 
has a qualification subjoined called a condition prece- 
dent or subsequent ; a precedent condition is one which 
must take place before the estate can vest, and a subse- 
quent condition is one which acts upon an estate 
already created or vested, and renders it liable to be 
defeated. 

Estates of inheritance and for life, continue to be 
denominated estates of freehold ; estates for years, 
chattels real ; and estates at will or by sufferance, chat- 
tel interests (1 Udm. R. p. 671, § 5). 

For the balance ot the statute relating to the creation and division of 
estates, see 1 Eim. B. 8. pp. 670 to 676, and for the law as to condi- 
tional or qualified fees, see Gerard on Titles (2d ed. pp. 123 to 
138). 



6 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

II. 

Of estates for life. 

An estate for life exists where a lease is made of lands 
or tenements to a man, to hold for the term of Ms own 
life, or for that of any other person, or for more lives 
than one, in any of which cases he is styled tenant 
for life ; only when he holds the estate by the life of 
another, he is usually called tenant pur autre vie {Litt. 
§ 36 ; 2 Bouviefs Law Die. tit. " tenant," sub. 8). 

An estate for life is a freehold estate, but not of in- 
heritance. 

An estate during the life of a third person is deemed 
a freehold only during the life of the grantee or de- 
visee, but after his death it is deemed a chattel real (1 
£!dm. R. 8. p. 671, § 6). 

A conveyance made by a tenant for life or years of 
a greater estate than he possessed or could lawfully 
convey, shall not work a forfeiture of his estate, bat 
shall pass to the grantee all the title, estate, or interest 
which such tenant could lawfully convey {Id. p. 690, § 
145). 

Incidents of the estate. 

The tenant for life can not be affected by any act of 
the remainder man (Doe «. Thompson, 5 Cow. 371), nor 
can the tenant for life by any act of his prejudice the re- 
mainder man (Jackson ». Luquere, Id. 221), and the 
possession of the tenant for life is not adverse to the re- 
mainder man, and the latter may make a valid convey- 
ance notwithstanding such possession (Grant v. Town- 
send, 2 Hill, 554), and the tenant for life is entitled to 
reasonable estovers, that is wood from off the land, for 
fuel, fences, agricultural erections and other necessary 
improvements (4 KenPs, Com. 73 ; 5 Barh. 339 ; 26 Id. 
409 ; 1 Paige, 573 ; 3 Sandf. Ch. 601), but has no right 
to dig up and use soil for the manufacturer of bricks 
for sale (26 Wend. 115 ; 2 Hill, 157) ; he is bound to pay 



CBEATION ANB DIVISION OF ESTATES. 7 

interest on incumbrances, ordinary taxes, and such 
like charges for the purpose of preserving the estate 
from loss and forfeiture (3 Edw. Oh. 312 ; 4 Kent. 75 ; 
2 Brad. 311 ; 22 N. T. 200), and is liable for waste 
(4 Kent's Com. Ill ; 2 Edm. R. 8. p. 344, § 1, and 1 Id. 
p. 701, § 8). Tenants for life may make under-leases, 
which will possess all the rights and privileges in- 
cident to the original estate ; subject of course to 
be defeated by the death of the person upon whose 
life the first estate depends. A tenant pur autre vie 
who continues in possession without the consent of the 
owner after the determination of the life estate, is at 
common law a tenant by sufferance, but by statute has 
been declared a trespasser (Livingston «. Tanner, 14 N. 
T. 64 ; and see 8 Abb. N. 8. 37). 

Bemedy on lease for life. 

Any person having any rent due upon any lease for 
life or lives, may have the same remedy to recover such 
arrears, by action of debt, as if such lease were for 
years (1 Edm. B. 8. p. 697, § 19). 

Liability for holding over after determination of certain estates. 

Every person, who, as guardian or trustee for an in- 
fant, and every husband seized in right of his wife only, 
and every other person having an estate determinable 
upon any life or lives, who, after the determination of 
such particular estate, without the express consent of 
the party immediately entitled after such determination 
shall hold over and continue in possession of any lands, 
tenements, or hereditaments, shall be adjudged to be a 
trespasser; and every person, and his executors and 
administrators, who shall be entitled to such lands, 
tenements or hereditaments, upon the determination of 
such particular estates, may recover in damages against 
every such person so holding over, and against his, 
her, or their executors or administrators, the full value 
of the profits received during such wrongful possession 
{Id. p. 700, § 7). 



o LANDLOBD AND TENANT. 

III. 

Of estates for years. 

A general occupation of premises is treated as from 
year to year whenever the reservation of rent or other 
circumstances indicate an annual holding {Taylor'' s L. 
& T. §§ 54, 55), but not where the agreement for occu- 
pation provides for occupation for a shorter period ; as 
for example, a single quarter or month (Wilkinson v. 
Hall, 3 Bing, N. C. 508 ; Blamenberg v. Myres, 32 Cal. 
93 ; Secor v. Prectana, 37 III. 525), and a statute appli- 
cable to the city of New York, provides that 

" Agreements for the occupation of lands or tene- 
ments in the city of New York, which shall not partic- 
ularly specify the duration of such occupation, shall 
be deemed valid until the first day of May next after 
the possession under such agreement shall commence, 
and the rent under such agreemnt shall be payable at 
the usual quarter days for the payment of rent in the 
said city, unless otherwise expressed in the agreement" 
(1 Edm. B. S. p. 695, § 1). 

In the city of New York, a tenant who holds over, 
and remains in possession of premises leased to him at 
a certain rent, with the assent of the owner, after the 
expiration of the term, without any new agreement as 
to the rent, becomes a tenant from year to year, and 
liable for the rent, at the same rate, up to the first of 
May next following (Witt ». The Mayor, 5 Roht. 248 ; 
and see Hunt v. Wolfe, 2 Daly, 298; Conway v. 
Starkweather, 1 Den. 133) ; and the rule seems to be, 
that where a tenant holds over after the expiration of 
his term, the law will at the option of the landlord, 
imply a new hiring upon the terms and conditions 
specified in the former lease (Brewer ti. Knapp, 1 Pick. 
332 ; Ellis «. Paige, Id. 43 ; Fronty v. Wood, 2 Hill 
[& C] 367 ; Moore v. Beasley, 3 Ham. 294 ; Diller o. 
Eoberts, 13 S. & R. 60 ; Bacon v. Brown, 9 Conn. 334 ; 
Dorrill v. Stevens, 4 McCord, 59) ; and the rule is said 



CREATION AND DIVISION OF ESTATES. 9 

to be the same where the holding over is personal or 
by tenants placed there by the tenant (Bacon v. Brown, 
9 €ann. 334). 

Where premises, situate in the city of New York, 
were demised for a term over six and less than nine 
months, at the yearly rent of three hundred dollars, 
payable quarterly, it was held, that the time of the first 
payment of rent was not deferred until three months 
from the date of the lease, but that the rent was paya- 
ble on the usual quarter days for the payment of rent 
in the city, happening after the date of the lease (Wolf 
V. Merritt, 21 Wend. 336) ; and see the construction put 
upon somewhat similar terms contained in a lease of 
lands outside of the city of New York (Curtis v. Miller, 
17 Barb. 477), and as to implied tenancies, see Mar- 
quart ■». La Varge (5 Duer, 559). 

Where possession is taken under a parol lease void 
as to the term, if the premises are situate in the city of 
New York, the statute designates its termination (Tag- 
gard V. Roosevelt, 2 E. B. S. at p. 105), and as to 
presumption as to the term, see Clarke v. Richardson 
(4 B. D. JS. 173). 

Definition of the word " year." 

Whenever the word year or years is or shall be 
used in any statute, deed, verbal or written contract, 
or any public or private instrument, the year intended 
to be taken shall be taken to consist of 365 days ; a 
half year of 182 days; and a quarter of a year of 
91 days ; and the added day of a leap year, and the 
day immediately preceding, if they shall occur in any 
period so to be computed, shall be reckoned together as 
one day (1 Udm R. 8. p. 563, § 3), 

Montlily tenancies. 

A renting of premises by the month, and which is 
to be from month to month,, can bear but one interpre- 



10 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

tation, viz. : that, to be continued, it must be renewed 
monthly ; and that to terminate the tenancy, a month's 
notice is not necessary (The People v. Goelet, 64 Barh. 
476). In the case just cited, the contract was for the 
letting of a store in Third Avenue, for the month of 
August, and the Court said, "The contract for August 
was to the first of September. The receipt given on 
the first of September was for rent in advance for Sep- 
tember. It contained no agreement for extending it 
beyond that time, and left the contract as originally 
made to be from month to month" (76. at 481, and 
see The People ex rel. Gledhill v. Scha,ckno, 48 Barb. 
551). 

Under a hiring from month to month, the acceptance 
of a second month' s rent by the landlord merely oper- 
ates as a renewal of the tenancy for another month 
upon the same terms, and either party to such a ten- 
ancy may determine it at the end of any month, without 
notice (Gibbons v. Dayton, public admr., 4 Hun. 451, 
reported in full in Chapter IV= post). 

Where a monthly tenant occupies rooms of a land- 
lord, with an agreement to pay rent in advance, and 
leaves the latter part of the month, he is not liable for 
the rent of the subsequent month (Fash t\ Kavanagh, 
24. How. 347). 

Coustrnction of the word "month." 

Whenever the term "month" or "months" is, or 
shall be used in any statute, act, deed, verbal or 
written contract, or any public or private instrument 
whatever, it shall be construed to mean a calendar, and 
not a lunar month, unless otherwise expressed (1 Edm. 
B. S. p. 563, § 4). 

IV. 

Of estates at will and by sufferance. 

Tenancy at will is said to exist where lands or 
tenements are let by one man to another, to have and 



CEEATION AXD DIVISION OF ESTATES. 11 

to hold of him at the will of the lessor ; by force of 
which lease the lessee is in possession. In this case the 
lessee is called tenant at will, because he hath no certain 
sure estate ; for the lessor may put him out at what 
time it pleaseth him (Co. Lit. vol. 1, p. 637). The dif- 
ference between a tenant at will and a tenant by suffer- 
ance is, that a tenant at will is always by right, and a 
tenant by sufferance entereth by lawful lease, and 
holdeth over by wrong. A tenant at sufferance is he 
that at first came in by lawful demise, and after his 
estate ended coutinueth his possession and wrongfully 
holdeth over {lb. p. 649) ; in short, any one who con- 
tinues in possession without agreement, after a particu- 
lar estate is ended, is a tenant at sufferance (12 Barh. 
at p. 484) ; but such a tenancy will not attach, unless 
the landlord negligently omits to put the over-holding 
tenant out, within a reasonable time after the expira- 
tion oi his term, for the relation exists only by the 
laches of the landlord (11 Wend. 617). A tenancy at will 
can scarcely exist in the city of New York (The People 
V. Groelet, 64 Barb, at p. 481), unless, perhaps, the in- 
tention to create such a tenancy is declared in and by 
the words of the demise (Post «. Post, 14 Barb. 253), 
for if the agreement under which the premises are held 
does not particularly specify the duration of such oc- 
cupancy, it shall be deemed valid, by force of the sta- 
tute {tiide ante, p. 8) until the first day of May next 
after possession under such agreement shall commence. 
In Rowan v. Lytle (11 Wend. 617), it was held that 
the tenancy by sufferance was created not by the con- 
sent, but by the laches of the owner, and that at the 
expiration of the lease, the parties stand in some rela- 
tion to each other ; that when the possession is con- 
tinued without the consent of the landlord, the law 
says the person in possession is tenant at sufferance. 
But for the purpose of giving the statute a fair con- 
struction and beneficial operation, no notice to quit 
is held to be necessary, unless the landlord has un- 
necessarily delayed bis proceedings ; and that the object 



12 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

of the Legislature will be best promoted by holding that 
such notice is not necessary, unless the landlord has 
permitted the tenancy to continue for such a length of 
time as to imply assent, and that a delay to be called 
laches ought to be of longer continuance than three 
months, and should be accompanied by some evidence of 
negligence, and that if the landlord in such a case after- 
wards accepts rent, the tenancy will be converted from 
sufferance into one from year to year, and in Conway ». 
Starkweather (1 Ben. 113), it was held that where a 
tenant under a demise for a year or more holds over 
after the end of the term, without any new agreement 
with the landlord, he may, at the election of the land- 
lord, be treated either as a trespasser or a tenant holding 
upon the terms of the original lease, and tfiat distrain- 
ing for rent payable after the expiration of the original 
term, is an election by the landlord to consider him a 
tenant, and that the over-holding tenant being a wrong- 
doer has no such election, and after holding over, he is 
not at liberty to deny that he is in as tenant, if the land- 
lord chose to bold him to that relation {IDenio, 113 ; 5 
Robt. 248 ; 2 Daly, 298). 

See the comments ou the rule laid down in Eowan c. Lynde (1 1 
Wend. 616), in the note to § 718 of Taylor's L. & T. 5th ed. 



PARTICULAR ESTATES. 13 



CHAPTER III. 

DETERMINATION OF PARTICULAR ESTATES BY SERVICE 
OF NOTICE TO QUIT. 

A notice to quit will be taken to be a good notice if 
the tenant could not mistake its nature ; but the court 
will not construe a notice in a manner at variance with 
its express language, even if the effect of adhering to 
such language would be to make the notice bad. So no- 
tices dated in the wrong year (Duke of Bedford v. 
Kightley, 7 T. H. 63), or misdescribing the premises 
(Cox V. Doe, 4 Bsp. 185), or their situation have been 
held good (Armstrong o. Wilkison, 12 A. c& B. 743), 
and under the statute of this State, notice served by 
the landlord upon a tenant at will to terminate his 
tenancy, takes eflfect in thirty days after service, and 
the specification therein of a day on which the time will 
expire, which will be less than thirty days from time 
of service, will not vitiate the notice (Burns v. Bryant, 
31 iV. y. 453 ; People v. Shackno, 48 Barb. 551), and a 
notice to remove in thirty days, served in a month which 
contained only thirty days, was held to be a month's 
notice (McGuire v. Ulrich, 2 Abb. 28). Notice to quit 
is never required where the parties have, by mutual 
agreement, fixed the terms on which the lease is to ter- 
minate (Allen «. Jaquish, 21 Wend. 628) under a parol 
agreement for renting for premises for one month from 
August 1, 1866, and for each successive month there- 
after until the landlord should want the premises for 
his own use, whereupon the tenancy should expire ; 
held, that notice of thirty days was not necessary to 
terminate the tenancy (People «. Schackno, 48 Barb. 
55] ), and a tenant hiring from month to month is not 



14 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

entitled to notice to quit (Gibbons v. Dayton, 4 Hun. 
451). The object of the statute is to inform the tenant 
when his term expires ; in other words, when he must 
quit the possession. In case of tenancy for a year, the 
lease contains the information, and the statute does not 
require any other notice (Rowan v. Lytle, 11 Wend, at 
p. 619), a tenant for the life of another who, without the 
consent of the owner, continues in possession after 
the determination of the life estate, is under 1 E. 8. 749, § 
7, a trespasser ; and is not entitled to notice to quit 
before action (Livingston v. Tanner, 14 N. Y. 64 ; Tor- 
rey v. Torrey, 14 N. Y. 430); one entering under a parol 
agreement for a lease, the rent to be paid monthly, who 
refuses to accept the lease becomes a common-law tenant 
at will or by sufferance, and is liable to be ejected im- 
mediately ; but if the parol agreement was for a term 
exceeding one year, and, therefore, void by the statute, 
the tenancy after the acceptance of rent is from month 
to month, and the tenant is entitled to a month's notice 
(Anderson v. Prindle, 23 Wend. 616 ; aff'g 19 15. 
391)jJ When a tenant is in possession under a parol 
agreement void by the statute of frauds, and has occu- 
pied for a year, paying the rent monthly, this creates a 
tenancy from month to month which can only be termin- 
ated by a month' s notice to quit, expiring with the end 
of some month, reckoning from the beginning of the ten- 
ancy (The People «. Darling, 47 iV. Y. 666), and if the 
premises are situated in the city of New York, and the 
parol lease is void as to the term, the statute treats it as 
a tenancy for no specified term, and designates its ter- 
mination to be on the first of May following (Taggard 
■0. Roosevelt, 2 M B. S. at p. 105). 



A renting of premises bj tlie month, 

and which is to be from month to month, can bear but 
one interpretation, viz. : that, to be continued, it must 
be renewed monthly, and to terminate the tenancy no 



tARTICULAE ESTATES. 15 

notice is necessary (The People ?). Groelet, 64 Barh. 476 ; 
see also Gibbons ?'. Dayton,. 4 Kun. 451). 

Tenancy from year to year. 

A tenacy from year to year is, under the provision of 
the revised statutes, for the summary dispossession of 
tenants, a tenancy for one or more years. Therefore, a 
tenant from year to year may, after the expiration of 
his term, that is, at the expiration of each year he holds 
over the original term, be proceeded against in a sum- 
mary manner for his removal from the premises, with- 
out any notice to quit. There is no such estate as a 
tenancy "at will from year to year ; " its assertion is a 
solecism. Six months' notice to quit may be necessary 
to authorize the removal of a tenant, from year to year, 
where there is a valid lease in writing for the term of 
one year, and thereafter, until one or the other elects 
to terminate it (Park v. (Jastle, 19 Sow. 29 ; and see 
Nichols -0. Williams, 8 Oow. 13 ; Post w. Post, 14 Barh. 
253; compare Kowlan v. Trevor 2 Sweeny, 67; and 
Paysley «. Aiken, 11 N. J. 494). 

Tenancy at will or by snifei-ance. 

At common law, neither a tenant at wil 1 or by suf- 
ferance was entitled to notice to quit before he could be 
ejected, although a demand of possession was always 
required {Taylor'' s L. & T. § 63). The statute, how- 
ever, provides, that "wherever there is a tenancy at 
will, or by sufferance, created by the tenant's holding 
over his term, or otherwise, the same may be terminated 
by the landlord' s giving one month' s notice in writing 
to the tenant, requiring him to remove therefrom" (1 
Edm. B. 8. p. 696, § 7). 

In The People v. Fields (1 Lansing at p. 238), it was 
held that this statute relating to notices to quit does 
not apply to tenancies at will, as such tenancies were 
known at common law, and that it applies only where 



16 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

the conventional relation of landlord and tenant exists 
between the parties, and that in the so-called common- 
law tenancies where such relation did not exist, the 
former common-law right of reentry without notice 
remains (see 1 Lansing, at p. 238 ; 2 Cai. 169 ; 9 Johns. 
267; \^ Johns. 106; Id. 235; 1 Wend. 418). And at 
common law, a tenancy at sufferance might be deter- 
mined by mere entry. No demand of possession or 
other notice was necessary (Livingston v. Tanner, 12 
Barb, at p. 484 ; aflFd. in 14 N. T. 64). 

Form of notice to qnit. 

To Richard Roe, tenant : 

Please to take notice, that you are hereby required 
to quit, surrender, and deliver up possession of the 
rooms on floor, in premises known as Number 

, street, in the city of New York, 

and to remove therefrom on the first day of , 

187 , pursuant to the provisions of the statute relating 
to the rights and duties of landlord and tenant. 
Dated New York, - 187 . 

John Doe, landlord. 

The notice need not state the day upon which the 
tenant is to quit, but it is sufficient to give notice to 
quit at the expiration of the current year (4 D. & JR. 
248 ; 5 ^. & K 350 ; 7 Q. B. 511 ; 31 JSf. T. 453 ; 48 Barb. 
551) ; and if the notice be directed to the tenant by a 
wrong Christian name, and he keeps it, he waives the 
objection, and will be bound by it (Doe v. Spiller, 6 
£!sp. 70). 

Notice, how seiTed. 

The statute provides that such notice shall be served 
by delivering the same to such tenant, or to some per- 
son of proper age residing on the premises ; or, if the 
tenant can not be found, and there be no such person 
residing on the premises, such notice may be served by 



PARTICITLAE ESTATES. 17 

afl5xing the same on a conspicuous part of the premises, 
where it may be conveniently read (1 Edm. R. 8. p. 
696, §8), 

Rights of landlord after notice. 

At the expiration of one month from the service 
of such notice, the landlord may re-enter, or maintain 
ejectment, or proceed in the manner prescribed by law, 
to remove such tenant, without any further or other 
notice to quit {Id. § 9). 

Penalty on tenant not fielding^ possession after giring notice. 

If any tenant shall give notice of his intention to 
quit the premises by him holden, and shall not accord- 
ingly deliver up the possession thereof, at the time in 
such notice specified, such tenant, his executors or ad- 
ministrators, shall, from thenceforward, pay to the 
landlord, his heirs or assigns, double the rent which he 
should otherwise have paid, to be levied, sued for, and 
recovered, at the same time and in the same manner as 
the single rent ; and such double rent shall be contin- 
ued to be paid during all the time such tenant shall 
continue in possession as aforesaid (1 JEdm. R. S. 697, 
§ 10 ; and see Hall v. Ballentine, 7 Johns. 636). 

Penalty on tenants for holding orer after notice to quit. 

If any tenant, for life or years, or if any other per- 
son who may have come into the possession of any 
lands or tenements, under or by collusion with such 
tenant, shall wilfully hold over any lands or tenements 
after the termination of such term, and after demand 
made and one month's notice in writing, given in the 
manner hereinbefore prescribed, requiring the posses- 
sion thereof by the person entitled thereto, such person 
so holding over shall pay to the person so kept out of 
possession, or his representatives, at the rate of double 



38 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

the yearly value of the lands or tenements so detained, 
for so long a time as he shall so hold over or keep the 
person entitled out of possession ; and shall also pay 
and remunerate all special damages whatever, to which 
the person so kept out of possession may be subjected 
by reason of such holding over ; and there shall be no 
relief in equity against any recovery had at law under 
this section (1 Edm. R. S. p. 697, § 11). 



DEFINITION OF LEASES. 19 



CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE DEFINITION, NATITEE, AND VALIDITY OF 

LEASES. 

The act of granting an estate is called a demise, and 
the instrument or agreement by which it is granted is 
a lease (2 Bouv. Inst. 254). A lease at the common 
law is a grant or assurance of a present or future inter- 
est, for life, for years, or at will, in lands or other pro- 
perty of a demisable nature, a reversion being left in 
the party from whom the grant or assurance proceeds. 
A pecuniary rent, or other recompense, though not es- 
sential to the contract, is usually reserved, payable 
yearly, or at other stated times during the term. The 
party granting the lease is called the lessor ; he to whom 
it is granted, the lessee. If the instrument be executed 
by the lessee only, iiisnot^ilesLse {Piatt on Leases, p. 9). 

To make such a contract, there must be a lessor able 
to grant the land ; a lessee capable of accepting the 
grant ; and a subject-matter capable of being granted 
(2 Bouv. Inst. 254). No special form of words is neces- 
sary to constitute a lease. Whatever words are suffi- 
cient to explain the intent of the parties that the one 
shall divest himself of the possession, and the other 
come into it for a determinate time, are of themselves 
sufficient ; and will in construction of law amount 
to a lease for years as effectually as if the most 
proper and pertinent words had been made use of 
for that purpose ; for a lease for years being a contract 
for the possession and profits of lands on the one side, 
and a recompense of rent or other income on the other, 
if the words made use of, are sufficient to prove such a 
contract, in what form soever they are introduced, or 



20 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

however variously applicable, the law calls in the in- 
tent of the parties, and models and governs the words 
accordingly {FawceW s L.&T. pp. 71, 72). A lease may 
be made by correspondence, in which one party oiFers 
to take on certain terms, fully and definitely stated, and 
the other unconditionally accepts such offer (Chapman 
». Bluck, 4 Bing. N. C. 187 ; 7 L. J. ; O. P. 100 ; seel 
Q. B. 506 ; 10 L. J. ; Q. B. 193) ; but when the parties 
are not together, the acceptance must be manifested by 
some appropriate act, and the manifestation put in the 
proper way of reaching the proposer ; a mere mental 
determination to accept, not indicated by speech, or put 
in course of indication by act, is not an acceptance 
(White V. Corlies, 46 If. Y. 467). 

It will be proper here to point out the difference be- 
tween an agreement for the lease and the lease itself. 
When an agreement for a lease contains words of pres- 
ent demise, and th^re are circumstances from which it 
may be collected that the tenant should have an imme- 
diate legal interest in the term, such an agreement will 
amount to an actual lease; but although words of 
present demise are used, if it appear on the whole that 
no legal interest was intended to pass, and that the 
agreement was only preparatory to a future lease to be 
made, the construction will be governed by the inten- 
tion of the parties, and the contract will be held to 
amount to no more than an agreement for a lease (2 
Bouv. Inst. 254). 

An agreement to construct a wharf, to be occupied 
when finished by grantee, at a stipulated rent, accom- 
panied by words of present demise, operates as a lease 
(People V. Kelsey, 14 Abb. Pr. 372 ; 38 Barb. 269). 
Where there are apt words of demise it is a lease, not- 
withstanding there is added a covenant for a further 
lease, so held where possession was held under it 
(Jackson v. Kisselbrack, 10 Johns. 336 ; Jackson v. 
Van Hoesen, 4 Cow. 325 ; and see Hallett v. Wylie, 3 
Johns. 44 ; 5 i&. 74 ; 1 Bosw. 28 ; 8 i\^. T. 44 ; 5 T. R. 



DEFINITION OF LEA8B3. 21 

163) ; but an agreement to give a lease is not a lease, 
unless accompanied by actual possession (Becker «. 
Deforest, 1 Sweeny, 528), particularly where it is mani- 
fest that further conveyances or instruments were con- 
templated (Jackson «. Moncrief, 5 Wend. 26). 

The creation of tenancies is frequently evidenced by 
no other writing than what is commonly called a receipt, 
signed by the landlord or his agent, and accepted by 
the tenant, and the question has been frequently 
mooted whether these receipts in any case amounted in 
law to a contract between the parties. 

The courts in analogous cases, while adhering to 
thB general rule that a simple receipt is nothing more 
than an admission amounting to prima facie evidence 
of the facts stated therein, and open to contradiction 
or explanation by parol (Eyan v. Ward, 48 N. Y. at p. 
207), have, however, limited the rule to receipts tech- 
nically and properly so called, and have held that 
where the receipt went further and embodied a contract, 
that that portion of it was not open to contradiction by 
parol {Id. ; and see also Berrian v. The Mayor, 4 Rdbt. 
539 ; Coon v. Knapp, 8 N. T. 402 ; Kellogg v. Richards, 
14 Wend. 116 ; Graves v. Friend, 5 Sandf. 568 ; Niles ». 
Culver, 8 Barb. 205) ; where, therefore, a writing be- 
sides containing the words belonging to a simple 
receipt, embraces the ingredients of a contract, e. g., 
the tenure, terms, and conditions of a hiring, it is in 
these particulars a contract, not open to contradiction 
by parol proof, in the absence of fraud or mistake. 

The question presented itself in the case of Gibbons 
«. Dayton, public admr. of Anna Maria Merriam, deed. 
(4 Hun. 451), on appeal from a judgment in favor 
of the plaintiff, entered upon the report of a referee. 

The claim was for rent of the second floor of the 
premises known as No. 165 Bleecker street, from May 
1st, 1873, to April 1st, 1874. "It appeared from un- 
disputed evidence that Mrs. Merriam had resided in 
the premises a number of years prior to her death ; that 



22 LANBLOED AND TENANT. 

she leased the premises ; that no lease was ever made 
between herself and the plaintiff, other than in the form 
of receipts for rent, of the following description : 

" Rent must be paid invariably in advance, on the 
first day of the month. 

" ISTew Yokk, Sept. 1st, 1871. 

" Received from Mrs. Mary Merriam the sum of 
sixty dollars, for one month's rent only, in advance, for 
second floor rooms in house No. 165 Bleecker street, 
ending October 1, 1871, at noon. It being expressly 
understood between us, the tenant and agent, or land- 
lord mentioned in this receipt, that this term of hiring 
and letting is for one month only, and will expire as 
aforesaid. $60. Thomas J. Gibbons." 

The court [New York Supreme] delivered the fol- 
lowing opinion : 

Davis, P. J.— The appellant is public administrator, 
and as such was appointed administrator of the estate 
of one Anna Maria Merriam, deceased. The respond- 
ent presented a claim for rent against the estate, which 
being disputed, was submitted to reference with the 
approval of the surrogate, in conformity to the statute 
in such case made and provided. Mrs. Merriam, the 
intestate, was the tenant of the respondent from month 
to month ; she had been accustomed to receive, on pay- 
ment of the monthly rent at the beginning of each 
month, an instrument acknowledging the receipt of the 
rent and expressing the term and nature of the ten- 
ancy. Such an instrument was executed and delivered 
to her about the first of April, 1873, on payment of the 
rent for that month. About the first of May, Mrs. Mer- 
riam was taken sick and went to the house of a friend, 
where she became so ill that she was unable to return 
to her rooms, and she remained at her friend's till her 
death, which occurred on the 6th of June, 1873. Her 
f nrniture and other personal property remained at the 
rooms leased to her by respondent until about the 29th 
or 30th of July, 1873. About the 28th of July, the 



DEFIIiriTION OF LEASES. 23 

appellant received notice of ttie death of Mrs. Merriam, 
and was on that day appointed her administrator, and on 
the 29th or 3(Jth of July removed all articles of any ap- 
parent value from the premises previously occupied by 
her, and about the same time sent the keys of the rooms 
to the place of business of respondent, and left them 
with a boy in the office, with a message that they were 
the keys of such rooms. The respondent on learning 
that the keys had been sent to his office, refused to 
receive them, and sent them back to the office of the 
appellant. The clerk of the appellant also refused to 
receive them. On the 16th of February following, the 
respondent entered the rooms, cleaned them out and 
repaired them, removing the articles of no value left in 
them, to the cellar of the building. The referee held, 
that the intestate was tenant from month to month, that 
there had been no lawful surrender of the premises, 
and that the appellant was liable for the rent down to 
the time of the entry of respondent on the 16th of Feb- 
ruary, 1874, at the rate of sixty dollars per month, and 
directed judgment accordingly. 

It is very clear that the tenancy was from month to 
month. Neither party was bound to give any notice 
to the other in order to terminate the tenancy at the 
expiration of any month. The landlord could have 
-removed the tenant by summary proceedings, without 
notice ; and so the tenant could lawfully have left the 
premises at the expiration of any month, without no- 
tice, and without being bound to pay further rent 
(People ex rel. Gledhill v. Schackno, 48 Barh. 551 : 
People V. Goelet, 14 Abb. Pr. JV. S. 130). The death 
of Mrs. Merriam did not change the character of the 
tenancy, and the appellant is not liable beyond the 
obligations that rested and would have remained upon 
her had she continued to live and retain her possession 
down to the day when appellant removed the property 
and sent the keys to the respondent's office. She would 
in that case have been chargeable with rent for the 



24 LAWDLOED AND TENANT. 

months of May, June, and July ; hut Tier tenancy 
would Jiace terminated with the month of July. The 
appellant acted promptly and with apparent good faith. 
He was appointed administrator on the 28th of July, 
and on the next day, or on the 30th, moved the furni- 
ture and everything of value from the premises, and 
sent the keys to the landlord. This was a complete 
termination of the tenancy, and full notice that the 
term would not be renewed for another month. A few 
articles were left in the rooms, but they seem from the 
evidence to have been nothing more than worthless 
things, which the referee finds to have been valueless. 
The rooms were excessively dirty, but the litter and 
filth, and worthless fragments and articles which ten- 
ants are often accustomed to leave behind them, have 
never been held to constitute a continuance of tlie ten- 
ancy. The landlord' s remedy, if any, for such an in- 
jury, is quite different from treating the tenancy as 
renewed by the omission to carry everything away, 
whether valuable or not. The referee has charged the 
administrator with rent after the month of July, on the 
ground that there was no formal surrender by him of 
the premises to the landlord. No form was necessary 
under the facts of the case, beyond a removal at or be- 
fore the expiration of the month, and the restoration 
of the keys to the landlord so that he could enter upon 
possession. The case is not like that of Pugsley v. 
Aiken (11 N. T. 494), where the lease was for " one year 
and an indefinite period thereafter," for in this case 
the express terms of the lease are " that this term of let- 
ting and hiring is for one month only, and will expire " 
at noon on the first day of the following month. There 
should have been a recovery, therefore, only for the 
rent of the months of May, June, and July, with in- 
terest on each month's rent from the time it was paya- 
ble. The judgment should be reversed, and a new trial 
granted, with costs of the appeal to the appellant, un- 
less the respondent shall stipulate to modify the judg- 



DEFINITION OF LEASES. 26 

ment by reducing it to the rent for the months above 
named and interest, in which case it may be affirmed 
as modified, without costs to either party on this ap- 
peal as sgainst the other." Daniels and Brady, JJ., 
concurred. 

In Blumenberg v. Myres (32 Cal. 93) the court 
said: "The doctrine that where the lessee holds ovei' 
and the lessor receives rent accruing after the expiration 
of the term, a new tenancy arises for a further term, 
subject to the covenants and conditions of the original 
lease, is true as a general rule ; and the reason is, that 
the receipt of the rent is considered as an acknowledg- 
ment of a subsisting tenancy. But it does not follow 
that the new term must necessarily be a year. 
Where the former lease was for less than a year, as a 
quarter or a month, or where the term, though extend- 
ing to a year or more, was composed of such periods, 
there is no ground for holding that the new term, pre- 
sumed from the holding over of the tenant and the 
receipt of rent by the landlord, extends beyond one of 
the periods of the tenancy. The tenant who enters 
under a lease for a month, and holds over, and during 
the second month pays rent, is not entitled to claim a 
new term of one year, but he becomes a tenant from 
month to month. When the tenancy is found from 
the fact of the holding over of the tenant and the 
acknowledgment of the landlord, it is presumed to be 
of the same character — as annual, quarterly, monthly, 
&c., and upon the same covenants and conditions as 
in the previous tenancy. It rests upon implication 
alone. But if the parties make an express agreement 
relating in any respect to the new tenancy, then in that 
respect there is no room for implication." This case 
also holds that a receipt specifying the tenure amounts 
in law to a lease. 

Certain leases to be in vrriting. 
A lease for a year or less need not be in writing, 
but if it be for a longer term than one year, it must be 



26 I,ANDLOED AND TENANT. 

in writing, subscribed by the party making tbe same, 
or by his lawful agent thereunto authorized by writing 
(Post V. Martens, 2 BoM. 437 ; Porter v. Bleiler, 17 Barb. 
149). The statute provides that "no estate or interest 
in lands, other than leases for a term not exceeding 
one year, nor any trust or power over and concerning 
lands, or in any manner relating thereto, shall hereafter 
be created, granted, assigned, surrendered or declared, 
unless by act or operation of law, or by deed or convey- 
ance in writing, subscribed by the party creating, grant- 
ing, assigning, surrendering or declaring the same, or 
by his lawful agent, thereunto authorized by writing" 
(2 Bdm. B. S. p. 1B9, § 6). 

' ' Every contract for the leasing for a longer period 
than one year, or for the sale of any lands, or any in- 
terest in lands, shall be void, unless the contract, or 
some note or memorandum thereof, expressing the con- 
sideration, be in writing, and be subscribed by the 
party by whom the lease or sale is to be made" {Id. 
§8). 

" Every instrument required to be subscribed by any 
party, under the last preceding section, may be sub- 
scribed by the agent of such party lawfully authorized " 
{Jd. § 9). 

' 'And leases for years, although chattels real, are no 
longer deemed terms as at common law, but estates" 
(Averill, v. Taylor, 8 iV. Y. 44). 

Yalidiiy of certain leases. Fnlure term. 

A parol lease of land, for one year, to commence in 
futuro is not within the statute, and is valid ; the year 
in the statute refers only to the term (Taggard « 
Roosevelt, 2 E. D. Smith, 100 ; S. C. 8 How. Pr. 141 
Young B.Dake, 5 N. T. 463; overruling 7 5ar6. 191) 
and a parol agreement to give a lease for a term exceed 
ing one year is void (Anderson u. Prindle, 23 Wend. 
616 ; afiE'g 19 Id. 391 ; Dung v. Parker, 52 iV. T. 494) 



DEFIliriTION OF LEASES. 27 



CoTenants. 

An express covenant will control an implied one, 
for the maxim of the law is " expressumfacit cessare 

Right to renewal of lease. 

The right of renewal constitutes a part of the ten- 
ant's interest in the land; and the grant of the addi- 
tional term is for many purposes considered as a con- 
tinuation of the former lease (Winslow ». Tighe, 2 Ball 

6 Beat. 195, 205 ; Kawe «. Chichester, 2 Amb. 715, 719 ; 
S. C. 1 Bro. O. C. 198, n. ; S. C. nom. ; Bromfield v. 
Chichester, and Raw v. Duthelly, 2 DicJc. 480 ; Eandall 
V. Russell, 3 Meriv. 197). A landlord is not bound to 
renew the lease without an express covenant to do it. 
And covenants for a continual renewal are not favored, 
for they tend to create a perpetuity, and have been 
said to be equivalent to an alienation of the inherit- 
ance. Covenants of renewal run with the land, and 
bind a grantee of the reversion. A covenant to renew 
implies the same term and rent, and perhaps the same 
condition, excepting that a covenant to renew a lease 
under the same conditions contained in the original 
lease is satisfied by a renewal of the lease omitting the 
covenant to renew (Carr v. Ellison, 20 Wend. 178 ; 
Tritton v. Foote, 2 Bro. C. G. 636; 2 Oox, 114: ; 
Iggulden V. May, 7 East, 237 ; Hide v. Skinner, 
2 P. Wins. 197) ; continuing in possession amounts 
to an election to renew (Kelso «. Kelly, 1 Daly, 419) ; 
and as to what amounts to waiver of a condition 
requiring notice, see Viany t>. Ferrar, 5 Abb. N. 8. 
110 ; and see 2 Daly, 213 ; and as to arbitrations as to 
terms of renewal, see 5 Aib. Pr. N. S. 110 ; 1 Daly, 39 ; 

7 Pobt. 468. A covenant in a lease that the lessee 
shall have "the refusal of the premises at the expira- 
tion of the lease" for a specified term, is a coven- 
ant to renew the lease at the same rent for such term. 



38 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

It is violated by the lessor if he refuse to give a new 
lease except at an increased rent, and the acceptance 
by the lessee of a new lease at the increased rent, after 
such violation, he at the time protesting against the 
right to exact the increased rent, and claiming to 
reserve the right of action for the breach of covenant, 
is not a waiver of the covenant. The lessee in such a 
lease is not compelled to wait until the actual termina- 
tion of the lease before he makes his election to have 
the lease renewed. The lessor is bound to renew wben 
the lessee makes Ms election and demands his renewal. 
Where the covenant is an independent one, the fact 
that the lessee was liable to the lessor for rent upon 
another covenant contained in the lease does not excuse 
its performance (Tracy v. Albany Exchange Co. 7 N. 
Y. 472). Where the instrument is silent as to the 
party who is to exercise the right to determine, the 
lessee only has the option of determining the lease at 
the specified time, on the principle that where the 
words of a grant are doubtful, they must be construed 
more strongly in favor of the grantee (Dann v. Spurrier, 
3 B. & P. 399 ; Price v. Dyer, 17 Ves. 356 ; Doe v. 
Dixon, 9 Hast, 15 ; Groodright «. Richardson, 3 T. H. 
462). A executed to B a lease of certain premises for 
one year, containing a clause in these words: "B to 
have the privilege to have the premises for one year, 
one month and twenty days longer, but if he leaves he 
is to give four months' notice, before the expiration of 
the lease," and it was held, that the lease created a 
term for the full period of two years, one month and 
twenty days, defeasible at the election of the tenant, 
after one year, by giving notice of his intention to leave 
the premises four months previous to the expiration of 
the year (Chretien v. Doney et al., I JST.'T. 419). 

A lease was executed for a term commencing the 
first day of July, 1853, and ending the first day of July, 
1855, "with the privilege of two years more if desired," 
one month before the expiration of the period specified, 



DEFINITION OF LEASES. 29 

at a certain yearly rent, to be paid monthly during the 
term, with a clause expressing that the lessees had hired 
and taken the premises, "for the term and at the rent 
aforesaid," and that they agreed to pay the rent, and it 
was held, that it was not contemplated by the parties 
that in case the lessees should desire the premises for 
the addi^nal two years, a new lease should be made, 
embraci^^he farther time ; but that it was intended 
the prM^T lease, on notice being given, should cover 
the whMe period ; and that the agreement to pay rent 
was coextensive with the entire term of the lease, not 
only as it was originally fixed, but as it should be ex- 
tended according to the provisions of the lease (House 
V. Burr, 34 Barb. 525) ; and equity will relieve a lessee 
who fails to comply with a condition respecting notice 
in a covenant for the renewal of his lease, and compel 
specific performance thereof, where it appears that he 
has given a fair intimation of his intention to renew, 
and no injury has been done to the other party ; but 
not where there have been gross laches, or where the 
neglect was wilful (Reed v. St. John, 2 Daly, 213). 

Power of agent. 

A lease signed^as agent of the lessor, by a person not 
having atithority in writing, so as to sign, can not 
create the estate purported to be created in it, and is 
rendered void by statute (Post v. Martens, 2 Hobt. 437 ; 
Porter ». Bleiler, 17 Barh. 149) ; although an agent 
must have written authority to make a valid lease for 
more than one year, an agent to sell real estate may 
contract in writing, without written authority, the lan- 
guage of the statute being differently construed in the 
two cases (Worrell v. Munn, 5 N. Y. 229 ; 8 N. Y. 
160 ; 1 Parsons on Contracts, 4th ed. p. 47) ; and as to 
ratification, see Commercial Bank v. Warren (15 N. Y. 
577); and an agent to rent premises and collect rents has 
no power to consent to the substitution of a new tenant 



30 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

(Wilson V. Lester, 64 Bari. 431), and a sealed agree- 
ment or lease, signed by an agent in his own name, de- 
scribing himself as "agent" of the owner of the pre- 
mises, does not bind the owner. A special agreement 
under seal, executed by an agent, must appear on its 
face to be the contract of the principal, or the principal 
will not be bound (Dean v. Eoesler, 1 Bilt. 430), 

Rights of lodgers. 

Lodgers are entitled to all the privileges of tenants, and'enjoy the 
same protection as to payment of rent and of notice to quit, terminable 
according to the terms of the letting. If a man takes lodgings on the 
first or second floor of a house, he has a right to the use of the door- 
bell, the knocker, the skylight of the staircase, and the water-closet, 
unless it is otherwise stipulated at the time of taking lodgings ; and 
if the landlord deprives him of the use of any, an action lies (§ 67 
Taylor's L. & T. 5th ed. citing Underhill «. Burrows, 1 O. & P. 36), and 
the doctrine of caveat emptor has no application to a demise of ready 
furnished lodgings (Smith ». Manable, 1 Oa/rr & Marahm. 479). 

Effect of occupation under void lease. 

Occupation under a lease void as to the term, is 
valid in other respects and inures as a yearly tenancy 
(Schuyler v. Leggett, 2 Cow. 660 ; People v. Rickert, 8 
Id. 226 ; 5 T. It. 471 ; 8 Id. 3 ; 31 iV^. Y. 514 ; 33 
Id. 245) ; but as to a tenant paying a monthly rental, 
it inures as a hiring from month to month (Anderson v. 
Prindle, 23 Wend. 616 ; aff'g 19 Id. 391 ; The People 
0. Darling, 47 N. T. 666) ; and if the premises are sit- 
uated in the city of New York, and the parol lease is 
void as to the term, the statute treats it as a tenancy for 
no specified time, and designates its termination to be 
on the first of May following (Taggard «. Roosevelt, 2 
E. D. S. at p. 105) ; and although a lease be void for 
want of written authority in the agent to execute it, it 
may still be referred to, to regulate and ascertain the 
rights of the parties during the actual existence of the 
tenancy (Porter ». Bleiler, 17 Barh. 149). 

Legal meaning of certain terms. 

Laud. — The term land comprehends any ground, soil, or earth 
whatsoever, which is not separated from the earth, as meadows, pas- 



DEFINITION OF LEASES. 31 



tures, woods, waters, marshes, furze, and heath. It has an indefinite 
extent upward and downward; no man can therefore build so as to 
overhang his house on his neighbor's ground. The buildings which 
are erected upon land are a part of it, for whatever is built upon the 
soil, is an accessory to the soil. Hence, if a man grant or devise the 
land without mentioning the buildings, the latter will pass (3 Bouvier 
Inst. pp. 156, 157J. 

More or less. — These words are used as matter of general descrip- 
tion, and as intending to cover a small difference one way or the other 
in the quantity of the premises demised. 

Beal property, in the technical phraseology of the law, consists 
of lands, tenaments, and hereditaments {Hilliard on Beal Property, 
vol. 1, p. 1). 

Tenement. — The word tenement in its most extensive signification 
comprehends everything which may be holden, provided it be of a 
permanent nature. In its most confined and vulgar acceptation, it 
means a house or building (2 Bov.v. Inst. p. 167) ; but it is also used in a 
much more enlarged sense, as signifying land, or any corporeal in- 
heritance, or anything of a permanent nature, which may be holden. 
And where it was used in a statute, providing a summary remedy for 
landlords to recover possession, it was held that as the act was a 
remedial one, the largest senae of the word should be adopted (Sackett 
V. Wheaton, 17 Pieh. 105). 

Hereditaments. —The terni hereditaments includes lands and 
tenements (1 Hilliard on Beal Property, p. 1). 

Mbsstjage or House. ^These are synonymous terms (3 T. B. 503). 
Apfuktenances. — This word will pass only things which have been 
used together with the house or land demised, or which are reputed 
or accepted as part thereof (Fawoett'sL. <Sc T. p. 76), and is introduced 
into leases for the purpose of including any easements or servitudes 
used or enjoyed with the demised premises. 

What is included in the term house. 

Messuage or house, may comprehend besides the house and build- 
ings adjoining, a court yard, garden, and orchard belonging to the 
same, and the stable and other outhouses necessary for the convenient 
occupation of the house {Fawcett's L. & T. p. 75, and cases cited), and a 
conveyance in general words of a house, passes everything that be- 
longs to the house with it ; and whether a thing is parcel or not of 
the thing demised, is always matter of evidence. Accordingly where 
the plaintiff, by a sealed lease, rented to defendant two houses, de- 
scribing them as "Nos. 163 and 164 Seventh avenue," it was held 
that parol evidence was admissible to show that a certain rear yard or 
lot passed with the demise of the two houses, and that as a general 
rule parol evidence is always admissible to ascertain the nature and 
qualities of the subject to which an instrument refers (Gary v. Thomp- 
son, 1 Daly, 35). 

Lease. — ^A lease is a contract for the possession and profits of 
land and tenements on the one side, and a recompense of rent or other 
income on the other, and there may be a lease without any reservation 
of rent (Failing «. Schenck, 3 Hill, 344 ; Hunt v. Comstock, 15 
Wend. 667). 

Rent is a periodical return made by any particular tenant of land, 
either in money or otherwise, in retribution for the land. A rent 



32 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

must be certain, or capable of being made so by either party (1 Sil- 
liard on Real Property, 237). 

Rent is defined to be a certain profit, issuing yearly out of lands 
and tenements corporeal (Co. Litt.. 141 g\ 2BI. Com., 41), and was 
defined by Lord Chief Baron Gilbert to be an annual return made by 
the tenant, either in labor, money, or provisions, in retribution for 
the land that passes (Gilh. Bents, 9; note to Co. Litt. 'by Thomas, vol. 
1, 508). The general understanding of the term rent, is the payment 
of a specified amount of money on a day named in the lease, for the 
use and oocupation of the demised premises. Instances where the 
compensation or return is made in goods or by rendition of services 
are certainly exceptional. 

Recording leases. 

The statute declares, that "every conveyance of real 
estate, within this State, hereafter made, shall be 
recorded in the oflSce of the clerk of the county where 
such real estate shall be situated ; and every such con- 
veyance not so recorded, shall be void as against any 
subsequent purchaser in good faith and for a valuable 
consideration, of the same real estate, or any portion 
thereof, whose conveyance shall be tirst duly recorded " 
(1 Edm. B. S., p. 707, § 1). 

Term " real estate " defined. 

The term "real estate," as used in this chapter, 
shall be construed as "co-extensive in meaning with 
" lands, tenements, and hereditaments," and as embrac- 
ing all chattels real, except leases for a term not 
exceeding three years {Id., p. 714, § 36). 

Certain counties not affected. 

" The provisions of this chapter shall not extend 
to leases for life or lives, or for years, in the counties 
of Albany, Ulster, Sullivan, Herkimer, Dutchess, 
Columbia, Delaware, and Schenectady" [Id., p. 715, 
§43). 

Register In New York. 

All the provisions of this chapter, excepting the 
eighteenth section, conferring any powers, or imposing 



DEFINITION OF LEASES. 33 

any duties, obligations, or penalty upon a county 

clerk, shall extend and apply to the Register of the 

city and county of New York, in the same manner as 

if lie were county clerk of the said county {Id., p. 716, 

§43). 

The statute embraces all leases for a term exceeding three years 
(35 Barb. 334; 16 N. T. 713), and leases improperly recorded are not 
available as notice (James v. Morey, 3 Oow. 346 ; Frost v. Beekman, 1 
Johns. Oh. 300; Cook v. Travis, 33 Barb. 338; Gilligs. Maas, 38 JT. 7. 
191; 13 Geo. 443; 37 Maine, 433; 11 Orat. 331). 

Effect of possession as notice. 

The general rule is, that possession of land is con- 
structive notice to a purchaser, mortgagee, or others, 
of the occupant' s title and equities ; the purchaser is 
chargeable with notice of the extent of their interest as 
tenants. Possession, however, to operate as construc- 
tive notice, must be by occupation, or by open and 
visible improvements, in distinction from mere fencing 
or such like (see Williamson ■». Brown, 15 JV. T. 354 ; 
Grimstone v. Carter, 3 Paige, 421 ; Trustees ». Wheeler, 

5 Lansing, 160 ; 5 Barh. 51 ; 10 Id. 97, 254, 454 ; 22 Id. 
338 ; 20 N. 7. 400 ; 5 Johns. Ch. 29 ; 6 Wend. 313, 226 : 

6 Cush. 170 ; 43 Maine, 519 ; 21 How. U. 8. 423). 

5 



34 LAJS^DIiOKD AND TENANT. 



CHAPTEE V. 

VALIDITY OF LEASE AS AFFECTED BY FBATJD. 

Leases, like other contracts, may be rescinded and 
relieved against upon the ground of fraud aa to or in 
any matter material to the subject of the demise. The 
maxim of caveat emptor applies, however, to the leas- 
ing as well as to the transfer of real or personal 
property, and the lessee or purchaser generally takes 
the risk of its quality and condition, unless he protects 
himself on the subject by express agreement (Cleves «. 
Willoughby, 7 Hill, 83 ; Meeks «. Bowerman, 1 Daly, 
100) ; in other words, he takes the premises for better 
or for worse (Bloomer v. Merrill, 1 Daly, 486 ; Mum- 
ford ■». Brown, 6 Com. 476). The extent to which this 
rule applies to demises is well illustrated by the cases. 
In Meeks «. Bowerman (1 Daly 99, supra), it was held 
that upon a demise the landlord is not bound to dis- 
close to the lessee the uses to which the demised prem- 
ises have been previously put, and in the absence of 
any express covenants in the lease, that there could be 
none implied by which the lessor could be held as 
warranting the premises fit for the purposes for which 
they were rented, and that the mere suppression by 
the landlord of the fact that the house had been previ- 
ously occupied as a brothel, constituted no defense. 

In a somewhat similar case in the superior court 
(Staples «. Anderson, 3 BoM. 327), it was held that 
"the question of fact as to the character of the house 
at the time of the letting being known to the plaintiflF, 
and his false representation or fraudulent concealment 
thereof from the defendant, ought to be submitted to 
the jury," and that a direction to find for the landlord 



VALIDITY OF LEASES. 35 

upon the theory that there was no defense was ground 
for granting a new trial. 

In another case (Comfort v. Fawke, 6 Mees. & W. 
at p. 373), it was held that "it must also be admitted 
that if the plaintiff knew of the nuisance (a brothel next 
door), but purposely employed an agent, suspecting 
that a question would be asked from him, and at the 
same time believing and suspecting that it would, by 
reason of such ignorance, be answered in the negative, 
the plaintiff would undoubtedly be guilty of a fraud, 
and the contract would be avoided ; for then the rep- 
resentation of the agent, which he intended to be made, 
would be the same as his own ; and his own representa- 
tion, coupled with his knowledge of its falsity, would 
doubtless be a fraud." The further question as to how 
far the existence of such nuisances amount to an 
eviction of the tenant, will be considered in a subse- 
quent chapter, under the title of Eviction. 

In Hart v. Windsor {12 M. & W. 68 ; 13 L. J. Ex. 
129), it was held that there is no contract implied by 
law on the part of the lessor of an unfurnished house, 
that it is in a reasonably fit state for occupation, 
although it is let for the purpose of immediate habita- 
tion. 

In Keates v. Cadogan (10 Com. B. 591 ; 20 L. J. C. 
P. 76), it was held that the owner of a house is not 
bound to disclose to an intended lessee that it is in a 
ruinous state, and dangerous to occupy. In the case 
first cited, the court say: "It is not pretended that 
there was any warranty, express or implied, that the 
house was fit for immediate occupation ; but it is said, 
that, because the defendant knew that the plaintiff 
wanted it for immediate occupation, and knew that it 
was in an unfit and dangerous state, and did not dis- 
close that fact to the plaintiff, an action of deceit will 
lie. The declaration does not allege that the defendant 
made any misrepresentation, or that he had reason to 
suppose that the plaintiff would not do what any 



36 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

man in Ms senses would do, viz., make proper investiga- 
tion and satisfy himself as to the condition of the house, 
before he entered upon the occupation of it. There is 
nothing amounting to deceit ; it is a mere ordinary 
transaction of letting and hiring" (see also 12 M. & W. 
at p. 87). 

It is said that no legal demand can arise out of a 
contract based upon an illegal or immoral consideration, 
ancl that rent or damages for breaches of covenant are 
not recoverable under leases of houses used for purposes 
of prostitution, provided the lessor is aware the pre- 
mises are so used (Girardy ». Richardson, 1 Esp. 13 ; 
Crisp V. Churchill, \ B. & P- 340 ; Jennings v. Throg- 
morton, Ry. & M. 251 ; Appleton ». Campbell, 2 C. d: 
P. 347 ; see also Smith v. White, 35 L. J. Oh. 464 ; L. 
B. 1 Eq. 626). In an action for breach of a contract to 
let premises, the defendant may justify such, breach by 
proving that the plaintiff intended to use the premises 
for an illegal purpose, although at the time of refusing 
to perform the contract he did not assign or act upon 
such intended use, as a reason ior his refusal (Cowan 
V. Milbourn, 36 L. J. Ex. 124 ; L. B. 2 Ex. 230 ; 15 W. 
B. 750 ; 16 L. T. N. S. 290) ; tlie JSTew York Common 
Pleas, however in O' Brien v. Brietenbank (1 HUi. 304), 
decided otherwise. That court held that in an action by 
a lessee for damages for refusing to give possession of 
the premises, it was no defense that the defendant hired 
the premises intending to keep a bawdy house therein, 
and that the mere avowal by the lessee of an intent to 
employ the leased property in an unlawful business did 
not constitute an offense, nor did it entitle the lessor to 
repudiate his contract. 

In Peret v. Hill (15 0. B. 207 ■,2 0.L. R. 1366 ; 18 
Jur. 1014 ; 23 L. J. O.P. 186) it was held that after the 
lessee has entered into possession under a lease, the 
lessor can not avoid such lease, on the ground that it 
was obtained by the fraudulent misrepresentations of 
the lessee as to matters collateral to the lease ; as, for 



VALIDITY OF LEASES. 37 

instance, that he intended to use the demised premises 
for a respectable business, whereas he used them for an 
immoral purpose. 

In the Gas Light Co. v. Turner (6 Bing. JST. 0. 324), 
it was held that rent reserved upon a lease of premises, 
used for the purpose of boiling oil and tar, contrary to 
the provisions of the building act, could not be re- 
covered. 

In Griraldy v. Richardson (1 Usp. 13), which was 
an action of assumpsit for use and occupation of certain 
rooms belonging to the plaintiff, the defendant proved 
that she was a woman of the town ; that the rooms had 
been let to her by the wife of the plaintiff, who, it was 
proved, managed the business of his house in letting 
his lodgings ; that at the time of letting them, she was 
informed of the defendant's mode of life, and con- 
sented that she should be at liberty to receive male 
visitors for the purpose of prostitution ; and Lord 
Kestyon ruled that, under these circumstances, the 
action was not maintainable ; that the contract upon 
which it was attempted to be sustained was contra 
bonos mores, and therefore could not support an 
action, and his lordship therefore directed a verdict 
for the defendant; and the same rule governs in 
cases of contracts for clothes, or board and lodging, 
the price of which is to be paid out of the profits of 
prostitution. But the mere fact that the person to 
whom board and lodging or any articles are furnished, 
is a prostitute, does not invalidate the contract there- 
for, unless the very object of the agreement be to 
pander to her prostitution {Story on Oont. § 542, and 
authorities cited). 

Appleton V. Campbell (2 Oar. & P. 347), was an 
action of assumpsit for board and lodging. The de- 
fense was, that the defendant was an immodest woman, 
and used the lodging for the purposes of prostitution, 
to the knowledge of the plaintiff. To substantiate this, 
another female, who lodged in the house, and who was 



38 LANDLORD AKD TENANT. 

called for the plaintiff, proved on her cross-examina- 
tion, tbat the defendant was in the habit of receiving 
male visitors ; and that the plaintiff used sometimes to 
open the door for them ; and that the plaintiff told her, 
that the defendant was an immodest woman, and 
Abbott, C. J., said, "If a person lets lodging to a 
woman to enable her to consort with the other sex, 
and for the purposes of prostitution, he can not recover 
for the lodging so supplied. But if the defendant had 
her lodgings there, and received her visitors elsewhere, 
the plaintiff may recover, although she be a woman of 
the town, because persons of that description must 
have a place to lay their heads ; but if this place was 
used for immoral purposes, the plaintiff can not 
recover." The jury found for the defendant. 

Jennings v. Throgmorton (1 Ryan & Moody, 251), 
was an action of assumpsit for use and occupation of 
certain rooms belonging to the plaintiff. The defense 
set up was, that the rooms were let to the defendant 
for the purposes of prostitution, and with a knowledge 
on the part of the plaintiff of that fact. It did not 
appear from the evidence produced in support of the 
defense, that the plaintiff, at the time of letting the 
rooms to the defendant, was aware of her mode of life ; 
but it was proved that after the defendant had occupied 
the rooms for about two months the plaintiff was fully 
informed of the defendant's receiving male visitors 
there, and that she supported herself by prostitution. 
It was also shown that the defendant was a weekly 
tenant, and Abbott, Ld. C. J., said: "There are two 
questions for your consideration :" First. You are to 
consider whether the plaintiff originally let these lodg- 
ings to the defendant for the purposes of prostitution ; 
and if you should be of opinion that he did, then your 
verdict should be for the defendant : Secondly. If 
you should be of opinion that the plaintiff was not 
originally aware of the defendant's course of life, and 
the purpose to which these lodgings were to be applied, 



VALIDITT OF LEASES. 39 

you are to consider whether he allowed her to remain 
as his weekly tenant, after he had become acquainted 
with her mode of life. I am of opinion, that if the 
plaintiff, after he became acquainted with her mode of 
living, suffered her to occupy the premises for the 
express purpose of continuing a life of prostitution, 
and the present demand accrued after he had acquired 
this knowledge of her character, that he is not entitled 
to recover, and that your verdict should be for the de- 
fendant." Ths jury found a verdict for the defendant. 
In Bowry t>. Bennet (1 Gamp. 348), where an 
action was brought to recover for clothes sold to a 
prostitute, and the defense was that the ^ articles were 
sold for the purpose of enabling her to carry on her 
business of prostitution, Lord Ellenborotjgh said it 
must not only be shown that the plaintiff had notice of 
the defendant' s way of life, but that he sold the goods 
to enable her to carry it on (see also Gray v. Mattheas, 
5 Yes. Jr. 291). In Trovinger v. McBurney (5 Cow. 
253), which was for the board of a female who had 
been living with the defendant, and had by him 
an illegitimate child, and the defense was that the 
contract was made with a view of facilitating the con- 
tinuance of the state of prostitution between the de- 
fendant and the female boarder, the court said, ' ' The 
simple circumstance that the plaintiff had knowl- 
edge of the previous cohabitations did not furnish 
legal ground for an intent to sanction their repetition ; 
something more was necessary." 

These authorities are referred to as establishing the 
doctrine that in order to avoid a contract of leasing 
upon the ground of the illegal nature of the occu- 
pation of the premises, the landlord must be connected 
with the illegal act complained of, by previous knowl- 
edge or notice, so that the illegal nature of the occupa- 
tion enters into and actually forms part of the contract, 
by necessary implication, for, as the court held in 
Gibson v. Pearsall (1 E. D. Smith, 90), a lease is not 



40 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

void under the laws prohibiting gaming, unless the 
lessor at the time of making the agreement was a party 
to the illegal act, and let the premises in furtherance 
thereof. 

In Updike v. Campbell (4 £J. D. 8. 570), it was held 
that a contract letting premises for the very purpose of 
conducting a bowling alley is void, but that letting 
premises with knowledge of facts from which the lessor 
may reasonably suppose an intention on the part of 
the lessee to keep a bowling alley, followed by the 
actual use of the premises for that purpose within the 
observation of the lessor, is not of itself sufficient, 
unless the lessor is clearly proved a direct party to the 
to the illegal ihtent, and performs some act plainly in aid 
and furtherance thereof. 

In Jackson v. Walker (5 Hill, 27), which was an 
agreement to pay money to keep open the log cabin 
on Broadway, contrary to the law relative to elec- 
tions, it was made a part of the agreement that 
the building should be used for the prosecution of 
the success of a political party, and it was held to 
be void for that reason, as a violation of the election 
laws, and the judgment was afterwards affirmed (7 
Rill, 387). 

In Kneiss v. Seligman (5 How. Pr. 425), it was de- 
cided that it does not affect the legality of the sale of 
goods, that the vendor knew that they were to be used 
by the purchaser for an unlawful purpose, unless the 
vendor does some act beyond the mere sale, in aid or 
furtherance of the unlawful object, and that bare 
knowledge on the part of the vendor that the vendee 
intends to put the goods to an illegal use, which inten- 
tion may or may not be followed up, will not vitiate 
the sale nor deprive the vendor of his remedy for the 
purchase money. 

In Smith v. White (1 L. B. Eq. 626; 35 L. J. Ohanc. 
454 ; 14 W. E. 510 ; 14 L. T. N. S. 350 ; 2 O. B.), where 
a lessee of a house which to his knowledge had for 



VALIDITY OF LEASES. 41 

many years been used as a brothel, assigned the lease 
absolutely, knowing that the assignee intended to use 
the house for the same purpose, and where the original 
lease contained covenants to deliver up at the end of 
the term, in good repair, and not to use the house as a 
brothel ; and the assignment contained a covenant to 
indemnify the lessee from the covenants in the lease, 
and the lessee having been compelled to pay for dilap- 
idation at the end of the lease, sought to recover the 
amount from the estate of the assignor, which was be- 
ing administered in equity, and it was held that the 
assignment, and everything arising out of it, were so 
tainted with the immoral purpose that the lessee could 
not recover. 

In Holmead ■». Maddox {Circ. Gt. D. O., 2 Oranch 
Q. Gt. 161), it was held that the owner of a race-field, 
who knowingly let it for the purpose of public races 
and for booths and stands for the accommodation of 
licentious and disorderly persons for the purpose of 
unlawful gaming, and of gross immorality and de- 
bauchery, to the corruption of good morals and man- 
ners, could not recover the rent in an action of cove- 
nant. 

In Rosenbaum w. Grunter (3 E. D. 8., 203), it was 
decided that a fraudulent representation, by the lessee 
of a house, as to the amount paid by him under his 
lease, will not avoid a contract made by him for hiring 
to a third person a part of the premises, at a specified 
rent, it being within the power of the latter to ascertain 
the value by a personal examination. The rule as 
applicable to vendor and vendee of real estate is other- 
wise ; and if the vendor misrepresent the rental of the 
property, it is ground for refusing to perform the con- 
tract (Phillips V. Oonklin, 2 T. & G. Sup. Gt. Bep. 
619 ; 58 N. Y. 682). 

In Ellis V. Andrews (56 iV. Y. 83), the Court of Ap- 
peals decided that a false statement, as to the value of 
property, made by a vendor for the purpose of obtain- 



43 LANDLORD AND TBNANT. 

ing a higher price than he knows the property is worth, 
will not sustain an action of fraud by the purchaser 
who contracted relying upon the statement, and that 
the purchaser in such a case must rely upon his own 
judgment as to value ; although an action on the case 
may be maintained by the purchaser of lands against 
the seller for fraudulently misrepresenting the bounda- 
ries of the lands (Clark v. Baird, 9 If. T. 183) ; and 
where one conveys to another his right in real estate, 
an action will lie for a fraudulent representation as to 
the territorial extent of snch right ( Whitney v. Allaire, 
1 N. Y. 305). 

In the famous case of Laidlaw o. Organ (2 Wheaton, 
178) Chief Justice Maeshall said : " The question in 
this case is, whether the intelligence of extraneous cir- 
cumstances which might influence the price of the 
commodity, and which was exclusively within the 
knowledge of the vendee, ought to have been commu- 
nicated by him to the vendor. The Court is of opinion 
that he was not bound to communicate it. It would be 
difficult to circumscribe the contrary doctrine within 
proper limits, where the means of intelligence are 
equally accessible to both parties. But at the same 
time each party must take care not to say or do any- 
thing tending to impose upon the other." 

The suppressio veri is not therefore necessarily a 
ground of fraud, although the suggestio falsi is, as a 
rule ; for the concealment or non-disclosure of facts, to 
amount to a fraud, must be of those facts and circum- 
stances which one party is under some legal or moral 
obligation to communicate to the other, and which the 
other has a right to know^ not merely mforo conscien- 
ticB, but juris et de jure (Van Arsdale «. Howard, 5 
Ala. N. 8. 596 ; s. p. Barnett v. Stanton, 2 Ala. N. S. 
181 ; Truebody v. Jacobson, 2 Cal. 269 ; Aorston v. 
Kidgway, 18 III. 23 ; Jenkins v. Simpson, 14 Me. 364 ; 
Young V. Bumpass, 1 Freem. \Miss.\ Ch. 241; Mc- 
Adams v. Cates, 24 Mo. 223 ; Trigg v. Read, 5 Humph. 



VALIDITY OF LEASES. 43 

529 ; Ingram X). Morgan, 4 Id. 66 ; Dickinson v. Davis, 2 
Leigh. 401) ; unless, perhaps, in a case where one party 
artfully conceals from another material facts within his 
knowledge, of which he knows the other party has 
neither knowledge nor the necessary means of informa- 
tion (Prentiss v. Russ, 16 Me. 30 ; Durell v. Haley, 1 
Paige, 492). 

In Wallace v. Lent (1 Daly, 481), it appeared " that 
a landlord rented a dwelling-house to a tenant without 
disclosing the fact, of which he was aware, that there 
was a deleterious stench in the house, proceeding from 
some unknown cause, which rendered it unfit for hab- 
itation. The tenant, ignorant of the circumstances, 
went into possession with his family, and in a very 
short time all the inmates of the house experienced the 
injurious stench, producing vomiting, &c., and it was 
held that the concealment was a fraud on the part of 
the landlord, and that the tenant was justified in leav- 
ing." 

In Westlake v. Degraw (25 Wend. 672), the ques- 
tion presented was whether the tenant was justified in 
putting an end to the lease under which he held, on 
account of certain noxious smells, set up as a defense, 
and the Supreme Court (per Nelson, C. J.) said : "It 
must be assumed, that no fraud was practiced upon 
the tenant by the landlord, as that has been negatived 
by the verdict of the jury. It appears, also, that the 
alleged nuisance existed at and before the defendant 
made the contract and entered into the possession ; and 
that it arose from the carcasses of dead rats under the 
steps of the house. The discovery was made by the 
succeeding tenants ; and it seems to me that ordinary 
vigilance on the part of the defendant would have en- 
abled him to have done the same. He not only appears 
to have been remiss in this respect himself, but even 
refused to allow a mechanic, sent by the plaintiff, to 
take the necessary steps to detect and remove the cause 
of the nuisance. It was readily removable when dis- 



44 LAWDLOBD AND TENANT. 

covered, and in its own nature was of but temporary 
duration. It is an inconvenience to which all buildings 
are more or less subject at times ; but wbicli, with, 
ordinary skill and attention, may be abated by the 
tenant. It would, I apprehend, be the introduction of 
a new principle into the law of landlord and tenant, 
and one liable to great abuse, to give countenance to 
this defense." Judgment for plaintiff affirmed. 

Remedy in case of fraud. 

The sweeping assertion frequently made, that fraud 
vitiates every contract, must be limited somewhat in its 
application, for the innocent party may waive the fraud 
and insist upon the contract, while the fraudulent 
party can not assert his fraud, and claim as his right 
any advantages resulting from it. The defrauded party 
has also a choice of remedies ; he may rescind the con- 
tract for the fraud, or may, as in case of warranty, re- 
tain the property and recover the damages sutfered in 
consequence of the misrepresentations (1 JV. F. 305). 
If he desires to rescind, he must offer so to do within a 
reasonable time after the discovery of the fraud (Rosen- 
baum V. Grunter, 3 E. D. S. 203 ; Wallace v. Lent, 1 
Balp, 481 ; 46 Barb. 467 ; 2 Par. on Con. 4th ed. 277 ; 
Kerr on Frauds, 299), and in order to rescind the con- 
tract, he must restore the other party as nearly as pos- 
sible to the same condition th^t he would have been 
in, if the contract had not been made (Minturn v. Mann, 
7 N. T. 220 ; Mason v. Bovet, 1 Den. 69 ; Nichols v. 
Pinner, 18 JST. Y. at p. 312 ; Nichols v. Michael, 23 Id. 
at p. 272; Sweetman v. Prince, 26 Id. at p. 227; 
Cobb V. Hatfield, 46 Id. 533), and in order to rescind 
the contract, it is supposed that the tenant ought to 
offer back the lease, with any writing necessary to re- 
invest the title in the lessor (Central Bank v. Pindar, 46 
Barb. 467 ; Quincy e. Tilton, 7 Oreenl. at p. 279), and^ 
ought to surrender the keys which, in a symbolical 



VALIDITY OF LEASES. 45 

sense, is regarded, as the possession itself (Little v. 
Martin, 3 Wend. 219 ; Hall ». Western Trans. Co., 34 
JV. T. 284 ; see also 5 John. 335 ; 2 PicTc. 206 ; Boss 
on Vendors (1st Ed.), 11, 55; 11 Cush. 282; 55 Penn. 
393). 

Election to affirm. 

Where a party discovers the misrepresentation of 
another before proceeding with a contract he must, if 
he can, elect whether he will waive the fraud and pro- 
ceed with the contract, or whether he will on account of 
the fraud throw it up, and the election when made is 
conclusive ; for example, in a case where A. engaged to 
carry away certain rubbish for B. at a specified sum, 
found upon commencing his work that B. had made 
fraudulent representations as to the quantity of rub- 
bish, but nevertheless went on with the work, and then 
sought to recover more than the sum specified by the 
contract, and it was held that by going on with the 
work he had waived the fraud, and could not recover 
except upon the special contract (Selway v. Fogg, 5 M. 
& W. 83), and the case of Saratoga R. E.. Co. v. Row 
(24 Wend. 74), is somewhat similar. In that case a 
contract was made for work to be done at a sti- 
pulated price, and it was discovered before the work 
was commenced, that a misrepresentation had been 
made in respect to its value, and the court held that on 
that account, th^ party engaging to do the work might 
repudiate the contract, but that if he did not do so, but 
went on and performed it, he could demand no more 
than the contract price. 

Eifect of lessee taking possession. 

In Whitney v. Allaire (1 N. Y. 305), it was held 
that wjiere one conveys or leases to another his right in 
real estate, an action will lie for a fraudulent repre- 
sentation as to the territorial extent of such right, and 



46 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

that the lessee, by taking possession at the commence- 
ment of the term, aud after having discovered the fraud, 
waives thereby only his right to rescind the contract, 
but not his right to recover the damages occasioned by 
the fraud. 

The rule seems to be that where a party has been 
defrauded in the purchase or sale of real property, he 
may rescind the contract, so as to restore the parties 
to the same situation they were in when the contract 
was made, or he may affirm it, so far as it has been 
executed, and claim a compensation for the fraud 
(White V. Seaver, 25 Barl). 235). If he has received a 
conveyance, he must reconvey, or offer to reconvey, or 
he can not rescind (Bradley ». Bosley, 1 Barb. Ch. 
Rep. 125 ; Moyer «. Shemaker, 5 Barb. 319), and the 
same is true as to personal property ( 4 Denio, 51-54: ; 
2 Hill, 288-294 ; 5 Id. 389 ; 3 Sandf. 174 ; 14 Barb. 
594). 



BIGHTS OF LANDLORD. 47 



CHAPTER VI. 



EIGHTS OF LANDLORD. 

I. Time of payment of rent. 
n. Mode of payment. 
in. Tender of payment. 
IV. Application of payments. 



Time of payment of rent. 

The time when rent is to be paid, is to be deter- 
mined from the words of the reddendum if the lease be 
in writing, or from the oral evidence of the terms of 
hiring, if there be no writing, and if prior rent has 
been paid under the agreement, that circumstance 
together with the manner and time of payment, may 
by necessary implication aid in arriving at the cor- 
rect understanding of the parties as to the manner 
and time of payment, where the same were not other- 
wise intelligently expressed. 

In the city of New York, however, the statute in 
the absence of any different agreement between the 
parties provides that rent shall be payable at the usual 
quarter days for the payment of rent in said city (1 
Bdm. R. 8. 695, § 1 ; Wolf v. Merritt, 21 Wend. 336) ; 
and a provision in a lease making the rent payable in 
advance, is valid and enforceable (Giles «. Comstock, 4 
N. Y. 370 ; 1 Den. 113 ; 4 Oow. 576). 

II. 

Mode of payment. 

The landlord is entitled to his rent in lawful money 
jf the United States, but if the landlord accepts a check, 



48 LANDLOKB AND TBWAKT. 

note, or bill for the rent, it will be a good payment in 
law, provided the check, note, or bill be paid on pre- 
sentation or maturity, but as a rule, however, a mere 
promise to pay is no payment until performed, and the 
taking of the tenant's check, note, or bill is not pay- 
ment until the obligation taken is paid (Peters «. New- 
kirk, 6 Cow.. 103 ; Bradford w. Fox, 38 N. Y. 289 ; 
Smith V. Miller, 43 Id. 171 ; Snyder v. Kunkleman, 
3 Penn. 487 ; VanstSenburgh v. Hoffman, 15 Barb. 28 ; 
Cornell v. Lamb, 20 Johns. 407 ; Price v. Limehouse, 4 
McCord, 544 ; Printems ». Helfried, 1 JSTott. & McG. 
187 ; Bailey v. Wright, 3 McCord, 484), and rent is 
not extinguished by taking a note and chattel mort- 
gage to secure it (Lofsky v. Maujer, 3 Sandf. Ch. 69); 
and see Toby v. Barber, 5 Johns. 68 ; Muldoon t> . 
Whitlock, 1 Cow. 290). Indeed, nothing is considered 
as an actual payment which is not in truth such, unless 
there be an express agreement based on a good con- 
sideration that something short of a payment shall be 
taken in lieu of it (Olcott w. Eathbone, 5 Wend. 490) ; 
and it has been held that taking the debtor' s note will 
not even suspend the right of distress until it becomes 
due (Davis ?). Gyde, 4 Nev. & M. 462 ; Bailey v. Wright, 

3 McCord, 484) ; but the supreme court of Maine have 
leceutly decided, that the taking of a promissory note 
for an antecedent debt imposes upon the creditor an 
obligation to wait for his pay till the note matures, with- 
out any special agreement to that effect (Thompson v. 
Gray, 63 Maine, 228, and see 9 Cow. ^194 ; 2 Barn. & 
Aid. 496 ; 2 Whart. 253) ; when the debtor gives his own 
note it is not paymeint, though receipted as such 
(Muldoon «. Whitlock, 1 Cow 290 ; 9 Johns. 310), 
but the note must be surrendered at or before the 
trial upon the original cause of action {Cow. Tr. § 464 ; 

4 Barh. 369; 6 Id. 432; 8 Id. 408; 3 Cow. 147; 8 
Id. 77 ; 8 Johns. 149 ; 15 Id. 247 ; 23 Wend. 345 ; 
4 Watts, 452 ; 3 Cranch. 311 ; 2 Oilman, 701-713) ; 
.where the draft of a third person is received by a 



EIGHTS OF THE LANDLORD. 49 

creditor as conditional payment of a debt due him, his 
right of action upon the debt is suspended until the 
draft is properly presented for payment, and payment 
refused ; by receiving such draft, the creditor accepts 
the duty of doing everything with respect thereto 
which is necessary to fix the liability of the parties ; 
and the onus is upon him to show that he has per- ' 
formed that duty when he seeks to recover upon the 
original cause of action (Phoenix Ins. Co. «. Allen, 
Redfield & Bigelow, Leading Cases upon Bills and 
Botes, p. 637, and 11 Mich. 501). In the absence of such 
neglect of duty upon the part of the creditor, the effect 
of receiving payment of a precedent debt in the notes 
of a third person afterwards dishonored, was con- 
sidered by the New York marine court, June term, 
1875, in Wehrlin et al. v. Schmutz, et al., reported in 
the New York Daily Register, July 24, 1875, as 
follows : 

McAdam, J.— The determination of this action de- 
pends upon the effect to be given to the alleged pay- 
ment of the precedent debt of the defendant in the notes 
of a third party, afterwards dishonored. 

The rule deducible from the authorities seems to be, 
that taking a note from one of several joint debtors, or 
taking from the debtor the note of a third person for a 
pre-existing debt, is no payment, unless it be expressly 
agreed to be taken as payment, and unless the creditor 
agrees to assume the risk of the maker' s solvency (Tobey 
n. Barbee, 5 Johns. 68 ; Johnson ■». Weed, 9 Johnson, 
310 ; Muldoon ». Whitlock, 1 Cow. 290 ; Van Eps v. Dil- 
laye, 6 Barb. 244 ; Vail v. Poster, 4 N. Y. 312 ; Noel v. 
Murray, 13 Id. 167 ; Benedict v. Field, 16 Id. 595 ; 
Bates V. Rosekrans, 37 Id. 409 ; Roberts v. Fisher, 43 
Id. 159 ; Smith v. Appelgate, 1 Daly, 91). 

In determining the question of payment by note or 
bill, the distinction between the payment of a precedent 
debt and one created at the time the note or bill is 
given must be observed, for the rule applicable to the 



50 LAHDLOED AND TBNAITT. 

one class of cases has no application to the other. For 
example, if the note is received on a precedent debt, the 
presumption is that it was not taken as payment, and 
the onus of establishing that it was agreed to be so 
taken is upon the debtor (Noel ». Murray, 13 N. Y, 
167 ; Gibson v. Tohey, 46 Id. at p. 640) ; while, on the 
other hand, if the note is received at the time the debt is 
contracted, the presumption is that it was given in pay- 
ment (Noel V. Murray, Gibson v. Tohey, supra). 

The reason for the first presumption is that a person 
should not easily be presumed to abandon the rights 
which belong to him, and as a novation implies an aban- 
donment by the creditor of the first claim, to which the 
second is substituted, it ought to be expressly stated to 
be effective {PotMer on Obligations, vol. 1, pp. 385, 386), 
and the reason for the second seems to be "that taking 
a note for goods sold is a payment, because it is a part 
of the original contract ; but paper is no payment where 
there is a precedent debt, for when such is given in pay- 
ment, it is always intended to be taken under this con- 
dition, to be payment if the money be paid thereon " 
(Chief Justice Holt in Ward v. Evans, 2 Lord Baym. 
at p. 930). 

In the present case, the notes of the third party 
were given for a precedent debt, under circumstances 
which, on the authorities cited, do not amount in law 
to a payment. i 

Another objection urged by the defendants to the 
plaintiff's right of recovery, is that after the two notes 
in question were given, a balance of sixty- seven dollars 
and eighty- fite cents remained due from the defend- 
ants, and the plaintiffs received this amount, and re- 
ceipted the defendant's account in full. 

This circumstance does not establish the plea of 
payment. 

In Muldoon et al. v. Whitlock et al. (1 Cowen, 290), 
the plaintiffs sold stores for a ship to F. & S., the ship's 
husbands and part owners, on a credit of four months, 



EIGHTS OF THE LANDLOBD. 61 

whicli stores were charged to the owners of the vessel 
by name. A few days after the sale, the plaintiffs 
rendered two bills to P. & S., charging them only, and 
about two months after the sale, took the sole note of 
F. & S., at an extended credit of eight months, giving 
a receipt for the note, as in full for the stores. This 
note not being paid, and F. & S. becoming insolvent, 
it was held that the other owners were not thereby dis- 
charged, but were liable in assumpsit for the original 
consideration. That being originally liable, the sub- 
sequent delivery of the bills charging the ship's hus- 
bands alone did not discharge the other owners. That 
they were not discharged by taking the note, which 
being for a precedent debt, was not a satisfaction until 
actually paid ; unless expressly agreed to be received 
as payment, and that the receipt of the note in full was 
not evidence of such an agreement, and a recovery 
against all the owners upon the original cause of action 
was sustained (see also 3 Bosw. 497 ; 37 N. Y. 312 ; 
and 48 Id. 204). 

In Roberts v. Fisher (43 N. Y. 159), the defendant 
being indebted to the plaintiff for goods sold, gave him 
the promissory note of a third person, which was re- 
ceived by him in full payment and discharge of the 
debt. The maker of the note was insolvent at the time 
of the transfer of the note, although this fact was un- 
known to the parties ; and it was held that it was a case 
of mutual mistake of fact, and that the plaintiff was en- 
titled to recover from the defendant his original debt. 

Judge Peqkham, in delivering the opinion of the 
court in the last case, remarked that "upon broad 
principles of justice it would seem that a man should 
not be allowed to pay a debt with worthless paper, 
though both persons supposed it to be good." 

Upon the same principle, the court of errors held 
that " payment in the bills of an insolvent bank is not 
a satisfaction of a debt, although at the time and place 
of payment the bills are in full credit, and the parties 



52 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

to the transaction are wholly ignorant of such insol- 
vency, if previous to such payment the bank has in fact 
become insolvent (Ontario Bank v. Lightbody, 13 
Wend. 101, and see Thomas v. Todd, 6 Eill, 340). The 
application of these principles to the facts of the pres- 
ent case effectually dispose of it. 

The maker of the two notes given by the defendants 
to the plaintiffs was insolvent at the time the plaintiffs 
received them, a fact then unknown to the parties, but 
publicly announced shortly afterwards. Upon the 
authorities cited, it is evident that these notes did not 
operate in law as a payment of the plaintiffs' debt. 

The plaintiffs are; therefore, entitled to judgment for 
the amount claimed, with interest. 

III. 

Tender of payment. 

A mere offer to pay is not a tender. The money 
must be actually produced and paid down, unless 
the creditor, by some positive act or declaration, dis- 
penses with this being done (Strong v. Blake, 46 Barb. 
227 ; Hornby v. Cramer, 12 How. Pr. 490). An offer to 
draw a check is not a tender, although declined (Dun- 
bar V. Jackson, 6 Wend. 32 ; Mclntire v. Clark, 7 Id. 
330), and where the debtor had the money in his 
pocket, and told the creditor that he was ready for 
him, but the creditor did not know that the debtor had 
the money with him, this was held to be no tender 
(Bakeman v. Pooler, 15 Wend. 637), and the tender 
must in general be made directly to the creditor (Hornby 
V. Cramer, 12 How. Pr. 490 ; Smith v. Smith, 2 Hill, 
351 ; 25 Wend. 405), and a tender to a clerk of a sub- 
agent of the creditor is insufficient, unless it is shown 
that such clerk had authority to receive the money 
(Hargous v. Lahens, 3 Sandf. 213), and the tender 
must be without any conditions, terms, or qualifications, 



EIGHTS OF THE LANDLORD. 53 

and without any protest against liability for the debt 
(Wood 0. Hitchcock, 20 Wend. 47) ; where the party 
making the tender demands a receipt or satisfaction 
piece aa a condition, the tender is illegal (Roosevelt v. 
Bulls Head Bank, 45 Barh. 579) ; and tender of 
money before it is due is ineffectual (Mitchell ». Cook, 

29 Barh. 243) ; and an absolute refusal to receive the 
money, or to do the act in consideration of which the 
money is to be paid, is a waiver of tender (Murray i}. 
Roosevelt, Anth. N. P. 138 ; Vaupell «. Woodward, 2 
Sandf. Ch. 143 ; Stone v. Sprague, 20 Barh. 509 ; 
Data v. Fiedler, 1 E. D. S. 463 ; Sliugerland v. Morse, 8 
Johns. 474 ; Everett v. Saltus, 15 Wend. 474; Warren 
B. Mains, 7 Johns. 476) ; and if tender is refused on a 
specified ground, the creditor can not afterwards raise 
any other objection which, had he stated it then, might 
have been obviated (Hull v. Peters, 7 Bari, 331 ; 10 
Abb. Pr. iV. -S^. 484 ; 21 iV. Y. 547) ; and a tender hav- 
ing been refused because not made in time, objection 
can not afterwards be taken that the tender was not in 
money (Dufiy v. O' Donovan, 46 If. Y. 223) ; a tender 
does not extinguish a money debt, but merely stops the 
interest (Raymond v. Bearnard, 12 Johns. 274 ; Hunter 
V. Le Oonte, 6 Cow. 728) ; and a tenant can in no case 
legally demand a receipt as a condition of paying his 
rent (45 Barb. 579 ; 20 Wend. 47 ; 23 Id. 342 ; 21 iV". Y. 
581). 

Flea of tender. 

A plea of tender before action should allege the tender and refusal, 
and that defendant has always Ibeen, and still is, ready to pay (8 Barb. 
408; 5 Abb. 358; 23 Sarb. 490; 2 K D. Smith, 197; 2 Denio, 197), and 
to keep the tender good the amount tendered must be paid into court (2 
E. B. Smith, 197 ; 25 How. 464) ; and notice of such payment must be 
given to the plaintiff's attorney (35 How. 464). The answer should 
aver that the money has been brought into court (7 Robt. 389 ; 21 N. 
Y. 843). A defense of tender after action commenced, must state the 
amount tendered, and should include interest and costs to the time 
of the tender (8 Row. 358) ; and the amount must be paid into court 
(45 Barb. 579 ; 3 Hill. 538; Gowen'i Tr. § 1148 to § 1160; 7 Bobt. 389; 
36 How. Pr. 26; 5 Abb. Pr. N. 8. 18; 25 How. Pr. 464; 45 Barb. 554; 

30 How. Pr. 226) ; a party who makes a tender is bound to keep the 
same money at all times ready for payment when demanded, and when 



54 LANDLORD AKD TENANT. 

sued is bound to bring it into court (Roosevelt v. Bulls Head Bank, 
45 Bari. 579). 

Effect of tender. 

Payment of money into court admits the cause or causes of action 
stated in the complaint, to the amount paid in, but beyond that the de- 
fendant may make his defense (Cow. Tr. § 1154; T Johns. 315; 2 
Wend. 431), and the plaintiff is in any event entitled to the amount 
tendered or paid in (1 £<wi. 115; 1 E. D. Smith, 498; 1 Wend. 191; 13 
Id. 390). 

If the defendant pays in court less than is due, the plaintiff is en- 
titled to a verdict and judgment for the whole amount, and must credit 
the payment on the judgement, for this preserves his right to costs ; 
but if the payment equals the debt, defendant should have a verdict 
(Dakin o. Dunning, 7 Hill, 30). 

IV. 

Appropriation of payments. 

A debtor paying money to a creditor to whom he 
owes several debts, may appropriate it to which he 
pleases. In default of an appropriation by the debtor, the 
creditor has the right to make the application. If 
both omit to do it, and the demands consist of a run- 
ning account, the presumption is that the first items of 
the accouut were intended to be satisfied ; and where 
neither party makes the application, the law will ap- 
propriate the payments according to the justice and 
equity of the case, and sureties for the debt are gov- 
erned by the same rules as to the appropriation of 
payments which apply to their principal, and where a 
general payment is made, the creditor is allowed a 
reasonable time to make the application ; and an entry 
by the creditor of a general jjayment to the credit of 
an account does not prelude him from afterwards 
applying it to another demand, provided such entry 
be not communicated to the debtor, for to inform the 
debtor of the entry, is an appropriation of the payment 
to that account. Accordingly, where the relation of 
landlord and tenant existed, the latter being bound to 
pay his rent quarterly, and there were other extensive 
dealings between the parties and the landlord kept an 



BIGHTS OF THE LANDLOBD. S6 

account with the tenant, in which he charged the rent 
as it became due along with other accounts against the 
tenant, and credited the payments made by the latter, 
and from time to time rendered these accounts to the 
tenant; and in an action of covenant for the rent 
against a surety of the tenant, it was held that the pay- 
ments must be applied in satisfaction of the several 
items of the account, including the rent, according to 
the priority of the time in which they were charged in 
the account (Allen t. Culver, 3 Den. 284, cited and 
approved in Seymour v. Marvin, 11 Barh. 90 ; Hunter 
V. Osterhoudt, Id. 34 ; Dows «. Morewood, 10 Barb. 
189 ; Peck v. Minot, 4 BoM. 338 ; Smith v. Marvin, 25 
How. 325 ; Truscott v. King, 6 N. Y. 165 ; Com. Bk. 
V. Union Bk., 11 N. Y. 214 ; Smith v. Marvin, 27 N. Y. 
142). 



66 LAITDLOED AlTD TENANT. 



CHAPTEE \^II. 

Remedies of the landloed and of his geanteeb 
and assignees. 

I. Various remedies of the landlord. 
n. Kemedies of executors, 
m. Remedies of grantees and assignees. 
IV. EfEect of judgment upon other remedies. 



Various remedies ' of the landlord. 

The remedies furnished by the law for the protec- 
tion of real property, embrace actions for the redress 
of injuries thereto, and trespasses thereon, and for the 
enforcement of all agreements respecting the occupation 
thereof, and for the collection of all rentals accruing 
from the tenants in possession, as well as actions and 
appropriate proceedings for the recovery of possession 
thereof, in cases where the same has either been 
wrongfully invaded or improperly withheld. If, there- 
fore, the tenant fails to pay his rent, the landlord may 
maintain the common-law action of debt (McKeon ». 
Whitney, 3 Den. 452), or an action of covenant, npon 
the covenants contained in the demise {ld.\ or he may 
sue for use and occupation (see page 59, post), or 
he may institute summary proceedings under the stat- 
ute, to enforce the payment of the rent, or to obtain the 
possession of the demised premises in case of its non- 
payment. 

If the tenant holds over after the expiration of his 
term, he may be removed as an overholding tenant by 
summary proceedings under the statute. The statute 
law and practice in regard to forcible entries upon lands 



KEMEDIES OE THE LA"[TDLOIlD. 57 

and tenements and forcible detainers thereof, and in 
regard to summary proceedings for the recovery of pos- 
session of lands in certain cases will be found in sub- 
sequent chapters of this treatise. 

These summary proceedings were intended as auxil- 
iaries to and not substitutes for the action pf ejectment, 
which is a more comprehensive, as well as a more ex- 
pensive and dilatory remedy. 

The statute concerning ejectment and other actions 
relating to real property will be found in 2 E&m. M. 
S. (pp. 311, 349, 350, 521). 

If the tenant by his own wilful or negligent con- 
duct, injure the inheritance, the landlord has an action 
for the injury, and although the former action of waste 
was abolished by the Code (§ 450), the wrongs remedia- 
ble thereby are made the subject of a civil action, and 
the rights and liabilities of the parties are fixed by the 
Revised Statutes (2 £Jdm. R. 8. pp. 160, 344). 

Ordinary trespasses upon land by strangers, may 
also be punished by action (2 Edm. It. 8. p. 349), and 
an act was passed by the legislature in 1853 (ch. 573, p. 
1055), for the more effectual prevention of wanton and 
malicious mischief, which act as amended in 1865 (ch. 
222, p. 359), provides that "any person whq shall mali- 
ciously or wantonly injure or deface any monument, 
or work of art, building, fence or other structure ; or 
destroy or injure any ornamental tree, shrub or plant, 
whether situated on any private ground, or on any 
street, public place, public or private way, or cemetery ; 
or who shall paint or print upon, or in any manner 
place upon or affix to any stone or rock, not a part of a 
building, or upon or to any bridge ^or tree, any word, 
letter, character or device, stating, referring to or ad- 
vertising, or intended to state, refer to or advertise the 
sale or manufacture of any property or article, profes- 
sion, business, exhibition, amusement or place of 
amusement or other thing ; and any person who shall 
directly or indirectly cause any such act to be done, or 



58 LANDIOBD AND TENANT. 

shall aid therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misde- 
meanor ; and npon conviction, shall, for each and 
every such offense, be punished by a line not exceeding 
two hundred and fifty dollars, or by imprisonment not 
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and impris- 
onment. Every such person shall, moreover, be liable, 
whether before or after conviction as aforesaid, to an 
action in favor of any person injured, or owning, or 
possessing any land, premises upon which any such 
act has been done ; in which action damages may be 
recovered of not less than five dollars, and in addition 
to that sum, of not more than five times the amount of 
the actual damage sustained ; provided, however, that 
nothing herein before contained shall apply to any word, 
letter, character or device relating to any sale, manufac- 
ture, profession, business, exhibition or amusement held, 
carried on or to take place within fifty rods of the place 
where such word, letter, character or device shall be 
painted, printed, placed or affixed, and which may be 
so painted, printed, placed or afiixed upon the lands or 
premises owned or possessed by the person who shall 
have, by himself or by any other, painted, printed, 
placed or affixed the same." 

The wanton, malicious, and secret destruction of personal prop- 
erty of another, — e. g., mnltilating harness in a spirit of wantonness and 
revenge, although committed in daytime, amounts to a malicious mis- 
chief, and is an indictable offense at common law (People ». Moody, 
5 Pm-h Gr. 568). 

If the landlord finds that the occupants of his prem- 
ises are using them for purposes of prostitution or for 
the carrying on of illegal trades, he will find in the 
subsequent chapters of this treatise, the statute law and 
practice upon the remedies furnished by the legislature 
for their removal, and for the abatement of the nuisance. 

And in order to protect the reversionary rights of 
the landlord while his premises are in the possession of 
tenants, the statute provides that " a person seized of 
an estate in remainder or reversion, may maintain an 
action of waste or trespass, for any injury done to the 



liEMEDIES OF THE LANDLORD. 59 

inheritance, noth with standing any intervening estate 
for life or years" (1 Edm. R. 8. p. 701, § 8, and see 29 
Barb. 15 ; 13 Johns. 268 ; 11 Id. 429). 

Where recoTery may be had for use and occupation. 

The statute provides that " any landlord may recover 
in an action on the case, a reasonable satisfaction for the 
use and occupation of any lands or tenements, by any 
person under aUy agreement not made by deed ; and if 
any parol demise or other agreement, not being by deed, 
by which a certain rent is reserved, shall appear in evi- 
dence on the trial of any snch action, the plaintiff shall 
not on that account be debarred from a recovery, but 
may make use thereof as evidence of the amount of the 
damages to be recovered" (1 Edm. R. S. p. 698, § 
26). 

In order to maintain an action for use and occupa- 
tions, the conventional relation of landlord and tenant 
created by agreement must exist between the parties ; 
title in the plaintiff and use and occupation by the de- 
fendant are not enough (Wood v. Wilcox, 1 Den. 37 ; 
Croswell v. Crane, 7 Barb. 191 ; Hall v. Southmayd, 15 
Id. at p. 36 ; Pierce v. Fierce, 25 Id. 243 ; Sylvester v. 
Ralston, 31 Id. 286; Jennings v. Alexander, 1 Hili. 
154 ; Hurd v. Miller, 2 Id. 540 ; Taylor v. Bradley, 4 
Abb. Ct. App. Dec. 363 ; 53 Barb. 258 ; Eichey v. 
Hinde, 6 Ohio, 371 ; Butler v. Oowles, 4 Id. 205 ; 
Ryan v. Marsh, 2 iV. tfc McO. 156 ; Hen wood v. Cheese- 
man, 3 S. & R. 500 ; Stockett v. Watkins, 2 Gill <& 
Johns. 326 ; Wiggin v. Wiggin, 6 JV. H. 298 ; Brewer 
n. Craig, 3 Harr. 214 ; Curtis «. Treat, 8 Shep. 525 ; 
Brolasky «. Ferguson, 48 Penn. St. 434 ; Steuart v. 
Fitch, 2 Broom, i.7 ; Edmonson v. Kite, 43 Mo. 176), 
and action for use and occupation will not, therefore, lie 
against an under-tenant (Jennings v. Alexander, 1 Hilt. 
154), except under special circumstances (3 If. T. 286). 
It has been urged that the action might perhaps lie 



60 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

against an assignee of the term, on the general ground 
of liability, e. g., the privity of contract in respect of 
the estate (Stevenson ». Lambard, 2 East, 575 ; Staines 
v. Morris, 1 Ves. & B. 8, 11 ; Burnett v. Lynch, 5 Barn. 
& Ores. 589 ; S. C. 8 Bow. &By. 368 : Mathews «. Sawell, 
8 Taunt. 270) ; but this form of action is founded on 
privity of contract, and not on privity of estate (Hen- 
wood ». Cheeseman, 2 8. &, E. 500), and upon this 
ground the court of appeals held in Bedford «. Ter- 
hune (30 N. T. 458), that a lessor can not recover upon 
a complaint for use and occupation, where it appears 
from the evidence that there was a lease of the premises 
to other parties, and that the defendants were in as assig- 
nees of the term, but that in such a case the court might 
on the trial allow an amendment of the complaint so as 
to conform to the proof, and permit a recovery for the 
rent due upon the lease, where it did not appear that the 
defendants had been surprised. It was held (in Brewer 
V. Craig, 3 Rarr. 214 ; Redden v. Barker, 4 Id. 179 ; 
McNair v. Schwartz, 16 111. 24 ; Dixon v. Haley, Id. 
145 ; Smith v. Steuart, 6 Johns. 46 8. P. ; Vanderheuvil 
V. Storrs, 3 Con7i. 203 ; Bell v. Ellis, 1 Stew. & Port. 284 ; 
Little V. Pierson, 7 Pick. 301 ; Jones v. Tipton, 2 Dana, 
29i6 ; Bancroft t^.'Wardell, 1^ Johns. 489 ; 32 Vt. 551) that 
an action for use and occupation would not lie against 
a person in possession of land under a contract of sale ; 
there are other cases, however, holding that if a party is 
let into possession under a contract of sale which goes 
off, he is liable in use and occupation at the suit of the 
vendor, for the period during which he continues in 
possession, after the contract went off, although he might 
not be for occupation prior to the rescinding of the con- 
tract (Howard v. Shaw, S M. & W. 118 ; Little v. Pear- 
son, 7 Pick. 301 ; Dwight v. Cutler, 3 Mich. 566 ; Patter- 
son V. Stoddard, 47 Maine, 355) ; and in Illinois it lies 
in this case by statute Febuary 20, 1861 (Hadley «. 
Morrison, 39 III. 392) ; and where one entered under a 
verbal contract of purchase, void by the statue, and 



REMEDIES OF THE LANDLORD. 61 

continued in possession for a year, an action will lie 
against him for use and occupation (Pierce v. Pierce, 25 
Barb. 243) ; but where one goes into possession under a 
contract of purchase, and in consequence of the vendor' s 
refusal to perform, the purchaser abandons the premi- 
ses, he will not be liable, either to rent or for use and 
occupation, (Sylvester v. Ralston, 31 lb. 286). The 
action will not lie against a mere trespasser (Hurd v. 
Miller, 2 Eilt. 540 ; Weaver «. Jones, 24 Ala. 420), nor 
against a defendant whose possession is tortious ; no 
contract existing in such a case (Ryan v. Marsh, 2 iV. 
& McC. 156 ; Henwood v. Cheeseman, S S. & H. 500 ; 
Stockett V. Watkins, 2 Gill. & Johns. 826 ; Wiggin v. 
Wiggin, 6 iV". Hamp. 298; Rickey v. Hinde, 6 Ham. 
371), and where the owner agrees to give a lease and the 
tenant enters, but the owner then refuses and tenant 
quits, he is not liable for use and occupation 
(Greaton «. Smith, 33 JST. Y. 245; S. C, 1 Bdly, 
380) ; but where there is an agreement to de- 
mise a house for five years, and leases to be ex- 
ecuted, under which the party enters, and subse- 
quently refuses to accept a lease, the owner may main- 
tain assumpsit for the use and occupation (Little ?). 
Martin, 3 Wend. 219), and if a man gets into a house 
without the privity of the owner, although they may 
afterwards enter into a negotiation for a lease, but 
differ about terms, and the negotiation goes off ; or if 
after being let into possession under an agreement to 
sign a written lease, and find surety for the rent, he 
does neither, no species of tenancy is created, but the 
occupant in either case becomes a mere trespasser (Doe 
n. Pullen, 2 Bing. N. C. 749 ; Doe v. Quigley, 2 Camp. 
505 ; Doe «. Cartwight, ^ B.&A. 326 ; Fisk «. Mooers, 
n Rob. La. 279 ; Doe «. Burt, Walm. & H. 3). The 
payment of rent will be prima facie evidence of ten- 
ancy, unless the defendant rebuts it by showing that it 
referred to some other relation or was paid under a mis- 
take ( Comyn. L. & T. p. 519, 2 ed. note). 



62 LAWDLOBD AND TENANT. 

The existence of the relation may in some cases be 
implied from circumstances (Colt v. Planer, 4 Ahh. Pr. 
JV. 8. 140 ; 6 Buer. 494 ; 25 Barb. 243), but the action 
will not lie while there is an outstanding lease in 
another (Bedford v. Terhune, 30 JV. Y. 458 ; aff'g 1 
Dal'i/, 371). An entry or possession is necessary in 
order to maintain the action ; an agreement to take is 
not enough (Wood v. Wilcox, 1 Ben. 37). It is not 
necessary, however, to prove manual occupation. If 
the power to occupy and enjoy is given by the land- 
lord to the tenant, so far as the landlord is concerned 
he has performed his part, and the action is maintain- 
able (Hall V. Western Trans. Co., 34 JV. Y. 284 ; Mof- 
fatt 1). Smith, 4 N. Y. 126 ; Little v. Martin, 3 Wend. 
220), and taking the key and entering without con- 
tinued possession is suflBcient (Little v. Martin, 3 Wend. 
220, supra), and there is a slight difference between 
the phraseology of the English and Amferican statutes, 
in regard to use and occupation ; the English statute 
contains the words "held or occupied" while the 
American statute does not (Cleves «. Willoughby, 7 
Hill, 87, 88), and this difference must be remembered 
in considering the effect of the decisions under the two 
statutes. This form of action will not lie, after a recovery 
in ejectment for rent accruing after the day of the 
demise (Bircli v. Wright, 1 T. R. 378). Nor against a 
tenant who holds over, after the expiration of his term, 
where proceedings have been instituted against him to 
turn him out of possession under the statute ; for such 
proceeding is in the nature of an action of ejectment, 
by which the relation of landlord and tenant is dis- 
owned (Featherstonhaugh v. Bradshaw, 1 Wend. 134 ; 
Crane v. Hardman, 4 IE. JD. Smith, 339). The plain- 
tiff's remedy, in such case, is either by action of tres- 
pass for the mesne profits, or for double rent under the 
statute (^Id. Clarence v. Marshall, 2 Gr. & J/". 495), and 
in an action for use and occupation, where there has 
been a tenancy at a special annual rent, and there is a 



EEMEDIES OF THE LANDLORD. 63 

holding over, the tenant will be deemed to hold upon 
the terras under which he entered ; but is not precluded 
by an agreement to pay a fixed sum for a term less 
than a year (Evertson v. Sawyer, 2 Wend. 507), and the 
rate of rent fixed in the lease is prima facie evidence 
of the value of the premises (McCarty «. Ely, 4 M D. 
8. 375), and where a corporation have actually used and 
occupied land for the purpose of their incorporation, 
by the permission of the owner, it seems that they are 
liable to be sued in assumpsit for use and occupation, 
notwithstanding they have not entered into a contract 
under their common seal (Lowe v. London K. E,. Co., 
14 Eng. L. & Eq. B. 18). 

Rents dependent npon life of another. 

The statute provides that "every person entitled to 
any rents dependent upon the life of any other, may, 
notwithstanding the death of such other person, have 
the' same remedy by action, for the recovery of all 
arrears of such rent, that shall be behind and unpaid 
at the death of such other person, as he might have had 
if such person was in full life " (1 Edm. JR. S. 697, § 20). 

When rent has a preference over certain claims against deceased 

tenants. 

The statute provides that "preference may be given 
by the surrogate (in the payment of debts by an 
executor or administrator), to rents due or accruing, 
upon leases held by the testator or intestate, at the time 
of his death, over debts of the fourth class, whenever 
it shall be made to appear to his satisfaction, that such 
preference will benefit the estate of such testator or in- 
testate" (2 Edm. B. S. 89, § 30). 

The fourth class over which rent as a claim has a 
preference, consists of " all recognizances, bonds, sealed 
instruments, notes, bills and unliquidated demands 
and accounts" {Id. % 27). 



64 LANDLOEB AND TEKANT. 



Enforcing compliance of conditions by action. 

Courts of equity will frequently grant injunctions 
in the nature of a specific performance, to restrain the 
violation by a tenant of covenants contained, in his 
lease. And where a lease restricted the ilse of premises 
to "the regular dry -goods jobbing business," and the 
lessees commenecd selling goods at auction therein, 
it was held, although there was no damage, or irrepair- 
able injury done to the lessor, nor any nuisance at law, 
yet it was a breach of the covenant, and the lessor 
could have an injunction (Steward «. "Winters, 4 Sandf. 
Oh. 587). So the defendants obtained from the plain- 
tiff an agreement for a lease of a house adjoining the 
plaintiff's coach-making establishment, representing, 
after other and conflicting statements, "that they 
wanted it for a private house." There was also an 
agreement that the defendants should expend a certain 
sum in repairs. Immediately upon taking possession, 
the defendants proceeded to prepare the premises for 
the business of coach-making. And it was held, that 
the plaintiffs were entitled to an injunction (Bennett ®. 
Sadler, 14 Vesey, 526). So where A, a lessee, a drug- 
gist, with notice that the landlord will not let the 
premises for a bar-room, agrees to sub-let to B for that 
purpose, and himself renews the lease, equity will 
restain both A and B from using the premises for a 
bar-room (Parkham v. Aicardi, 34 Ala. 393). So the 
administrator of an insolvent estate, having an undi- 
vided interest in a block of stores, may enjoin a lessee 
of one of them from a use injurious to the income of 
all {Id). But it is held that equity will not enjoin the 
use of leased premises for one purpose, merely because 
the lease contains a provision that they are to be used 
for another, unless it is also provided that they shall 
be used for the latter exclusively (Brugman ®. Noyes, 
6 Wis. 1). And where a lessee assigns his lease, with 
a covenant in the assignment that the assignee will not 



REMEDIES OE THE LANDLOKD. 65 

carry on a certain trade on the premises, and the 
assignee underlets to one who has no actual notice of 
such restriction, the lessee may restrain this use 
against the ntider-tenant, or his assignee, although the 
restriction was not contained in the original lease. Sm 
John Romilly, M. R., says : "If not, observe what 
the consequences would be. A man makes a lease of 
a large piece of land to a builder ; the builder erects a 
building on it, and then assigns, making the assignee 
covenant not to carry on any noxious trade — as, for 
example, that of a soap-boiler— which would be in- 
jurious to the neighborhood. 

"It is contended that the assignee may grant an 
under-lease, free from this covenant, to a person who 
may immediately afterwards set up this very trade to 
the injury of tlie whole neighborhood " (Clements v. 
Welles, Law. Hep. {Eng). Eq. February, 1866, pp. 
199, 202). 

Tile aid of a court of equity may be properly in- 
voked by the owner of the fee, to restrain a sub-lessee 
from effecting such changes in the premises as are in- 
consistent with the terms of the lease, and as are likely 
to result in such injury to the owner's right as is not 
susceptible of adequate compensation at law (Baugher 
V. Orane, 27 Md. 36). So, too, the lessor may re- 
strain his lessee, or those claiming under him, or act- 
ing by his authority, from making material alterations, 
as by changing a building rented for a post-office into 
a beer-hall (Maddox v. White, 4 Md. 72), or a dwell- 
ing into a warehouse (Douglas v. Wiggins, 1 JoJins. CJi. 
435). And the Commissioners of Appeals have held 
that the lessee, in the absence of an agreement to that 
effect, or an express permission from his lessor, is not 
justified in making material alterations in the demised 
premises ; and that wliere such alterations were made 
without the landlord's permission, his right of action 
acci'ues as soon as they are made, and that he is not 
bound to wait until the expiration of the tenancy be- 



DO LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

fore bringing his action (Agate v. Lowenbein, 57 JV. T. 
604). And equity will enjoin one who covenants not 
to carry on any calling in a house, or suffer it to be 
used to the annoyance of other houses, from keeping a 
girl's school, though the covenantee had allowed 
schools to be kept in other houses in the same neigh- 
borhood, and held under the same covenant (Kemp<«. 
Tober, 4 Mig. L. cfe Eq., 64). And where on a lease of 
premises to A, the lessee covenanted that they should 
not be used for any purpose extra-hazardous on 
account of fire and also not to underlet, it was held, 
where the premises were used for an extra-hazardous 
purpose by an under-tenant of A, the plaintiff inight 
enforce the covenant, as to the use of the premises, by 
injunction against A and his tenant, and in the same 
action, obtain damages for the breach against A 
(GHllilan w. Norton, 6 Rob. 546). But where a lease 
contained a covenant on the part of the lessee, not to 
underlet to any one whose business or signs should be 
considered objectionable by the lessors, and it was held, 
that an injunction against making an objectionable use 
of the premises, could only issue against the sub-lessses, 
and not against both the sub-lessees and the lessee 
(Importers «. Christie, 5 Bob. 169). 

In restraining by injunction the breach of a negative 
covenant, the interference of the court is in effect an 
order for specific performance. " An agreement," said 
Lord St. Leonards in Lumley b. Wagne (1 D. M, & G.- 
616), "may be as effectually performed in this way, as 
by an order for the performance of the thing to be 
done." Persons accordingly who had entered into a 
covenant not to ring church bells at stated periods, and 
had accepted the benefit of the covenant, were re- 
strained from violating its obligations (Martin «, Nut- 
kin, 2 P- Wms. 266). So also a public board of func- 
tionaries was restrained from erecting buildings on a 
plot of land opposite a club-house, contrary to cove- 
nant (Lloyd V. London, 2 D. J. & S. 568 ; and see Foster 



( REMEDIES OF THE LANDLORD. 67 

V. Brimington E,. Co., 2 W. B. 378). So also a railway 
company which had bought land from a man, and had 
covenanted with him in the purchase deed not to erect 
any building upon it to a greater height than eighteen 
feet within the distance of eighty feet from certain other 
property of his, were restrained according to the terms 
of the covenant {Id.). So also a man who had pur- 
chased land under a condition prohibiting building 
thereon except after permission was obtained, was re- 
strained from building before obtaining the permission 
required (Att.-Gen. v. Briggs, 1 Jur. B. S. 1084). So 
also the lessee of a house who had covenanted not to 
carry on any business or trade on the demised premises, 
was restrained from carrying on the trade or business 
of a baker, confectioner, beer-shop keeper (Hodson v, 
Coppard, 29 Beav. 4), hairdresser (Clements v. Welles, 
1 L. R. Eg. 300), or auctioneer (Parker xi. Whyte, 1 
H. & M. 167). A covenant not to carry on the trade of 
a butcher is broken by selling raw meat, though it was 
not exposed in the shop windows, but was visible to pas- 
sengers, if they looked in (Doe v. Spry, IB. & Aid. 617) ; 
and a covenant not to carry on business of a common 
brewer, or retailer of beer, is broken by the carrying on 
of the business of a retail brewer (Simons v. Farren, 1 
Bing. JST. C. 128). But a covenant not to use a " public 
house for sale of beer, wine, malt liquor, or spirits," 
is not broken by taking out an ordinary excise license, 
for the sale of beer not to be drank on the premises 
(Pease v. Coats, 2 L. B. Eq. 688) ; and a covenant not 
to carry on the business of a horse-hair manufacturer, 
is not broken by merely dealing in horse-hair (Harms 
». Parson, 32 Beav'. 328). The trade of a coach-maker 
does not fall within the provisions of a covenant against 
carrying on an offensive trade (Bonnett v. Sadler, 14 
Yes. 526). Nor is the opening of a house as a public 
house a breach of covenant not to carry on a trade or 
business that might be offensive, or an annoyance, or dis- 
turbance, to any of the tenants of the lessor, or any part 



68 LANDLOED AND TENANT. ^ 

of the neighborhood (Jones v. Thorne, 1 B. & C. 715 ; 
and see Gorton v. Smart, 1 Sim. & S. T. 66 ; Hickman 
V. Isaacs, 4 L. T. N. S. 285). And as to offensive 
trades, see Barrow v. Richards (8 Paige Ch., 351); 
Seymour v. McDonald (4 Sandf. Ch. 503). So also 
the court will enforce by injunction a covenant in a 
lease not to assign without license (Dyke v. Taylor, 3 
D. F. & J. 467), and see Browne -o. Lord Sligo (10 J. 
R. CTi. 1). A court of equity will, recognize and 
enforce agreements concerning the occupation and mode 
of use of real estate, although they are not expressed 
with technical accuracy, for the owner of land selling 
or leasing it, may insist upon such covenants as he 
pleases, touching the use and mode of enjoyment of 
the land ; and he is not to be defeated when the cove- 
nant is broken, by the opinion of any number of 
persons, that the breach occasions him no substantial 
injury. He has a right to define the injury for himself, 
and the party contracting with him, must abide by the 
deiinition, for it is evident that the extent of the injury 
is difficult to be ascertained or measured in damages 
(Steward v. Winters, 4 Sandf. Ch. 587). So, where a 
store was leased, with a covenant that it should not be 
used for any other purpose than a jewelry and fancy- 
goods store, an injunction was granted restraining the 
use of the tenement as a hat store (Howard v. Ellis, 4 
Sandf. 369). So an injunction lies against a pur- 
chaser with notice, to prevent the use of a house as a 
family hotel, in violation of covenants entered into 
between owners and purchasers of the lot upon which 
such house is built, not to carry on the business of an 
inn-keeper (Whateman ». Gibson, 9 Sim. 196), and 
where the owners of land lay it out into house lots and 
orally agree among themselves that they shall be thus 
exclusively used, and convey the lots with a condition 
to that effect, any purchaser is bound by such agree- 
ment, and the owner of other lots may have an in- 
junction enjoining him from converting a dwelling- 



REMEDIES OF THE LANDLORD. 69 

house into a public eating-house (Parker v. Nightengale, 
6 Allen, 341). So where the owner of land divided 
it into lots and sold them to different purchasers, 
witli a covenant or condition that no livery-stable, 
slaughter-house, glue-factory, &c., should be erected 
upon any part of the lots so conveyed, or any manu- 
facture, trade, or business, which might be offensive to 
the neighboring inhabitants, it was held that the cove- 
nants in the deeds of the different lots were for the 
mutual benefit and protection of all the purchasers of 
such lots, and that the occupation of one of the lots as 
a coal yard was, upon the allegations of the bill, offen- 
sive (Barron v. Richards, 3 Edwards Ch. 96 ; 8 Paige, 
351) ; and where adjoining proprietors covenant be- 
tween themselves to build in a certain manner, or 
upon a uniform plan, or on designated lines, equity 
will enforce such agreement, as against such owners 
or as against a purchaser with notice (Cole ?). Sims, 
citing Whitman v. Gibson, 23 Eng. L. & Eq., 588), and 
equity will also stay any acts of waste upon the part 
of the tenant or those in possession. 

Enforcing^ forfeiture for breach of coudition. 

The landlord having the jus disponendi, may 
annex whatever conditions he pleases to his grant, pro- 
vided they be neither contrary to the laws of the king- 
dom, nor to the principles of reason or public policy 
(Roe d. Hunter v. Galliers, 2 T. E. 133), and it is by 
these general maxims persons must be guided when 
called upon to consider the validity of any particular 
covenant in a lease. Limitations, conditions and cove- 
nants may all be found in the same lease, but there is in 
some respects a wide distinction between them ; a lim- 
itation determines the estate when the period of 
limitation arrives without entry or claim. A condition 
does not defeat the estate until entry by the grantor or 
lessor, or his heirs ; and upon entry, the grantor or 



70 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

lessor is as of his former estate. It is an express qual- 
ification of the estate contained in the lease, whereby 
the estate granted shall either commence, be enlarged, 
or be defeated upon performance or breach of such 
qualification or condition. A covenant is a mutual 
promise contained in the deed or lease, between 
the lessor and lessee, to do or forbear doing a 
specific act or specific acts ; a condition and a cove- 
nant are frequently created in a lease by the same 
form of words, and the distinction between the two is 
illustrated by the case put by Coke. When the proviso 
comes alone it is a condition ; but he says if a man by 
intendure lets land for years, " provided always, and it 
is covenanted and agreed between the said parties, that 
the lessee should not alien;" this is a condition by 
force of the proviso, and a covenant by force of the 
other words (1 Inst. 203 b). In case the condition is 
broken, the lessee may elect to which he will resort, 
for he can not have both, as they are incompatible 
remedies. 

If the tenant fails to observe the covenants upon his 
part contained in the lease, he may be enjoined by in- 
junction at the suit of the landlord, as suggested at page 
63 {ante) from continuing the violation, and if the lease 
contain a condition that upon default by the tenant 
in the performance of the covenants and conditions of 
the lease, the lease shall cease and determine, or be null 
and void, the estate becomes forfeited upon the breach 
(Garrett ». Scouten, 3 Den. 334) ; the breach, however, 
does not render the lease absolutely void, but voidable 
only, at the option of the lessor (Norman v. Wells, 17 
Wend. 136 ; Clark v. Jones, 1 Den. 516) ; and if the 
landlord desires to insist upon the forfeiture, he must 
enforce the same by action of ejectment for the pos- 
session of the premises ; and if he elects to enforce a 
forfeiture of tlie lease, he can not in the meantime treat 
the lessee as his tenant, rightfully in possession, so as 
to obtain an equitable claim to the accruing rents by 



REMEDIES OF THE LANDLORD. 71 

virtue of his lease, for by bringing ejectment for the 
fofeiture, he has chosen to treat the tenants as tres- 
passers from that tinae (Stuyvesant v. Davis, 9 Paige, 
427 S. P. ; Linden v. Hepburn, 3 Sandf. 668 ; S. C. 5 
How. Pr. 188 ; 9 if. Y. Leg. Obs. 80). With respect to 
provisoes for re-entry upon the breach of covenants 
and conditions, no general principle can be laid down, 
excepting that which arises out of the maxim of our 
law, that every doubtful grant shall be construed in 
favor of the grantee ; namely, that the breach com- 
plained of must come within the very letter of the 
covenant, or the lease will not be forfeited ; and the 
following illustrations will show the application of this 
general rule to particular cases. 

Where the lessee covenanted with the lessor not to 
assign his term without the lessor's consent, and after- 
wards devised his term without such consent, it was 
holden not to amount to a forfeiture, for a devise is not 
a lease (Fox v. Swan, 8ty. 482), and where the lessee 
covenanted not to demise, assign, transfer, or set over, 
or otherwise do away the indenture of demise, or the 
premises thereby demised, or any part thereof, to any 
person or persons whomsoever, and afterwards made 
an under-lease of the premises, it was held not to be a 
breach of the covenant, or a forfeiture of the term, for 
an under-lease is not an assignment (Crusoe d. Blen- 
cowe V. Bugby, 3 Wils. 234 ; Jackson v. Silvernail, 15 
Johns. 278 ; Jackson «. Groat, 7 Cow. 285, 287 ; Mar- 
tin V. O' Conner, 43 Barb. 514 ; Davis v. Morris, 36 N. 
7. 569, aff'g. 35 Barb. 227 ; Hargrave v. King, 5 Ired. 
Eq. 430) ; and a covenant not to underlet any part of 
the premises without license, is not broken by taking 
in lodgers (Doe «. Laming, 4 Campb. 77). Nor will a 
covenant "not to let or underlet the whole or any 
part " of the demised premises preclude an assignment 
of the whole interest (Lynde v. Hough, 27 Barb. 415), 
but a condition not to set, let, or assign over the de- 
mised premises, or any part thereof, comprehends 



72 LANDLOSD AND TENANT. 

under-leases (Roe v. Harrison, 3 T. B. 425 ; Roe «. 
Sales, 1 Jl/attZe (6 <S: 297 ; Greenaway ». Adams, 12 Fe*. , 
395 ; Crusoe v. Bugby, 3 PFiZ*. 234 ; Doe v. Worsley, 
1 Gampb. 20). 

Where the lessee enters into covenants not to assign, 
the courts will distinguish between those acts done by 
him voluntarily, and ttiose which pass in invitum, aud 
will not hold the latter to be a breach of the covenant. 
Thus, if the lessee become bankrupt, and the term be 
assigned under the commission (Roe v. Sales, 1 M. &o 8. 
297), or if the term be sold under an execution upon a 
judgment (Doe 1). Carter, 8 T. E. 57, 300), in neither of 
which cases will a forfeiture be incurred, and where the 
landlord seeks to enforce a forfeiture for non-payment 
of rent, his right to re-eater is not perfected until he 
makes a demand of the precise sum due for rent, at the 
time and place required by law (A.cademy of Music v. 
Hackett, 2 Hilt. 217); and .where an estate for life is 
subject to be divested by the breach of a condition sub- 
sequent, a breach which forfeits the estate destroys the 
lien thereon of a judgment against the tenant for life 
(Moore v. Pitts, 53' N. Y. 85). 

The forfeiture may be waived by the landlord's con- 
sent or act. Thus : Receiving rent which accrued sub- 
sequent to the forfeiture, with full knowledge of the 
facts creating the forfeiture (Ireland v. Nichols, 46 If. 
Y. 413, aff 'g 2 Sweeny, 289 ; Murray «. Harway, 56 If. 
Y. 337). 

Nuisances upon adjoining premises. 

No person has the right to make any erection upon 
his land, that projects over the land of his neighbor. 
The erection of a house or building of any kind by one 
land owner, so that the eaves thereof overhang the land 
of another, is a nuisance, and an action lies therefor 
even though no special injury results therefrom (Tucker 
V. Newman, 11 Ad. <& El. 40 ; Wright ?;. Williams, 1 M. 



EEMEDIES OP THE LANDLORD. 73 

(& TT. 77 ; Carlyon v. Levering, 1 H. & M. 784 ; Ahsley 
V. Ashley, 6 CusTi. 70), and where an action waa com- 
menced for erecting a house with a cornice projecting 
over the lands of the plaintiflF, by means of which quan- 
tities of rain fell from the cornice upon the plaintiffs 
garden and did damage, and by reason of which the 
plaintiff was greatly annoyed and incommoded in the 
use and possession of his premises, and it was held by 
the court that the projection in itself was a nuisance 
from which the law inferred , a damage, and that the 
plaintiff could maintain his action in respect to the pro- 
jection alone, even though no rain had fallen, and that 
the plaintiff was not confined to damage from the rain 
(Fry V. Prentice, 14 L. T. N. S. 298), and Comyn in his 
Digest, vol. 1, p. 427, says : " An action upon the case 
lies for a nuisance to the habitation or estate of another ; 
as if a man build a house hanging over the house of 
another, whereby the rain falls upon it, or fixes a spout 
upon his own house, whence the rain falls into the 
yard of another and injures the foundation of his 
building." 

In Aiken ■». Benedict (39 Barb. 400), which was an 
action for damages by reason of the erection of a house 
by the defendant upon the line of his land, in such a 
manner that the eaves and gutters projected over the 
land of the plaintiff, and it was held an action for the 
nuisance would lie. 

In Sherry v. Frecking (4 Buer, 452), the defendant 
erected a building upon a lot adjoining one owned by 
the plaintiff, and in so doing encroached upon the soil 
of the plaintiffs lot some four or five inches, and also 
overhung the same with his wall at the top of said 
building some ten or twelve inches. The plaintiff 
brought his action under the Code for the recovery of 
the premises, and the damages for its detention being a 
remedy in the nature of the common-law action of eject- 
ment, and in his action sought to recover not only the 
soil actually encroached upon, but also the space which 

10 



74 LANDLOBD AND TENANT. 

was overhung by the defendant' e wall. Upon the trial a 
verdict was rendered for the damages for withholding 
the strip of land, and the injury to the plaintiflF's prem- 
ises by the overhanging of the wall, and also for a recov- 
ery of the premises as claimed in the complaint. The 
supreme court in Aiken v. Benedict (39 Barh. 400), 
while sustaining the right to damages, deny the riglit 
asserted in the last case to maintain ejectment under 
such circumstances upon the ground that ejectment 
will not lie for anything whenever entry can not 
be made, or of which the sheriff can not give posses- 
sion. 

In Pendruddock' s case (5 Coke, 101), it was held 
that the person injured by the nuisance might abate it, 
but this would only apply to cases where the thing is 
in itself a nuisance, and not where it may or may not 
become one (Norrice v. Baker 1 Rolle, 393), and al- 
though the party injured may at his election cut off 
that portion of the eaves that project over his land, and 
thus of his own motion abate the nuisance, yet he is not 
justified in so doing until he has suffered some special 
injury from it, but it is always unsafe for a person in- 
jured in this manner to interfere with the building, be- 
cause the nuisance consists purely in the discharge of 
the water, either in its natural state or congealed into 
ice and snow upon his land, and the evil might be rem- 
edied by the wrong-doer by the employment of proper 
appliances, without the actual removal or destruction 
of the building, and in such cases the most prudent and 
indeed the only safe course to pursue, is to bring an ac- 
tion for the damages and for an abatement of the nuis- 
ance by the courts (Shipley v. Fifty Associates, 106 
Mass. 194 ; 8 Am. Rep. 318 ; 101 Mass. 251 ; 3 Am. Rep. 
346 ; Ryland v. Fletcher, 3 H. L. G. 330 ; Bellows v. 
Sackett, 15 Barb. 96 ; Martin v. Simpson, 6 Allen, 102 ; 
Ball V. Nye, 99 Mass. 582 ; Washurn on Easements, 
390 ; Ely ». Supervisors, 36 N. Y. 300 ; Goldsmith v. 
Jones, 43 How. 415). 



EEMEDIEri OF THE LANDLORD. 75 

II. 

Remedies of executors. 

The statute provides that the heirs and pei'sonal 
representatives of the lessor, grantee, or assignee, shall 
have the same remedies by entry, action or otherwise, 
for the non -performance of any agreement contained in 
the lease so assigned, or for the recovery of any rent, 
or for the doing of any vpaste or other cause of forfeit- 
ure, as the lessor, grantee,- or assignee had, or might 
have had, if the reversion had remained in him (1 
Edm. B. 8. 698, § 23), and further provides that "the 
executors or administrators of every person to v^hom 
any rent shall have been due and unpaid at the time of 
his death, may ha,ve the same remedy by action or by 
distress, for the recovery of all such arrears, that their 
testator or intestate might have had, if living" {Id. 
698, § 21) ; and the statute further provides, ''that when 
a tenant for a life, who shall have demised any lands, 
shall die on or after the day when any rent became due 
and payable, his executors or administrators may 
recover from the under-tenant, the whole rent due ; 
if he die before the day when any rent is to become 
due, they may recover the proportion of rent which 
accrued before his death " {Id. § 22). 

If the landlord was possessed of an estate of 
inheritance, the estate upon his death vests in his 
heirs-at-law, in the absence of a last will and testa- 
ment devising it to others, or placing the legal estate 
in trustees for the benefit of others, in which case the 
will designates the persons to whom and the conditions 
upon whicb the legal title is given. And executors ac- 
quire no title to or right of control over the real estate, 
unless the same be conferred by the will, which is the 
evidence of the right, if not the right itself. An ad- 
ministrator, therefore, has no interest in or control over 



76 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

the real estate of his intestate (Bridgewater v. Brook- 
field, 3 Cow. 299). If, however, the estate of the intes- 
tate was merely that of a tenant for years, the estate 
would go to the administrator or executor as part of 
the personalty. And rent accruing from real estate 
after the death of the testator, as a rule goes to the 
heir, and the executor or administrator is only entitled 
to rent due at the time of the death of the deceased 
(Wright V. Williams, 5 Cow. 501 ; 2 Johns. Cas. 17, 
§ 390 ; Taylor's L. & T.), and the person to whom the 
right of action belongs must prosecute all proceedings 
in respect thereto, and the person entitled to the 
possession must commence summary proceedings to 
recover it, and the heir and executor can not unite in 
the proceeding (Griffin n. Clark, 33 Barb. 47). 

III. 

Rights of grantees and assignees of landlord. 

The statute provides that "-the grantees of any de- 
mised lands, tenements, rents, or other hereditaments, 
or of the reversion thereof, the assignees of the lessor 
of any demise, and the heirs and personal representa- 
tives of the lessor, grantee or assignee, shall have the 
same remedies by entry, action or otherwise, for the 
non-performance of any agreement contained in the 
lease so assigned, or for the recovery of any rent, or for 
the doing of any waste or other cause of forfeiture, as 
their grantor or lessor had, or might have had, if such 
reversion had remained in such lessor or grantor" (1 
Edm. B. 8. p. 698, § 23). 

Under this statute the grantee of the reversion can 
only take advantage of such covenants as run with the 
land (Dolph v. White, 12 iV. T. 296). The provisions 
of this statute, it is said in Norman v. Wells (17 Wend. 
136), are in substance a transcript of 32 Hen. VIII, ch. 
34, and do not extend to collateral covenants, but only 



REMEDIES OF THE LAWDLOED. 77 

to covenants touching or concerning the thing demised, 
and in Harbeck «. Sylvester (13 Wend. 608), it was de- 
cided that the remedies of a grantee of demised prem- 
ises are confined to remedies upon the lease, and did not 
extend to the prosecution of a suit in his own name 
upon a guaranty for the payment of the rent reserved 
in the lease given to his grantor, and that the Revised 
Statutes had not changed the rule in this regard. The 
Code has changed the rule, however (§§ 111, 112, 117), 
and this case was disapproved in -Allen «. Culver (3 
Den. 284), where it was held that the contract of the 
surety of the lessee, who by a separate covenant had 
guaranteed the rent, passes to the grantee of the rever- 
sion, who is entitled to sue thereon, and in Slocum v. 
Clark (2 Hill. 475), it was held that in order to confer 
upon the assignee a right to distrain the lease or land 
should be included in the assignment ; a mere transfer of 
the rent remaining unpaid, does not carry with it the 
remedy by distress, and where a lessor who had taken 
the lessee's notes to secure the payment of rent granted 
the land absolutely, it was held that the title to the 
notes as well as to land passed, unless they were parted 
with by the lessor, who would in that event be person- 
ally liable for the amount (Beebe ». Coleman, 8 Paige, 
392). The assignee of an assignee, as well of a rever- 
sion as of the term, is now said, in the English cases, to 
have the same rights both at common law and under the 
statute as the first assignee (Hornidge c. Wilson, 3 Per. 
& B. 641 ; Campbell ■». Lewis, 3 5. &A. 392 ; Fryer «. 
Combs, 11 Ad. &, E. 403). Rent not accrued is con- 
sidered a part of the realty and passes with a grant of 
the reversion, as incident to the reversion, and not 
as a thing in action (Van Wicklen t. Paulson, 14 
Barh. 654) ; where the landlord is made a party to a 
foreclosure of a mortgage on the land, and the decree 
directs him to surrender it to the purchaser, he, being 
entitled to possession until the surrender is to be made, 



78 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

is entitled to the rents which accrue up to that time, 
even though such rent be payable in advance, so that 
a part of the term for which it is due comes after the 
surrender by him, and the consequent eviction of his 
tenant (Griles v. Oomstock, 4 iV^. Y. 270'). In an action 
against a surety for rent, it appeared that the landlord 
leased the premises after he had mortgaged them, and 
after the mortgage was under foreclosure. The tenant 
abandoned the premises where they were sold under 
foreclosure, and refused to continue the tenant of the 
purchaser. The purchaser having taken an assignment 
of the lease, sued the surety of the tenant for the rent 
which accrued after the sale and the abanondment. 
Held that the surety was not liable (Simus v. Salters, 2 
If. Y. Leg. Ohs. 180). If the lessor mortgages the lease 
and re-acc[uires it before the rent accrues, the tenant is 
liable to him for the rent (Evertson ti. Saroyer, 3 Wend. 
507). An assignment by the lessor of the lease, and all 
rents to become due, is merely an assignment of the 
rents ; and the lessee' s covenant to leave the premises in 
repair at the end of the term, as it is not broken till the 
end of the term, belongs still to the reversioner, who 
alone can sue uponit(Demarest v. Willard, 8 Oow. 206) ; 
an assignee of the landlord is bound by the covenants 
real annexed to the estate, and running with the land ; 
but his liability extends ouly to covenants broken 
during the term when he is possessed of the estate (Day 
v>. Swackhamer, 2 Milt, 4). In Moffatt v. Smith (4 N. 
Y. ]26), the lessor assigned the lease without the rever- 
sion, and the lessee paid rent to the assignee, and it 
was held that this created such a privity of contract 
between the tenant and the assignee, that the latter 
might sue in his own name for rent subsequently ac- 
cruing under the lease. As to rights of grantees gen- 
erally see Van Rensselaer «. Hays, 19 N. Y. 68 ; 
Dolph «. White, 12 Id. 296 : Main v. Gfreen, 32 Barb. 
448 ; Van Rensselaer n. Smith, 27 Id. 104. 



EEMED1E8 OF THE LATSTDLOKD. 79 

IV. 

Effect of judgment upon other remedies. 

A landlord, like any other creditor, is entitled to all 
the auxiliary and concurrent remedies of the law, 
appropriate to the full protection and enforcement of 
his rights, where the same are not in their character 
inconsistent with each other. Thus, at common law, 
the right of distress is not extinguished by an un- 
satisfied judgment for rent (Snyder v. Kunkleman, 3 
Penn. 490 ; Chipman v. Martin, 13 Johns. 240 ; Ban- 
leon V. Smith, 2 Binn. 146 ; Bates v. Nellis, 5 Hill, 
651 ; 3 Price, 572 ; 2 A. & E. 623 ; 4 Nev. S M. 462 ; 
Ewer «. Clifton, Bull. N. P. 182 ; Harris c Shipway, 
1744, cited by Byles, 304, note 1). An unsatisfied 
judgment does not satisfy the debt, nor merge or ex- 
tinguish other remedies (Drake «. Mitchell, 3 East, 
252 ; Chipman ». Martin, supra ; Clapp n. Meserole, 
38 Barh. 661 ; Taileton t. AUhusen, 'l A. & E. 32), 
and in G-ridley o. Rowland (1 E. D. 8. 670), the plain- 
tiff brought a personal action against a contractor, who 
pleaded by way of defense, the pendency of other pro- 
ceedings against the owner to foreclose a lien filed for 
the same debt, and the court held that the foreclosure 
proceedings against the owner were no defense to the 
action against the contractor, and that a party who has 
a claim against several for the same debt, may bring 
actions against each at the same time, and that it is 
only after a satisfaction has been recovered in one, that 
the same is a defense to the further prosecution of 
another, and that a proceeding under the lien law of 
1851, was a mere foreclosure of a security. 

Election between inconsistent remedies. 

Where there exists an election between inconsistent 



80 LANDLOBD AND TENANT. 

remedies, the party is confined to the remedy which he 
first prefers and adopts (Rodermund v. Clark, 46 JV. Y. 
354 ; S. P. Qossv. Mather, Id. 689 ; aflTg 2 Lans. 283), 
and if a vendor who is entitled to rescind the sale and 
re-take possession of goods delivered, acually elects to 
do so, instead of proceeding to collect the price, he 
disaffirms the sale, and can not afterwards sue for the 
price. The remedies are not concarrent, and the choice 
between them once being made, the right to follow the 
other is forever gone (Morris v. Eexford, 18 If. Y. 552 ; 
S. P. 1 Abb. Pr. If. S. 432) ; and if a seller of goods, who 
has been defrauded in the sale, proceeds to judgment 
against the buyer, upon the contract of sale, after he is 
apprised of the fraud, his election is determined ; and 
he can not afterwards follow the goods, or the proceeds 
thereof, in the hands of a third person (Bank of Beloit 
V. Beale, 34 If. T. 473), and the failure of the party 
to secure satisfaction by means of the remedy which he 
adopted, is no reason for permitting him to resort to 
the other (Gross ». Mather, 2 Lans. 283 ; afF'd in 46 
If. Y. 689). 



BIGHTS OF THE TENANT. 81 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

RIGHTS OP THE TENANT. 

I. Eight of possession and damages for withholding. 
II. Assigning lease and underletting premises. 

III. Right to remove fixtures. 

IV. Rights of under-tenant. 



Right of possession and damages for witTiTiolding. 

To have and. retain possession of the denjised 
premises during the term, and to peaceably and quietly 
enjoy the same without disturbance, is the principal 
right which a tenant possesses ; but on an ordinary 
demise of premises, without any special agreement to 
give possession, the landlord is under no obligation to 
put the tenant in actual possession ; and it has been 
held, that where the lease from the landlord gives the 
tenant the legal right of possession, it is no ground of 
defense to an action for rent upon a lease, that at the 
time of making the lease there was a tenant in pos- 
session of the premises who still remains in possession, 
and that the defendant in consequence has never had 
possession. It must be shown that the tenant remain- 
ing in possession has a right so to do, either from the 
landlord or under a title paramount (Gardner v. 
Keteltas, 3 Hill, 330; Mechanics & Traders Ins. Co. 
i>. Scott, 2 Hilt. 550). But a lease of real property for a 
term commencing at a future day, with an agreement 
to give possession, gives to the lessee, when the day 
arrives, the right of possession ; and an entry is not 
necessary to enable him to maintain ejectment, if the 

landlord, or one claiming under him, withholds pos- 
11 



82 LANDLORD AWD TENAWT. 

session. But the lessee is not bound to resort to 
ejectment, under [such an agreement, but may, at his 
option, bring his action against the landlord for 
damages for breach of the agreement (Trull v. Granger, 
8 jy. T. 115), and it has been held, that a lessee may- 
abandon his contract, if the lessor refuse to give pos- 
session on the day fixed (Spencer v. Burton, 5 
Blackf. 57) ; and where it appears from the terms of 
a lease of a store being erected by the lessor, and from 
the subsequent acts of the parties, that they understood 
the property rented was to be a finished store, fit for 
immediate occupancy for the purposes for which it 
was leased, a covenant in the lease, on the part of the 
lessor, will be implied, that the store shall be finished 
and fit for use as a store, by the time stipulated for 
the commencement of the term, and in such a case, to 
entitle the lessor to recover the rent, it is incumbent 
on him to show that he has performed on his part. If 
the lessees have taken possession, so that they became 
vested with the term, a breach of the agreement, on the 
part of the lessor, will constitute no defense to an 
action to recover the rent reserved. They can only 
recoup the damages actually sustained (La Farge v. 
Mansfield, 31 Barh. 345 ; The People v. Kelsey, 38 Id. 
269). 

Damages for wrongfully withholding possession. 

In an action by lessee against lessor, to recover 
damages for failure and inability to give possession, 
the rule of damages is the difference between the yearly 
value of the premises and the rent reserved (Dean ». 
Keosler, 1 Kilt. 420 ; Trull «. Granger, 8 N. Y. 116), and 
for a breach of an agreement to give a lease, expenses 
incurred in preparing to remove to and occupy the pre- 
mises, together with the difference between the real 
value of the lease and the contract price may be recov- 
ered (Driggs ■». D wight, 17 Wend. 71 ; Giles v. 
0' Toole, 4 Barh. 261; Lawrence ». Wardwell, Q Id. 



RIGHTS OF THE TENANT. 83 

423) ; but the lessee can recover nothing for profits 
which he might have made if he had obtained posses- 
sion (Giles V. O' Toole, 4 Barb. 261), nor for the loss he 
suffered by being obliged to crowd his goods into a 
small space while looking for another store, nor the ex- 
pense or injury of packing them, such packing not 
being done with a view to removal into the defendant's 
store. Nor can he recover interest on the value of his 
stock during the period of finding a store (Lowenstein «. 
Chappell, 30 Barb. 241), and if the lease be of an opera 
house, to be finished by a certain time, the damages may 
include the tenant's expense of advertising the per- 
formance, but not the loss of anticipated profits (Acad- 
emy of Music V. Hackett, 2 Hilt. 217) ; and in an action 
by a lessee for damages for refusing to give possession 
of the premises, it is no defense that the defendant 
hired the premises, intending to keep a bawdy house 
therein, and the mere avowal by the lessee of an intent 
to employ the leased premises in an unlawful business 
does not constitute an offense, nor does it entitle the 
lessor to repudiate his contract (O'Brien v. Brieten- 
back, 1 Hilt. 304 ; but see the cases cited at page 36, 
ante). 

Damages to eyicted tenant. 

A tenant in possession, evicted before the expiration of his lease, 
may recover the diflference between the value of' his lease for the un- 
expired term, and the stipulated rent. If evicted at a season when 
the expense of removing is greater than it would have been at the 
end of the term, he may recover such extra expense, but he can not re- 
cover any increased rent he may be compelled to pay for other premises, 
without reference to the equality of their accommodation (Chatterton 
«. Fox, 5 Duer, 64; and see 1 Id. 343, and 34 Sarh. 178). 

11. 

Assigning lease and underletting. 

A tenant, unless restrained by express agreement, 
may without the consent of his lessor assign the lease 



84 LANBLOBD AND TENANT. 

itself, or he may grant underleases for any number of 
years less that the term for which he holds the premises. 

The effect of a covenant not to assign or underlet 
was considered at page 71 {ante), and the legal status 
of the under-tenant will be found stated in a subse- 
quent portion of this chapter (page 88, post). 

Upon an assignment by a lessee, and entry into pos- 
session by the assignee, though the latter becomes lia- 
ble to the landlord for the rent, the original lessee re- 
mains liable as theretofore upon the covenants in the 
lease ; payment by the assignee does not amount to a 
surrender by the lessee (Damb v. Hoffman, 3 £!. D. 
8. 361 ; 8. p. Port v. Jackson, 17 Johns. 239, aff'd 
Id. 479). Under a lease with a covenant that the lessee 
shall not assign without the lessor's consent, the 
lessee's assigning part of the premises with consent is 
not a severance of the original lease, but the lessee still 
remains liable for every act of his assignee, amounting 
to a breach of the covenant contained in the lease 
(Jackson «. Brownson, 7 Johns. 227), and an assign- 
ment of a lease upon the lessors consent, where the 
lease requires such consent, does not discharge the 
lessee from liability on his covenant to pay rent (House 
«. Burr, 24 Barh. 525) ; and a general release of the 
lessee after an assignment does not discharge the assig- 
nee's liability for use and occupation (McKeon v. 
Whitney, 3 Den. 452). 

Who are assignees, 

I A lessee of whole unexpired term with covenant to pay rent to 
his immediate lessors, and a right of re-entry on their part, is deemed 
an under-tenant and not an assignee (Martin v. O'Conner, 43 Barb. 
514j. To render the assignee of a lease liable for rent to the lessor, 
the whole term of the lease must have been assigned. An assignment 
reserving the last day of the term does not render the assignee liable 
to the lessor (Davis v. Morris, 36 N. T. 569, afi'g 35 Barb. 237). Third 
persons entering upon leased premises under an arrangement with the 
original tenant not fully disclosed, held, properly deemed assignees 
of the term, and not mere under-tenants; and therefore liable directly 
to the owner in an action for rent (Bedford v. Terhune, 30 N. T. 458, 
aflE'g 1 Dal^i, 371 ; 27 How. Pr. 433). 



EIGHTS OF THE TEKAKT. 85 

And where an administrator enters and takes the 
rents and profits of the demised premises he is person- 
ally liable as assignee of the term for all rents falling 
due after his entry (In tlie matter of Galloway, 21 
Wend. 32 ; Fisher v. Fisher, 1 Bradf. 337 ; Rubery v. 
Stevens, 4 Barn <£ Adol. 241 ; Buckley -y. Perk, 1 SalJc. 
317 ; Hargraves, case, 5 Cooke JR. 31 ; Weniworth on 
Executors, 285). And an assignee for the benefit of 
creditors, if he enter into possession of the demised 
premises, is liable during occupancy (Morton v. Pinck- 
ney, 8 Bosw. 135 ; Jermain v. Patterson, 46 Barh. 9), 
but not after surrender (Young v. Peyser, 3 Bosw. 308) ; 
nor if he -refuse to accept the lease (Bagley v. Freeman, 
1 Hilt. 196 ; Lewis v. Burr, 8 Bosw. 140 ; Journeay v. 
Brackley, 1 Hilt. 447.) 

LiaMlilj of assignee. 

An assignee of the term is always liable to the les- 
sor for rent reserved, in the same manner and to the 
same extent that the lessee was, and the assignor 
also remains liable upon all his covenants to the lessor 
(Dolph V. White, 12 N. T. 296 ; 3 B. D. Smith, 361 ; 
17 Johns. 239 ; Id. 479), and is liable on all covenants 
that run with the land as covenants to repair and pay 
rent although not expressly named therein (Jacques v. 
Short, 20 Barb. 269), and when a covenant to pay rent 
becomes broken after an acceptance of an assignment, 
and during actual possession, the assignee is liable for 
• the whole rent then becoming due (Holsman v. De 
Gray, 6 Abb. Pr. 79). 

Discharge of assignee by furtlier assignment. 

An assignee is only bound by the covenants in the 
lease, so long as he retains possession, by himself or 
his tenants, and may relieve himself from liability for 
subsequent breaches by getting out of possession and 
assigning over (Armstrong v. Wheeler, 9 Cow. 88 ; 
Childs V. Clark, 3 Barb. Ch. 62 ; Astor v. L'Amoreux, 



86 LAWDLOED AND TEWANT. 

4 Sandf. 524 ; Carter w. Hammett, 18 Barb. 608), for 
the assignment destroys the privity of estate, which 
was the only ground upon which the assignee was 
liable {Taylor's L. & T. §§ 452, 680). The possession 
of the sub-tenant is the possession of the tenant and the 
assignee (Carter v. Hammett, 18 Barb. 608, and see 24 
Id. 525 ; Harding t). Crethorn, 1 Esp. 57), and they must 
get him out (Taylofs L.&T.% 524). 

Sale of leasehold estate. 
A person agreeing to buy a specific lease, is (in the ab- 
sence of misrepresentation on the part of the seller), as a 
rale, chargeable with notice of all the covenants and re- 
strictions it contains (Pope v. Garland, 4 Y .&Q. 397; 
Spunner ». Walsh, 10 Ir. Eq. 400), for a man who 
wishes to protect himself against unusual or particular 
covenants, should before purchasing inquire into the 
covenants and stipulations of the original lease, so as 
to know precisely the terms on which the property is 
held (Pope ?). Garland, 4 J". <fe a 394 ; Martin n. Cotter, 
^J. & L. 506 ; Oullen «. O'Mara, L. R. Ir. ; 1 O. L. 
640) ; but if there be misrepresentation, so that the 
acuteness and industry ol" the purchaser is set to sleep, 
and he is induced to believe the contrary of what is the 
the real state of the case, the vendor is in such a case 
bound by the misrepresentation (Pope v. Garland, 4 Y. 
& C. 394). If, for instance, the terms of a particular 
covenant turn out to be of much more stringent de- 
scription than they were represented to be, there is 
fraud (Flight «. Booth, 1 Bing. N. C. 377), and the 
reading of the lease at an auction by the d,uctioneer, is 
no excuse for a misdescription of the terms of the lease 
in the particulars of sale (1 Bing. N. O. 379 ; 6 Beav. 
590 ; 6 Hare, 443). 

III. 

Right of tenant to remove fixtures. 

It seems to be the general doctrine that chattels be- 
ing a part of the trade of the tenant, and peculiarly 



RIGHTS OF THE TENANT. 87 

appropriated to it, may be removed during the ten- 
ancy ; thus engines and machinery firmly fixed to a 
building by a tenant for years, for the carrying on of a 
business or trade of a personal nature, are the personal 
property of the tenant, and removable at his will (Cook 
V. Chaplain, Trans. Co. 1 Den. 91 ; Farrar v. Chau- 
Ifetete, 5 Id. 527 ; 33 Barb. 410 : 20 Johns. 29). Things 
set up by a lessee during his tenancy for the purposes of 
his trade, as kettles and boilers in a tannery, stills in a 
distillery, tables and partitions, are personal property 
and are removable by the tenant {Billon Fixtures, § 17). 
When put in by the tenant, he may remove gas fixtures 
(Shaw V. Lenke, 1 Daly, 487 ; Beardsley v. Sherman, 
Id. 325 ; Lawrence v. Kemp, 1 Duer,36B ; 83 Penn. 522), 
or stoves (Vreeland v. Southwoth, 24 Wend. 191), or 
chimneypieces, hanging-glasses window-blinds, pumps, 
wainscot, grates, fixed tables, furnances, cofi'ee-mills, 
cupboards, chandeliers, fireplace frames, and par- 
titions {Hill on Fixtures, § 34), and such removal may 
be after the term has expired, if made during his pos- 
session (Beardsley o. Sherman, 1 Daly, 326). In Moore 
V. Wood (12 Aii. Pr. 398), it appeared that the tenant 
sunk a brick chimney three feet into the ground for a 
foundation, and pierced the roof, that the chimney 
could not be removed without being taken down, 
together with the machinery, which were erected and 
put into the building by the tenant for the purpose of 
trade, and the court held that the tenant had a right 
to remove them on being dispossessed for non-payment 
of rent, and that the landlord who directed the officer 
to prevent the removal was liable in an action for the 
conversion of the property, and that the value of the 
property for the purpose of removal was the measure 
of damages. 

The right of a tenant to remove buildings is dis- 
cussed in Hillard on Real Property (3d ed., vol. 1, 
pp. 5, 6, 7, 8), and in Smith n. Benson (1 Rill, 176) ; 
and see 10 Barh. 496 {E. D. Smith, 611) ; and although 



88 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

the right is recognized in certain cases, yet it is 
clear that if buildings are erected upon the land 
of one person by another, without any authority or 
agreement in respect thereto, it becomes a part of the 
realty, and passes with the conveyance of the land ; 
and to take the case out of this principle, on the ground 
that the building was erected by a tenant for the pur- 
pose of trade and business, it is not enough to show 
that it was occupied for the purpose of business, but the 
existence of the relation of landlord and tenant must 
be made out by express proof or clear implication ; 
and it must also be shown that the building was erected 
by th^ tenant for the purposes of trade, and that he 
exercised his right of removal during the term (Ritch- 
myer v. Moss, 5 Abb. Pr. N. S. 44 ; 4 Abb. Ot. of 
App. Decic. 55), and as to the test in determining what 
are fixtures, see Potter o. Cromwell (40 If. Y. 287) ; 
Voorhees v. McG-innis (48 JST. Y. 278). 



IV. 

Rights of the under-tenant. 

The undertenant is chargeable with knowledge of 
the contents of the original lease (Cosser «. Collinge, 3 
Myl. c& K. 283 ; Grosvenor v. Green, 28 L. J. Oh. 173), 
for although he is not personally liable for the rent re- 
served in the original lease, nor directly liable for 
breaches of the covenants in the original lease, yet he 
may be evicted by the original lessor for a forfeiture 
incurred by such breaches, and the original lessor may 
by injunction restrain the under-tenant from commit- 
ting breaches of the covenants contained in the original 
lease ; so also, if default be made in the payment of the 
rent reserved in and by the original lease, the original 
lessor may by summary proceedings remove the lessee, 
and also all under-tenants or others in possession claim- 
ing under him, from the premises demised, unless the 



EIGHTS OF THE TEIfANT. 89 

rent claimed be paid before tlie warrant of disposses- 
sion is issued. 

In other respects the same rights, remedies and lia- 
bilities attending the relation between the original land- 
lord and tenant, apply in like manner to the relation 
between the latter and his tenant. 

The under-tenant may protect his possessory right 
in the premises against trespassers and intruders, and 
punish any interference therewith, by the appropriate 
legal remedies. 

Bight of snb-tenant to pay original landlord. 

Where the tenant of lauds under a lease containing 
a right of re-entry for default in paying rent, sublets a 
part thereof, the sub-tenant in order to protect his pos- 
session may pay his rent to the original lessor, and it is 
not necessary to protect him in so doing, that the origi- 
nal lessor should threaten a suit or even demand the 
money. The right of the landlord to action for the 
rent, or to re-enter, is sufficient to render the payment 
by the tenant compulsory, and to render it a valid pay- 
ment to and for the use of his landlord (Peck •». Inger- 
soU, 7 N. T. 528). 

Snb-lease and snb-lesseCj 

A lease, by the lessee, to a third person for the 
residue of his original term, reserving rent to himself, 
and a right to re-enter for breaches of covenant which 
required the sub-tenant to keep the covenants in the 
original lease, is a sub-lease as between them, and 
not an assignment of the original lease ; and the lessee 
may re-enter for breach of the conditions, although 
he has no reversion (Linden v. Hepburn, 3 Sand'/. 668 ; 
S. C, 5. How. Pr. 188 ; 9 JV. Y. Leg. Obs. 80 ; People 
V. Robertson, 39 Barb. 9 ; s. p. Post v. Kearney, 2 N. 
Y. 394 ; aff'g 1 Sandf. 105). And where a lessee ex- 

12 



90 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

ecutes an instrument conveying the whole of his unex- 
pired term, but reserving rent at a different rate and 
time of payment from the original lease, and a right of 
re-entry on non-payment and on breach of other condi- 
tions, also providing for a surrender of the premises to 
him on the expiration of the term, the instrument is a 
sub-lease, not an assignment (Rollins v. Hasbrouck, 56 
N. Y. 157) ; and a sub-tenant's covenant to repair is 
not a mere covenant of indemity, but renders him lia- 
ble to his lessor whether the latter has paid the origi- 
nal landlord or not (Smith v. Coe, 2 Sweeny, 332) ; and 
where a sub-lease contains a covenant by the under- 
tenant to pay taxes and assessments which his imme- 
diate lessors had covenanted with the owners of the 
land that they would pay, no action will lie by the ori- 
ginal lessor, the owner, against the under-tenant, for 
the non-payment thereof. He being an under-tenant 
and not an assignee of the lease, the covenant is for the 
benefit of his immediate lessors (Martin v. O' Conner, 
43 Barl. 514). 



REMEDIES OF THE TENANT. 91 



OHAPTEE IX. 

REMEDIES OF THE TENANT, AND OF HIS ASSIGNEES 
AND PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVES. 

I. Rescision of lease for fraud or mistake. 

n. Other remedies of the tenant. , 

ni. Remedies of assignees and representatives. 

IV. Remedies of joint tenants. 

I. 

Rescision for fraud or mistake. 

Besides the right of rescision and of damages growing 
out of fraudulent misrepresentations, upon the part of 
the landlord, as to any material matter connected with 
the demise, and operating as an inducing cause to the 
execution of the contract of hiring, the tenant may in a 
proper case be relieved in equity, from the obligations 
of the lease, upon the ground of mistake of fact, when- 
ever such mistake can be clearly made to appear by 
competent evidence. If the mistake be upon the part 
of the tenant, he may file his bill in equity, claiming 
the rescision of the contract, upon the ground that he- 
has become bound by a contract which he never in 
tended to make, and never would have made, but for a 
mistake he was laboring under in regard to a material 
fact (Smith ». Macklin, 4 Lans. 41 ; Adams Eq. 171 ; 
Rider v. Powell, 28 N. Y. 310-316) ; and where relief is 
sought in equity against a written agreement on the 
ground of mistake or surprise, parol evidence is 
admissible to show that the written agreement is con- 
trary to the real terms of the contract, and that there- 
fore the written agreement ought to be rescinded (Price 



92 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

». Ley, 33 L. J. C. 530-532), and the law in regard to 
personal property seems to be settled, that if a man 
sells a different interest from that which he pretends, 
and especially if the contract be founded in ignorance 
and fraud, the purchaser of a chattel may return the 
chattel, if he does it immediately on discovery of the 
imposition, and thereby rescind the sale (Kettletas 
». Fleet, 7 Johns. 331, and cases cited) ; and upon the 
same principle, misrepresentations as to the boundaries 
or territoral extent of lands have always been regarded 
as material (Clark v. Baird, 9 N. T. 183 ; Whitney v. 
Allaire, 1 Id. 305). 

Where by mutual mistake of fact the lease fails to 
express the true agreement between the parties, it may 
in a proper case be reformed in equity upon a bill 
filed for the purpose (O'Donnell v. Harmon, 3 Daly, 
424 ; Nevius v. Danlap, 33 N. I. 676 ; Quick ®. Stuy- 
vesant, 2 Paige, 84 ; Leavitt v. Palmer, 3 If. T. 19 ; 
Pitcher v. Hennessy, 48 N. Y. 415 ; Mills v. Lewis, 
37 How. 418). In an action for the reformation of a 
written agreement, on the ground of mistake, no fraud 
being proved, the following rules are observed : 

1. The mistake must be plain and clearly proved. 

2. It must have been a mutual mistake. 

3. The mistake must be of fact, and not of law. 

4. It must be clearly shown to the court what the 
real contract was. If any doubt be left on this point 
the written contract can not be disturbed (Kent v. Man- 
chester, 29 Bari. 595 ; and see Stoddard «. Hart, 23 If. 
T. 556). The mistake must be one of fact, for mistake 
in matter of law can not be admitted as a valid excuse, 
either for doing an act prohibited by law, or for the 
omission of a duty which it imposes. Ignorantia 
juris non excusat, is the maxim of the common law. 

See Chapter V, ante, page 34, as to the validity of leases effected by 
fraud. 



REMEDIES OF THE TENANT. 93 

II. 

Other remedies of the tenant. 

Besides tbe defenses of surrender and of eviction 
which will be found in subsequent chapters, as well as 
defenses growing out of the non -performance of the 
landlord's covenant to repair, which will be found in a 
chapter devoted to that subject, the tenant has certain 
other remedies which require consideration. 

If the demise be by deed, and the lessor be guilty of 
the breach of any of the covenants in it upon his part 
to be performed, the lessee may maintain an action of 
covenant against him to recover the amount of the 
damages he, the tenant, may have thereby sustained. 

Where a lessee is ousted, either by the lessor him- 
self or another person having title paramount, an ac- 
tion of covenant lies against the lessor. If the lease 
contain an express covenant for (Juiet enjoyment, the 
remedy of the lessee is upon this covenant (Line ?;. 
Stephenson, 5 Bing. JSI. C. 383) ; and if the lease contain 
no express covenant, an action lies against the lessor on 
the implied covenant in law upon the word "demise" 
(1 Saund. 322a, n. 2). The law implies from this word 
" demise " in a lease, a covenant upon the part of the 
landlord, that at the time of the delivery of the lease, 
he had full power and authority to demise the premises 
to the lessee for the time and on the terms expressed in 
the lease (Fraser v. Skey, 2 Chit. 646). The covenant of 
quiet enjoyment, does not warrant or protect the tenant 
against the interruptions of a stranger having no rights 
(Dudley v. Folliott, 3 T.B. 684) ; and Agnew, J., said 
in a late case in Pennsylvania (Inprovement Co. w. 
Schmoele) : "Every lease implies a covenant, for quiet 
enjoyment. But it extends only to the possession, and 
its breach, like that of the warranty for title, arises only 



94 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

from eviction by means of title. It does not protect 
againsti the entry and ouster of a tort feasor." Even 
the entry of the state, by virtue of her right of eminent 
domain, incurs no breach of the covenant (Maule v. 
Ashmead, 8 Harris, 483). The rights of a landlord 
would be almost worthless if every time a pretender to 
title brought an ejectment against his tenant, or 
issued an estrepement to stay alleged waste, he' would 
find his rent suspended, and his remedies gone until the 
ejectment should be ended. Such an action can not pro- 
duce this result, until it has its point in actual or vir- 
tual eviction. The tenant has a right to call his land- 
lord into his defense, and if eviction follows, as the re- 
sult of a failure to defend, him, he can then refuse 
payment of the rent, and fall back upon his covenant 
for quiet enjoyment to recover his damages (Improve- 
ment Co. V. Sohmoele, supra). 

Tenant's remedy for wrongful entry. 

If the landlord, not having any right of entry, enter 
upon the demised piemises during the term, he is just 
as much liable to an action of trespass at the suit of the 
tenant, as any stranger would be, but a landlord may 
enter premises let by him during the term, whenever 
and so far as it may be necessary to prevent waste, 
and to save himself from penalties (Taylor'' s L. & T. 
% 174 ; Anderson «. Dickie, 26 How. 105 ; S. C. 1 Bobt. 
238); and it is said that a landlord having the reversion 
in a house may enter it, after the determination of his 
tenant's tenancy by a notice to quit or otherwise, either 
peaceably, or, if no person be in the house at the time, 
even by breaking open the door, upon the theory that 
the tenancy being ended, the right of possession reverts 
to the landlord. But if the tenant holds over, and the 
landlord breaks in upon him forcibly, so as to endan- 
ger a breach of the peace, he is liable to indictment, and 
although there are authorities which seemingly exempt 



REMEDIES OF THE TENANT. 95 

the landlord from civil liability for auch entry, yet the 
policy of the law seems to be opposed to such summary 
and extra-judicial entries, and in Flaherty «. Andrews 
(2^. Z)./S.539), the court held, "that although a tenancy 
had terminated by expiration of the term, or by non-pay- 
ment of rent, or there has been an agreement to surren- 
der, the landlord has no right to enter by force and put 
the family and goods of the tenant out of the demised 
premises, without process." Every unlawful entry 
upon the premises of another is a trespass, and whether 
the owner suflFer much or little, he is entitled to recover 
some damages (Dixon v. Clow, 24 Wend. 188 ; Sedgw. 
on Damages, 133 etseq. ; Parker v. Griswold, 17 Conn. 
288 ; Blake v. Jerome, 14 J. R. 406) ; but where the 
trespass is committed under an honest mistake, with- 
out intent to injury, the damages recoverable are con- 
fined to compensation for the injury sustained, and do 
not include exemplary damages (Shannon v. Burr, 
1 But. 39). 

If the tenant be turned out of possession, or dis- 
turbed in his possession of the demised premises by a 
stranger having no title, the tenant s remedy is by 
action of ejectment or trespass against the intruder, or 
by proceedings under the statute for forcibly taking 
and detaining the possession, if such be the fact, or if 
he be merely disturbed in the possession by action of 
trespass or case, according to circumstances. But if 
he be put out of possession by a stranger having title 
paramount, the remedy is, as before remarked, against 
the landlord upon his covenant for quiet possession. 

After a tenant was entered upon the demised prem- 
ises, and is in possession thereof, he may maintain an 
action of trespass against any person who trespasses 
upon them, and in fact, may maintain any and all ac- 
tions necessary for the full protection of his possessory 
rights and for the redress of any injury thereto, the 
nature of the remedy and the amount of damages recov- 
erable, however, depending of course upon the nature 



96 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

of the injury and the character and value of the tenant' s 
possessory title. 

III. 

Remedies of assignees and representatives. 

The statute provides, that " the lessees of any lands, 
their assigns or personal representatives, shall have the 
same remedy by action or otherwise against the lessor, 
his grantees, assignees, or his or their representatives, 
for the breach of any covenant or agreement in such 
lease contained, as such lessee might have had against 
his immediate lessor, except covenants against incum- 
brances, or relating to the title or possession of the 
premises demised" (1 Edm. B. S. p. 698, § 24), and 
the provisions of this section extend as well to grants 
or leases in fee, reserving rents as to leases for life 
and for years (/£?. § 25), and when an estate is trans- 
ferred, the remedy is transferred also ; if, therefore, 
the lessor grant his reversion, the remedy follows the 
f reversion to the grantee, and where he assigns it, the 
remedy will pass to the assignee (Howland v. CoflBn, 12 
Pick. 125 ; S. C. 9 Id. 52 ; Patton v. Deshon, 1 Graj/, 
326). 

IV. 

Remedies of joint tenants. 

The statute provides that "one joint tenant or 
tenant in common, and his executors or administrators, 
may maintain an action of account, or for money had 
and received, against his co-tenant for receiving more 
than his just proportion ; and the like action may 
be maintained by them against the executors or ad- 
ministrators of such co-tenant" (1 Edm. B. 8. p. 701, 

§9)- 



EIGH'ra AKD DISABILITIES. 97 



CHAPTER X. 

OERTAIN EIGHTS AND DISABILITIES QEOWING OUT OF 
THE EELATION. 

I. Tenant estopped from disputing landlord's title. 

II. Certain attornments void. ' 
in. Certain provisons affecting tenant's possession. 

IV. Leases to infants, married women, partners and corporations. 



Tenant estopped from disputing landlord's title. 

For reasons of >public policy, a tenant is never 
allowed to dispxate his landlord's title after having 
accepted possession under him. This rale is elemen- 
tary. 

The estoppel extends equally to both landlord and 
tenant, so that where the tenant is estopped from deny- 
ing the landlord's title, the landlord can not allege that 
he had no title at the time of the demise. 

It is competent, however, for the tenant to show 
that the title of the landlord, under whom he entered, 
has terminated either by its original limitation, or by 
conveyance, or by judgment and operation of law ; 
and this the tenant may show, although he does not 
claim under that title, and though the title be outstand- 
ing in the trustee of the lessor (Hoag i). Hoag, 35 N. 
T. 469). And a tenant who acquires his landlord's 
title, by a purchase under a judgment subsequent to 
the demise, may sfet it up against him (JSTellis «. La- 
throp, 22 Wend. 121). And if the lessor's interest is 
sold, and the lessee attorns to the purchaser, who 

acquires the title, the lessee may set up the divesting 
13 



98 LANDLOED AKD TENAKT. 

of the title to defeat the lessor's action for rent accruing 
thereafter (Evertson v. Sawyer, 2 Wend. 507 ; and see 
also Lawrence v. Miller, 1 Sandf. 616; Jackson v. 
Eowland, 6 Wend. 666). 

II. 

Certain attornments -void. 

Attornment, in feudal or old English law, means a 
turning over, or transfer by a lord, of the services of his 
tenant to the grantee of his seignory. A transfer by the 
tenant of his services to the grantee, or new lord ; a ten- 
ant' s consent to a transfer of lands by his lord ; or his 
acknowledgment or acceptance of the grantee as his lord, 
in place of the former lord. A tenant is said to attorn, 
where he agrees to become the tenant of the person to 
whom the reversion has been granted. The attornment 
of the tenant is unnecessary, however, to the validity 
of a conveyance by his landlord, and in that respect 
attornments may be considered as abolished (4 Kent's 
Com. 490, 491). The term, however, continues to be 
applied to the acts of tenants, in somewhat of its 
ancient signification. 

The statute in regard to attornments provides that 
"the attornment of a tenant to a stranger shall be 
absolutely void, and shall not in any wise aflfect the 
possession of his landlord, unless it be made, 

" 1. With the consent of the landlord ; or, 

"3. Pursuant to, or in consequence of, a* judgment 
at law, or the order or decree of a court of equity ; or, 

"3. To a mortgagee after the mortgage has become 
forfeited" (1 Edm. R. 8. 695, § 3). 

The object of the statute is to prevent attornment to 
strangers or other persons against the will or without 
any grant from or consent of the landlord. 

Certain attornments are, however, recognized and 
allowed by the statute ; thus an attornment to a mort- 
gagee after default is valid (13 Johns. 587 ; 20 Id. 51 ; 3 



RIGHTS AND DISABILITIES. 99 

Wend. 208 ; 3 Ben. 2] 4 ; but see 2 Wend. 507) ; but 
an attornment to one having no color of title is void 
(Jackson v. Delancy, 13 Johns. 537; Jacksan v. Sears, 
10 Id. 435), and taking a lease from an adverse claim- 
ant of title is a fraudulent attornment by the tenant and 
void (Jackson v. Harper, 5 We7id. 246) ; and persons 
entering into possession by the consent, assent or con- 
nivance of the tenant becomes tenant (Bensen v. Bolles, 
8 Wend. 125 ; Jackson ». Miller, 6 Id. 228 ; Graves «. 
Porter, 11 Bari. 592 ; Jackson v. Davis, 5 Cow. 123). 
The tenant paying his rent to his landlord, can not be 
prejudiced by any change of title, made by him v?ithout 
notice. The statute has substituted for an attornment, 
i. e. the acknowledgment by the tenant of the new lord, 
the necessity of giving notice to the tenant before he 
can be sued by an assignee, for rent accruing after the 
assignment {Taylor'' s L. & T.,% 442). 

III. 

,. Certain provisions affecting tenant's possession. 

' The statute provides, that "every tenant to whom 
a declaration in ejectment, or any other process, pro- 
ceeding or notice of any proceeding, to recover the land 
occupied by him, or the possession thereof shall be 
served, shall forthwith give notice thereof to his land- 
lord, under the penalty of forfeiting the value of three 
years' rent of the premises so occupied by him, which 
may be sued for and recovered by the landlord or per- 
son of whom such tenant holds" (1 Bdm. R. 8. p. 699, 
§ 27), and further provides that " whenever the relation 
of landlord and tenant shall have existed between any 
persons, the possession of the tenant shall be deemed 
the possession of the landlord, until the expiration of 
twenty years from the termination of the tenancy ; or, 
where there has been no written lease, until the expir- 
ation of twenty years from the time of the last payment 



100 LANDLOED AND TEW ANT. 

of rent ; nothwithstanding that such tenant may have 
acquired another title, or may have claimed to hold ad- 
vesely to his landlord. But snch presumptions shall 
not be made after the periods herein limited" {Code, § 
86), and the statute relating to highway assessments 
and deductions therefor, provides that, 

" § 30. Whenever the commissioners of highways 
shall assess the occupant, for any land not owned by 
such occupant, they shall distinguish in their assess- 
ment lists, the amount charged upon such land, from 
the personal tax, if any, of the occupant thereof. But 
when any such land shall be assessed in the name of 
the occupant, the owner thereof shall not be assessed 
during the same year to work on the highways on ac- 
count of the same land. 

" § 31. Whenever any tenant of any land for a less 
term than twenty-five years, shall be assessed to work 
on the highways, for such land, pursuant to the last 
preceding section, and shall actually perform such 
work, or commute therefor, he shall be entitled to a 
reduction from the rent due, or to become due from 
him, for such land, equal to the full amount of such 
assessment, estimating the same at the rate of sixty-two 
and a half cents per day ; unless otherwise provided 
for by covenant or agreement, between such tenant 
and his landlord!" (1 Edm. R. S. p. 467). 

IV. 

Leases to infants, married women, partners and cor- 
porations. 

Although a demise to an infant may be voidable, it 
has been settled by authority that an infant who fails to 
pay his rent, and perform the conditions of the demise, 
may be removed from the premises by ejectment on the 
ground of a wrongful possession (McOoon v. Smith, 3 
Hill, 147). When a married woman leases lands, 
whether for money paid from her separate estate or 



EIGHTS AND DISABILITIES. 101 

upon credit, to the extent of her interest therein, the 
lands become her separate estate, and she can let them 
or enter into any contract in reference to them the same 
as if she were a feme sole (Prevot v. Lawrence, 51 iV. T. 
219), and to the extent and in the matters in which 
married women are by law permitted to engage, they 
owe the same duty to those with wliom they deal, and 
may be bound in the same manner as if unmarried 
(Bodine v. Killeen, 53 JV. T. 93 ; Frecking t. Holland, 
Id. 432) ; and where they clothe others with an appar- 
ent authority to act for and bind them, the apparent 
must be taken for the real authority (Bodine t). Killeen, 
su%>ra.) 

Partners. 

Where a lease for a term of years, made hj one 
of two partners to the firm, for the purposes of the 
business, is subject to the continuance of the business, 
and upon a dissolution by the death of either partner, 
the lease terminates (Johnson v. Hartshorne, 52 iV. Y. 
173) ; and where a lease to a partnership gives a privi- 
lege to the lessors of continuing the lease for an addi- 
tional term upon giving notice of their intention to con- 
tinue prior to the termination of the original term, in 
case of the death of one of the partners, the survivor 
can as such give the required notice, and enforce a ful- 
fillment of the covenants of the lease for the extended 
term (Betts «. June, 51 N. Y. 274) ; and where, during 
the existence of a continuing partnership of undeter- 
mined duration, three or four co-partners, without the 
knowledge of the other, obtain a new lease in their own 
name of premises leased and used by the firm, the same 
becomes partnership property, and upon dissolution 
the other partner is entitled to his proportion of its 
value (Struthers v. Pearce, 51 JV. Y. 357) ; and if there 
be a specialty as a lease to the partners by name, the 
retirement, or dissolution, or settlement, will in no way 
exonerate the retiring partner or any one who is lessee ; 



102 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

nor will anything else which would not operate his dis- 
charge if there were no partnership between the lessees. 
In such a case, notice to the lessor of his retirement 
would not discharge bim, nor would receiving rent by 
the lessor, from the remaining partners {Parsons ^on 
Part. 417) ; and where the bargain between the partners 
is, that the new comer shall be a partner as of a preced- 
ing day, here it is held that he is not bound to the cred- 
itor, nor a party to the agreement for a debt contracted 
between that previous day and the actual making of the 
contract, although he is bound to the partners for his 
share of the debt, if they pay it (Saltoun v. Houston, 
1 Bing. 433 ; but see Schindler v. Euell, 45 How. Pr. 
33}. 

Corporations. 

A corporation authorized to dispose of its property 
may in general dispose of any interest in the same it 
may deem expedient, having the same power in this 
respect as an individual (Reynolds «. Stark County, 5 
OMo., 205), land it may lease its lands (Featherston- 
haugli v. Lee M. P. Co., L. B. 1 :Eg[. 318), and the 
technical mode of executing a specialty of a corpora- 
tion is to conclude the instrument, which should be 
signed by some officer or agent in the name of the cor- 
poration, with, "In testimony whereof, the common 
seal of said corporation is hereunto affixed;" and 
then to affix the seal (Flint v. Clinton Co., 12 N. M. 
433), and to bind a corporation by specialty, it is 
necessary that its corporate seal should be affixed to 
the instrument {Ang. & Ames on Corp., § 215). The 
corporate seal is the only organ by which a body 
politic can oblige itself by deed; and though Us agents 
affix their private seals to a contract binding upon it 
yet these not being seals as regards thie corporation, it 
is in such case bound only by simple contract {Id. § 
295), and where a corporation has actually used and 
occupied land for the purpose of its incorporation 



EEMEDIES OF THE TENANT. 103 

by the permission of the owner, it seems that it is 
liable to be sued in assumpsit for use and occupation, 
notwithstanding it has not entered into a contract 
under its common seal (Lowe ■». London R. R. Co., 
14 Bng. L. B. Eq. 19), and it may be laid down as a 
rule that the right to engage premises necessary for the 
carrying on of its business, is a power inherent in every 
corporation, without which the objects of the corpora- 
tion could not be accomplished nor its business success- 
fully carried on, and that this power may be exercised 
by the managing officers or agents of the corporation, 
as corporations of necessity act only through officers 
and agents. Whenever a power is given, everything 
necessary to a complete execution of it is necessarily 
implied and goes with it. 



104 LAITBLOEB AND TENANT. 



CHAPTER XL 

OP THE OBLIGATION TO KEPAIE. 

The landlord sometimes covenants that he will 
repair the premises. But, unless he bind himself by 
such express covenant, he is under no obligation to do 
so. The law imposes an obligation on the lessee to 
treat the premises demised in such manner that no in- 
jury be done to the inheritance, but that the estate 
may revert to the lessor undeteriorated by the wilful or 
negligent conduct of the lessee. He is, therefore, 
bound to keep the soil in a proper state of cultivation ; 
to preserve the timber ; and to support and repair the 
buildings. These duties fall upon him without any 
express covenant upon his part ; and a breach of them 
will, in general, render him liable to an action for waste 
{Corny n's L. & T.,2 ed., p. 188). The obligation of a 
landlord to repair demised premises rests solely upon 
express contract, and a covenant to repair will not be 
implied, nor will an express covenant be enlarged by 
construction (Witty «, Mathers, 52 N. T. 512). 

In Eagle «. Swayze (2 Daly, 140), it was held that a 
tenant from year to year, renting part of a dwelling- 
house, the residue of which is occupied by other ten- 
ants, is under no obligation to make repairs of so 
general, substantial, and lasting a nature, as the re- 
building of a chimney which has fallen down (see also 
Johnson v. Dixon, 1 Daly, 178). A tenant can not, 
without special agreement, make repairs at the expense 
of his landlord (Munford tj. Brown, 6 Oow. 4!7o ; McOarty 
V. Ely, 4 ^. D. S. 375) ; but the tenant, may, when his 
landlord is bound to repair, and repairs are needed, 
make the repairs himself, after due notice to the land- 
lord, and waiting a reasonable time, and may recover 
the expense thereof from the landlord ; or he may, at his 



OF THE OBLI&ATIOW TO BEPAIE. 105 

own option, leave the premises unrepaired, and recover 
from the landlord the damage sustained by him (Myers 
V. Burns, 35 N. Y. 269 ; aflf'g 33 Barb. 401 ; Cook v. 
Soule, 56 N. Y. 420). In the case last cited the court 
held that where the lease is for a year, the fact that the 
lessee has paid the rent except for the last quarter does 
not deprive him of the right to counter-claim his dama- 
ges for the entire year, and if in excess of the rent, he 
is entitled to a verdict for the excess, and that tlie 
lessee's measure of damage is the difference in value of 
the use of the premises as they are and as the lessor 
agreed to put them ; a promise by a landlord to repair, 
made after the delivery and acceptance of the lease, re- 
quires a new consideration to render it binding (Walker 
». Gilbert, 2 BoM. 214 ; Doupe w. Genin, 37 How. Pr. 
5 ; aff'd in 45 N. Y 119 ; Flynn v. Hatton, 43 How. 
333 ; and see 1 H. D. 8. 253 ; 2 Id. 248) ; and where a 
lease is in writing, parol evidence can not be given that 
the landlord at the time of executing it, promised to re- 
pair (Cleves w. Willoughby, 7 Hill, 83; All. Dig. 
vol. 2, p. 661) ; and a landlord is under no obli- 
gation to the tenant to protect his premises from 
adjoining excavations (Sherwood «. Leaman, 2 Boaw. 
127; Howard v. Doolittle, 8 Duer. 4:64:-, White v. 
Mealio, 37 JV. Y SupW Ct. 72) ; and in the contract of 
letting there is no implied warranty that the premises 
are tenantable (Mayer v. Moller, 1 Hilt. 491 ; 7 Hill, 
86; 2 M B. S. 248 ; 1 Daly, 481) ; for the maxim of 
caveat emptor applies, that if a building is injured by 
lire, the landlord can not be compelled to re-build or 
repair it for the benefit of his tenants, unless he has 
expressly covenanted to do so, applies as well to a case 
where a tenant has hired a part of the building, e.g., a 
basement-room, and the injury by the fire is confined 
to the roof. The landlord is not liable for injuries con- 
sequent upon his delay to repair the part destroyed 
(Doupe V. G-enin, 45 N. Y. 119). 

For liability for injuries to third persons, vide that title. 
14 



106 LANDLORD AND TllNAlSfT. 



Under coTenaut to repair. 



Under a covenant to "keep" in repair, if to keep 
in repair, it is necessary that the rooms should first be 
put in repair, the covenantor is bound to perform that 
duty (Myers v. Briggs, 35 iV. Y. at pp. 271, 272 ; Ward 
«. Kelsey, 38 Id. 80 ; Payne v. Haiue, 16 M. &W. 541). 
And where the agreement stated was, to leave the 
premises in the same state in which they were at the 
commencement of the tenancy, and the written agree- 
ment given in evidence, was to leave them in the state 
they then were, — the premises being then in the posses- 
sion of another tenant, and the defendant's tenancy was 
not to commence for a month afterwards, yet the court 
held it to be sufiicient (White v. Mcholson, 4 Man. & 
Or. 95). Where there was an agreement between the 
plaintiff and the defendant, the plaintiff to let, and the 
defendant to take a house for three years, from Decem- 
ber 25, 1839, at the yearly rent of thirty pounds, paya- 
ble quarterly, and the defendant (amongst other 
things), thereby, agreed to keep the premises in as 
good repair and condition as the same then were, and 
to leave them so on the determination of the tenancy, 
fair wear and tear excepted ; the tenant, however, 
quitted the premises in September 29, 1841 ; — in an ac- 
tion of assumpsit upon the agreement for two quarters 
rent due March 25, 1842, the defendant pleaded that 
the house by reason of the badness of the materials 
with which it was built, &c., and by and through the 
neglect and default of , the plaintiff, and not for want of 
any such repair as the defendant was bound to do un- 
der the agreement, became so runious, unsafe and un- 
fit for habitation, that he was obliged to quit it before 
the rent in question began to accrue ; this was traversed 
by the replication, which also alleged that the premises 
became in the state mentioned in the plea, for want of 
the repairs the defendant was bound to do by the agree- 



OV THE OBLIGATION TO EEPAIR. 107 

ment, and by and through the default of the defendant. 
At the trial the defendant proved that by reason of the 
house being built in a marsh, and upon a bad founda- 
tion, the walls had sunk, and there were large gaps in 
them, so that they were obliged to be shored up, and 
the basement was so full of water, that pumping for 
several hours a day became necessary, and even then it 
was so wet, as to be utterly unfit for habitation ; the 
jury having given a verdict for the defendant, the court 
upon application granted a new trial ; they held that 
the plea and the proof of it, were no reasons why the 
tenant should not pay the rent during the term ; he 
might have examined the house before he took it ; and 
his not having done so, or not having done so effectu- 
ally, was his own fault ; and as to the landlord, he was 
under no agreement, express or implied, to make any 
repairs, nor had he expressly or impliedly warranted 
the house to stand during the term (Arden v. Pullen, 10 
Mees. & W. 321). 

So, where a wharf was leased, and before entry of 
the tenant, a large portion of it was destroyed by nat- 
ural decay, of which the lessee gave notice to the land- 
lord, requesting him to repair ; but he neglected to do 
it, and the lessee then refused to enter or pay rent ; 
held, that he was still liable for the rent (Hill v. Wood- 
man, 2 Shep. (14 Maine) 38 ; Cleves v. Willoughby, 7 
Bill, 83) ; and where there is no stipulation upon the 
subject, a person who agrees to take a house must take 
it as it stands, and can not compel! the lessor to put 
it into a condition fit for habitation (Ohappell v. Grreg- 
ory, 34 Beav. 250). 

The extent of the repairs, however, are to be meas- 
ured by the age and class of the buildings ; and a ten- 
ant who enters upon an old house is not bound to leave 
it in the same state as if it were a new one. The ex- 
pression "good repair" is to be received with like 
qualification (Hart v. Winsdor, 12 M. c& W. 77 ; Mautz 
V. Goring, 4 Bing. N. O. 451 ; 33 M O. L. R. 409 : 



108 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

Payne v. Haine, 16 M. & W. 541 ; Bardettw. Withers, 
1 A. & E. 136). la an action for rent, the defendant 
may, under a covenant of the landlord to keep the 
premises in repair, set np, as a counterclaim, an 
amount expended by him in the necessary repair of 
the premises, and also damages sustained by the loss 
of the use of certain parts of the premises rendered 
untenantable for want of repair, and in such an action 
the defendant may recover for his expenses in repairs, 
even when they exceeded what it would have cost the 
landlord, had he employed his own mechanics. 

In the leasing of premises for a first class hotel, a 
covenant to keep the same in repair is broken by per- 
mitting the flues to remain in such condition that the 
rooms can not be used with a fire, owing to the issuing 
of smoke from the grate in the room, whenever a fire is 
lighted therein (Myers v. Bowers, 35 N. Y. 269). The 
breaking of a door-waj^ through the wall of a demised 
house into an adjoining house, and keeping it open for 
a long space of time, amounts to a breach of covenant 
to repair) Doe d. Vickery v. Jackson, 2 StarTc. 293 ; and 
see 2 F.&F. Ill, 115 ; 6 C. c& P. 195). 

A tenant to keep in repair the premises, and all 
erections, buildings, and improvements erected on the 
same during the term, and to yield up the same at the 
end of the term, can not remove a veranda erected by 
himself, which is aflflxed to the ground by means of 
posts (Penry v. Brown, 2 Btarlc. N. P". 0. 408), and a 
tenant covenanting to repair is liable to a penalty in- 
curred by want of them (Mayor v. Corliers, 2 Sandf. 
301). Under a covenant to substantially repair, uphold, 
and maintain a house, the tenant is not bound to keep 
up the inside painting (Mark v. Noyes, 1 C. & P. 265), 
nor is a tenant under covenant to repair liable for the 
extra expense of laying a new floor on an improved 
plan (Soward v. Leggatt, 7 O. <& P. 613), and the term 
habitable repair means a state of repair reasonably fit 



OF THE OBLIGATION TO BEPAIR. 109 

for the occupation of an inhabitant (Belcher v. Mcin- 
tosh, 8 0. & P. 720). 

Kiglit of action for breach. 

Under the tenant's covenant to keep the premises in 
repair, and lease the same in such condition, the land- 
lord need not wait till the expiration of the term, be- 
fore suing for suffering to get out of repair (Webster v. 
Nosser, 2 Daly, 186 ; Schiefflin v. Carpenter, 15 Wend. 
400, and cases cited). 

Extent of landlord's liability. 

It has been held in the Common Pleas, that the 
measure of damages, in an action against a landlord for 
not repairing, is the amount it would cost to make such 
repairs, and for the reason that the tenant can not, by 
exposing himself, his family, or his goods to the inju- 
ries or damage which result from the landlord's negli- 
gence, present a meritorious claim, when he could rem- 
edy the evil by repairs for which he would be fully in- 
demnified (Walker V. Swayzee, dAbb. Pr. 138) ; when a 
building is unfit for the use contemplated, if the tenant 
has a remedy for such unfitness, he must seek it either 
by charging the landlord with the expense of remedy- 
ing the defects, or by refusing to use the premises, and 
thereby exonerate himself from liability under the con- 
tract of hiring. But a tenant has no right to use de- 
mised premises, which he knows to be unfit for occupa- 
tion, in such a way as to cause damage and loss, and 
then seek to recover from his landlord for the damages 
so occasioned by his own acts. This was held by the 
N. Y. Common Pleas some years since, in Mchol v. 
Dusenbury, where the tenant, knowing that the roof 
of a house he had hired was unfinished, and per- 
mitted the rain to come through, instead of repairing 
the roof, placed his goods in the store, which were 
there damaged by the rain — the court held that under 
these circumstances the tenant could not recover. The 



110 LANtoLOED AND TENANT. 

rule is the same whether the damage is produced 
by water on goods or by exposure to cold, either 
in property or person (Academy of Music v. Hackett, 
2 lliU. at p. 223, citing the above). A lessee know- 
ing that his property if left upon premises will 
be exposed to injuries from storms, or otherwise en- 
dangered by a failure of the lessor to repair, has 
no right to take the hazard ; and if he does, and his 
property is injured, he can not recover of his lessor 
therefor (Cook v. Soule, 56 iV. T. 420) ; and a simple cov- 
nant to repair in no way contemplates any destruction 
of life or casualties to the person or property of any 
one, which may accidentally result from an omission to 
fulfill the agreement in any respect (Flynn v.Hatton, 43 
How. 833). If premises are in good repair when demised, 
but afterward became ruinous and dangerous, the land- 
lord is not responsible therefor either to the occupant or 
the public during the continuance of the lease, unless he 
has expressly agreed to repair or has renewed the lease 
after the need of repair has shown itself ; and this rule 
applies to a lessee out of possession who has sublet to 
another who is in possession (Clancy v. Byrne, 56 N. T. 
129), and the lessor of buildings, in the absence of fraud 
or any agreement to that effect, is not liable to the les- 
see or others lawfully upon the premises, for their 
condition, or that they are tenantable,and may be safely 
and conveniently used for the purposes for which they 
are apparently intended (Jaffe v. Harteau, 56 N. Y. 398). 

(See chapter upon Liability for Injuries to Third Persons, post.) 



COVENANTS KUNNING WITH THE LAND. Ill 



CHAPTER XII. 

COVENANTS KTJNNING WITH THE LAND. 

A covenant is said to run with the land, when either 
the liability to perform it, or the right to take advan- 
tage of it, passes to the assignee of the land. A cove- 
nant is said to run with the reversion, when either the 
liability to perform it, or the right to take advantage of 
it, passes to the assignee of the reversion. 

Questions upon this branch of the law, generally 
arise between the lessor of lands or his assignee upon 
the one side, and the lessee thereof or his assignee upon 
the other. 

The leading case upon the subject (Spencer's) will 
be found discussed in SmiWs Leading Cases (vqI. 1, 
marg. p. 23), where all the authorities upon the sub- 
ject are collated ; and further reference will be made 
only to a few of the general principles which charac- 
terize the rule, in its application to particular cases. 

The rule applies to all contracts of lease or demise, 
except where the common law has been changed by 
statute. The assignee of the lessee is in privity of es- 
tate with the owner of the reversion, and is said to be 
liable by reason of that privity. He is not liable by 
the same rule which binds him to fulfill his own agree- 
ments, because he is not in privity of contract, for he 
was not a party to the making of the contract, and his 
liability attaches, therefore, upon another ground: e. g., 
his privity of estate. 

The lessee continues liable upon the express cove- 
nants in the lease by virtue of the privity of contract, 
notwithstanding any assignment he may make, and 
notwithstanding the assignee's liability; by reason of 



113 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

the privity of estate, the lessee's liability, in respect to 
covenants which run with the land, rests both upon 
the privity of contract and of estate ; of the first he 
can not divest himself by assignment. Covenant for 
rent, therefore, may always be maintained against the 
lessee or his representatives, although he may have as- 
signed his term, and although the lessor or his grantee 
may have accepted rent of the assignee (Walton v. 
Cronly, 14 Wend. 64 ; Auriol «. Mills, iTH.dS; Post 
V. Jackson, 17 Johns, 239, a.ff'd Id. 479 ; Damb v. 
Hoffman, 3 £J. D. S. 361 ; House v. Burr, 24 Barh. 
525). 

Sugden, in his work on Vendors (note to marg. p. 
582 : 8th Am. Ed.),explains the phrase "privity of estate 
and of contract " as follows : ' ' There are three manner of 
privities, viz.: 1. Privity in case of estate only ; 2. Priv- 
ity in respect of contract only ; 3. Privity in respect of 
estate and contract together. The first, viz.. Privity ot 
estate only, as between the grantee of the lessor's rever- 
sion and the lessee, or between the lessor and the as- 
signee of the lessee, for no contract was made between 
them. The second, viz.. Privity in respect of contract 
only, which is personal privity, and extends only to the 
person of the lessor and the person of the lessee, as be- 
tween the lessor and the lessee, after the latter has as- 
signed over, for the privity of contract remains, although 
the privity of estate is destroyed ; and yet this is be- 
tween the lessor and lessee only, for in the very case, 
viz., an assignment by the lessee, there is no privity of 
contract between the lessor and the assignee, but there 
is a privity of estate between them. The third, viz.. 
Privity in respect of contract and estate together, as 
between the lessor and the lessee himself." 

It is said, however, that there are only two kinds 
of privity, namely, privity of contract and privity of 
estate. That the third privity is constituted by the join- 
ing of both between the same parties. Privity of con- 
tract is not assignable, but remains between the lessor 



COVEKATS'TS BlTTTNIIfG- -WITH.THB LAIfD. Il5 

and fhe lessee, after the privity of estate is transferred, 
to exist between otiier parties. In stating that the priv- 
ity of contract remains, it is meant only that the lessee 
would remain liable upon his personal covenant after 
be had assigned the estate. 

There is no doubt but that the rule of law which 
makes covenants run with the land as a burden, applies 
to all leases of lands, except^ where the statute has pro- 
vided against such application. So far there seems to 
be a uniform concurrence of all the authorities. It 
should, liowever, be borne in mind that the covenant in 
such case binds only the assignee, and does not reach 
parsons in possession as under-tenants, or those who 
have acquired an interest in any way except by assign- 
ment. The under-le^jsee or under-tenant holds under 
another contract, and is not, therefore, in privity of es- 
tate under the first lease. It has been a doctrine settled 
ever since the decision of Halford v. Hatch (1 Douglass 
183,) that a landlord can not maintain an action of cov- 
enant for rent against an under-tenant. 

Upon the same prin;;iple it was held in Qaackenboss. 
a. Clarl\G(ia Wend., 555), that the defendant was not 
liable upon a lease for years because no assignment had 
been made to him, although he was in possession and 
had purchased tiic rights of the lessee, had received 
from him the lease, and had declared himself owner of 
the premises. The court remarked, that " as the liabil- 
ity of the assignee rests upon his estate, it is clear that 
when it is shown that no estate is vestedin the defend- 
ant, it follows that he is not liable as assignee." 

The following covenants maybe said to run with the 
land, viz.: the covenant against nuisances, to pay rent, 
to pay taxes and asesEments, to repair, and in short any 
covenant which extends to a thing in esse, parcel of tlie 
demise and thing to be done by force of the covenant is 
annexed to and appurtenant to the thing demised, and 
goes with the land, and binds the assignee, although not 
named ; but when the covenant extends to a thing which 
15 



114 LAHDLOHD AlfD TBHANT. 

is not in being at the time the demise is made, it can not 
be appurtenant or annexed to the thing wljich hatb no 
being. In Cole v. Hnghes (i54 iV. Y. 444), the Court of 
Appeals held that the benefit of a covenant will pass 
with the land to which it is incident, but that the bur- 
den or liability is confined to the original covenantor, 
tinlessa privity of estate between him and the covenan- 
tee exists, or is created at the time the covenant is made, 
and that where an owner of land builds a party wall 
under an agreement with the adjoining owner that when 
the latter shall use it, he will pay the expense of his 
portion of the wall, that the right to compensation is 
personal to the builder, and does not pass by a grant 
of his land, and that the agreement does not run with 
the land of the adjoining owner so as to bind his subse- 
quent grantees, and that this is so, although the adjoin- 
ing owner, by the terms of his agreement, assumes to 
bind his grantees, and although one purchases of him 
with notice of the agreement. The Commission of Ap- 
peals in Brown v. McKee (57 iV. T. £84), hold that the 
criterion for determining whether a covenant runs 
with the land is the intention of the parlies, pro- 
vided tlie covenant be of such a nature that it can, 
tinder any circumstances, bind the land in respect to 
grantees, and that where covenants are of a nature that 
they can run with the land, they bind, not only the orig- 
inal parties, but. the subsequent owners of the respective 
premises, and that as affecting assignees, there is no dis- 
tinction between the benefit and the burden of a cove- 
nant ; and that both will pass alike as an incident to an 
estate in lands, and both will run with an incorporeal, 
as well ?is with a corporeal hereditament. 



StEBENDEE. 115 



CHAPTER XIII. 

SURBENDEE. 

A surrender is defined to be a yielding up of an es- 
tate for life or years to him wLo hatti the immediate re- 
version or remainder, wherein tlie particular estate may 
merge or drown by mutual agreement between fhem 
{OomyrCs L. & T., 2d ed., 336) ; a surrender is either in 
fact, by express words, clearly manifesting the inten- 
tion of the lessee to yield up liis interest, or by act and 
operation of law, when the parties without any express 
surrender do some act which implies that they have 
both agreed to consider the surrender as made (7^,), 
By statute it is enacted that "No estate or interest in 
lands, other than leases for a term not exceeding one 
year, nor any trust or power, over or concerning lands, 
or in any manner relating thereto, shall hereafter be cre- 
ated, granted, assigned, surrendered or declared, un- 
less by act or operation of law, or by deed or convey- 
ance in writing, subscribed by the party creating, 
granting, assigning, surrendering or declaring the 
same, or by his lawful agent, thereunto anthprized by 
writing" {2Edm. B. S., 139, § 6). 

This statute has been held to relate only to jthe es- 
tate intended to be surrendered, and not to the terms 
of the instrument by which it is created, and that an 
unexpired term of one year in a lease originally for 
three years may be surrendered by parol (Smith v. 
Devlin, 23 JV. Y. 363). 

The surrender of a lease, though with an agreement 
that the lessee should remain liable for the rent, and 
that the landlord might take all lawful measures for 
its collection, terminates the relation of landlord and 



lie LAtJDLOED AND TENANT. 

tenant (Bain v. Clark, 10 Johns. 424; Shepard v. Mer- 
rill, 2 Johns. Cli. 27(1) ; the surrender of tlie remainder of 
tile term does not discharge liie lessee from tlie paj'- 
ment of the rent already due (Sperry v. Miller, 8 iV. Y. 
3C6; Curtis V. Miller, 17 Bari.^'ll), though payable in 
advance (L3arned v. Byder, 61 Barh. 552 ; S. C, 5 
Lans. 539). Neither can a landlord, where rent is ex- 
pressly reserved, payable at stated periods, recover a 
proportionable pait of the rent for the occupation of 
his premises for any time short of such periods. There- 
fore, where A. demised to B the first and second floors 
of a house for a year, at a rent payable quarterly ; and 
during a current quarter some dispute arising between 
"the parties, B told A that she would quit immediately ; 
and A answered, she might go when she phased, and 
B quitted, and A accepted possession of the apart- 
ments, it was held, that A could neither recover the 
rent, which, by virtue of the original contiact, would 
have become due at the expiration of the current quar- 
ter, nor rent^7'6i rata for the actual occupation of the 
premises for any period sliort of the quarter (Grimman 
V, L-gge, 8 B. & a. 324 ; Whitehead c. Clifford, 5 Taunt. 
'518) ; and where under the usual provision that, if the 
premises became vacant, the landlord might relet and 
charge the tenant with the deficiency, and the tenant 
gave notice of his inability to continue to pay rent, and 
the landlord thereupon consented to a reletting, it was 
held not a surrender, and that the original lessee was 
still liable for the deficiency (Ogden n. Rowe, 3 E. D. S. 
312) ; and where the lessee covenants (hat if the lessor 
shall re-enter during the term for condition broken, 
and shall be unable to relet the premises for a sum 
equal to the amount of the rent reserved, that he will 
pay the lessor the deficiency, and the lessor re-enters 
and relets the iiremises for the residue of tiie term, the 
covenant is valid and binding upon the tenant, but the 
landlord can only recover of the lessee the difference 
between the amount of the rent reserved bythe original 



lease and the amouut of all the rent realized during the 
term from the original lessee and tne tenant to whom 
the premises v/ere relet ; and when tlie lessor, after a 
re entry and a reletting of the premises, nnder such con- 
dition, brings an action upon such covenant before the 
rent reserved from the tenant to wnoni be relet is due, 
he can only recover the deficiency wnich exists, after 
allowing the amount of the rent towaras the rent re- 
served from the original lessee. JNor ia such lessor 
entitled to any allowance, as against lae original lessee, 
for expenditures made upon tue premises after the 
re-entry, although thereby he was enaoied to and did 
obtain more rent for the residue ot ttie term, from the 
tenant to whom he relet the premises (Hackett v. 
Richards, 13 If. Y. 138 ; Hall v. Uonld, Id. 127). 
Where a tenant before the expirauon ol his term in- 
forms his landlord that the premises are not fit to live 
in, and that lie will surrender them ana have nothing 
farther to do with them, and pays ud the rent to that 
time, and the landlord tells him that he will let the 
premises on his account, and hold him responsible for 
the rent, held, no evidence of a suvrenaer. although the 
landlord afterwards let the premises to a new tenant, 
and received rent of him (Bloomer v. Merrill, 29 How. 
259 ; 1 i)aZ?/ 485). Proof of an oral declaration by a 
lancilord, that on payment of rent ro a particular day 
he would release the tenant from lurtner liability ac- 
companied by proof of payment of such rent, is not suf- 
ficient evidence of the surrender of premises held under 
a written lease (Goelet v. Ross, 15 Abb. Fr 251). 

Where a tenant informed his lanuiora of his inten- 
tion to remove from the demised r>remises on a certain 
day, and the latter thereupon saia ue was sorry, for 
then he must get some other person to nire the prem- 
ises ; and the landlord also gave the tenant permission 
to leave some of his property on the premises after such 
day ; held, that giving such permission is evidence from 
which an acceptance of a surrender of the premises 



lis LANDLOED AND TEJTAltt. 

could be presumed, and if so presumed no rent could 
accrue thereafter (Stanley v. Koeliler, 1 Hilt. 354). A 
lessor who has consented to a change of tenancy and 
of occupation, and received rent from the new tenant as 
an original and not as a sub-tenant, can not afterwards 
charge the original tenant for rent accruing during the 
occupation of the new tenant (Smith v. Niven, 2 Barb. 
180). After a lessee had underlet the whole of the de- 
mised premises, by two written sub-leases, the landlord 
called on the under-tenants, produced the sub-leases, 
demandt'dof them the rent reserved, forbade tlieir pay- 
ing any more rent to the original lessee, said lie was the 
rightful landlord, and had taken tlie place off tiie les- 
see's hands, and afterwards collected all the rent which 
v/as ever collectfcd'of the sub-tenants, and held Lliat there 
v/^as a surrender of the original lease by operation of 
law (Bailey v. Delaplaine, 1 Sandf. 5) ; and the mere 
acceptance by the landlord of the key of tlie demised 
premises, from a tenant who quits possession during 
the term, is not an acceptance of the surrender, where 
the landlord states that lie I'eceives the key but not the 
premises (Townsend v. Albers, 3 lU. D. 8. 560). Where 
the landlord and tenant from year to year had agreed 
that another tenant should be substituted, which sub- 
stitution was accordingly made, Holrotd, J., held 
that tliis agreement operated as a surrender in law, and 
that consequently no surrender in writing was neces- 
sary (Stone V. Whiting, 2 StarJc. 235) ; but a tenancy 
from year to year created by parol, is not determinable 
by a parol license from the landlord to the tenant to 
quit in the middle of a quarter, followed by the ten- 
ant's quitting the premises accordingly, the statute 
requires that such a surrender should be by deed or note 
in writing, or by operation of law (Mollett v. Brayne, 2 
Camp. 103) ; but where the lessee underlet, and the les- 
sor accepted the under-lessee as tenant, which accep- 
tance was afterwards assented to by the original lessee, 
the Court of King's Bench held that this amounted to 



a virtual surremier of the lessee's interest by act and 
operation of law (Thomas v. Cook, 2 B. & Aid. 119). In 
Murray v. SJjave (2 Duer, 183), the tenant requested to' 
be allowed to give np her lease, and the landlord ac- 
cepted the key and thereupon entered into a new agree- 
ment with another person, this was held a virtual 
acceptance of the landlord of the tenant's offered sur- 
render,and discharged her from her liability on the lease. 
In Kandell v. Rich (11 Mass. 494), it was held that a lease 
under seal was determined by the delivery of the key to 
the lessor, accompanied by his receipt of it, and putting 
another tenant in possession. In Talbot v. Whipple 
(14 J.?Ze7i,177),BiGELOW, C. J., said, "The rule of law as 
now settled by the recently adjudicated cases is, that 
any acts which are equivalent to an agreement on the 
part of the tenant to abandon, and on the part of the 
landlord to resume possession of the demised premise^ 
amount to a surrender by operation of law." If a land- 
lord relets the premises, without notice to the tenant 
that it is on his account, it dispenses with a formal sur- 
renderon the part of the tenant (Watts v. Atcheson, 3 
Bing. 462 ; Peter v. Kendal, G B. & C. 703) ; and after 
an original landlord has recognized under-tenants as 
his tenants and as the persons responsible to him for 
the rent, he can not hold the assignors of such sub- ten- 
ants (Carter v. Hammett, 18 Barb. 608). 

B Agent's poTTcr to accept snrienaer. 

An agent employed to let pramises and collect the 
rents has uo authority to consent to the subslitutiou of 
anew tenant, and the discharge of the original lessee ; 
that not being within the ordinar.y scope of such an 
agent's authority (Wilson v. L3Ster, 64 Barb. 431). 

i Accepting new lease. 

The statute provides that "if any lease be surren- 
dered in order to be renewed, and a new lease be made 



120 LANDIiOBb ATjlV TTEITAKT. 

by the chief JandJorcT. such new lease shall be good and 
valid to all intents and. purposes, witlionta surrender of 
all or any of the under-kaaes derived out of such orig- 
inal lease so aurrenciered ; and the chief landlord, his 
lessee, and the holders of such under-leases, shall en- 
joy all their rights and interests, in the same manner 
and to tlie same extent, as if tlie original lease had been 
still continued ; and the chief landlord shall have the 
same remedy by entry upon the demised premises for the 
rents and duties aecurea by such new lease, so far as tlie 
same do not exceed the rents and duties reserved in the 
original lease so surrenaered (I JEJdm. R. 8. 6911, § 2) ; 
and an acceptance dv the tenant of a new lease of the 
same premises, during the period of the first lease, will 
be deemed to be a virtual surrender of the former lease. 
It admits the caDaclty of the lessor to make such a 
lease, which he would not have without a surrender of 
the first lease, and the iDresumption of law is, that such 
lease has been surrendered ; for no man would take 
from an other a lease olDremises, of which he has already 
the legal control, and agree to pay him rent for it (Cole- 
man V. Maberly. S T. B. Monr. 220 ; Jackson v. Gard^ 
ner, 8 Johns. 394 : Koe v. Archbishop of York, 6 East, 
86, 90, 101 ; Abeii v. Williams, 3 Daly, 17). 



EVICTION. 121 



CHAPTER XIV. 



EVICTION. 



To be maintained in the peaceable and quiet enjoy- 
ment of the property demised to him, is the right of 
every tenant, but the obligation on the part of the 
landlord to protect his tenant in the possession and 
quiet enjoyment of the premises demised extends only 
to evictions and disturbances caused by himself, or by 
some one with title paramount, and the covenant of 
quiet enjoyment expressed or implied in a lease, only 
goes, therefore, to the extent of engaging that the land- 
lord has a good title, and can give a free unincum- 
bered lease of the premises demised, and the acts of 
strangers, not claiming under any title, can not in any 
sense be regarded as a breach of snch covenant on the 
part of the lessor (Weeks v. Bowerman, 1 Daly, 100 ; 
Johnson «. Oppenheim, 34 JV. T. Superior Court It. 
416, 428, affirmed in 55 N. T. p. 280 ; 3 Duer. 464 ; 3 
mil, 330; Taylor's L. & T. § 305); and to work a 
suspension of the obligations of the tenant, under the 
lease, while his rights under it remain in' full force, 
there must be an exclusion of the occupant from some 
portion of the premises demised, or a substantial and 
effectual deprivation of the beneficial enjoyment of the 
property in whole or in part (Edgerton v. Page, 20 N. 
Y. 281, 284 ; Lounsberry v. Snyder, 31 Id. 514). The 
following authorities illustrate the application of these 
general principles to stated cases. 

In Cohen v. Dupont (1 Sandf. 280 ; S. P. Djett v. 
Pendleton, 8 Cow. 727), it was held that it was not 
necessary that there should be a physical eviction or 
expulsion of the tenant by the landlord, to operate as 
a suspension of the tenant's liability to pay rent, and 



122 LANDLORD AND TENAKT. 

that it is sufficient that there was an interference with 
or disturbance of the beneficial enjoyment of the de- 
mised premises, intentionally committed by the land- 
lord, and injurious in its character. 

In Cohen «. Dupont {supra) it appeared that the 
defendant's principal, Dr. Chase, occupying the second 
floor of the house, had reserved to himself in the lease, 
the privilege of exercising his vocation as a dentist. 
His business necessarily would lead to many visits to 
his apartments, and to tlj^ more in proportion to his 
prosperity. 

It seems that the calls made upon him, were in fact 
numerous ; and either because they were disturbed by 
the constant ringing of tlie door-bell, or from a mis- 
chievous or malicious motive, some of the plaintiff's 
family resorted to the expediency of muffling the bell. 
This was done frequently, and was continued, after the 
tenant remonstrated with the plaintiff against it, and 
after the latter, by exercise of his authority, should 
have stopped it effectually. The consequence of this 
conduct was, that persons coming to visit the tenant as 
a dentist, would pull at the bell, and wait from fifteen 
to twenty minutes and half an hour, before effecting an 
entrance, and sometimes were compelled to leave with- 
out succeeding in getting into the house, and if persis- 
ted in, the inevitable effect of such conduct would be 
seriously to impair, if not to destroy, the tenant's pro- 
fessional business. In addition to this, and calculated 
to affect the tenant in the same way, there were a 
variety of minor offenses committed by the plaintiff's 
family. They littered the stair-carpet with nut- shells, 
dirt, and other filth, with the sweepings from the story 
above, and with water spilled upon it, and placed 
snow balls in the window-sill, &c., to drip upon the 
carpet. On one occasion, a -placard was put on the 
stairway to call attention, by his name, to the filthy 
condition of the tenant's stairs ; such condition being 
in spite of great efforts on his part to keep it clean. 



EVICTION. 123 

Impertinent and insulting language was addressed by 
the plaintiff's fanaily to persons visiting the tenant on 
business ; and loud singing and like noises were made 
on the stairway, calculated to disturb such persons. 
Such being the evidence, the Jury held that it proved 
an eviction of the tenant, and the court held that the 
conclusion was correct. 

In Dyett v, Pendleton (8 Cow. 727), it was held to be a 
good defense against a claim for rent, that the lessor 
was in the habit of bringing lewd women under the 
same roof with the house leased, though in an apart- 
ment not let, by which noise and disturbance was made, 
so that the lessee left the house with his family. 

In Rogers v. Ostrom (35 Barb. 523), it was held that 
tearing down a partition which separated the entrance 
to the tenant's room from a grog shop, so as to compel 
him to pass through the latter, in order to reach his own 
room, amounts to an eviction. 

In Smith v. Marrable (1 Carr. c& Marshm., 479), 
which was an action of assumpsit for tlje use and occu- 
pation of a furnished house, the defendant took pos- 
session, but quit at the end of four days because the 
beds, mattresses, and bedsteads were infested by bugs. 
A week's rent was tendered by him, but the action was 
prosecuted to recover for the residue of the term, which 
was four weeks. Lord Abiistger, 0. B., before whom 
the cause was tried, charged the jury that ''every per- 
son who undertakes to let a ready furnished house or 
apartment is bound to take care that the premises are 
free from nuisances ;" and he left it to thofjury to decide 
whether this house was in that condition. The jury 
found for the defendant, and on a motion for a new 
trial the court agreed that the charge was right. In 
Salisbury" v. Marshal (1 Carr. & Payne, 65), the prem- 
ises became ruinous before the expiration of the ten- 
ant's term, and he abandoned them. At the commence- 
ment the landlord said he would put tliem in good re- 
pair, and something had been done for that purpose. 



124 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

In an action for use and occupation, Chief Justice Tin- 
pal laid some stress on the peculiar words of the lease, 
and told the jury that they must determine "whether 
the premises were put into such a reasonable and de- 
cent state of repair, as that a decent family might be 
supposed to occupy them during that time ;'' " whether 
such repair had been made at the time when the de- 
fendant was to go in, as that they could be reasonably 
expected to continue during the tenancy, and give. the 
tenant the decent enjoyment of the premises.'' The 
jury found for the defendant. 

In Gilhooley-a. Washington (3 Sandf. 330, affirmed 
in Court of Appeals, 4 N. T. 217), it was held that if 
a landlord lets a part of a house to one tenant, and then 
a part of the same house to another, and ttie one ten- 
ant makes his part a disorderly house and a nuisance, 
so as to render the other portion no longer habitable, 
the lease to the latter is not thereby determined, nor is 
he excused from the payment of rent. The doctrine of 
eviction by a nuisance can not be applied where the 
landlord lets apart of his tenement in good faith, and 
is not instrumental in producing the nuisance. Nor is 
it peculiarly the landlord's duty to initiate proceedings 
against the disorderly tenant for a misdemeanor. (See 
Townsend v. Grilsey, 7 Abh. N. 8. 59 ; and see also 
title. " Fraud in the Leasing of Premises," ante, p. 
34),' 

In Randell v. Alburtis (1 Hilt. 285) it was held, that 
the refusal by a landlord occupying premises in con- 
junction with his tenant, to permit an under-tenant to 
occupy the premises demised, constituted an eviction. 
In Christopher v. Austin (11 N. T. 216), it was held 
that an eviction from part of the demised premises, op- 
erates as a suspension of the whole rent. 

In Ogilvie v. Hull (5 Hill,52) it appeared that the land- 
lord, a year and more before the expiration of the lease, 
wilfully undertook to let the premises, and posted a bill 
on the building, but desisted before the commencement 



EVICTION. 125 

of the last year, and it was held that this was not a 
constructive eviction. 

In Campbell v. Shields (11 How. Pr. 565), it was 
held that the landlord altering the wall of the house so 
as to make the rooms somewhat narrower, in compliance 
with a claim of an adjoining owner that the true boun- 
dary required it, the tenant remaining in possession was 
not an eviction. 

In Cowie ». Groodwin (9 Carr. & Payne, 378), it was 
shown that the wall of the house gave way, whereby 
the kitchen was filled with filth and rendered useless. 
The tenant quit in consequence of this state of the prem- 
ises, and an action for use and occupation was brought 
against him. Lord Denman asked the jury " whether 
these premises were unfit for proper and comfortable oc- 
cupation, and if the defendant bonaflde quitted the 
apartments as soon as he could procure others." The 
jury answered both questions in the affirmative, and 
the plaintiff elected to be non-suited. 

In Vatel v. Herner (1 Hilt. 149), it was held that an 
interference by the landlord with the person of the ten- 
ant, although on the demised premises, does not con- 
stitute an eviction ; and that the use of a privy by a 
landlord in a passage-way leading to the demised prem- 
ises, and which was there at the time of the hiring, al- 
though so used as to be offensive to the tenant, does not 
of itself constitute an eviction ; the tenant not being ac- 
tually deprived of any part of his premises. 

In Ogden ?;. Sanderson (3 E. B. S. 166), it was held 
that where the tenant is present at a negotiation to re- 
let the premises to a third person, and does not object, 
but proposes a surrender on his own part, a possession 
by such third person should not be considered an evic- 
tion. 

In Yanderpoel v. Smith (1 Daly, 311) it was held that 
the landlord continuing possession of a small part of 
demised premises for a very brief period after the ex- 
piration of the time fixed by the lease for his giving 



126 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

possession of it, without any intent to keep the tenant 
out of possession is not an eviction. 

In Lounsberry v. Snyder (31 iV. Y. 514), it was held 
that where the landlord piled fire- wood on a part of the 
demised lands, which did not interfere with the sub- 
stantial enjoyment of the premises, did not amount to 
an eviction but a trespass, and that to suspend the 
obligations of the tenant, under the lease,, while his 
rights under it remain, there must be an exclusion from 
some part of the premises, or a substantial and effectual 
deprivation of the beneficial enjoyment of the property, 
in whole or in part. 

In Edgerton v. Page (20 N. T. 281 ; S. P. Academy 
of Music V. Hackett, 2 Biit. 217), it was held that a 
tenant who has continued to occupy the whole of the 
demised premises during the whole period for which 
rent is claimed, is not released from payment of such 
rent by the landlord's acts of neglect diminishing the 
beneficial enjoyment of the premises during the period 
for which the rent is sought to be 'recovered. "While 
the tenant remains in possession of the entire premises 
his obligation to pay rent continues ; though it is 
otherwise if he is compelled to abandon possession be- 
fore the rent falls due. 

If while a tenant is in possesion of premises, the 
landlord enters and uses any part of them, he thereby 
deprives himself of his claim to rent (Griffltli v. Hodges, 
1 0. & P. 419, 420) ; so also if after a tenant has left a 
house unoccupied, the landlord enters and is in profit- 
able occupation of the house, he can not recover rent 
from the tenant after such occupation ; but this result 
will not be produced by merely putting a person into 
the house to take care of it and prevent depredations 
(Bird V. Defonvielle, -2 C. & K. 415). The landlord of 
apartments deserted by the tenant may recover rent, 
although he has put up a bill in the window for the 
purpose of letting them (Eedpath v. Eoberts, 3 £Jsp. 
225), or has lighted fires in the rooms and made some 



EVICTIOK. 127 

use of sach fires (Grifiith v. Hodges, supra) ; and the 
landlord who relets deserted premises should give 
notice to the former tenant that he lets the premises 
solely on such tenant's account (Walls v. Atcheson, 3 
Bing. 462), and a tenant who has been evicted from 
part of the demised premises does not, by the mere fact 
of demanding of his landlord a sum by way of rent for 
premises from which he has been evicted, waive his 
right of action for damages for the eviction (Drucker ». 
Simon, 4 Daly, 53). 

In Johnson v. Oppenheim (34 N. T. Superior 
Court B. 416; aff'd 55 N. Y. 280; 3. P. White v. 
Mealis, 37 N. Y. Superior Court B. 72; 3 Buer. 464 ; 
2 Bosw. 127), it was held the acts of strangers erecting 
a building on an adjoining lot do not amount to an 
eviction, and that the landlord was not answerable for 
such acts ; and a landlord owning a lot adjoining prem- 
ises demised may build on such lot, notwithstanding 
the building cuts light and air from the premises de- 
mised. Such an act on the part of the landlord is not 
an eviction (Palmer v. Wetraore, 2 Sandf. 316 ; 9 N. 
Y. Leg. Obs. 173 ; 10 Barb. 537), and the undermining 
the tenant's wall, by an adjoinining owner, is no ex- 
cuse for the non payment of rent (Kramer v. Cook, 7 
Gray, 550 ; 37 If. Y. SupW Ct. 73 ; 3 Buer. 464 ; 2 
Bosw. 127). 

Effect of eviction. 

An eviction from part of the demised premises by the wrongful act 
of the landlord operates as a suspension of the whole rent (Christopher 
«. Austin, 11 N. T. 316), but if the eviction be by title paramount, 
the rent is to be apportioned (Blair v. Claxton, 18 N. Y. 539 ; Lansing 
v. Van Alstyne, 3 Wend. 561, 563). 



Eminent domain. 

The act of appropriating property under the right of eminent 
domain, is not an eviction which will bar a suit for rent (Folts v. 
Hautley, 7 Wend. 310 ; see Gillilan v. Spratt, 3 Daly, 440). 



128 LANDLORD AND TENAKT. 



What the eviction affects. 

The eviction does not affect arrears of rent, but that accruing 
afterwards (McKeon_«. Whitney, 3 Den. 453; Giles v. Comstock, 4 
N. T. 370), and the rule is the same although the rent is payable in 
advance, and the eviction occurs before the expiriation of the period 
in respect to which the rent is claimed {Id. Whitney®. Meyers, 1 
Buer. 366J, and the eviction onl^ suspends the rent during the con- 
tinuance of the eviction (Ogden ». Sanderson, 3 E. B. S. 166). 



UNTENANTABLE PREMISES. 129 



OHAPTEE XV. 

THE STATUTE RELATING TO UNTENANTABLE PREMISES. 

LAWS 1860, CHAPTER 345. 

An Act in relation to the Sights and Liabilities of Owners and Lessors, 

and of Lessees and Occupants of Buildings. 

Passed April 13, 1860. 

The Peo^jle of the State of New York, represented in Senate 
Assembly, do enact as follows: 

Section 1. The lessees or occupants of any building which shall, 
without any fault or neglect on their part, be destroyed, or be so in- 
jured by the elements, or any other cause, as to be untenantable and 
unfit for occupancy, shall not be liable or bound to pay rent to the 
lessors or owners thereof, after such destruction or injury, unless 
otherwise expressly provided by written agreement or covenant, and 
the lessees or occupants may thereupon quit and surrender possession 
of the leasehold premises, and of the land so leased or occupied. 

Sec. 3.* This act shall take effect immediately. 

Construction of said act. 

The act does not apply where the injury complained 
of existed at the time of the making of the lease 
(Bloomer v. Merrill, 1 Daly, 485 ; 29 Eow. Pr. 259) ; 
and where a tenant took possession of demised prem 
ises and removed within twenty-fonr hours thereafter, 
on account of blasting, on the adjoining lot, and it not 
appearing whether the house was unfit for occupation 
before or after the tenant took possession, it was held 
that the tenant was not exonerated by the act of 1860 
from paying rent (Murray v. Waller, 42 How. Pr. 64) ; 
and to be absolved from paying rent, under this act, 
the tenant must surrender possession of the premises, 
and he will be held liable for the whole rent if he retain 
possession of any part (Johnson v. Oppenheimer, 34 
JSr. Y. Superior Oourt, 416, affd in 55 If. Y. 280). 

In Fash v. Kavanagh (24 How. 347), it appeared 

that the defendant occupied rooms in the plaintiff's 

* So in the original. 
17 



130 lANDLOED AND TENANT. 

building, under a hiring by the month, the rent being 
paid in advance. The action was brought for the 
month's rent, payable August first, and' the tenant's de- 
fence was twofold : 1. That he removed from the prem- 
ises in the month of July, and before the rent claimed 
became due. 2. That before he left, the contents of 
the privy attached to the house overflowed his apart- 
ments, rendering them untenantable, and unfit for occu- 
pancy ; and having been on this account obliged to aban- 
don them, he was not thereafter bound or liable to pay 
rent, and in delivering the opinion of the court, Hilton 
J. , said : " I think the proof at the trial entitled the ten- 
ant to judgment on both grounds. The defendant testi- 
fied positively that he left on the 23d of July, and then 
oflfered the keys to the piainti&''s agent, who declined 
to receive them. That at the time, the filth from the 
privy had flowed over his apartments, rendering them 
untenantable and unfit to occupy." The learned judge 
after deciding that the tenancy was only for the month, 
and that it had been terminated before the rent sued 
for accrued, proceeded to the second ground of de- 
fense, and said that "the reason assigned by the tenant 
for leaving was undoubtedly sufficient to justify an 
abandonment under the provisions of the act of 1860 " 
{supra), and referring to that act he continued: " The 
injury contemplated must obviously be of a piiysical 
nature, such as if done by the landlord would amount 
to an eviction of the tenant from the whole or part of 
the demised premises. It must be to the building 
occupied, and not caused by the privity or procure- 
ment of tlie tenant, or by his neglect or want of proper 
care. If it be of the nature the present case discloses, 
I have no doubt it would fall within the class of injuries 
which the law was passed to meet. As an occupant 
of premises in a tenement house, the defendant was not 
bound to either see to the erection of a proper sink or 
privy upon premises, or to cause it to be emptied, to 
prevent an overflow. This was a matter which the 



TlNTEKANTABLE PREMISES. 131 

landlord who, by maintaining a building of that 
class— one of those so-called modern improvements 
which the necessities of the present day have required 
to be erected in the compact portion of oiir city, 
where rents are high and the poor abound— was 
required to look after and prevent, or else stand to 
the consequences. I do not mean to be understood 
as holding that a landlord is required, after he 
has rented a house, to attend to the emptying of the 
sinks and cesspools attached to it ; on the contrary, 
that duty ordinarily devolves upon the tenant, who is 
bound to see that the premises are not injured by any 
inattention to his duties in this respect ; but I do mean 
to say, that modern improvements require appropriate 
rules, and, as in a tenement house, no occupant of a 
single room, renting direct from the landlord for a 
short and may be uncertain term, generally from 
month to month, can be required to perform this duty, 
it follows of necessity that it must fall upon the land- 
lord to attend to it. On the other hand, if, as the 
plaintiff' s agent testified, the filth came from the ad- 
joining premises, and as it is not contended it thus 
came through any fault, procurement or neglect of the 
defendant, it was equally an injury to the building 
within the provisions of the law referred to. It will 
probably be said that if this view be correct, a landlord 
may be left without remedy against the acts of those"^ 
who covertly furnish his tenants with excuses for aban- 
doning demised premises. I can only answer, that the 
statute is certainly extraordinary in its character, and 
may give rise to great abuses being practiced under it 
by unwilling tenants upon land-owners ; but it is our 
duty only to construe its provisions, and not speculate 
upon the injustice it may produce, leaving it to future 
legislatures to remedy any of the evils that may spring 
from it." 

In Suydam v. Jackson (54 N. 1'., 450) it was held 
"that the act of 1860 before referred to, has reference to 



132 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

a destruction or injury from some sudden and unex- 
pected action of the elements, or other cause, and not to 
the gradual deterioration and decay produced by the 
ordinary action of the elements, and that it does not af- 
fect the common-law rule requiring the tenant to make 
ordinary repairs." This is the most important decision 
under this act, and is controling as to the construction 
of it. 

(See Title "Eviction, " ante, p. 121.) 



OF EXCAVATIONS. 133 



CHAPTER XYI. 

OF EXCAVATIONS. 

Excavations, particularly upon city lots, frequently 
tend to endanger adjoining buildings, and therefore give 
rise to important questions of duty and responsibility, 
which sometimes require prompt decision upon the part 
of those interested, in order that the rights of property 
and possession, in the buildings endangered should 
receive the necessary protection and support from the 
persons owing that duty. These questions, therefore, 
more frequently arise between the owner or occupant of 
the buildings endangered by the excavation, on the one 
side, and the party making the excavation upon the 
other ; and sometimes come up between the tenant of 
the endangered building and his landlord, and in order 
to present the respective rights, duties, and liabilities 
of these several interests intelligently, it will be neces- 
sary to consider first the general right to excavate, and 
next the rights of the adjoining owner, and of his ten- 
ants in possession of the building endangered by the 
excavation, growing out of the inconveniences arising 
therefrom. First. As to the general right to excavate, 
the maxim, sic utere tuo, ut alienum, nov IcBdas, is not 
of universal application ; for as a general rule, a man 
who exercises proper care and skill, may do what he 
will with his own property, provided the act done does 
not amount in law to a nuisance (Radcliff's Executors t?. 
The Mayor, &c., of Brooklyn, 4 N. T., 196), and an own- 
er may excavate his land to any extent he deems neces- 
sary for building purposes, or for any legitimate use to 
which he intends to put the property, being liable only 
for the want of proper care and skill in doing the work. 



134 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

Of course the landlord can not excavate upon any part 
of the demised premises, during the term, without the 
tenant's consent, for such an excavation would amount 
to an unlawful deprivation by the landlord of part of 
the thing demised, and would operate as a constructive 
eviction of the tenant, and as a suspension of the rent, 
while the eviction continued. 

Excavations as affecting adjoining: owners. 

A distinction is made in many of the cases between 
the right of an owner of unimproved property to its 
natural support from adjoining land, and the right of 
an owner who has, by the erection of buildings, put 
au artificial weight upon his land so as to require for 
it greater support than it would have required in its 
natural state ; and while the first right is sustained 
by numerous authorities, the latter right is universally , 
denied. 

This distinction is stated by Rolle, in his abridgment. 
He first gives the Judgment of the court in Wilde «. 
Minsterley, to the effect that if A erect a house on the 
confines of his land next adjoining the land of B, and 
B afterwards digs his land so near the foundation of 
A' s house (but on no part of his land), that thereby 
the foundation, and the house itself, fall into the pit, 
yet no action lies by A against B, because it was A's 
own fault that he built his house so near to B's land ; 
for he, by his own act, can not hinder B from making 
the best use of his own land that he can. Rolle then 
adds: "But it seems that a man who has land next 
adjoining my land can not dig his laud so near mine 
that thereby my land shall go into the pit; and, there- 
fore, if an action had been brought for that, it would 
lie." 

This same distinction was noticed and approved in 
Thurston «. Hancock (12 Mass., 220 ; see also Farrand 
«. Marshall, 21 Barb. 409). In Lasala v. Holbrook 



OP EXCAVATIONS. 135 

(4 Paige, 1 69), the Chancellor decides that I can not, 
by erecting a building near the extremity of my own 
land, deprive the adjoining owner of the right of dig- 
ging In his own soil for a legitimate purpose, even 
though my house be thereby ruined, but he says, " I 
have a natural right to the use of my land, in the situ- 
ation in which it was placed by nature, surrounded and 
protected by the soil of the adjacent lots ; and the owners 
of those lots will not be permitted to destroy my land by 
removing this natural support or barrier;" but the 
Court of Appeals in Radcliff's Executors w. The Mayor 
&c., of Brooklyn (4 N. T. at p. 203), speaking of this 
distinction say, that although the reasoning of the 
Chancellor is not without some force, so long as the 
land on both sides remains in its natural state, yet it 
was considered unsound — especially in reference to 
property in cities and large towns — the court observing 
that if the doctrine were carried out to its legitimate 
cons(?cLuences, it would often deprive men of the whole 
beneficial use of their property ; that an unimproved 
lot in the city, would be worth little or nothing to the 
owner, unless he were allowed to dig in it for the pur- 
pose of building ; and that if he may not dig because 
it will remove the natural support of his neighbor's soil, 
he has but a nominal right to his property, which can 
only be made good by negotiation and compact with 
his neighbor: that a city could never be built under 
such a doctrine ; and Beojstson, C. J., in the same case 
says, " I think the law has superseded the necessity 
for negotiation, by giving every man such a title to his 
own land that he may use it for all the purposes to 
which such lands are usually applied, without being 
answerable for consequences ; provided he exercise 
proper care and skill to prevent any unnecessary injury 
to the adjoining land-owner." But a man may do many 
things under a lawful authority, or in his own land, 
which may result in an injury to the property of others, 
without being answerable for the consequences. In- 



136 LAIfDLORD AND TENANT. 

deed an act done under lawful authority', if done in a 
proper manner, can never subject the party to an ac- 
tion, whatever consequences may follow. Nor will a 
man be answerable for the consequences of enjoying 
his own property in the way such property is usually 
enjoyed, unless an injuiy has resulted to another from 
the want of proper care or skill upon his part ; and a 
man may in the enjoyment of his own property, withoat 
being liable for consequential damages build upon his 
own land, though it stops the lights of his neighbor 
(Parker v. Foot, 19 Wend. 309), and even though he 
build for the very purpose of stopping the lights 
(Mahan v. Brown, 13 Id. 261) ; and a man has aright to 
build a fence upon his ground for the purpose of dark- 
ening the windows of his neighbor (Pickard v. Collins, 
23 Barb. 444). He may pull down his own house, 
though the adjoining house fall for the want of the sup- 
port which it before had ; and he may do it without 
shoring up the adjoining house — that being the business 
of the owner (Peyton v. The Mayor, &c. 9 B. & O. 
725). He may pull down his own wall, though the 
vaults of his neighbor be thereby destroyed (Chad wick 
v. Trower, 6 Bing. N. G. 1). He may build a house, 
and make cellars upon his soil, whereby a house in the 
adjoining soil falls down {Com. Dig. action on the case 
for Nuisance, c). He may dig in his own land, though 
the house which his neiglibor has previoasly erected at 
the extremity of his land be thereby undermined and 
and fall into the pit (2 Hollers Abr. Trespass, I. pi. 1 ; 
Wyatt ?). Harrison, 3 B. & Ad. 871). 

In Panton v. Holland (17 Johns. 92), the defendant 
excavated for the purpose of laying the foundation 
walls on his lot adjoining the plaintiffs house on the 
contiguous lot, whereby the walls of the plaintiffs 
house were cracked, and the house was otherwise in- 
jured ; and it was held that no action would lie. 

In Lasala v. Holbrook (4 Paige, 169), the plaintiffs 
were the owners of a church, built within six feet of 'the 



OF EXCAVATIONS. 137 

line of their lot, and the defendant, for the purpose of 
building in Ms adjoining lot, was sinking the foundation 
for his building sixteen feet below the natural surface of 
the ground, and ten feet below the foundation of the 
church, whereby the foundation of the church was 
greatly endangered ; and yet an injunction to restrain 
the excavation, which had been granted by a master, 
was dissolved by the chancellor, on the ground that 
the defendant was exercising a lawful right. 

In Thurston v. Hancock (12 Jf ass. 220), the plain - 
tiflE had built a valuable house on Beacon hill, in the 
city of Boston, one side of the house being within two 
feet of the side of his land, and had taken the pre- 
caution to sink his foundation fifteen feet below the 
ancient surface of the ground. Seven years afterwards 
the defendant commenced digging and carrying away 
the earth from his adjoining land, and dug to the depth 
of from thirty to forty-five feet below the natural sur- 
face of the ground ; by reason of which the foundation 
of the plaintiff' s house was rendered insecure, and he 
was obliged to take the house down. And yet it was 
held that no action lay for the injury to the house, be- 
cause the defendants having the entire dominion, not 
only of the soil, but of the space above and below the 
surface, could not be restrained in the exercise of their 
right, unless by covenant, or by custom ; that the 
house had not the qualities of an ancient building, so 
that the plaintiff could prescribe for the privilege of 
which he had been deprived ; and that a man who 
builds a house adjoining his neighbor's land ought to 
foresee the probable use by his neighbor of the adjoin- 
ing land. 

In Dodd V. Holme (1 Ad. v. Ellis, 493), the defen- 
nant was held liable on the ground that the injury 
complained of was occasioned by his negligence. 

In Pennsylvania, it was held that where the owner 
of two adjoining lots builds thereupon, he is bound to 
use proper materials and reasonable skill. If he does 

18 



138 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

not, and the wall falls, upon his neighbor's excavating 
his own lot, using reasonable care, no damages are re- 
coverable (Rickart o. Scott, 7 Waits, 460 ; and see Oat 
V. Middleton, 2 Miles, 247 ; Norris v. Adams, Id. 337 ; 
White V. Snyder, Id^ 395). 

An owner has the right to take down his building 
and excavate the soil, or to do the latter act alone. 
Although by these acts the other building is injured 
or endangered, this furnishes no ground of action pro- 
vided reasonable notice was given, and proper care used 
in the operation, which is a question for the jury. It 
is otherwise, however, where an adjoining owner claims 
under a grant or an ancientor prescriptive right pertain- 
ing to the building or the foundation. This title limits 
and controls that of his neighbor ; so, where the wall of 
the house taken down has long supported the beams 
of the other house, this may give a right to have the 
beams inserted in the new wall (Peyton v. St. Thomas, 
9 Barn. <& Cr. 725 ; Massey v. Goyder, 4 Carr. & P. 
161 ; Wyatt v. Harrison, 3 Barn. & Ad. 871 ; Jones v. 
Bird, 5 Barn. & Aid. 837 ; Rickart v. Scott, 7 Watts, 
460 ; Dodd v. Holme, 3 Nev. & M. 739 ; 1 Ad. & Ml. 
493 ; Trower v. Chadwick, 3 Bing. JST. C, 334 ; Part- 
ridge V. Scott, 3 Mees. & W. 220 ; Bradbee v. Govern- 
ors, &c., 2 Dowl. p. R. 164 ; Davis v. London, &c., 2 
Nich. (&c., 308). A declaration alleged that the plain- 
tiffs were possessed of a vault, and of certain wine 
therein ; that the defendant was about to pull down and 
remove certain other vaults and walls, next adjoining 
the plaintiff's vault ; and therefore was bound, in the 
event of his not shoring- up or protecting said vault, to 
notify the plaintiff of his intentions, that the plaintiff 
might thereby protect his own property ; and also to 
pull down and remove the vaults and walls with such 
care and skill that the plaintiff' should not be injured 
thereby, and it was held that the defendant was not 
bound to shore-up the plaintiff's vault, to notify him 
of his intentions, nor, in the absence of any knowledge 



OF ExcAvAWojsrs. l39 

on his part as to the existence and situation of the 
plaintiff's vault, to use such care and skill in the ope- 
ration, as would prevent injury to the plaintiff (Chad- 
wick V. Trower, 8 Scott, 1 ; 6 Bing. N. O. 1). 

A. owned a building, the footing of one of the walls 
of which supported one of the walls of an adjoining 
house, belonging to B. A being about to pull down 
and remove the foundations of his house, notified B of 
his intention, and used reasonable and ordinary care in 
the work, but took no means to preserve B's building, 
although the nature of the soil required him to lay the 
new foundation several feet deeper than the old ; and 
it was held that A was not liable for an injury thereby 
caused to B's house (Massey v. Goyder, 4 Carr. & P. 
161). 

In an action on the case the declaration alleged 
that A was lawfully possessed of a dwelling-house, 
adjoining a dwelling-house of B, and that B dug into 
the soil and foundation of the latter so negligently, 
and so near A's house, that the wall of this house gave 
way. Upon demurrer to that part of the declaration 
which alleged the digging so near, &c., the defendant 
had judgment. The question was stated to be, 
whether, if one builds to the extremity of his own 
land, the adjoining owner may dig the ground there so 
as to remove some of the soil which supported the 
building. It was suggested, that if the building were 
an ancient one, or if it did not increase the weight upon 
the soil of the party erecting it, an action might lie. 
But one is not to be debarred from digging his own 
soil, because his neighbor's will then become incapable 
of supporting an artificial weight (Wyath ■». Harrison, 
3 Barn. & Ad. 871). 

In Brown ». Windsor (1 Oromp. & Jer. 20), an excep- 
tion to the rule arising out of acquiescence on the part 
of the plaintiff was considered. These facts appeared: 
In 1803, the house of A, the plaintiff, was built against 
the pine end wall of the house of B, the defendant, by 



140 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

permission. In 1829, B made an excavation in a care- 
less and unskillful manner, in his own land, near this 
wall, thereby weakening it and injuring A's house, anJ 
it was held, that both the express permission and the 
long acquiescence gave A a right of action ; and that the 
declaration alleging ownership of a house, belonging to 
and supporting which were certain foundations, was 
well supported, as it intended only an easement in 
such foundations. 

In several of the cities, party walls, buildings, and 
excavations are regulated to a certain extent by statute. 
The New York statute, applicable to lands in the cities 
of New York and Brooklyn, provides : 

"§34. That whenever excavations hereafter com- 
menced, for building or other purposes, on any lot or 
piece of land in the city and county of New York, 
and the city of Brooklyn, shall be intended to be 
carried to the depth of more than ten feet below 
the curb, and there shall be any party or other wall, 
wholly or partly on adjoining land and standing upon 
or near the boundary lines of such lot, the person 
causing such excavations to be made, if afforded the 
necessary license to enter on the adjoining land, and 
not otherwise, shall at all times from the commence- 
ment until the completion of such excavations at his own 
expense, preserve such wall from injury, and so support 
the same by a proper foundation that it shall remain 
as stable as before such excavations were commenced 
(1855, ch. 6, and see 2 B. S. 5th {Banks) ed. p. 1002). 

This statute, it will be observed, changes the com- 
mon-law rule, as to those two cities (New York and 
Brooklyn), in cases where the party excavating intends 
to carry the excavation to the depth of more than ten 
feet below the curb, and in such cases the persons 
causing such excavations to be made, if afforded the 
necessary license to enter on the adjoining land, and 
not otherwise, are required at all times from the com- 
mencement until the completion of such excavations, at 



OF EXCAVATIONS. l4l 

their own expense, to preserve suet wall from injury and 
to so support the same by a proper foundation that it 
will remain as stable as before such excavation was 
commenced. The duty under this statute attaches to 
the party making the excavation only in cases where 
it is intended to carry the excavation to a greater depth 
than ten feet below the curb, and in such sases only 
upon being afforded by the owner of the adjoining land 
the necessary license, to enter upon it, for the purpose 
of such protection, and this license must be explicit, 
and sufficient to protect the party excavating, and it 
should be given by all persons who would be injur- 
iously affected by such acts (Sherwood v. Seaman, 2 
Boaw. 127), and in all other cases the common-law 
rule remains in force. 

The effect of adjoiuiug excavations upon the relation between the 
landlord and tenant of the house inconvenienced by them. 

If a tenant in possession of a building suffer 
damage to his possessory rights by adjoining exca- 
vations, he may if it be a case in which the party mak- 
ing the excavation is liable in damages according to 
law, recover by action whatever damages his particular 
estate or property received by the wrongful act of the 
party excavating. 

As between the tenant thus injured and his landlord, 
however, the rule of law is that a landlord, in the ab- 
sence of an express covenant, is under no obligation to 
repair, or to do any act to protect his tenant from the 
consequences of the lawful acts of the owner of adjoin- 
ing premises, in excavating them to such depth as would 
endanger the stability of the demised premises (Sher- 
wood V. Seaman, 2 Bosw. 127; Howard o. Doolittle, 3 
Duer. 464 ; White v. Mealio, 37 N. Y. Superior Qt. 
72) ; and mere knowledge of the landlord, that his ten- 
ant is willing that he should give tlie license provided 
for by statute, does not create a duty to give it, nor 



142 lanUloed And IbnaNI. 

subject the landlord to an action, because he did not 
give it (Sherwood v. Seaman, supra). 

A lessee, who covenants to restore the premises at 
the end of the term, "in as good order and condition, 
&c. (reasonable use and wearing thereof, fire and other 
unavoidable casualties excepted), as the same now are 
or may be put into by the lessor," and to pay rent dur- 
ing the term, is not excused from paying rent, by the 
undermining of the partition wall by the owner of the 
land adjoining, while building upon his own premises, 
after notice to the lessor of his intention to build, and 
the lessor's omission to support the wall, even if by the 
custom of the place, the landlord is bound to support 
and secure his foundation and walls in such cases 
(Kramer v. Cook, 7 Oray {Mass.) 550). 

A lease that provides that the landlord may at rea- 
sonable hours in the day time enter the premises to ex- 
amine or to make such repairs . and alterations therein 
as shall be necessary for the presevation thereof, or of 
the building, gives a clear right and authority (in case 
the excavation of the adjoining property threatens in- 
jury or destruction to the building or premises leased), 
to enter the premises and shore-up and strengthen the 
same, by running large pieces of timber known as 
"needles" through the basement to support the floor 
of the store occupied by the tenants, and in such case 
the landlord is not liable in damages to the tenant, for 
an interruption to business, &c., unless it appears that 
the work was done in an unskillful and negligent 
manner (White v. Mealio, 37 N. T. Superior Ct. 72). 

And where a landlord owning a lot adjoining the de- 
mised premises, built a house on such lot so as to cut 
off the tenant' s light and air, the obstruction was held 
not to amount to an eviction (Palmer v. Wetmore, 2 
Sandf. 316 ; Myers o. Gemmel, 10 Barb. 537). 

Other acts of adjoining owners. 
Where a person is authorized to do an act upon an- 



OF EXCAVATIONS. 143 

other' s premises the natural effect of which is to endan- 
ger the lives and property of those giving the authority, 
the person so authorized to do the act is bound to 
provide and maintain all suitable and proper safeguards 
against injurious results therefrom. The law presumes 
that the authority given is coupled with that condi- 
tion. 

The owner of land is, therefore, limited in the use of 
it, by the rights of others to the lawful possession of 
theirs, and in making use of his own he is liable for 
direct injuries to their possession, without regard to 
the extent or motives of the aggression. Thus the 
owner who in making a lawful excavation on his own 
land, casts earth and stones upon that of his neighbor 
by blasting is answerable for the damage, though no neg- 
ligence or want of skill be proved (Hay v. Cohoes Co., 2 
JV. Y. 159, 163, afl'g 3 Barb. 42 ; Gourdier z. Cor- 
mack, 2 B. D. S. 200 ; Ulrich v. McCabe, 1 Hilt. 251) ; 
and in such case the tenant may have an action for his 
injury to his possession, as well as the reversioner, 
under the statute, for injury to the reversion (Gourdier 
V. Cormack, supra; Ulrich v. McCabe, Id. ; Hardrop 
V. Gallagher, 2 E. D. 8. 523). 

ExcaTation adjoining highway. 

Where excavations are made so near to a highway, 
that a person passing along by slipping may be precip- 
itated into it, the person making the excavation will be 
liable for all the injuries sustained thereby, provided 
the person injured was himself guilty of no contribu- 
tory negligence. A person can not rush blindly upon 
danger, and then charge the responsibility for his inju- 
ries upon another. In an action for injuries sustained 
by falling into a sewer in course of construction in a 
public street, it was held, that although the plaintiff 
previously knew that the sewer was being constructed, 
yet in the absence of any guard-light, or other special 



144 



LAWDLOED AWD TENANT. 



notice sufficient to call her attention to the hazard she ran, 
she was not guilty of contributory negligence in attempt- 
ing to cross the street ; that in such an action it is a 
question of fact for the jury to determine, on conflict- 
ing evidence, whether at the time of the accident the 
excavation was without sufficient guard or light, and 
that it was also a question for the jury in such a case, 
under proper instruction by the court, whether the 
plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence (Bate- 
man V. Ruth, 3 Daly, 378). 



PARTY WALLS. 145 



CHAPTER XVII. 

PARTY WALLS. 

In our populous cities, the value of land and proper 
economy in its use, have given rise to that species of 
easement known as party walls. Their frequent use 
suggest many interesting questions affecting the rights 
and liabilities of those owning adjoining lands, separ- 
ated by party walls. These walls are generally used 
between two estates for their common benefit, in sup- 
porting adjoining buildings. They may rest entirely 
upon the land of one or upon that of two adjoining 
owners, in equal or in any other agreed proportions. 
They are created by grant, agreement, or by prescrip- 
tion. In general, however, party walls will be found 
"to be built on the common property of the two, and 
to be the common property of both ; ' ' and in the 
absence of any further proof than that which is afforded 
by evidence of a common user, such, will be presumed 
to be the case. By the common law, party walls exist 
only by virtue of statutory provisions, grant, or pre- 
scription. If one lot owner erects a building upon the 
extremity of his land, the walls of which are entirely 
within his own domain, an adjoining owner can not 
use the wall to support his timbers without rendering 
himself liable as a trespasser. But if he fastens his 
timbers in the wall by the consent of the owner, and 
maintains them there uninterruptedly for twenty years, 
or the usual statutory period, the wall becomes 
charged with the servitude of support as a party wall, 
and to that extent the owner loses his absolute and 
entire control over the wall. 

The most usual and ordinary method of creating 

party walls is where the owner of adjoining lots erects 
19 



146 LANDLOED AND TEKANT. 

a block or a row of buildings thereon, the walls of each 
lot mutually supporting the other, and conveys the lots 
separately, making the wall the dividing line between 
the two. The mere fact, however, that a wall has been 
built partly upon to adjoining lots and is used by both, 
does not necessarily make it a party wall (Roberts v. 
White, 2 Jiob. 425) ; nor does the fact that an ad.join- 
ing owner has inserted the timbers of his building 
into the walls of the other owner, without permission, 
give him any right to the support of the wall, even 
though done without objection, unless there has been 
an express and unequivocal ratification of the act, or it 
has been continued for the statutory period (McOon- 
nel V. Kibbee, 33 111. 175). The question whether 
an executed verbal agreement between adjoining 
owners in regard to a party wall, was enforceable 
or not, came up in the New York Marine Court at the 
June term, 1875, upon a motion for a new trial, in the 
case of Polye v. Sheehy, et al. (reported in the New 
York Daily Begister, of July 12, 1875), the opinion in 
which case contains the various authorities upon the 
subject, and it is on that account considered of suffi- 
cient interest for publication. 

McAdam, J. — This action is brought to recover one- 
half of the expense of a party wall, erected one-half 
upon the plaintiff's land and one-half on land which 
the plaintiff' claims belongs to the defendants. The re- 
covery is claimed under a parol agreement, made 
about July, 1870, whereby the defendants agreed to 
pay the plaintiff" three hundred and fifty dollars, upon 
the completion of the work. The jury, upon the con- 
clusion of the trial, found the contract to be as alleged, 
and also found that it had been performed in all things 
by the plaintiff", and awarded him a verdict for the 
agrefed price, with interest. The defendants now move 
for a new trial, upon the ground that the agreement is one 
which creates an interest in land, and that it is on that 
account void, not being in writing (3 R. S., 5th ed. p. 



PAETt WALLS. 14"? 

220, §§ 6, 8). This objection is inapplicable to the pres- 
ent case. 

The agreement does not create an interest in lands 
within the meaning of the statute. It is substantially 
an agreement to pay for improvements upon land, dis- 
tinct from title or possession, or in other words, to pay 
for work and labor bestowed upon the land, and such 
promises, although by parol, do not come within the 
statute (Lower v. Winters, 7 Qow. 263 ; Frear v. Har- 
denbergh, 5 Johns. 272 ; Benedict v. Beebee, 11 Id. 
145 ; see also 37 N. T. 106). 

The Superior Court, general term, in Maxwell v. 
East River Bank (3 Bosw. 146 ; per Bos worth, J.), 
held: "We regard it as settled law, that when the 
owners of adjoining lots agree, though verbally, that 
each will erect a building or store on his own lot, and 
that the dividing wall shall be a party wall, and shall 
be used to support the beams and roof of each building, 
and they build according to such agreement, and 
with a view to execute it, neither can remove or do any- 
thing to impair the stability or sufficiency of such wall, 
so long at least, as the buildings continue in a condi- 
tion to subserve in every substantial respect the uses 
for which they were erected." 

In McLarney v. Pettigrew (B E. D. Smith., Ill), an 
action commenced to recover the alleged consideration 
for a parol license, granted by the plaintiff, to insert into 
the wall of his house the beams of a building in course 
of erection by the defendant, the Common Pleas, 
general term, held: "There is nothing in the contract 
giving the defendant any interest in the land. When- 
ever the wall shall be removed the plaintiff' s title to the 
land will remain unimpaired, and the defendant will 
have no claim to rebuild the wall on the plaintiff's lot 
or to use any other wall the plaintiff might build. It 
is a mere license to insert the beams in the present 
wall, without any interest in the land on which the 



148 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

wall stands. A license of this kind is not within the 
statute." 

In Talmadge v. Kensselaer & S. E,. R. Co. (13 Barb. 
,493), the Supreme Court held that an agreement by one 
party, on a sufficient consideration, to build and keep 
up a division fence between him and the other party is 
not an agreement creating an interest in the lands, and 
does not fall within any of the cases where the contract 
was required to be in writing. The rule that an action 
will not lie upon a parol contract creating an interest in 
land has, like many general rules, its exceptions, de- 
pending upon the peculiar circumstances of each par- 
ticular case ; and, where such contracts have been fully 
executed upon the one side, recoveries have in some in- 
stances been allowed against the other, notwithstanding 
the statute. (For example, see Thomas v. Dickenson, 
12 N. Y. 364 ; Bowen v. Bell, 30 Johns. 338 ; Murray 
«. Smith, 1 Duer, 412 ; Hess v. Fox, 10 Wend. 436). 

In Rundge v. Baker (67 iV. Y. 209), the Commission 
of Appeals held that where, under a parol agreement 
between two adjoining proprietors to jointly build a 
party wall, one-half on the premises of each, and the 
parties have gone on and built a portion of the wall, 
and the one who has prepared his materials and 
planned his buildings in view of and relying upon the 
performance of the contract, upon the refusal of the 
other to proceed, may complete the wall himself, and 
recover of the other one-half of the expense, and that 
the statute is no impediment to such recovery. 

The contract sued upon in the present case, although 
not in writing, was under the circumstances binding up- 
on the parties, and for this reason the motion for a new 
trial must be denied. 

The general principles of law, in regard to party 
walls, are best illustrated by a reference to the authori- 
ties, in which these principles have been applied to the 
peculiar circumstances of particular cases. Thus when 
the owners of adjoining lots, by agreement, construct a 



Paety walls. 149 

wall, partly on each lot, for the common support of 
their buildings, the wall so constructed, if used as such 
for twenty years, is a party wall in the legal sense of 
the term, and the owner of each house has an easement 
for its support in that portion of the wall which stands 
on the adjoining lot. So, when the owner of two ad- 
joining lots erects a building on each with a wall partly > 
on each lot, for their common support, a conveyance 
by him of either lot, conveys with the building an ease- 
ment for its support on that part of the wall which 
stands on the other lot (Webster v. Stevens, 5 Duer, 
553 ; S. P. Eno v. Del Yecchio, 4 Id. 53). This is true 
not only of the foundation wall (Webster v. Stevens, 
5 Duer, 553 ; Eno v. Del Vecchio, supra), but of the 
entire wall of the building abutting upon the adjoining 
premises, so far as it is made use of by, and furnishes 
support for, the building of the adjoining owner, even 
though the wall is not made the division line. A con- 
veyance of part of a block, or row of houses, in the 
usual form with all appurtenances passes an easement 
for the support of the part of the building so conveyed 
(Eno V. Del Vecchio, supra.; G-len v. Davis, 35 Md. 
2o8; 6 Am. Hep. 389) ; and the easement would pass 
even though the word "appurtenances" was wholly 
omitted from the conveyance. The easement is open 
and apparent, and passes as an incident to, and a part 
of the estate the same as any other easement. 

In the United States v. Appleton (1 Sumn. TJ. S. 
492), it appeared that in 1808 a block of buildings was 
erected in Boston, consisting of a central building and 
two wings, wit]i a piazza extending along, in front of, 
and for the entire length of the central building, with 
doors in the sides of the wings, which opened on, and 
swung over the piazza, the upper part of which doors 
had glass in them, and were used as windows. In 1811, 
the two wings were conveyed to different persons, no 
mention being' made in the conveyance of the doors 
opening upon the piazza. In 1816 the central building 



l50 lANDLOED ANi) TtiNAlir*. 

was sold and conveyed to the United States. The Grov- 
ernment claimed the right to erect a building to cover 
their entire lot, which would close up the doors of the 
wings ; but the court held that the use of these doors 
and windows passed as appurtenances, and that, too, 
without any reference to the length of time they had 
been used. There is no duty or obligation on 
the owners of adjoining building lots in a city, to unite 
in building a party wall on the dividing line 
(Sherred v. Cisco, 4 Sandf. 480). If the owner of 
a city lot, on building it, place half of the wall upon 
the adjoining lot ; the owner of the latter is not liable 
to contribute towards the expense of the wall, upon his 
subsequently using, in his own erection, the part which 
stands upon his own land {Id.). So where party walls 
are erected by one of two adjoining lot owners, the wall 
resting upon the land of both, there is no obligation at 
common law on the part of the other owner to contiibute 
toward the expense of the construction of the wall, 
where he subsequently uses it as a support for a build- 
ing erected by him. His doctrine rests upon the prin- 
ciple that the land owner is to^be his own judge as to 
what disposition he will make of, or what erection he 
will make upon his land, and that he is not to be bene- 
fited without his own request or sanction (Moore v. 
Cable, 1 Johns. CTi. 385 ; Gillett «. Maynard, 5 Johns. 
58 ; Dewey v. Osborn, 4 Cow. 329 ; Erwin v. Olmstead, 
7 Id. 229 ; Sherred v. Cisco, 4 Sandf. 480) ; where two 
adjoining owners enter into an agreement by which one 
of them erects a party wall resting upon the land of 
each, and erects a building thereon, under a promise 
from the other owner that whenever he uses the wall 
by the erection of a building thereon, he will pay one- 
half of the expenses thereon, he will pay one-half of 
the expense of the construction, this is not a covenant 
running with the land, and will not be binding iipon, 
nor can it be enforced against the grantee of the adjoin- 
ing lot in favor [of the grantee of the builder ojF the 



PAETT WALLS. 151 

wall, even though lie uses the wall as a support for a 
building erected by hira after his purchase of the pre- 
mises. The benefit of a covenant passes with the land 
to which it is incident, but the liability imposed by the 
covenant is confined to the original covenantor, unless a 
privity of interest between him and the covenantee exists 
oris created at the time when the covenant is made, such 
a covenant is personal to the builder, and does not pass 
by grant (Hurd v. Curtis,19 PicTc. 459 ; Black v. Isham,16 
Am. Law Reg. [Ind.] 8 ; Keppel v. Bailey, 7 Myl. & K. 
517 ; Todd «. Stokes, lOPenn. Si. 155 ; Davids v. Harris, 
9 Id. 503 ; Gilbert v. Drew, 10 Id. 219 ; Hart v. Kurcher, 
5 ;S'. c& i2. 1 ; and see the cases cited at page 114, anie, 
but see Brown v. Pentz, 1 Abb. Ot. of App. Decis. 
227, and 57 N. T. 684). A grant to A. and his heirs, 
and his right to erect and maintain a party wall on the 
top of the grantors wall ; Jield, even, if not in fee, to 
give the right so long as the sustaining wall stood, and 
answered the purpose (Brondage v. Warner, 2 Hill, 
145). 

Party wall not an incumbrauce. 

A party wall creating a community of ^interest be- 
tween adjoining proprietors is in no sense to be deemed 
a legal incumbrance upon the property, and a party 
purchasing a hotel and premises at public auction, 
without being informed that part of the walls of the 
hotel adjoining other buildings are party walls, can not, 
for that cause, refuse to complete the purchase. As 
between adjoining proprietors maintaining party walls, 
their mutual easement in walls is a benefit and not a 
burden to each of them. It is a valuable appurtenant 
which passes with the title of the property (Hendricks 
t. Stark, 37 ISf. Y. 106). 

ProTlsioiis of the building law upon the subject of party walls. 

The statute relating to buildings in the city of New 
York, passed April 20, 1871 (chap. 625, as amended, 



152 LANDLORD AND TENANT. ' 

May 22, 1874, chap. 547), contains among others the fol- 
lowing provisions in reference to buildings in said city. 
Section 3, among other things provides that, "Whenever 
there shall be any excavation, either of earth or rock, 
hereafter, commenced upon any lot or piece of land in the 
city of New York, and there shall be any party or other 
wall wholly or partly on adjoining land and standing 
upon or near the boundary line of said lot, if the 
person or persons whose duty it shall be, under exist- 
ing laws, to preserve and protect said wall from injury 
shall neglect or fail so to do, after having had a notice 
of twenty-four hours from the department of buildings 
so to do, the superintendent of buildings may enter 
upon the premises, and employ such labor and take 
such steps as in his judgment may be necessary to 
make the same safe and secure, or to prevent the same 
from becoming^unsafe or dangerous, at the expense of 
the person or persons owning said wall or building of 
which it a may be a part, and any person or persons 
doing the said work, or any part ^thereof, under and 
by direction of the said superintendent, may bring and 
maintain an action against the owner or owners, or any 
one of them, of the said wall or building of which it 
may be a part, for any work done or materials furnished 
in and about the said premises, in the same manner as 
if he had been employed to do the said work by the 
said owner or owners of the said premises." 

Section 5 provides that : "In all dwelling-houses that 
may hereafter be erected not more than fifty-five feet 
in height, the walls shall not be less than twelve inches 
thick, and if above fifty-five feet in height, and not 
more than eighty feet in height, the outside walls 
shall not be less than sixteen inches to the top of 
second story floor beams ; provided the same is twenty 
feet above the curb level, and if not. then to under side 
of the third story beams, and also provided that ])ortion 
of the wall that is twelve inches thick, shall not exceed 
forty feet above the said sixteen inch wall ; and in 



PAETT "WALLS. 153 

every dwelling-house hereafter erected more than 
eighty feet in height, four inches shall be added to the 
thickness of the wall for every fifteen feet or part 
thereof that is added to the height of the building. 
All party walls in dwellings over fifty-five feet in 
height shall not be less than sixteen inches in thick- 
ness." 

Section 6 provides that: "In all buildings other 
than dwellings hereafter erected, the bearing walls shall 
not be less than twelve inches thick to the height of 
forty feet above the curb level ; if above forty feet in 
height, and not more than fifty -five feet in height, the 
bearing walls shall not be less than sixteen inches 
thick ; if above fifty -five feet, and not more than seventy 
feet in height, the bearing walls shall not be less than 
twenty inches thick, to the height of twenty feet above 
the curb level, or to the next tier of floor beams above, 
and not less than sixteen inches from thence to the 
height of fifty-five feet above the curb level or the next 
tier of floor beams, and not less than twelve inches 
thick from thence to the top ; and if above seventy feet 
and not more than eighty-five feet in height, the bear- 
ing walls shall not be less that twenty -four inches thick 
to the height of twelve feet above the curb level or the 
second story floor beams, and from thence to the height 
of sixty feet above the curb level, the said walls shall 
not be less than twenty inches thick, and from thence 
to the top not less than sixteen inches thick ; and if 
above the height of eighty -five feet, the bearing walls 
shall be increased four inches in thickness for every 
fifteen feet, or part thereof, that shall be added to the 
height of said wall above the eighty-five feet. In all 
buildings over twenty-five feet in width, and not having 
either brick partition walls or girders supported by 
columns running from front to rear, the walls shall be 
increased an additional four inches in thickness, to the 
same relative thickness in height as required under this 
section for every additional ten feet in width of said 

30 



154 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

building, or any portion thereof. It is understood that 
the amount of materials specitied. may be used either in 
piers or buttresses, provided the outside walls between 
the same shall in no pase be less that twelve inches in 
thickness to the height 'of forty feet, and if over that 
height, then sixteen inches thick ; but in no case shall 
a party wall between the piers or buttresses of a build- 
ing be less than sixteen inches in thickness. In all 
buildings hereafter erected, situated on the street corner, 
the bearing wall thereof (that is, the wall on the street 
upon which the beams rest), shall be four inches thicker 
in all cases than is otherwise provided for in this act. 
All walls other than bearing walls may be four inches 
less in thickness than required, in the clauses and. pro- 
visions of this section above set forth, provided no wall 
is less than twelve inches in thickness." 

There are various other general provisions concerning buildings in 
the city of New Yorlc, and their mode of construction, and the char- 
acter of the materials to be used therein, and these statutes will be 
found in the laws of 1871, cli. 635, amended in 1874, by ch. 547, of 
the laws of that year, and reference "is thereunto made for such of said 
general provisions as are not hereinabove contained. 



Increasing the thickness of party and other walls. 

The statute contains the following provisions upon 
the subject : 

" § 35. It shall be lawful to increase the thickness of 
any partition wall or other wall between two adjoining 
buildings in the city of New York, erected, before the 
passage of the act of 14th April, eighteen hundred, and 
fifty-six, in relatiofi to buildings in said city, provided 
that such additions be properly and securely tied into the 
original wall by iron fastenings or slabs of stone, so as 
to make a firm wall of not less than sixteen inches in 
thickness ; and such wall when so altered shall be 
deemed and taken to be a sixteen-inch wall in like 
manner as if originally built of that thickness, anything 



]PAET-5f WALtS. loS 

in the before-mentioned act to the contrary notwith- 
standing" (1857, ch. 225, § 1). 

The act above referred to is chap. 188, of Laws, 1856, entitled, 
"An act to provide against unsafe buildings in the city of New 
York." 

"§ 36. If any owner or part owner of any wall here- 
tofore erected between two adjoining buildings in the 
city of New York, shall refuse to give his written con- 
sent to the reconstruction thereof, by the entire substi- 
tution of a new wall of the thickness now required by 
law in buildings more than fifty feet in height, it shall 
be lawful to increase the thickness of such wall by ad- 
ditions thereto, to be firmly secured by sufficient and 
proper iron anchors, or slabs of stone, making together 
a wall of at least sixteen inches in thickness ; and such 
wall so strengthened and increased shall be deemed 
and taken to be a sixteen-inch wall, in like manner as 
if the same had been originally built of that thickness" 
(1857, ch. 225, § 2). 

Chap. 6, of the Laws of 1855, entitled, "An act respecting excava- 
tions in the cities of New York and Brooklyn," will be found at page 
140, ante; and the above sections, 35 and 36, will be found in chap. 
235 of the Laws of 1857, under the title of "An act in relation to 
party walls in the city of New York." See also 3 B. 8. 5th (Banks) 
ed.^page 1003. 

Diminishing thickness of party wall. 

The owner of land having a party wall is not per- 
mitted to pare oS" a portion of the wall upon his prem- 
ises with a view to the erection of a new wall entirely 
upon his own land, nor in any manner deal with the 
wall so as to diminish its sufficiency or strength (Phil- 
lips V. Bordman, 4 Allen, 147). 

Increasing height and depth of party wall. 

The height of the wall may be increased, and any 
changes made therein that the taste or convenience of 
either owner may dictate, so long as the same can be 
done without detriment to the strength of the wall^ or 



166 LANDLOBD AND TENANT. 

to the property of the adjacent owner ; but the party- 
making the addition does it at his peril ; he stands as an 
insurer to the other of the safety of the work, and 
against injurious results therefrom ; and if injury does 
result he is liable for all the consequences (Brooks ». 
Curtis 50 N. T. 639 ; Eno «. Del Vecchio, 4 Duer, fiS ; 
Moody V. McClelland, 39 Ala. 45 ; Bertram v. Curtis, 
31 Iowa, 46 ; McGrittigan v. Evans, 8 Pfiila. 264). 

Either owner may do what he can with the wall to 
serve his individual necessities ; as to lower it, sink it, 
or raise it (Eno «. Del Vecchio, 4 Duer, 53 ; and see 
Brooks V. Curtis, 50 N. T. 639), if he can do so with- 
out injury to the other. 

And an agreement for a party wall does not prohibit 
either owner from extending the building beyond it in 
front and in rear (Wolfe «. Frost, 4 Sandf. Gh. 72). 

Under a covenant, in an executory contract for the 
sale of a lot of land, by the vendor, to erect upon 
an adjoining lot, along the boundary line, a wall, and to 
grant to the purchaser the right to use such wall, in the 
erection of a house, specifying the particular manner 
in which it was to he used, it was held, that the pur- 
chaser did not acquire thereby a right to use such wall 
in any other way than that specified ; and that he was 
not entitled to prolong the limited course of his front 
wall across the boundary line of such two lots, so as 
to enter into the front wall of the vendor's building at 
the point or line where those walls meeting, adjoined 
the party wall (Fettretch v. Leamy, 9 Bosw. 510). 

Kepairiug party walls. 

Where two adjoining owners have erected a party 
wall at their joint expense, and have applied it to their 
joint benefit, each is botind to contribute ratably toward 
the expense of its necessary repair. But if the wall had 
become ruinous and fallen into decay, or is destroyed 
by fire or other cause, no liability attaches on the part 



PARTY WALLS. l67 

of either owner to contribute toward the construction of 
a new wall, if he has no present use therefor, even 
though he subsequently make use of the wall by build- 
ing thereon (Sherred v. Cisco, 4 Sandf. 480 ; Glen v. 
Davis, 35 Md. 208 ; 6 Am. Bep. 389). But where the 
buildings upon the two lots are still standing, if the 
walls get out of repair, each owner is bound to contrib- 
ute to its repair, but this liability does not exist except 
where there is a real necessity for repairs, and never 
when the expense is incurred merely to suit the con- 
venience, or to serve the capricious ends of one of the 
owners, or when the adjoining owner has no further 
use for the wall ; nor when the wall has become so ru- 
inous as to serve no useful end ; but when repairs in 
the wall are rendered necessary, either party has a right 
to make them, upon reasonable notice to the other, 
using such care and skill in the prosecution of the 
work as circumstances may require. 

Taking down party wall. 

If the wall is intact and capable of yielding sup- 
port to one owner, it can not be taken down by the 
other, even though his building has been destroyed by 
fire, and every part thereof except this wall rendered 
utterly useless. The wall itself must have become un- 
safe or useless, or it can not be interfered with to the 
injury of the other (Brondage «. Warner, 2 Hill, 145 ; 
Eodgers v. Sinsheimer, 50 iV. ¥. 646 ; Evans v. Jayne, 
23 Penn. St. 34 ; Partridge v. Gilbert, 15 If. T. 601) ; 
but if the walls fall into a state of decay so that it be- 
comes necessary to take them down and rebuild them, 
either party has the right to do so, upon reasonable 
notice to the other, using such care and skill in the 
prosecution of the work as the circumstancs may re- 
quire (Partridge «. Gilbert, supra; Dowling v. Hen- 
nings, 20 Md. 179 ; Richards v. Rose, 9 Bxc/tq. 218 ; 
Oranshaw v. Sumner, 56 Mo. 517). 



158 tAlTBLOllD AKD TENANT. 

In an action on the case by A, the owner of a leased 
house, against B, the owner of the adjoining house, for 
an injury for the pulling down of B's house, it ap- 
peared that the two houses were very old and decayed, 
and the party wall between them weak and defective. 
For some time pieces of timber, called struts, had been 
carried across H lane, on the east side of which B's 
house stood, to the opposite house on the west side of 
the lane. A' s house adjoined B's eastward; and the 
struts, in sustaining B' s, also supported A's. When 
B' s house was taken down, the struts were necessarily 
removed, and no others substituted, nor were any up- 
right shores placed in A's house to sustain the floors 
and roof, either of which measures would have answered 
the desired end. A's house consequently parted from 
the house adjoining it on the east, became unsafe to 
inhabit, partly fell or was taken down and rebuilt. B 
gave no notice that he was going to pull down the 
house, but both parties knew the defective state of the 
houses. There had been previous discussions between 
"them, especially with regard to the party wall, and the 
statutory notice of rebuilding it had been given, but 
within the time fixed B's house was taken down. The 
taking down was done by day, and A's tenant must 
have known of it. Held, in the absence of evidence of 
any right to have his house supported by the defend- 
ants, he was bound in law to protect himself by the 
use of shores within, and that he could not compldin 
that the defendant had neglected to do it (Peyton ». 
The Mayor, 9 Barn. & Ores. 725). 

In Potter v. White (6 Bosw. 644), it was held that 
one of the owners of a party wall, used as such with- 
out written agreement for twenty years, can not re- 
move it without the consent of the other, so long at it 
remains sound and suitable for the purposes of its 
erection. 

In Eno V. Del Vecchio (6 Duer, 17), it was held that 
an improper interference with a party wall by one 



PAETY WALLS. 159 

owner, which injures the other building, is a trespass ; 
and either the tenant or the reversioner may maintain 
an action therefor, against the owner who employs a 
contractor to do the work by which the injury is done, 
as well as against the contractor ; and that it is not 
necessary to prove any negligence. 

In Partridge v. Gilbert (15 N. Y. 601, alfg 3 Duer, 
185), it was held that when one building becomes so 
delapidated as to be unsafe and unfit for occupation, 
and. the removal of the front and rear walls, with the 
floors and beams, would occasion the destruction of 
the entire wall, the owner of such building may, on 
reasonable notice to the adjoining tenant, lawfully take 
down the whole wall ; and if he occupy no unnecessary 
time in completing the work, and use proper care and 
skill in its execution, he will not be responsible to the 
adjoining tenant for damages resulting from exposure 
to weather, from loss of business, or inability to let the 
upper lofts. 

In Keteltas v. Penfold (4 E. D. 8. 132), it was held, 
that under a contract that a "division wall" should 
be taken down, and "in the place thereof" a party 
wall put up "on the division line," "to rest equally 
on the ground of each" party ; that the new wall was 
to be erected on the division line occupied by the for- 
mer wall, and that A's devisees, sued upon his cove- 
nant, could not defend on the ground that the line was 
not the true boundary. 

Rebuilding party wall. 

In Partridge v. Gilbert (15 JV. T. 601), it was held 
that the easement in a party wall ceases when the walls 
falls into such a ruinous condition as to serve no useful 
purpose except by being replaced by a new one, and 
that neither owner has the right at common law, against 
the remonstrance of the other, to rebuild the wall and 
claim contribution therefor (see also Sherred v. Cisco, 
4 Sandf. 480). The easement ends with the destruc- 



160 LAKDLOED AND TENANT. 

tion of that in which it existed, and in the absence of 
a binding covenant between the parties or running 
with the land, neither party can be compelled to re- 
build it, or to contribute toward the expense thereof, if 
it is rebuilt by the other (Glen v. Davis, 35 Md. 308 ; 
6 Am. Bep. 389 ; Pentz v. Brown, 5 JV. Y. Leg. Obs. 
19 ; Webster v. Stevens, 5 Duer, 558 ; Daniel v. North, 
11 Bast, 372 ; Partridge v. Gilbert, 15 N. T. 601). 

When a party wall between two houses has been 
rebuilt, all the servitudes belonging to the former one 
revive and continue in respect to the new wall or new 
house. 



OTHER EASEMENTS. 161 



CHAPTER XYIII. 



OTHEE EASEMENTS. 



I. Definition of Easement. 
II. Rights of Way. 
III. Rights under covenant as to character of adjoining buildings. 



Definition of Easement. 

An easement may be defined to be a privilege that 
one neighbor hath of another by grant, charter or pre- 
scription. It contemplates two distinct tenements — the 
dominant, to which the right belongs, and the servient, 
upon which the obligation rests ; although it is not nec- 
essary that the dominant and servient estates should be 
contiguous. 

II. 

Rights of way. 

One of the most common class of easements or ser- 
vitudes known to the law is that of ways, or the right 
of one man to pass over the land of another in some par- 
ticular line. 

"A way of necessity" over the land of another is 

always of strict necessity, and this necessity must not be 

created by the party claiming the right of way. It never 

exists where a man can get to his property through his 

own land. That the way through his own land is too 

steep or too narrow, does not alter the case. It is only 

where there is no way through his own land that the 
ai 



162 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

right of way over land of another can exist. That a 
person claiming a way of necessity has already one way 
is a good plea, and bars the plaintiff. A way of nec- 
essity, ex vi termini, imports a right of passage 
through the lands of another, as being indispensable. 
Nor can one claim a way of necessity because of its su- 
perior convenience over another way which he has ; or 
as stated by another class of cases, a right of way ex- 
ists only where the person claiming it has no other 
means of passing from his estate into the public street 
or road. 

Of rights of way, there are two kinds, public and 
private. Public rights of way are rights of passage 
which every individual is entitled to enjoy, for the 
purpose of passing from one locality to another ; while 
private rights of way are rights which belong to a par- 
ticular individual only, or to a body of individuals, 
either for the purpose of passage generally, or for the 
purpose oi. passing from a particular tenement of which 
they are possessed. 

III. 

Rights under covenant as to character of adjoining 
'buildings. 

It is well established, that under a covenant in a 
deed, providing against certain constructions, which 
may be noxious or offensive to neighboring inhab- 
itants, those who have suffered from a breach of the 
covenant, though not parties to the deed, will be 
afforded relief in equity. As the covenant is intended 
for their benefit, it will be deemed to have given an 
easement in the land, and a court of equity will inter- 
pose to give them relief, by injunction against its in- 
fraction (Gribert v. Peteler, 38 JS. J. 165). A covenant 
in a deed of land, not to erect a building on a common 
or public square owned by the grantor in front of the 



OTHEli EASEMENi^S. 168 

premises conveyed, is a covenant running with the 
land, and passes to a subsequent grantee of the prem- 
ises without any special assignment of the covenant 
(Trustees, &c. v Cowen, 4 Paige, 510), and where the 
owner of a block of ground in the city of New York 
divided it into lots, and sold the lots from time to time, 
to different individuals, and the conveyances of the 
lots contained mutual covenants between the grantor 
and grantees, respectively, against the erection of any 
livery stable, slaughter-house, glue factory, &c., upon 
any part of the lots conveyed, or any other manufac- 
tory, trade, or business, which might be any wise 
offensive to the neighboring inhabitants, it was held, 
that the covenants in the deeds of the different lots 
were for the mutual benefit and protection of the pur- 
chasers of lots in the block. And although a previous 
purchaser from the owner of the block could not sue 
at law, upon the covenant in the deed to a subsequent 
purchaser, the Court of Chancery might protect him 
by injunction against the carrying out of any noxious 
business or trade upon tlie lot of such subsequent 
purchaser (Barrow ». Richard, 8 Paige. 351). The 
owners of the lots on the north side of St. Mark's Place, 
in the city of New York, agreed by parol that the 
houses to be erected thereon should be set back eight 
feet from the line of the street, so as to have a court- 
yard of that depth and of the width of the lot in front 
of each house. The agreement was carried into effect by 
the erection of a row of dwelling-houses on a line with 
each other and having each a courtyard in front, and 
it was held, that the agreement thus executed became 
binding on the parties and their grantees, so as to ren- 
der it the duty of a court of equity to restrain its viola- 
tion. And that each house thus erected became a 
servient tenement with respect to the others, to the ex- 
tent of the space in front, and to that extent each 
acquired an easement, that unless by the consent of all 
the owners could not be disturbed, and that an injunc- 



164 LANDLOBD AND TENANT. 

tion restraining the defendants, who by mesne convey- 
ances had become the owners of the lots, from building 
on the space so agreed to be left open, was properly 
granted (Talmadge v. East River Bank, 2 Duer, 614 ; 
S. C. on app. 36 iV. T. 105 ; S. C. sub. tit. Maxwell v. 
East Eiver Bank, 3 Bosw. 124 ; and see Perkins v. 
Coddington, 4 Mobt. 647) ; and a covenant against nuis- 
ances contained in a deed under which a person claims 
title constitutes an incumbrance within the meaning of 
that term, as settled by the authorities (Roberts «. 
Levy, 3 Abb. N. S. 311 ; Gibert v. Peteler, 38 JV. Y. 

165 ; In re Whitlock, 10 Abb. 316 ; Trustees of Water- 
town -0. Cowell, 4 Paige, 510 ; 4 Robt. 647 ; 5 Oowen, 
143 ; 21 Wend. 120 ; 8 Paige, 351 ; 12 How. Pr. 551 ; 
26 N. Y. 105 ; 23 Barb. 153). 



LIABILITY TO THIED PEKSONS. 165 



CHAPTER XIX. 

LIABILITY TO THIRD PERSONS. 

I. Of tenant, 
n. Of landlord. 



Of tenant. 

The tenant, as occupier, is 2?rma/ac?'e liable to the 
public for injuries to third persons, caused by want of 
repairs, whatever private agreement there may be be- 
tween him and the landlord ; but if he can show that 
the landlord is to repair, the landlord is liable for neg- 
glect to repair (The Mayor «. Corlies, 2 Sandf. p. 303). 
In Cheetham b. Hampson (4 T. B. 318), an action on 
the case was brought for not repairing fences, whereby 
the plaintiff was injured, and it was held that the action 
could only be maintained against the occupier, and not 
against the owner of the fee, who was not in posses- 
sion ; and the same rule was laid down in 3 Ld. Ray. 
804. 

The following case shows the extent to which the 
principle that the tenant or occupier is alone liable, has 
been carried : "Where a complaint for damages in 
consequence of injuries received by the plaintiff in 
falling down, by the giving way of a back stoop and 
stairs, on a certain building owned by the defendant ; 
alleged, that the defendant, as owner, was bound to 
keep the premises, and especially the said stoop and 
stairs, in good condition and repair, and had neglected 
and refused to do so ; and in consequence of such neg- 
lect and refusal, the plaintiff had sustained the inju- 



166 lANDLOED AND TENANT. 

ries complained of. Held, bad oa demurrer, because 
it appeared from the complaint that the premises were 
occupied, not by the defendant, but by third persons, 
and consequently it was upon the tenants, and not upon 
the defendant, as owner and landlord, that the duty of 
keeping them in repair presumptively rested, and that 
the averment that the defendant was bound to repair, 
without stating any facts from which the obligation re- 
sulted, was plainly insufficient, it being a conclusion of 
law" (Corey V. Mann, 14 How. 163). 

It has been said that a landlord who lets a house 
in a dangerous state is not liable to the tenants, cus- 
tomers, or guests for accidents happening during the 
term (per Eakle, C. J., in Kobins v. Jones, 15 G. B. 
N. 8. at p. 240) ; but it has since been held, that a 
landlord who lets or relets premises in such a state as 
to constitute a nuisance, is responsible for such nui- 
sance, notwithstanding the tenancy ; and that the con- 
tinuance of a tenancy from year to year is equivalent 
to a reletting (Gaudy v. Jubber, 5 B. &S.78; 33 L. J. 
Q. B. 151 ; but see 6 B. (& S. 485 ; 4 0. B. 783 ; 16 L. J. 
0. P. 278) ; and owners of real property who let it 
with the defects complained of, are liable for injuries 
sustained by third persons by reason thereof, notwith- 
standing the possession was in their tenants at the time 
of the injury (Moody v. The Mayor, 43 Barb. 282 ; 
S. C. 84 How. Pr. 288) ; and if an owner so constructs 
and adapts a building, that in its ordinary use it would 
be injurious and offensive to plaintiff, and cast unwhole- 
some odors into his house, he is liable for the nuisance 
thus caused. But if it proved a nuisance by reason of 
a special, unusual circumstance, he is not liable (Pick- 
ard w. Collins, 23 Barh. 444) ; where a tenant having a 
long lease of premises, so uses them as to create a nui- 
sance, the landlord, having no power or right of inter- 
ference, incurs no responsibility (Judgment of Comp- 
TON, J., in Gandy ». Jubber, ^ B.& 8., p. 78; 88 L. J. 
Q. B. p. 154). 



LIABILITY TO THIRD PBRSOH"S. 167 

An owner of the freehold is liable for injuries re- 
sulting from the condition of the freehold itself, caused 
by his own negligence, whether in his actual occupa- 
tion or not ; and if he have let to another, with cove- 
nant to repair, he has been held liable to any third 
person for injuries resulting from his neglect to repair. 
If he build the upper part of his house so negligently 
that it fall, he is liable for his negligence to whomso- 
ever may suffer thereby ; and if he let a part of a 
building to one, and by reason of his construction of 
other portions of the same building, the tenant sustain 
an injury, the owner is liable (Eakin i). Brown, 1 £J. D. 
S. 43). Either the landlord or the tenant, or both, are 
liable to indictment by the public for maintaining a 
ruinous house in a public place, or a house in a con- 
dition that endangers the safety of the public. But if 
the defects are due to the original faulty construction 
of the house, the landlord is alone liable. So, too, for 
injuries arising to adjoining owners therefrom (Todd 
V. Flight, 9 0. B. [iV. -S\] 377 ; Rex «. Pedly, 1 Ad. & 
Bl. 822 ; Bellows «. Sackett, 15 Barh. 96). Vhere the 
houses are in good repair when the tenant goes into 
possession, and become ruinous while in the tenant's 
possession, the tenant alone is liable for the consequen- 
ces, public or private (Payne w. Rodgers, 2 H. & Bl. 
349 ; Leslie xi. Pound, 4 Taunt. 648 ; Bobbins v. Jones, 
33 2,. J. C. P.l; Bishop v. Trustees, 1 Ell. & Ell. 
697 ; Chauntler v. Robinson, 4 Exch. 163). 

In cases of negligence consisting of a mere omis- 
sion of duty, where no affirmative fault, misfeasance or 
affirmative wrong was committed by the defendant, 
or is imputed to him, it is essential to sustain a re- 
covery, to establish that the defendant owed some 
clear, specific legal duty to the party injured which 
was violated, and as between landlord and tenant, 
the law is well settled, that when there is no fraud 
or false representations, and in the absence of an 
express warranty or covenant to repair, there is no 



168 LANDLORD AND TEWAKT. 

implied covenant that the demised premises are suit- 
able or fit for occupation, or for the particular use 
which the tenant intends to make of them, or that they 
are in a safe condition for use. The principle of caveat 
emptor applies to all contracts for the letting of prop- 
perty, real, personal, or mixed, as much as to contracts 
of sale, with one or two recognized exceptions; and 
when there is no covenant on the part of the lessor to 
repair the buildings upon the demised premises, he is 
not liable to respond in damages to a servant of the 
tenant, for injuries sustained by reason of a want of 
repairs, and when a lessor is under no obligation to 
repair the premises, and their condition is equally as 
well known to the tenant as to him, there is no basis 
for an action against him for negligence, by the tenant 
or any servant of his, or person standing in his place, 
arising from the fact that the premises were out of 
repair (O'Brien v. Capwell, 59 Barb. 497). 

In respect to the necessity of averring that the defend- 
ant owed some specific legal duty to the party injured 
which has been violated, before any liability attaches to 
the defendant, the case of Grillis v. The Pennsylvania 
Railroad Company (8 Am. Law. Beg. JV. S. 729), fur- 
nishes a striking illustration. The plaintiif in that ac- 
tion alleged that the defendants, being a corporation 
for conveying freight and passengers, and having the 
sole control of the passenger depots, platforms, &c., 
along the road for the mutual accommodation of them- 
selves and the public, bnilt a platform at the Johns- 
town Station, bridging a chasm over the bed of an 
abandoned canal, on whioti large numbers of people 
were in the habit of congregating, ' ' as matter of general 
custom ;" and that it was the duty of the defendant to 
construct the pla.tform so as to make it safe and keep it 
in good repair ; that it had come to the knowledge of 
the defendants that the timbers of the platform were 
rotten, and " insufficient to support a large multitude of 
people," but that they, notwithstanding, insufficiently 



LIABILITY TO THIRD PEESQi^fS. 169 

repaired it ; that on the 14th of September, 1866, " on 
the occasion of the visit of Andrew Johnson, President, 
&c., and suite, to Johnstown." The defendants fur- 
nished a special train, and made a special time sched- 
ule for their accommodation, by which the train was 
required to stop a longer time than usual for passen- 
ger trains at Johnstown, &c., the company notifying the 
people at Johnstown and vicinity of the time of arrival 
and departure of the train at Johnstown, the stoppage 
being made by the direction of the defendants, to give 
the people an opportunity of receiving Mr. Johnson and 
hearing him; that it had been publicly made known that 
wherever Mr. Johnson and his company had stopped 
large numbers of people congregated, and thereupon it 
became the duty of the defendants "to have the plat- 
form aforesaid made sufficiently strong to bear and up- 
hold as many people as might congregate thereon on 
the occasion aforesaid ; " that the defendants knowing 
the insecure condition of the platform, did not use due 
diligence to have it made secure, but permitted and in- 
vited "a large multitude of people to congregate" 
thereon without notifying them or the plaintiff of its in- 
secure condition ; that the platform broke and precipi- 
tated the multitude with the plaintiff into the<chasm, by 
which he was injured and wounded, and the Supreme 
Court of Pennsylvania held, "that the platform of the 
railroad company at its station or stopping place was 
in no sense a public highway. That there was do ded- 
ication to public use as such. That it is a structure 
erected expressly for the accommodation of passengers 
arriving and departing in the train. That being unen- 
closed, persons are allowed the privilege of walking over 
it for other purposes, but they have no legal right to 
do so," and Judge Shaeswood, in delivering the opin- 
ion of the court, said : " That plaintiff may not have 
been technically a trespasser. The platform was open ; 
and there was a general license to pass over it. But 
he was where he had no legal right to be. His pres- 

33 



170 LANDLOED AND TEWANT. 

ence there was in no way connected with the purposes 
for which the platform was constructed. Had it been 
the hour for the arrival or departure of a train, and he 
had gone there to welcome the coming or speed a part- 
ing guest, it might very well be contended that he was 
there by the authority of defendants, as much as if he 
were actually a passenger, and it would then matter 
not how unusual might have been the crowd, the de- 
fendants would have been responsible. As to all such 
persons to whom they stood in such a relation as re- 
quired care on tJieir part, they were hound to have the 
structure st/rong enough to hear all who could stand on 
it. As to all others, they were liable only for wanton 
or intentional injury. The plaintiff was on the spot 
merely to enjoy himself, to gratify his curiosity, or to 
give vent to his patriotic feelings. The defendants had 
nothing to do with that. I am bound to have the ap- 
proach to my house sufficient for all visitors on busi- 
ness or otherwise ; but if a crowd gathers upon it to 
witness a passing parade and it breaks down, though 
it may be shown not to have been sufficient even for its 
ordinary use, 1 am not liable to one of the crowd, — / 
owe no duty to him. If a traveller by foot, on the 
open track of a railroad, crosses a bridge which ought 
to be, but is not in its ordinary use, strong enough to 
bear a locomotive and train of cars, and a rotten board 
breaks down under him, the company are not liable to 
him, for they owe him no duty ; and the court conclude 
by saying, that however much to be lamented was the 
sad occurrence which occasioned the suit, and however 
much sympathy may be felt for those who were in- 
jured, and the families of those who lost their lives, we 
are of the opinion that the circumstances of the case 
were not such as to cast any pecuniary responsibility 
on the railroad company, and a verdict for the defend- 
ants Tipon the direction of the court below was affirmed. 
The mere agreement of a landlord to repair, has ref- 
erence only to the condition of the premises demised 



LIABILITY T^O THIED PEESONS. 171 

for the purpose of their profitable use, and in no way 
contemplates any destruction of life or property, which 
may accidentally result from an omission to fulfill the 
agreement, and a landlord under covenant to repair is 
liable only for a breach thereof, and a claim can not ex^ 
ist on the part of sufferers from defects to a piazza ap- 
purtenant to a tenement house, occurring from natural 
wear and tear, in an action for a tort or negligence 
against the landlord, whose only obligation exists in 
contract with the tenant in possession, and such claim 
can only be founded on some other negligence, trespass, 
or wilful breach of a direct public or private duty to the 
party injured (Flynnt). Hatton,43Z?ow>. 333). In an action 
against a defendant, who was landlord, owner, and one of 
the occupants of a tenement house for damages, for inju- 
ries received by one of the tenant' s visitors, it appeared 
that there was a stairway leading from the first floor to 
the cellar, through which the occupants of the house 
descended to the various portions of the cellar assigned 
to them, such stairway being immediately behind the 
stairway leading to the upper part of the building, and 
the open space at its entrance being provided with a 
trap-door, which, when shut, covered it, jutting out 
about two inches into the hallway, and rendering the 
aperture safe ; but there were no other safeguards 
about its entrance, and a visitor to one of the occupants, 
in attempting to go upstairs, placed one foot on the as- 
cending stairway, and the other in the space forming 
the entrance to the descending stairway, the same being 
open by reason of the trap-door not being shut, and 
thereby fell and sustained injuries ; and it was held 
that (1) the defendant being both landlord and owner, 
and also an occupant, was not liable, it not appearing 
either that there was any defect or negligence in the 
construction of the stairway and its covering, or that 
when properly uBed it did not suffice to protect persons 
using the hallway, and was not all that reasonable 
care and prudence could suggest ; or that defendant 



172 ' LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

left the trap-door open, or caused or allowed it to be 
left open ; and that (2) such landlord and owner is not 
bound to protect his tenants and their visitors from the 
consequences of their careless acts in the course of occu- 
pancy ; and that (3) the tenants are each liable for their 
respective negligence, and that in such case there is no 
presumption against any particular occupant (Kaiser v. 
Hirth, 36 W. Y. Superior Court, 345). 

When a party is engaged in erecting a house upon 
his own ground, he is not, nor are his workmen, bound to 
put up temporary partitions about stairways nor floors 
across beams, nor use other means for the protection 
of intruders who voluntarily enter the unfinished 
house and venture to walk across the beams or around 
its well- holes, and where the owner of lots upon the rear 
of which were buildings occupied by his tenants, opens 
a way which they use for their ingress and egress 
through an adjoining lot, while he is improving the 
front of the lots by putting up buildings ; their visitors 
have no such license, as visitors, that they can aver a 
right to pass through the unfinished buildings. In 
such case, when the buildings in front are enclosed and 
even alley-ways, which the tenants in the rear begin to 
use, are arranged along the walls ; an obstruction of 
such alley-way does not give either the tenants or their 
visitors a right to pass through th«3 house, and accord- 
ingly, where the father of two of the tenants, wishing 
to visit his daughters in the night season, and finding 
the alleys along the new houses obstructed, attempted 
to grope his way thoragh the basement hall and fell 
down into the cellar, it was held, that he had acted at 
his peril, and could maintain for the injury received no 
action founded upon the negligence of the mechanics 
employed in the erection (Eoulston v. Clark, 8 E. D. S. 

mi). 

Openings on sidewalk. 
Owners having coal-holes and such like openings 



LIABILITY TO THIRD PERSONS. 173 

upon the sidewalk in front of their premises, are liable 
to persons injured thereby, whether such owners be in 
possession or not, upon the ground that they are nuis- 
ances upon the public highway (see Anderson v. Dickie, 
1 BoM. 241 ; Congreve v. Smith, 18 iV. T. 79 ; Same v. 
Mogan, Id. 84 ; Davenport v. Rackraan, 37 Id. 568 ; 
Mullen V. St. John, 57 Id. 567). As to landlord's lia- 
bility for injuries received from open hatchway, see 
Totten V. Phipps, 52 i\^. Y. 354 ; Southcote v. Stanley, 
1 Hurl. & Norm. 247 ; Grodley «. Hagerty, 20 Penn. St. 
387 ; STierman & Bedf. on Neg. 508-9 ; Karl v. Millard, 
3 Bosw. 591 ; Freer «. Cameron, 4 Rich. (S. 0.) L. Bep. 
228 ; Carman d. Eastern Co. R. R. Co. 4 Hurl. & Norm. 
781 ; Pickard n. Smith, 10 Qom. Bench (JST. S.) 470 ; and 
see ante, page 110, as to further liability. 

Liability of third person to landlord. 

A landlord may maintain case against a third per- 
son for so disturbing his tenant's possession, with 
wrongful and malicious intent to injure the landlord, 
that the tenant was obliged to abandon possession, 
whereby the landlord lost his rent which he would 
otherwise have received, and the premises sustained 
injury and delapidation, by reason of remaining unoc- 
cupied during the remainder of the year (Aldridge v. 
Stuyvesant, 1 Hall, 210). 



174 lANDtOED AND TENAlirT. 



CHAPTEE XX. 

THE VAEIOUS STATTJTOET PEOVISIONS EELATIWa TO 
SUMMAET PROCEEDINGS TO EECOVEE THE POS- 
SESSION OP LAND IN CEETAIN CASES. 

These provisions will be found in 3 Edmonds^ B. S., p. 533. ' 
Where amendments have been made they have been specially referred 
to. The original sections as they appear in the statute have been re- 
tained. 

R S., Aeticle Fiest, Title X. of Chap. 8, Part 3. 
Of forcible entries and detainers. 

Sec. 1. Entries on land to be paaceable, &c. 

2. Complaint of forcible entry, &c. 

3. To be in vp^riting ; affidavit therewith; precept for jury. 

4. Notice of precept, &c., to be served on defendant. 

5. Jury to be sworn; to inquire, &c., and return inquisition. 

6. Traverse of inquisition, when to stay proceedings. 

7. When and on what terms landlord may traverse inquisition. 

8. Jury to be summoned to try traverse. 

9. Jury to be sworn ; proceedings before them, &c. 

10. When jury may be discharged, and new one summoned. 

11. Matters to be shown on trial by respective parties. 
13. Judgment, if defendant be found guilty. 

13. Process for restitution and collection of costs. 

14. To issue if there be no traverse within twenty-four hours. 

15. Sheriffs, &c., to execute process. 

16. Notice to jurors ; fine for not attending ; how collected, &c. 

17. Subpoena for witnesses ; penalty for their neglect, &c. 

1 8. Certain officers to have jurisdiction. 

19. Certiorari to remove proceedings. 

30. Bond to be given before allowance of certiorari. 

31. Bond, how returned; proceedings of supreme court. 
33. When restitution to be awarded and bond prosecuted. 
33, Criminal courts may award restitution in certain cases. 

Entries ou land to be peaceable. 

§ 1. No entry shall be made into any lands or other 
possessions, but in cases where entry is given by law ; 
and in such case, only in a peaceable manner, not with 
strong hand, nor with multitude of people. 



FOEOIBLE ENTKIES AND DETAINEES. 175 

For the law and practice in proceedings of forcible entry and 
detainer, see Chapter XXII. 

Complaint of forcible entry, &c. 

§ 2. Where any such forcible entry shall be made, 
or where the entry shall be made in a peaceable man- 
ner, and the possession shall be held by force, the per- 
son so forcibly put out, or so forcibly holden out of 
possession, and the guardian of any such person being 
a minor, may be restored to such possession, by making 
a complaint to a judge of the county courts of the same 
county, and by such proceedings as are hereinafter di- 
rected (see § 18, at page 180, post). 

To be in writing j affidavit therewith j precept for juiy. 

§ 3. Such complaint shall be in writing, and shall 
be accompanied by an affidavit of such forcible entry 
or forcible holding out, and that the complainant has 
an estate of freehold or for term of years in the prem- 
ises, then subsisting, or some other right to the posses- 
sion thereof, stating the same ; and the judge shall 
thereupon issue a precept to the sheriff or any consta- 
ble of the county, commanding him to cause twenty- 
four inhabitants of the same county, duly qualified to 
serve as jurors, to come before such judge, at some time 
not less than two days thereafter, to inquire of such for- 
cible entry, or such forcible holding. 

Notice of precept, &c., to be served on defendant. 

§ 4. Such judge shall immediately cause a notice, in 
writing, of the issuing of such precept, and of the time 
and place of the return thereof, to be served upon the 
party against whom such complaint is made, by deliv- 
ering the same to such person ; or if he can not be 
found, by delivering such notice to some person of 
proper age on the premises ; or if there be no such per- 
son, by affixing the same on the front door of the house, 



176 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

if there be one ; or if there be none, on some other pub- 
lic and suitable place on the premises. 

Jury to be sworn 5 to examine, &c., and return inquisition. 

§ 5. At the day and place appointed for the return 
of the said precept, the judge shall administer an oath 
to the persons returned summoned, who shall appear, 
not being less than thirteen and not more than twenty- 
three, well and truly to inquire into the matters com- 
plained of, and a true inquisition thereof to make. 
And the jury so sworn, shall proceed to make inquiry 
into the forcible entry or the forcible holding complained 
of, and may examine witnesses on oath to be adminis- 
tered by such judge ; and shall make and sign their 
inquisition before the said judge, and deliver the same 
to him. 

Traverse of inquisition ; when to stay proceedings. 

§ 6. If by such inquisition, it shall be found that 
forcible entry, as aforesaid, was made, or that the en- 
try being peaceable, the possession was forcibly kept, 
as aforesaid, the party complained against may traverse 
such inquisition, in writing, denying such forcible en- 
try or forcible holding out, or alleging that he or his an- 
cestors or those whose estate he has in such lands, have 
been in quiet possession thereof for the space of three 
whole years next before such inquisition found, and 
that his interest therein is not ended or determined ; 
and if the said traverser shall pay to such judge the 
fees of summoning a jury to try such traverse, and the 
jurors' and judge's fees on such trial, such traverse 
shall stay all further proceedings on such complaint 
and inquisition, until the same be tried. 

Wlien and on what terms landlord may traverse inquisition. 

§ 7. If any person shall make affidavit before such 
judge, that the party complained against is the tenant 



FORCIBLE ENTEIES AND DETAINEES. 177 

of such person, under a valid and then subsisting de- 
mise, he shall be permitted on payment of the fees 
specified in the last section, to traverse the said inquisi- 
tion as landlord, in the same manner as is allowed to 
the party complained of, either with such party or 
without him. 

Jiiryito be summoned to try trarerse. 

§ 8. Upon such traverse being made, either by the 
party complained against, or by his landlord, the judge 
shall issue a precept to the sheriff or any constable of 
the county, commanding him to sammon twelve quali- 
fied jurors to come before such judge, at the place 
therein to be specified, at a time not less than four, 
nor more than eight days thereafter, to try the same 
traverse. 

Jury to be sworn j proceedings before them, &c. 

§ 9. The jurors shall be summoned, returned, and 
impannelled, in the same manner as provided by law, 
in civil actions before justices of the peace, and shall be 
sworn by such judge, well and truly to hear, try and 
determine the said traverse ; they shall be kept together 
by such judge, and shall hear and examine any com- 
petent witnesses who may be offered, on oath, to be ad- 
ministered by such judge ; and after hearing the alle- 
gations and proofs of the parties, the jury shall be kept 
together until they agree on a verdict, by an officer, 
who shall be sworn, as is usual on trials in courts of 
record. 

When jury may be discharg'ed and new one summoned. 

§ 10. If the jnry can not agree, after being kept to- 
gether for such time as such judge shall deem reason- 
able, he may discharge them, and issue a precept for a 
new jury ; and the same proceedings shall be had in 
respect to such new jury. 

23 



178 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

Matters to be shown on trial by respectire parties. 

§ 11. On the trial of such traverse, the complainant 
shall only be required to show, in addition to the forci- 
ble entry or detainer complained of, that he was peace- 
ably in actual possession at the time of a forcible entry, 
or was in the constructive possession of the premises at 
the time of a forcible holding out ; and the traverser 
may show, in his defense, that he or his ancestor, or 
those whose interest in such premises he claims, have 
been in quiet possession thereof for the space of three 
whole years together, next before the said inquisition 
found, and that his interest therein is not then ended or 
determined ; and such showing shall be a bar to the 
prosecution. 

Judgment if defendant be found gnilty . 

§ 12. The verdict of such jurj shall be received and 
recorded by the said judge, and if the defendant is 
thereby found guilty, the said judge shall thereupon 
award restitution of the premises so forcibly entered or 
forcibly held out, and shall assess the costs and ex- 
penses of the proceedings. 

Process for restitution and collection of costs. 

§ 13. He shall thereupon issue his precept, reciting 
the proceedings before him, and commanding the sher- 
iflf of the county, or any constable thereof, to cause the 
complainant to be restored and put into full possession 
of the said premises, according as he was seized or pos- 
sessed thereof before such entry ; and shall also, in the 
same precept, or in separate execution, direct the costs 
and expenses so assessed, to be levied and collected of 
the defendant, in the same manner as costs are or may 
be collected on judgments before justices of the peace, 
in personal actions. 



FORCIBLE ENTEIES AND DETAIKEES. 179 

To issne if there be no traverse within twenty-four hours. 

§ 14. If no such, traverse shall be made, as authorized 
in the preceding sections of this title, in the manner 
therein specified, within twenty-four hours after the in- 
quisition found, the judge shall, in like manner, award 
restitution of the premises, and assess the costs and ex- 
penses of the proceedings ; and shall issue his precept, 
in the same manner, to cause restitution, and for the 
collection of the costs. 

SherijGTs, &c., to execute process. 

§ 15. Sheriffs and constables, to whom any process 
issued by a judge, as herein authorized, shall be di- 
rected and delivered, shall execute the same, and if' 
need be, shall command and take the power of the 
county for that purpose. 

Notice to jurors ; fine for not attending, how collected, &c. 

§ 16. Twenty -four hours' personal notice to any 
juror to attend upon any precept issued as aforesaid, 
shall be deemed sufficient service, and any person so 
summoned, who shall neglect to attend and serve as such 
juror, without reasonable excuse, to be allowed by the 
judge issuing such precept, shall be subject to the 
same fine, to be prosecuted for, collected and applied 
to the same use, as provided by law in respect to jurors 
injustices' courts. 

Spbpoenas for witnesses ; penalty for their neglect, &c. 

§ 17. The judge before whom such complaint shall 
be made, may, at the request of either party, issue his 
subpoena requiring any person to appear and testify 
before him, or before the jury of inquiry, or before the 
petit jury, touching the matters hereinbefore directed, to. 



180 LAKDLOED AND TENANT. 

be heard by them. And any person served with such 
subpoena, who, without reasonable cause, shall neglect 
to appear, or appearing, shall refuse to answer upon 
oath, touching the matters aforesaid, shall be subject 
to the proceedings and penalties prescribed by law in 
similar cases in justices' courts. 

Certain officers to hare jurisdiction. 

§ 18. Every justice of the Supreme Court, and 
every mayor, recorder and alderman of any city, any 
special justice, any justice of the Marine Court, and 
any justice of the Justices' Court of the city of New 
York, shall have the like powers and authority, respect- 
ing forcible entries or forcible detainers, in their re- 
spective cities or counties, as are above given-to judges 
of the county courts. 

Certiorari to remoTe proceedings. 

§ 19. No proceeding for the restitution of any pre- 
mises forcibly entered or forcibly detained, had accord- 
ing to the foregoing provisions, shall be removed by any 
certiorari, unless the same be allowed by a justice of 
the Supreme Court. 

Bond to be given before allowance of certiorari. 

§ 20. No such writ of certiorari shall be allowed 
by such officer, unless the defendant prosecuting such 
writ, with two sufficient sureties to be approved by such 
officer, or in case of the absence of such defendant, three 
Bufficient sureties, to be approved as aforesaid, shall 
become bound to the complainant, in such penal sum 
as such officer shall direct, not less than one hundred 
dollars, conditioned that such patty will appear at the 
return of the said certiorari, answer to the inquisition 
found, abide such order and judgment as the Supreme 
Court shall make in the premises, and pay all costs that 



FORCIBLE ENTRIES AND DETAINERS. 181 

shall be awarded against such defendant. Such bond 
shall be delivered to the j udge to whoni such certiorari 
shall be directed, and until the same be so delivered, 
such certiorari shall be of no efiEect. 

Bond, how returned ; proceeding of Supreme Conrt. 

§ 21. The judge shall annex and file such bond, 
with his return to such writ, and the Supreme Court 
shall proceed therein, and cause the defendant to trav- 
erse the inquisition, if no traverse has been had, and 
shall direct a trial. 

When restitution to be awarded and bond prosecuted. 

§ 22. If the defendant shall omit to traverse such 
inquisition, within such time as the court, by rule, shall 
direct, restitution shall be awarded by the court, with 
costs. And if, upon the trial of such traverse, the de- 
fendant be found guilty, the Supreme Court shall also 
award restitution, with costs ; and in either case, the 
court may authorize the complainant to prosecute the 
bond given, on the allowance of the writ of certiorari. 

Criminal Courts may award restitution in certain cases. 

§ 23. Upon the conviction of a defendant upon any 
indictment for forcible entry or forcible detainer, found 
in any court of General Sessions of the Peace, or in any 
court of Oyer and Terminer, such court may award 
restitution, in the same manner as a judge upon a ver- 
dict being rendered before him, as herein provided. 



182 LAITDLOED AND TENANT. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

THE VARIOUS STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELATING TO 
SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS TO RECOVER THE POSSES- 
SION OF LAND IN CERTAIN CASES — Continued. 

R. S., Article Second, Title X. of Chap. 8, Part 3. 

Siimmary proceedings to recover the possession of 
land in other cases. 

[These proceedings •will be found in 2 Bdm. S. S. p. 537. The orig- 
inal sections as they appear in the statute have been retained, and 
where amendments have been made they liave been specially noted.] 

Sec. 34. When justice to view deserted premises and give notice to 
tenant. 

35. When landlord to be put in possession ; effect thereof. 

36. Appeal by tenant, how and when made ; return by justice. 

37. Power of county court ; to award restitution and costs, &c. 

38. Cases in which certain tenants may be removed. 

39. Affidavit of facts to be made. 

30. Summons to tenant when to be issued ; its contents. 

31. Proof required in certain cases before granting summons. 
33. Summons, how to be served. 

33. If no cause shown, warrant of possession to issue. 

34. Tenant, &c., may by affidavit deny facts alleged. 

35. Proceedings to form jury to try facts controverted. 

36. Jury, how drawn and sworn. 

37 & 38. How kept; when discharged, and new one formed. 
39 & 40. When warrant of possession to issue ; how executed. 
41. When adjournment may be had ; for what time. 
43. Witnesses, how compelled to attend and testify. 

43. Agreement, &c., between parties annulled by warrant. 

44. How warrant in case of rent may be stayed. 

45. How stayed where tenant has taken benefit of act. 

46. Also when premises have been sold under execution. 

47. Proceedings may be removed by certiorari; but not stayed. 

48. When Supreme Court to award restitution and costs. 

49. Costs, by whom paid ; damages, when to be recovered. 

50. Rights of landlords and tenants not to be affected. 

51. Judgment in proceedings before a justice ; costs. 

53. The proceedings may be removed to county court by appeal. 

53. Appeal not to be allowed unless security be given. 

54. Bights of lessees and mortagees to redeem. 



BUMMAET PEOCEEDINGS. 183 



When justice to tIcw deserted premises. 

§ 24. If any tenant being in arrear for rent, shall 
desert the demised premises, and leave the same unoc- 
cupied and uncultivated, without any goods thereon 
subject to distress to satisfy the arrears of rent, any jus- 
tice of the peace of the county may, at the request of 
the landlord, and upon due proof that the premises 
have been so deserted, leaving such rent in arrear and 
no goods thereon subject to distress, go upon and view 
the said premises ; and upon being satisfied upon such 
view, that the premises have been so deserted, he shall 
affix a notice in writing upon a conspicuous part of 
the premises, requiring the tenant to appear and pay 
the rent due, at some time in the said notice speciiied, 
not less than five, nor more than twenty days after the 
date thereof. 

When landlord to be put in possession; effect thereof. 

§ 25. At the time specified in such notice, the jus- 
tice shall again view the premises ; if the tenant appear 
and deny that any rent is due to the landlord, all pro- 
ceedings shall cease. If upon such second view, the 
tenant, or some one for him, shall not appear and pay 
the rent in arrear, and there shall not be sufficient dis- 
tress on the premises to satisfy such rent, then such 
justice may put the landlord into possession of the said 
demised premises ; and any demise of the said premises 
to such tenant, shall from thenceforth become void. 

Appeal by tenant, how and when made. Return by Justice. 

§ 26. An appeal from the proceedings of any justice 
in such case, may be made by the tenant at any time 
within three months after such possession delivered, to 
the county court* of the county, by serving notice in 
writing thereof upon such justice, and by giving secu- 

* " County CO art " substituted for " Court of Common Pleas." See 
titles "Keview by appeal," post, and " Certiorari," post. 



184 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

rity to be approved by such justice, to pay to the land- 
lord all costs of such appeal which may be adjudged 
against such tenant ; and thereupon such justice shall 
return the proceedings had before him to the said court, 
within ten days after such notice and security given, 
and shall gi^e notice to the landlord of such appeal. 

Power of County Court to award restitution, costs, &c. 

§ 27. The county court * shall examine the proceed- 
ings, and hear the proofs and allegations of the parties, 
in a summary way ; and may order restitution to be 
made to such tenant, with costs to be paid by the land- 
lord ; or in case of affirming such proceedings may 
award costs against the tenant. 

Cases in which certain tenants may be remoyed. 

§ 28. , Any tenant or lessee at will, or at sufferance, 
or for any part of a year, or for one or more years, of 
any houses, lands or tenements ; and the assigns, un- 
der-tenants, or legal representatives of such tenant or 
lessee may be removed from such premises, by any 
judge of the county courts of the county, or by any jus- 
tice of the peace of the city or town where the premises 
are situated, or by any mayor or recorder of the city, 
where such premises are situated ; or in the city of New 
York, by the mayor, recorder, any justice of the Marine 
Court, or any one of the justices of the Justices' Courts 
of the city of New York, in the manner hereinafter 
prescribed, in the following cases : 

1. Where such person shall hold over and continue 
in possession of the demised premises, or any part 
thereof, after the expiration of his term, without the per- 
mission of the landlord. 

2. Where such person shall hold over without such 
permission as aforesaid, after any default in the pay- 
ment of rent, pursuant to the agreement under which 

* " County court" substituted for "Court of Common Pleas." 



summA-EY proceedings. 185 

such premises are held, and a demand of such rent 
shall have been made, or three days' notice, in writing, 
requiring the payment of such rent, or the possession 
of the premises, shall have been served by the person 
entitled to such rent, on the person owing the same, in 
the manner prescribed for the service of the summons 
in the thirty-second section of this title. 

3. Where the tenant or lessee of a term of three 
years, or less, shall have taken the benefit of any in- 
solvent act, or been discharged under any act for the re- 
lief of his person from imprisonment during such term. 

4. Where any person shall hold over and continue 
in possession of any real estate which shall have been 
sold pursuant to the foreclosure of a mortgage thereon, 
or by virtue of an execution against such person, after 
a title under such sale shall have been prefected {as 
amended hy Laws 1874, chapter 208). 

5. When any person shall hold over and continue in 
possession of any real estate occupied or held by him 
under an agreement with the owner to occupy and culti- 
vate the same upon shares or for a share of the crops, 
after the expiration of the time fixed in the agree- 
ment for such occupancy, without the permission of the 
other party to said agreement, his heirs, or assigns 
{as amended hy Laws 1874, chapter 471). 

For the Law and Practice on Summary Proceedings, see chap. 23. 

Jurisdiction of tlie district court justices. 

Prior to April 20, 1863, the jurisdiction of the justices of the dis- 
trict courts, in a territorial point of view extended over the whole 
city and was not limited to the district in which the parties resided 
or the premises were situated (Roach v. Cosine, 9 Wend. 327 ; Carlisle 
V. McCall, 1 Milt. 899). The proceeding was regarded as a proceeding 
before the magistrate out of court, and the act of 1857 (chap. 344 
§ 77), recognized the distinctive powers of these magistrates as officers 
out of court, by referring to these powers as peculiar to the justice, 
whereas the other judicial powers pertained generally to his court. 
The act of 1863 (chap. 189 p. 338), effected a great change in this re- 
spect. That act provides that " all proceedings had and process issued 
under the provisions of article two, title ten, chapter eight, part 
third of the Revised Statutes, in the city of New York, by any justice 
of the district courts thereof, shall be had and issued and be made 
24 



186 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

returnable before a justice of the district court in the districts in 
which the premises of which possession is sought to be recovered are 
situated, and all such process shall be made returnable by the clerk 
of said district court, at the court thereof, and the affidavit upon 
which the process is issued shall be sworn or affirmed to before, and 
filed with the said clerk or his deputy. 

The provisions of this act were changed by an amendment to 
section 66 of the Code, passed in 1870 (chap. 741, §4), which 
amendment reads as follows: "The district courts of the city of 
New York shall have such jurisdiction as is provided by special stat- 
utes; and proceedings under article two, of title ten, of chapter 
eight, of part three, of the Revised Statutes, may be had before any 
justice of such courts, without regard to the district in which the 
premises are situated; and the affidavits used in such proceedings 
may be taken before any officer authorized by law to take affidavits." 

This last amendment is constitutional (58. iV. T. 333). 

Keeper of Poor-Honse, 

May be removed under summary proceedings (1863, ch. 398). 

Lessees under tax sales. 

This remedy extended to lessees of corporation of Brooklyn (1850, 
p. 285, § 40). 

Affidavit of facts to be made. 

§ 29. Any landlord or lessor, his legal representa- 
tives, agents or assigns, may make oath in writing, of 
the facts, which, according to the preceding section, au- 
thorized the removal of a tenant, describing therein the 
premises claimed ; and may present the same to one of 
the officers in the last section specified. 

Sammons to tenant, when to be issued ; its contents. 

§ 30. On receiving such affidavit, such officer shall 
issue his summons, describing the premises of which 
possession is claimed, and recLuiring any person in pos- 
session of the said premises, or claiming the possession 
thereof, forthwith to remove from the same ; or to show 
cause, before the said magistrate, within such time as 
shall appear reasonable, not less than three nor more 
than five days, why possession of the said premises 
should not be delivered to such applicant ; provided, 
however, that in the cases where a person continues in 



StTMMAET PEOOEEDINaS. 187 

possession of the demised premises, after the expiration 
of his term, without the permission of his landlord, the 
magistrate, if the summons be issued on the day the 
term expires, or on the day next thereafter, may direct 
such summons to be made returnable on the same day, 
at any time after twelve o'clock noon, and before six 
o'clock in the afternoon {as amended 1868, chap. 828). 

Proof required in certain cases before granting summons. 

§ 31. Previous to issuing such summons in the case 
of a tenancy at will or at suflferenoe, the magistrate 
shall be satisfied, by afiidavit, that such tenancy has 
been terminated by giving notice in the manner pre- 
scribed by law. And if application be made for such 
summons to be served on any person holding over real 
estate which shall have been sold on execution, the 
magistrate shall in like manner be satisfied that a de- 
mand of the possession of such premises has been 
made. 

Summons, how to be serred. 

§ 32. Such summons shall be served, either, 

1. By delivering to the tenant to whom it shall be 
directed, a true copy thereof, and at the same time 
showing him the original ; or, 

2. If such tenant be absent from his place of resi- 
dence, and such place is in the city or town in which the 
demised premises are situated, by leaving a copy thereof 
at such place with some -person of mature age residing 
on the premises ; or, 

3. If no such person can be found at such place, or 
if such place is not in the same city or town with the 
demised premises, and the tenant can not be found upon 
the demised premises, by leaving a copy thereof at the 
demised premises, with some person of mature age resi- 
ding thereon ; or, if there be no such person residing 
thereon, with some person of mature age connected 



188 LAJvrCLOED AND TENAlTT. 

with the demised premises, by emploj^ment in any busi- 
ness for which the premises are used ; or, if no person 
residing or employed on the demised premises can be 
found thereon, then such service may be made by affix- 
ing such copy upon a conspicuous part of said demised 
premises. If the summons be returnable on the day on 
which it is issued, it shall be served at least two hours 
before the hour at which it is made returnable, and if 
not returnable on the same day, it shall be served at 
least two days before the day on which it is made re- 
turnable. The proof of the service of the summons 
shall state particularly the exact time, place and man- 
ner of service, including the name of the person on 
whom the service was made, if it can be ascertained. 

§ 3.* It shall be the duty of every person to whom a 
copy of a summons shall be delivered, in pursuance of 
subdivision two or three of section thirty-two of title 
ten, chapter eight, part three of the Eevised Statutes, 
to deliver such copy to the tenant to whom the same is 
directed, or, if such tenant can not be found, to his 
agent for the demised premises, without any avoidable 
delay ; and a copy of this section shall be written or 
printed upoa the outside of every such copy. If 
neither the tenant nor his agent can be found for that 
purpose, then the person to whom such copy is deliv- 
ered, shall take the same to the magistrate by whom 
the summons is issued, at the time and place named 
therein, and inform him that the tenant can not be found. 
Every person who shall wilfully violate any of the pro- 
visions of this section shall bQ deemed guilty of a mis- 
demeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by 
imprisonment for not less than thirty days, nor more 
than one year {as amended hy Laws 1868, cTiap. 828). 

If no canse shown warrant of possession to issue. 

§ 33. If at the time appointed in the said summons, 
no sufficient cause be shown to the contrary, and due 
* So in the original act. 



SUMMAEY PEOCEEDINGS. 189 

proof of the service of such summons be made to such 
magistrate, he shall thereupon issue his warrant to the 
sheriff of the county, or to any constable or marshal of 
the city or town where the premises are situated, com- 
manding him to remove all persons from the said premi- 
ises, and to put the said applicant to such magistrate 
into the full possession thereof. 

Tenant, &c., may by affldarit deny the facts alleged. 

§ 34. Any person in possession of such demised 
premises, or any person claiming possession thereof, 
may, at the time appointed in such summons for 
showing cause, file an affidavit with the magistrate 
who issued the same, denying the facts upon which the 
said summons was issued, or any of those facts ; and 
the matters thus controverted, shall be tried by the mag- 
istrate or by a jury, provided either party to such pro- 
ceeding shall at the time designated in such summons 
for showing cause, demand a jury, and at the time 
of such demand, pay to such magistrate the necessary 
costs and expenses of obtaining such jury {as amended 
1857, chap. 684). 

Proceedings to form jury to try facts controverted. 

§ 35. In order to form such jury, the magistrate 
with whom such affidavit shall be filed, shall nominate 
twelve reputable persons, q[ualified to serve as jurors 
in courts of record ; and shall issue his precept, directed 
to the sheriff, or one of the constables of the county, or 
any constable or marshal of the city or town, command- 
ing him to summon the persons so nominated to appear 
before such magistrate, at such time and place as he 
shall therein appoint, not more than three days from 
the date thereof, for the purpose of trying the said mat- 
ters in difference. 



190 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

Jury, how drawn and sworn. 

§ 36. Six of the persons so summoned shall be 
drawn in like manner as jurors in justices' courts, and 
shall be sworn by such magistrate, well and truly to 
hear, try, and determine the matters in difference be- 
tween the parties. 

Whenever a sufficient number of jurors duly drawn 
and summoned, do not appear, or can not be obtained 
to form a jury, the magistrate may order any sheriff, 
constable, or marshal to summon from the bystanders 
or from the county at large, so many persons qualified 
to serve as jurors as shall be suflBcient, and return their 
names to the magistrate. Every person so summoned, 
or summoned under the provisions of this article as 
hereby amended, shall attend forthwith and serve as a 
juror, unless excused by the magistrate ; and for every 
neglect or refusal so to attend, shall be subject to fine 
by said magistrate in the same manner as is now pro- 
vided by law in the case of jurors in courts of record {as 
amended by Laws 1862, chapter 368). 

Jury, how kept. 

§ 37. After hearing the allegations and proofs of the 
parties, the said jury shall be kept together until they 
agree on their verdict, by the sheriff or one of his dep- 
uties, or a constable, or by some proper person ap- 
pointed by the magistrate for that purpose, who shall 
be sworn to keep such jury as is usual in like cases of 
courts of record. 

Jury, when discharged and new one formed. 

§ 38. If such jury can not agree, after being kept 
together for such time as such magistrate shall deem 
reasonable, he may discharge them, and nominate a 
new jury, and issue a new precept in manner afore- 
said. 



STJMMAKY PROOEEDINGS. 191 



When warrant of possession to issue. 

§ 39. If the decision of the magistrate or the verdict 
of the jury, shall be in favor of the lessor or landlord, 
or the other person claiming the possession of the 
premises, the magistrate shall issue his warrant to the 
sheriff, or to any constable of the county, in which the 
premises are situated, commanding snch officer to put 
such landlord, lessor or other person, into possession, 
as hereinbefore directed {as amended by Laws 1857, 
chapter 684, § 3). 

Warrant, liow executed. 

§ 40. The officer to whom such warrant for deliver- 
ing possession shall be directed and delivered, in either 
of the cases aforesaid, is hereby required to execute the 
same according to the tenor thereof. 

When adjournment may be had. For what time. 

§ 41. Any magistrate before whom such application 
may be pending, may, upon the request of either party, 
adjourn the hearing of such application, for the pur- 
pose of enabling such party to procure his witnesses 
whenever it shall appear to be necessary ; but such ad- 
journment shall in no case exceed ten days. 

Witnesses, how compelled to attend and testify. 

§ 43. Any magistrate before whom such application 
may be pending, may, at the request of either party, 
issue his subpoena, requiring any person to appear and 
testify before such magistrate, or before the jury, 
touching the matters herein directed to be heard by 
them ; and every person who, being served with such 
subpoena, shall, without reasonable cause, refuse or 
neglect to appear ; or appearing, shall refuse to answer 
upon oath, touching the matters aforesaid ; shall be 
subject to the proceedings and penalties provided by 
law in similar cases. 



192 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

Agreement, &c., annulled by warrant. 

§ 43. Whenever a warrant shall be issued as afore- 
said, by any such magistrate, for the removal of any 
tenant, from any demised premises, the contract or 
agreement for the use of the premises, if any such ex- 
ists, and the relation of landlord and tenant between 
the parties, shall be deemed to be cancelled and an- 
nulled. 

How warrant in case of rent to be stayed. 

§ 44. The issuing of such warrant of removal shall be 
stayed in tlie case of a proceeding for the non-payment 
of rent, if the person owing such rent shall, before such 
warrant be actually issued, pay the rent due, and all 
the costs and charges of the proceedings ; or give such 
security as shall be satisfactory to the said magistrate, 
to the person entitled to such rent, for the payment 
thereof, and the costs aforesaid, in ten days. And in 
case the person giving such security shall not within the 
said ten days produce to the magistrate satisfactory 
evidence of the payment of the rent and costs, the war- 
rant of removal may at any time thereafter be issued. 

How stayed where the tenant has taken benefit of act. 

§ 45. When the application to a magistrate is found- 
ed on the fact, that the tenant or lessee has taken the 
benefit of any insolvent act, or been discharged under 
any act for the relief of his person from imprisonment, 
the proceedings shall be stayed, if at any time before is- 
suing the warrant for removal, the tenant, or lessee, or 
his assignee shall pay the costs of such proceedings as 
have been had, and give such security to the person 
entitled to the rent, for the payment thereof, as it shall 
become due, as shall be satisfactory to the magis- 
trate. 



STJMMAET PE0CEEDI1TG8. 193 

Also where the premises hare been sold under execution. 

§ 46. When such application is founded upon an 
alleged sale, by execution, of the premises occupied by 
the defendant in such execution, the proceedings shall 
be stayed, if at any time before issuing the warrant of 
removal, the occupant shall, 

1. Pay the costs of such proceedings : 

2. File with the officer before whom the application 
is pending, an affidavit that he claims the possession of 
such premises by virtue of some title or right acquired 
after such premises were sold, or as guardian or trustee 
for any other : and, 

3. Execute a bond to the applicant for such war- 
rant, in such penalty and with such sureties as the 
magistrate shall approve, conditioned to pay the costs 
which may be recovered against him in any ejectment 
that may be brought by such applicant within six 
months, for the recovery of the possession of such 
premises ; and to pay the value of the use and occupa- 
tion of such premises, from the date of such bond to the 
time such applicant shall obtain possession of the same 
by virtue of a recovery in such action of ejectment ; 
and also conditioned not to commit any waste or injury 
to such premises, during his occupation thereof. 

Proceedings may be removed by certiorari, but not stayed. 

§ 47. The Supreme Court may award a certiorari 
for the purpose of examining any adjudication made, 
on any application hereby authorized ; but the pro- 
ceedings on any such application shall not be stayed or 
suspended by such writ of certiorari, or any other 
writ or order of any court or officer. The judgment of 
the Supreme Court, at a general term, upon such cer- 
tiorari, shall be final, unless an appeal shall be al- 
lowed by the said court, at a general term, before the 
end o£ the term next after that at which the judgment 
was rendered. The appeal, upon any judgment ren- 

25 



194 LAIffDLOED AND TENANT. 

dered upon any such certiorari, may be brought on 
for argument aa a preferred cause, at any term of the 
Court of Appeals, by either party, upon fourteen days' 
notice. 

Nothing contained in this act shall prevent an ap- 
peal to the Court of Appeals, from any judgment here- 
tofore rendered by the Supreme Court upon a certiorari 
awarded pursuant to section forty-seven, title ten, 
chapter eight, part three of the Revised Statutes, pro- 
vided that such appeal has already been taken, or shall 
be taken, within one year from and after the passage of 
this act ; and any writ of error or appeal from any such 
judgment, heretofore rendered, may be brought on for 
argument as provided in and by the said section as 
hereby amended {as amended by Laws 1868, chapter 
828). 

When Supreme Court to award restitution, &c.; costs. 

§ 48. Whenever any such proceedings brought be- 
fore the Supreme Court by certiorari, shall be reversed, 
or qnashed, the court may award restitution to the 
party injured, with costs ; and may make such orders 
and rules, and issue' such process, as may be necessary 
to carry their judgment into effect. 

Costs, by wliom paid. Damages, by whom to be recoyered. 

§ 49. In all cases of an application pursuant to the 
provisions of this article, the prevailing party shall re- 
cover costs, and may maintain an action for the recov- 
ery thereof ; and if the proceedings shall be reversed 
or quashed by the Supreme Court, the tenant or lessee 
may recover against the person making application for 
such removal, any damages he may have sustained by 
reason of such proceedings, with costs, in an action on 
the case. 

Bights of landlords and tenants not to be affected. 

§ 60. Nothing contained in this title shall be con- 



SUMMAEY PEOCEEDlNGS. 195 

strued to impair tlie rights of any landlord or lessor, or 
of any tenant, in any case not herein provided for. 

Judgments and proceedings before a justice ; costs. 

§ 51. In case of proceedings before a justice of the 
peace under this article, the justice shall enter the find- 
ings of the jury, or in case no jury is called under the 
foregoing provisions, his final decision upon said ap- 
plication for such warrant, in his docket, and render 
judgment therefor, and include in such judgment, costs 
of such proceeding to the prevailing party at the same 
rate of fees now allowed by law in civil actions in 
courts of justices of the peace, and limited in like man- 
ner, and in the warrant for delivery of possessions, or 
by execution issued by him, the justice shall direct the 
collection of such costs. 

As to the remedy by appeal from proceedings before justice of the 
peace, see chapter 36, post. 

Proceedings may be remored to county court by appeal. 

§ 52. The proceedings before such justice may be 
removed by appeal to the county court of the county, 
in the same manner, and with the like effect, and upon 
like security, as appeals from the judgment of justices 
of the peace in civil actions, except that the decision of 
such county judge shall be an aflBrmance or reversal of 
such judgment and be final. But in addition to the se- 
curity for such judgment as required by law in case of 
such appeal, in order to stay the issuing of such war- 
rant or execution, there shall in case of appeal by the 
tenant be security also given for the payment of all 
rent accruing or to accrue upon said premises subse- 
quent to the said application to such, justice. 

Appeal not to be allowed unless security be giren. 

§ 63. No appeal shall under this act be allowed, 
unless such security for said judgment shall be given 



196 LANDIOED AND TENANT. 

and approved by the judge, at the time of allowing such 
appeal, and served on the justice with the affidavit for 
appeal. 

Bights of lessees and mortgagees to redeem. 

§ 54. In case of proceedings under the second subdi- 
vision of section twenty-eight, title ten, chapter eight 
of the third part of the Revised Statutes, if the unex- 
pired term of the lease under which the premises are 
held, exceeds five years at the time of issuing the war- 
rant upon such proceedings, the lessee, his assigns, or 
personal representatives, may at any time within one 
year after possession of the demised premises shall 
have been delivered to the landlord, pay or tender to 
the lessor, his represetatives or attorney, or to the offi- 
cer who issued the warrant, all rent in arrear to the 
time of such payment or tender, and all costs and 
charges incurred by the landlord — and in such case the 
premises shall be restored to the lessee, who shall hold 
and enjoy the same without any new lease thereof ac- 
cording to the terms of the original demise ; and any 
mortagee of the lease, or of any part thereof, who shall 
not be in possession of the demised premises, or any 
judgment creditor of the lessee who shall within one 
year after the execution of such warrant pay all rent in 
arrear, all costs and charges as aforesaid, and perform 
all the agreements which ought to be performed by the 
first lessee, shall not be affected by such recovery ; 
and such judgment creditor may file a suggestion of 
such payment upon the record, and may issue execu- 
tion for the amount of the original judgment and of 
such payment (1842, chap. 240, § 1, 3 ^. S. 5th [Banks'] 
ed. 840). 

§§ 55 to 64 were added to this statute by what is 
commonly called the Bawdy-house act (1868, chap. 764). 
These provisions will be found in full in chapter 34, 
post. 



FOECIBLE ENTRIES AND DETAINEES. 197 



CHAPTEE XXII. 

THE LAW AND PEACTICE ON PEOOEEDINGS FOE POECI- 
BLE ENTEIES AND DETAINEES. 

At common law, if a man had a riglit of entry in 
Mm, he was permitted to enter by force and arms, and 
to detain his possession by force, where his entry was 
lawful. This created great inconvenince by arming the 
tenants of the lords, and encouraging them in mischief 
and rebellious contentions. It also gave opportunity to 
powerful men, under the pretence of feigned titles, for- 
cibly to e.iect their weaker neighbors. The legislature 
finding it necessary to interfere, enacted statutes from 
time to time, regulating these conflicting interests, by 
punishing those guilty of forcible entries and detainers, 
and furnishing a remedy for restitution to those whose 
possessions were invaded and detained {Bac. Ahr., 
title "Forcible Entry and Detainer"). 

These old acts were almost literally copied into, our 
statute (1 R. L. 96) ; their provisons being intricate and 
unsuitable for the purpose intended, the present statute 
of this state, which went into efifect January 1, 1830, 
was passed. This statute provides that no entry shall 
be made into any lands or other possessions, but in the 
cases where entry is given by law ; and in such case, 
only in a peaceable manner, not with strong arm, nor 
with a multitude of people, and a forcible entry or de- 
tainer is committed by violently taking or keeping pos- 
session of lands and tenements with a strong arm or a 
multitude of people, with unusual weapons, personal 
violence or acts tending thereto, or such threats or 
menaces of life or limb, or such gestures or other cir- 
cumstances as may give reason to apprehend personal 
injury or danger in standing in defense of one's posses- 



198 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

sion, sometliiiig more than a mere trespass upon the 
property is necessary (The People v. Smith, 24: Barb. 16 ; 
People V. Field, 52 Id. 198 ; Wood o. Phillips, 43 N. 
Y. 152 ; Porter v. The People, 7 How. 441) ; and the 
same circumstance of violence or terror which will 
constitute a forcible entry, will amount to a forcible de- 
tainer, and threats may be sufficient to constitute either 
(The People v. Rickert, 8 Oow. 226), but the mere 
breaking of the lock of an outhouse is insufficient 
(Willard v. Warren, 17 We7id. 257). 

Under this statute, if a landlord enter with force to 
distrain for rent ; or if, upon the expiration of tie ten- 
ant's interest, the landlord enter upon him and dis- 
posses him with a strong hand ; the landlord will, in 
either case, subject himself to answer criminally for 
forcible entry {Compn' s L. & T.., 2d ed. p. 585), and 
civilly to an action for damages (Flaherty v. Andrews, 
2 E. B. S. 529 ; Shannon ». Burr, 1 Kilt. 39) ; at com- 
mom law an indictment will lie for a forcible entry and 
detainer, on the ground of a violation of the public 
peace ; and upon conviction upon any such indictment, 
the court may award restitution in the same manner as 
a judge, upon a verdict being rendered before him 
{^ide § 23 of the statute, at p. 181, ante^ and 8 Cow. 226) ; 
and by statute, an action of trespass is authorized, be- 
sides the remedy by summary proceedings (2 Edm. p. 
349, §4). The statute of forcible entry and detainer was 
originally strictly a criminal proceeding, and though it 
has been subsequently enlarged so as to embrace to a 
certain extent a civil remedy, the form of proceeding 
and the rules of law which govern it remain to a great 
decree unchanged (Wood «. Phillips, 43 N. Y. 152). 

Officers liaTiiig jnrisdiction of said proceedings. 

The officers authorized by the statute to entertain 
these proceedings, are the judges o£ the county courts 
of the same county in which the entry or detainer is 



FOECIBLE ENTEIE8 AND DETAINEES. 199 

made (§ 2 of statute, vide p. 175). Also the jiistices of 
the Supreme Court, the mayor, recorder, or aldermen 
of any city, within the limits of their cities, the judges 
of the court of Common Pleas, the city judge, and any 
justice of the district court of the city of New York, 
are clothed with like powers as the county judges (§ 18 
of statute, vide p. 180 ; Const, of 184,6, art. 14, § 8 ; Laws 
1848, chap. 153, §§ 3, 4 ; Id. chap. 276, § 1 ; 1850, chap. 
205; 1852, chap. 334 ; 6 Abi. 144). Likewise the justices 
of the Superior Court of the city of Buffalo, within that 
city (1857, chap. 361, §§ 6, 25) ; and the city judges of 
Brooklyn within the county of Kings (1849, chap. 125, 
§ 26 ; 1870, chap. 470, § 13). 

The Marine Court Justices were deprived of this jurisdiction by 
Laws 1870, chap. 582, § 5. 

Quere. Does the act of 1857, chap. 344, § 77, defining the powers 
of the District Court justices and repealing inconsistent acts (§ 81) 
take this jurisdiction away from them. 

Proceedings, how institnted, and by whom. 

The proceedings must be instituted by the person 
forcibly put out, or forcibly held out of possession, or 
the guardian of any such person being a minor, and 
must be prosecuted in the name of the party whose 
legal right of possession has been invaded (The People 
V. Fulton, 11 ]V. Y. 94). A mere intruder can not 
maintain the proceeding, but every person lawfully in 
possession, and having some right to the possession, 
and forcibly excluded therefrom, is entitled to the ben- 
eat of the statute (The People v. Eeed, 11 Wend. 157 ; 
§ 3 of the statute, vide p. 175, ante) ; but one tenant ia 
common can not maintain a proceeding of this kind 
against his co-tenant (King o. Phillips, 1 Lans. 421). 
The proceeding is instituted by a complaint in writing, 
accompanied by an affidavit of the forcible entry or 
forcible holding out, and must set oat the particular 
estate and right of possession of the complainant. If 



200 LANBLOKD AND TENANT. 

the complaint is verified by affidavit, no other affidavit 
is necessary, and the complaint will be regarded both 
as a complaint and an affidavit (Porter «. The People, 
7 How. 441 ; People v. Fulton, UN. Y. 96). The mere 
allegation of the complainant's right of possession, 
without stating the right is a mere legal conclusion, and 
the plaintiff, upon motion, should be dismissed for the 
defect (The People v. Field, 53 Bari. 198) ; but unless 
the objection is taken before the officer entertaining the 
complaint previous to the taking of the inquisition, it 
can not be raised afterwards (The People v. Reed, 11 
Wend. 157 ; People v. Field, 58 Barb, 270 ; 24 Id. 16 ; 
20 Wend. 207). 

Complaint for forcible entry and detainer. 

Before Hon. 

Justice of the Court. 



The People ex rel. John Doe, 

Complainant, 
e. 

Richard Doe, 

Defendant. 



To Hon. Justice of the Court of 

The complaint of John Doe of in said county shows: That 

Richard Roe of in said county, on the day of 187 , 

did, unlawfully make a forcible entry (describing fully the facts), into 
the lands and premises of this complainant, to wit: All, &c. (describe 
premises particularly), and that the said R. R. did then and there vio- 
lently, forcibly, and unlawfully, and with strong hand, eject and ex- 
pel this complainant from his said lands and premises (or hold this 
complainant out of possession of his said lands and premises). 

And the said complainant further shows : That he had at the time 
aforesaid, an estate of freehold (or for a term of years in the premises, 
stating fully the nature and extent of the right of possession), and that 
the said Richard Roe still unlawfully and forcibly holds and detains 
the said lands and premises from the said John Doe, against the form 
of the statute in such case made and provided. 
Dated this day of 187 . 

JOHN DOE. 

(If the complaint is verified by affidavit, no other affidavit is nec- 
essary; if not so verified, annex to the complaint an affidavit in the 
following form.) 



rORCIBLE E]SrTEIES AND DETAIBTERS. 201 

Title of Peocbbding. 
City and County of New York, ss.' : * 

John Doe of said city being duly sworn says : That he is 
the oomplainaiit above named. That Richard Roe of the city and 
county of New York, on the day of 187 , did unlawfully make 
a forcible entry (describe fully the facts), into the lands and premises 
of this complainant, to wit: (here describe premises), and that the 
said Richard Roe, did then and there violently, forcibly, and unlaw- 
fully, and with strong hand, eject and expel this complainant from 
liis said lands and premises (or did hold this complainant out of his said 
lands and premises), and that at the time aforesaid this complainant 
had an estate of freehold (or other right of possession or occupancy, 
setting forth its nature and extent), and that the said Richard Roe 
still unlawfully and forcibly holds and detains the lands and premises 
of deponent contrary to and against the form of the statute in such 
case made and provided. TOHN DOE 

Sworn to before me this ) 
day of 18V . \ 

This complaint and affidavit are filed with the offi- 
cer before whom the proceedings are instituted, who 
thereupon issues his precept for a jury as required by 
section 3 of the act {vide page 175, ante), and immedi- 
ately causes a notice in writing of the time and place 
of the return of said precept according to section 4 
of the act (Id.) to be served upon the party against 
whom the complaint is made in the manner specified in 
said section. The following is the form of precept for 
the jury, and the form succeeding that is the notice of 
precept, and is the only notice served upon the defen- 
dant upon the commencement of the proceedings : 
Precept for jury. 

Title of Procebdino. 
The People of the State of New York, to the sheriff or any constable 
of the City and County of New York, Greeting : 
You are hereby commanded to cause to come before me, at my 
office at the court house, city hall, in the City of New York, on the 
day of 187 , at 11 o'clock in the forenoon of that 

day, twenty-four inhabitants of the said county, duly qualified by law 
to serve as jurors, to inquire upon their oaths for the said people of a 
certain forcible entry made by Richard Roe, as it is said, into the 
lands and premises of John Doe, in the city and county of New 
York (or certain forcible liolding out of possession of John Doe by 
one Richard Roe of the lands and premises of the said John Doe ; 
situated in New York city and county aforesaid), against the form of 
the statute in such case made and provided. 

Given under my hand, this day of 187.5. 

Justice. 
36 



202 LAISTDLOED AND TENANT. 



• Notice to the defendant. ■ ^ 

Title of Peoceeding. 
To Bichard Roe of the city and couaty of New York : 

On the complaint of John Doe of said city and county, accom- 
panied by an affidavit, duly verifying the same, made to the under- 
signed justice of , that you did on the day of 
187 , unlawfully make a forcible entry (or did make entry in a forcible 
manner) into the lands and premises of the said John Doe, situate in 
aforesaid to wit : (Here describe premises) and that you 
did violently, forcibly, unlawfully and with strong hand eject and ex- 
pel the said John Doe from his said lands and premises (or hold the 
said John Doe out of possession of his said lands and premises) and 
that you do still unlawfully and forcibly hold and detain the said 
lands and premises from the said John Doe and that at the time afore- 
said the said John Doe had an estate of freehold (or other estate) in 
the said lands and premises then and still subsisting in the same. 

You will, therefore, take notice that I have this day issued my pre- 
cept, directed to the sheriff (or any constable) of said county, command- 
ing him to cause to come before me, at my office at the court house, 
in the city and county of New York, on the day of 

187 , at 11 o'clock in the forenoon, twenty-four inhabitants of the 
said county, duly qualified by law to serve as jurors to inquire upon 
their oaths, of the forcible entry (or forcible holding out) aforesaid. 

Justice. 

After the service of this notice upon the defendant, 
a duplicate or copy must be returned to the justice 
with the following affidavit of service thereon : 

City and County of New York, ss. : 

J. H. McC, of said city being duly sworn, says: That on the 
day of 187 , he served upon Richard Roe, of said city 

and county, a notice of which the annexed is a copy, by de- 
livering the same to him personally {or, by delivering the sanie 
to E. F. the wife of the said Richard Roe) on the premises de- 
scribed in said notice ; and that such service could not be made 
upon the said Richard Roe, for the reason that after diligent in- 
quiry he could not be found (or, by affixing the same to the front door 
of the house on the premises described in said notice, there being no 
person of proper age on the premises, and that such service could not 
be made upon the said Richard Roe, for the reason that after diligent 
inquiry he could not be found). 

J. H. MoO. 
Sworn to before me, this | 

day of , 187 . f 

As to this form, see § 4 at p. 175, ante. 

The sheriff or constable executing the precept must 
make his return thereto, showing that he has caused 
twenty -four inhabitants of the county, naming them,qual- 
ified to serve as jurors to appear before the justice enter- 



rORCIBLE ENTRIES AWD DETAINERS. 203 

taining thq proceedings; these jurors are thereupon called 
and the justice is required to administer an oath to such 
of the persons returned summoned, as shall appear, not 
being less than thirteen nor more than twenty-three, 
well and truly to inquire into the matters complained 
of, and a true inquisition to make (section 5 of the act, 
vide p. 176, ante). 

Sheriff's or constable's return to precept. 

Before Hon. 

Justice of the court. 



J 



The People ex rel. John Doe, 

Complainant, 

V. 
RrCHAED EOB, 

Defendant. 

Pursuant to the precept issued to me herein I do hereby return, 
that I have caused to appear at the time and place mentioned in said 
precept, twenty-four inhabitants of the said county, duly qualified to 
serve as jurors, to wit, the following named persons. (Here insert 
names and residences.) • 

To inquire upon their oaths of the forcible entry or detainer made 
and continued by Eichard Roe as it is said upon the lands and prem- 
ises of John Doe in said precept referred to. 
New York, , 187 . 

Form of oath to jury. 

You, and each of you, do swear that you will well and truly in- 
quire into the forcible entry (or forcible holding out) complained of 
by John Doe against Richard Roe and a true inqui^tion thereof to 
make, so help you God. 

The jury so sworn must not exceed twenty-three in 
number (2 Cai. 98) ; they are to make inquiry into the 
forcible entry or the forcible holding complained of, and 
may examine the witnesses produced, and are to make 
and sign their inquisition before the justice, and are to 
deliver the same to him (section 5 of the act, vide p. 
176, ante). 

The form of this inquisition is given below. The 
jury of inquiry are not to examine questions of title, or 
of the right of possession on the part of either contest- 
ant, and are coniined to the simple inquiry as to 



204 xAndlobd and tenant. 

whether there has been a forcible entry or detainer 
within the meaning of the Statute (Carter v. Newbold, 
7 How. 166 ; The People v. Wilson, 13 Id. 446). 

Oath to Tvitnesses. 

You do swear that the evideace you shall give touching the for- 
cible entry (or forcible holding out) complained of by John Doe 
against Richard Roe, and now to be here inquired into, shall be the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth: so help you God ! 

1 Inquisition. 

An inquisition taten before one of the judges of the 

Court of Common Pleas, in and for the city and county of New York, 
at the Court House in the city and county of New York, on the 
day of 187 , by the oaths of (here insert the names of the 

jurors who concur in the inquisition). 

The undersigned inhabitants of the city and county of New York 
aforesaid, qualified to serve as jurors, having been summoned to inquire 
of the forcible entry (or forcible holding) hereinafter mentioned, and 
having appeared at the time and place aforesaid, before the said county 
judge, who then and there administered to the undersigned an oath 
well and truly to inquire into the forcible entry (or forcible holding 
out) complained of by John Doe against Richard Roe, and a true 
inquisition thereof to make. Whereupon the undersigned jury so 
sworn, having then and thera proceeded to make inquiry into the said 
forcible entry (or said forcible holding out) complained of, and exam- 
ined the witnesses on oath administered by the said judge, before him 
then and there made, now here make this their inquisition as follows, 
to wit: 

The undersigned jury have found and hereby find and present, that 
John Doe of said city and county aforesaid, long since had an estate of 
freehold (or other estate, describing the same) in that certain piece or 
parcel of land in the city of New York aforesaid, and which is bounded 
and described as follows : (Here insert description of premises as con- 
tained in complaint), and that the said John Doe, was long since 
peaceably and lawfully possessed of the same, and that the estate and 
possession of the said John Doe, so subsisted and continued until 
Richard Roe, of said city and county, on the day of 

187 , * did forcibly and unlawfully, and with strong hand, enter 
into the said land and premises and eject and expel him, the 
said John Doe therefrom ; and the said John Doe so expelled from 
the said land and premises, from thd said day of 

187 until the day of the taking of this inquisition, unlawfully and for- 
cibly, and with strong hand did keep out and does yet keep out, to 
the great disturbance of the people of the state of New York, and con- 
trary to the form of the statute in such case made, and that the estate 
of the said John Doe as aforesaid, still subsists therein. 

And the said jurors, whose names are subscribed hereto, do, on the 
evidence produced before us, find the inquisition aforesaid true. 

{Signatures of Jurors.) 

* If the inquisition find the entry in a peaceable manner, and that 
the possession was held by force, then proceed from the asterisk (*) as 



FORCIBLE ENTRIES AND DETAINEES. 205 

Restitution ordered, if there is no traverse. 

If the jury find that the defendant is guilty of the 
forcible entry or detainer, and the defendant does not 
traverse the inquisition in the manner specified in the 
statute, and within twenty-four hours after it is found, 
the officer shall award restitution of the premises, and 
assess the costs and expenses of the proceedings, and 
issue his precept to cause restitution, and for the col- 
lection of the costs in the same manner as on judgment 
of verdict of guilty on the trial of such traverse. 

The costs and expenses here allowed, are only the 
fees of the officers who are required to perform services 
in these proceedings. 

Award of restitution after inquisition. 

Before Hon. Justice. 



n 



The People ea rel. John Doe, 

V. 

Richard Roe. 

The jury summoned and sworn to inquire into the forcible entry 
(or forcible detainer), complained of by John Doe, against Richard 
Roe, having made their inquisition, by which the said Richard Roe, is 
found guilty of the said forcible entry (or forcible detainer), and the 
defendant not having traversed the said inquisition within the time 
allowed by law; I, the undersigned county judge of the county of 
before whom the said proceeding is pending, do hereby 
award restitution to the said John Doe, of the premises described in 
the said inquisition, and do also hereby assess the costs and expenses 
of the said proceedings at the sum dollars. 

Justice. 

follows: — made entry in a peaceable manner into the said lands and 
premises, and after such entry did then and there violently, forcibly, 
and unlawfully and with strong hand, hold the said John Doe out of 
possession of his said lands and premises; and the said John Doe 
from the said day of until the day of the taking 

of this inquisition, unlawfully and forcibly did lieep out, and does yet 
keep out of the lands and premises aforesaid, to the great disturbance 
of the people of the state of New York, and contrary to the form of 
the statute in such case made ; and that thrf estate of the said John Doe 
as afore,said, still lawfully subsists therein. 

And the said jurors, whose names are subscribed hereto, do, on the 
evidence produced before us, find the inquisition aforesaid true. 

{Signatures oj Jurors.) 



206 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 



" Precept " or « Writ of Restitution. " 

The People of the state of New York, to the sheriff or any constable 
of the city and county of New York, Greeting : 
Whereas, John Doe of said city and county, did, on the 
day of 187 , make complaint in writing, duly verified, to 

the undersigned county judge of said county, that 

Richard Roe of said city and county on the day of at 

aforesaid, did, &c. (Here recite the complaint and the sub- 
sequent proceedings, and then add) 

This is therefore to command you to go to the premises aforesaid, 
and to cause the said John Doe, to be restored and put into full pos- 
session of the said lands and premises according as he was seized or 
possessed thereof before the said entry. 

And you are also further cormnanded to levy and collect the sum 
of dollars of the goods and chattels of the said Richard Roe, 

(excepting such goods and chattels as are by law exempt from levy 
and sale on execution), and to bring the money before me within sixty 
days from the date hereof to render to the said John Doe. 
Given under my hand, the ■ day of 187 . 

Justice. 

Traverse for inqnisition, &c. 

If by such inquisition it shall be found that forcible entry was 
made, or that the entry being peaceable, the possession was forcibly 
kept, the party complaiued against may traverse such inquisition, in 
writing, denying such forcible entry, or forcible holding out ; or by 
alleging that he or his ancestors, or those whose estates he has in such 
lands, have been in quiet possession thereof for the space of three 
whole years next before such inquisition found, and that his interest 
therein has not ended or determined, as follows : 

Form of traverse of inquisition. 

Before Hon. Justice. 



The People ex rel. John Dob, 

«. i- 

RicHARD Rob. 



And afterward, to wit: on the day of 187 , at the city 

and county of New York aforesaid, before the said county 

judge as aforesaid, comes the said Richard Roe, in his proper person, 
and having heard the said inquisition read to him hereby traversing 
the same (*) denies that he is guilty of the said supposed forcible en- 
try (or forcible holding out) in manner and form as m the said inquisi- 
tion alleged, and of thisy hei, the said Richard Roe, puts himself upon 
the country, and the said people do the like, &c., (or from the aster- 
isk (*) proceed thus) : alleges that he, the said Richard Roe, or his 
ancestors, or those whose estate he has in the lands in said inquisition 
described, have been in quiet possession thereof for the space of three 



FORCIBLE ENTEIBS AND DETAINERS. 207 

whole years next before the said inquisition found, and that his, the 
said Richard Roe's interest therein, is not ended or determined, and 
of this, he, the said Richard Roe, puts himself upon the country, and 
the said people doth the like, &c. 

RICHARD ROE. 

And if the defendant shall pay to sach officer the 
fees of summoning a jury to try such traverse, and the 
jurors' and officers' fees on such trial, such traverse 
shall stay all further proceedings on such complaint 
and inquisition, until the same be tried (section 6 of 
the act, vide p. 176, ante ). 

If any person shall make affidavit before such offi- 
cer, that the party complained against is the tenant of 
such person under a valid and. then subsisting demise, 
he shall be permitted on payment of the fees specified 
in the last section to traverse the inquisition as land- 
lord, in the said manner as is allowed to the party com- 
plained of, either vs^ith such party or without him {Id. 
section 7, ante, p. 176). 

The proceedings in the traverse seem at first blush 
to be an anomaly in civil proceedings, from the fact that 
two juries instead of one are called upon to adjudicate 
upon the rights of the respective parties ; but when we 
consider that the proceeding was originally of a criminal 
nature (Wood v. Phillips, 43 If. Y. 152), it will not be 
surprising to find the apparent close analogy between 
these and ordinary criminal proceedings. In these last 
mentioned proceedings, the grand jury form the jury of 
inquiry ; if they find no cause therefor, they decline to 
indict, and that generally terminates the proceeding ; 
if they do indict, however, the defendant is put up- 
on trial before a petit jury, and before this jury his 
rights are more thoroughly considered and finally dis- 
posed of. It is not to be understood that the proceed- 
ings are alike in all respects, but that the one bears a 
very strong resemblance to the other. If it shall be 
found by the inquisition made by the jury of inquiry, 
that the defendant is guilty of a forcible entry or de- 
tainer, and the defendant traverses the inquisition and 



208 LANDLOED AND TEWANT. 

pays the necessary fees for summoning a jury to try 
the traverse, the officer entertaining the proceeding 
shall issue a precept to the sheriff, or any constable 
of the county, commanding ,him to summon twelve 
qualified jurors to come before such officer at the place 
therein to be specified, at a time not less than four, nor 
more than eight, days thereafter, to try such traverse 
(section 8 of the statute, vide p. 177, ante) ; and although- 
the traverse has been made, it is not too late for a mo- 
tion to be made to quash the inquisition (The People 
V. Wilson, 13 How. 446) ; and the court may permit the 
defendant to move to set aside the inquisition, on 
the ground of the rejection of proper evidence before 
the jury which found it (Carter ■». Wewbold, 7 How. 
166). 

If any of the persons summoned as jurors are 
found to be disqualified, the sheriff or constable may 
be directed to summon others in their places until his 
panel contains twelve qualified jurors ; the traverse 
can not be tried with less (Porter v. The People, 7 How. 
441). 



Precept for jury to try trayerse. 

The people of the state of New York to the sheriff or any con- 
stable of the city and county of New York, Greeting : 

You are hereby commanded to summon twelve good and lawful 
men of the city and county of New York, duly qualified to serve 
as jurors, and not exempt from serving on juries in courts of record, 
and in no wise akin to John Doe or Richard Roe, of the same place, 
to come before the undersigned county judge of said county at the 
Court House, City Hall, in the city of New York, on the day 

of inst., to make a jury of the county, upon their oaths to 

try a certain traverse of an inquisition, found upon the complaint 
of the said John Doe against the said Richard Roe, and now pend- 
ing before me for a certain forcible entry (or forcible holding out of 
possession), made by the said Richard Roe, into the lands and prem- 
ises of said John Doe, in the city of New York afcresaid, against 
the form of the statute in such case made and provided. And that 
you make a list of the persons summoned, and certify and annex the 
same to this precept, and make return hereof to me. 
Given under my hand, this day of , 187 . 

Justice. 



FORCIBLE ENTRIES AND DETAINEES. 209 



Oath of jurors. ' 

You and each of you do swear that you will well and truly hear, 
try, and deteraiine the traverse of an iuquisition found upon the com- 
plaint of John Doe against Richard Roe, for a certain forcible entry 
(or forcible detainer) made by the said Richard Roe into the lands 
and premises of the said John Doe, as is alleged, and a true verdict 
give according to the evidence, so help you God. 

Oath to witnesses. 

You do swear that the evidence you shall give touching the forci- 
ble entry (or forcible detainer) complained of by John Doe against 
Richard Roe, on the traverse of the inquisition found upon the said 
complaint, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the 
truth, so help you God. 

Proceedings before^the jury 5 what may be shown. 

Section 9 of the statute {.ante, p. 177) provides for 
the manner of summoning, returning and impanelling 
the jury. If any of the individuals summoned are 
found to be disqualified, the sheriff or constable 
may be directed to summon others in their places, until 
the panel contains twelve qualified, j urors ; there can 
not be less (Porter v. Tlie People, 7 How. 441). If the 
jury are unable to agree, they are to be discharged, and 
a precept issued for a new jury (§ 10, ante, p. 177). 

Section 11 of the act {ante, p. 178) provides what the 
complainant and defendant may show upon the trial. 
The legislature has not cast upon either jury the bur- 
den of investigating titles to real property (People xi. 
Leonard, 11 Johns. 504 ; Carter w. Newbold, 7 How. 
166 ; 1 Daly, at p. 46), Their duty seems to be defined 
in this section {ante, p. 178, § 11). 

Proof of a sufBcient estate or right of possession is 
to be made to the j adge before any process can be is- 
sued ; but on the trial of the traverse before the second. 
jury, the complainant is only required to show, in ad- 
dition to the forcible entry and detainer complained of, 
that he was peaceably in actual possession, or was in 
the constructive possession at the time of the act com- 
plained of {^iicLe cases cited above). Nor is the defend- 

37 



210 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

ant authorized to show or avail himself of any estate 
or right of possession in a stranger (Carter v. Kewbold, 

7 How. 166). The proceedings are altogether statutory, 
and neither judge nor jury has any other power than 
what the act confers (Id.). The only matter incLuirable 
into upon the trial is whether the party charged entered 
by force upon one, having previously a peaceable pos- 
session, and held out by force (Wells v. De Leyer, 1 
Daly, at p. 46, citing 9 Wend. 51 ; 11 Johns. 504, and 

8 Cow. 226). 

If the jury find the defendant guilty, the magistrate 
shall thereupon award restitution of the premises so 
forcibly entered, or forcibly held and detained, and shall 
assess the costs and expenses of the proceedings (section 
12 of the statute, ante, p. 178 ; People v. Townsend, 6 
How. 178) ; which do not include the fees of attorneys, 
but refer to the fees of the officers who are required to 
perform the services. The statute regulating the fees 
of attorneys applies only to suits in courts of record, 
and the proceedings in forcible entries and detainers, 
are not an action in a court of record within the meaning 
of that statute (The People v. Townsend, 6 How. 178 ; 
Van Hovenburgh v. Case, 4 Hill, 541 ; Partridge v. 
Ford, 5 How. 21). 

Award of restitution after yerdict. 

{Title as in complaint.') 

The jury summoned and sworn to hear, try, and determine the 
forcible entry (or forcible detainer) complained of by John Doe 
against Richard Roe, having rendered their verdict, by which the 
said Richard Roe is found guilty of the said forcible entry (or 
forcible detainer), I, the undersigned, judge of the court of 
Common Pleas, in and for the city and county of New York before 
whom the said proceeding is pending, do hereby award restitution 
to the said John Doe of the premises described in the complaint 
of the said John Doe, and do also hereby assess the costs and expenses 
of the said proceedings at the sum of dollars. 

Dated, &c. 

Justice. 

Writ of restitution after verdict. 

(Same as ante, page 206, reciting the complaint and all subsequent 
proceedings.) 



LAW OF STTMMAKT PEOCEEDINGS. 211 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE LAW AND PKACTIOE ON SXJMMAKY PROCEEDINGS 

TO RECOVER THE POSSESSION OF DEMISED 

LANDS AND PREMISES. 

The object, design, and applicatioir of the Statute. 

Previous to the act of April 13, 1820 (chap. 194), 
the only remedy the law furnished to landlords for the 
recovery of lands and tenements, upon the forfeiture or 
expiration of the tenant's term was the action of eject- 
ment : a proceeding so expensive and dilatory as against 
a tenant iitigioiisly inclined and perhaps irresponsible, 
as to amount in some cases almost to a denial of jus- 
tice. The statute was designed to remedy this evil, by 
providing the landlord with a simple, speedy, and in- 
expensive summary method of regaining possession of 
his premises, in cases where the tenant refuses upon de- 
mand to pay the rent, or where he wrongfully holds 
over, and continues in possession of the demised 
premises, after the expiration of his term, without per- 
mission. The statute is restricted in its application, 
however, to cases where the conventional relation of 
landlord and tenant, created by agreement, exists be- 
tween the parties, and does not embrace every case 
where ownership is in one, and possession in another, 
but only where he who is in possession, has by some 
act or agreement recognized the other as his landlord, 
and assumed the character of a tenant under him, so 
that he is not at liberty to dispute his title (Benjamin v. 
Benjamin, 5N. T. 383 ; Mitchell v. Simpson, 28 N. Y. 
55 ; Roach v. Cosine, 9 Wend. 227 ; Sims v. Humph- 
rey, 4 Den. 185 ; People v. Bigelow, 11 How. Pf. 83 ; 
Wright V. Mosher, 16 How. 454 ; Russell v. Russell, 
32 Id. 400 ; People v. Annis, 45 Earl. 304 ; Deuel v. 
Rust, 24 Id. 438J. 



2l2 LAWDLOKD AND TEKAISTT. 

The remedy has by degrees been extended by stat- 
ute to lessees of the corporation of Brooklyn (1850, p. 
285, § 40) ; against keepers of poor houses (1862, ch. 
298) ; against keepers of bawdy houses (1868, ch. 764) ; 
against illegal trades (1873, ch. 583, § 1) ; against over- 
holding tenants working farms on shares (1874, ch. 471, 
p. 612) ; against any person whose real estate has been 
sold, and title perfected, under mortgage foreclosure 
(1874, ch. 203) ; or under executions against property 
(§ 28. subd. 4, ante, p. 185). 

These general principles in their application to par- 
ticular cases are illustrated by the following cita- 
tions : 

1. The relation of landlord and tenant, in the strict 
technical sense of the term, exists between the lessee, or 
his assignee, and the assignee or grantee of the lessor, 
provided there was a conventional relation between the 
original parties (Birdsall v. Philips, 17 Wend. 464 ; Mil- 
ler v; Levi, 44 N. Y. 489 ; 1 JEdm. B. S. p. 698, § 23). 

2. Where a party enters into the possession of 
premises, under an agreement to accept a lease for 
twenty months, and subsequently refuses to accept the 
lease, he becomes, by such refusal, a tenant at will, or 
by sufferance, and may be proceeded against summa- 
rily, under the statute (Anderson v. Prindle, 23 Wend. 
616 ; and see 14 Abb. 372 ; 38 Barb. 269.) 

3. Where the owner agrees that his creditor may oc- 
cupy premises belonging to him, for the term of one 
year, and until he pays a mortgage which the creditor 
holds against him, the relation of landlord and tenant 
is thus created between the parties ; and on payment of 
the money, after the first year, and refusal of the cred- 
itor to yield up the possession, the owner may properly 
resort to summary proceedings against the creditor, to 
obtain possession (Hunt v. Comstock, 15 Wend. 665). 

4. A judgment debtor, continuing in possession of 
real estate after title thereto has been perfected under a 
sale on the execution against him, is a tenant within 



LAW OF STTMMAET PROCEEDINGS. 213 

the meaning of the statute (Spraker v. Cook, 16 i7. 7". 
567). 

5. A wharf or pier, reclaimed from tide-water by 
embankment, or by raisng the bottom with stone, earth, 
or other material, is within the act (People v. Kelsey, 
14 Abb. Pr. 372; S. C. 38 Barb. 269); but in a subsequent 
case, where the relators who were entitled to use a pier 
for loading and unloading canal-boats, agreed to pay 
the respondent, the lessee of the pier, fifty dollars a 
month for the privilege of placing a derrick, scales, and 
office upon a certain portion thereof, it was Jield, that 
this did not create the relation of landlord and tenant, 
and that, upon the termination of the agreement, they 
could not be dispossessed under the landlord and ten- 
ant act (The People «. C ashman 8 Supreme Court [1 
Run.] p. 73). In the first of said cases the demise was of 
the wharf itself, which, for the purpose of the proceeding, 
was held to be land ; in the second case the subject of 
the so-called demise was not the reality itself, but a 
mere naked privilege of using, on the pier, utensils and 
machinery, and the court held that the contract granting 
such privilege, did not create the relation of landlord 
and tenant. The distinction between the two cases is ob- 
vious. This summary remedy does not extend, however, 
to cases (1) where the relation of landlord and tenant is 
created merely by operation of law (Williams v. Bige- 
low, 11 How. 83 ; Burnett v. Scribner, 16 Barb. 621 ; 
Keneda v. Q-ardner, 3 Id. 589 ; Doolittle v. Eddy, 
7 Id. 74 ; Livingston v. Tanner, 14 JSf. 7. 64 ; Carlisle 
«. McCall, 1 Hilt. 399 ; People v. Simpson, 14 Abb. 457, 
and notes, 28 N. T. 55) ; (2) nor to agreement for the pur- 
chase of real estate, where the vendee is in possession 
(Oakley v. Schoonmaker, 15 Wend. 226 ; Caswell v. Dis- 
trich. Id. 379 ; Putnam v. Wise, 1 Hill. 234), the proper 
remedy being by ejectment (3 Barb. 576; 7 Cow. 747): (3) 
nor to agreements for board and rooms (Wilson v. Mar- 
tin, 1 Den. 602); (4) nor to disputes between grantor and 
grantee, for conditions not performed (Roach v. Cosine, 



214 LANDLOED A.ND TEKAKTT. 

9 Wend. 227) ; (5) nor to intruders entering into pos- 
session immediately after the expiration of the tenant' s 
term, but without the tenant' s assent or landlord' s per- 
mission (Carlisle v. McCall, 1 Hilt. 399 ; Sliker v. 
Hovey, 4 Lans. 86) ; (6) nor to a case where the owner 
of the fee subject to a life estate made a lease to a third 
person (Buck v. Binninger), 3 Barb. 391 ; (7) nor as be- 
tween the widow of a person who died in poesession of 
premises, claiming to own them, on the allegation that 
the applicant stated to the widow that she might con- 
tinue to occupy the premises until a day named, without 
payment of rent, the widow not assenting otherwise than 
by continuing in possession (Benjamin v. Benjamin, 1 
Seld. 383) ; (8) nor to agreements between master and 
servant, by which the servants are furnished with a 
habitation without rent (Haywood v. Miller, 3 Hill, 
90 ; People v. Annis, 45 Barb. 804 ; Taylor v. Bradley, 

4 Abb. Ct. App. Decis. 363 ; and see 53, Barb. 258) ; (9) 
nor to cases where the tenant for life of another holds 
possession after the determination of his estate (Liv- 
ingston V. Tanner, 14 If. T. 64 ; and see Id. 430) ; 
(10) nor to cases where the tenant fails to pay the 
taxes which he covenanted to pay as one of the condi- 
tions of his lease, in addition to the rent reserved (The 
People V. Swayze, 15 Abb. 432); but it is claimed that 
where the agreement provides that the amount of the 
unpaid tax may be added to and form part of the rent, 
that the above decision does not apply; (11) nor as 
between mortgager and mortagee (Evertson v. Sutton, 

5 Wend. 281) ; (12) nor as between the tenant in pos- 
session and one to whom he asigns his lease (The People 
V. Simpson, 28 JV. Y. 55). 

Proceedings m.ay be taken by the grantees and representatiTes of 

the parties. 

These proceedings may be commenced by the land- 
lord or lessor, or his legal representatives, agents, or 
assigns (see § 29 of statute, ante, p. 186); and see pro- 



LAW OF SUMMAKY PROCEEDINGS. 215 

visions as to grantees and assignees {vide ante, pp. 76, 
86) ; and as to executors and administrators {Id. p. 75) ; 
and the term "legal representatives," as employed in 
the statute, is supposed to refer to those who, after 
death, succeed to the legal rights and remedies of the 
landlord, and stand in his place, representing him 
in respect thereto, as heirs, executors, or administra- 
tors, in the cases in which, by operation of law, will, or 
otherwise, the estate of the landlord is of such a nature 
as to go to or become vested in the persons occupying 
these respective relations or positions, in which cases 
they are authorized to assert their right thereto in the 
same manner as the iatestate or testator might have 
done if living, and the term "assignee" includes 
" grantee." 

The proceedings under the statute may be taken 
against the tenant and every one holding or claiming 
under him (§ 28, ante, p. 184 ; § 30, p. 186) ; and infancy 
is no defense to summary proceedings (3 Eill, 147) ; 
and as to who are under-tenants and who are assignees 
(see ante, pp. 84, 85, 88). 

The various statutory provisions upon summary proceedings will be 
found in the laws of 1830, chap. 194, p. 176; laws of 1843, chap. 240, 
p. 393; laws of 1849, chap. 193, p. 391; laws of 1850, chap. 144, p. 
385, §40; laws of 1851, chap. 460, p. 853; laws of 1857 (vol. 3\ 
chap. 684, p. 509 ; laws of 1863, chap. 398, p. 489 ; laws of 1863, chap. 
368, p. 631 ; laws of 1863, chap. 189, p. 338 ; laws of 1866 (vol. 3), 
chap. 754, p. 1636; laws of 1868 (vol. 2), chap. 764, p. 1724; laws of 
1868 (vol. 3), chap. 838, p. 1930; laws of 1870 (vol. 2), chap. 741, 
p. 1833; laws of 1874, chap. 208, p. 339; laws of 1874, chap. 471, p. 
612. And see the statute as it now stands {ante, pp. 174, 183). 

Arrangeineut of the ten chapters upon the law and practice of sum- 
mary pi'oceedings. 

Chap. 33 relates to •' Theobject, design, and application of the statute." 
" The rules of construction." 
•'The officers having jurisdiction." 
" Proceedings for non-payment of rent." 
"Proceedings for holding over." 
" Affidavits and its requisites." 
" Summons and its service." 
" Practice upon return-day." 
' Proceedings upon the trial." 
" Pinal determination and its efEect." 



33 relates to 


34 




25 




26 




27 




28 




39 




30 




31 




31 





216 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE LAW AND' PEACTICE ON SUMMAKY PROCEEDINGS 

— Continued. 

Rules of Construction applicable to the Statutes. Jurisdiction and 
proceedings thereafter. 

The rule of construction applicable to special or 
limited jurisdictions created by statute, is, that being 
the creature of the statute, the officer must clothe his 
proceedings with all the solemnities prescribed by the 
act which gives the power, and that such jurisdictions 
are (like justices' courts not proceeding according to the 
course of the common law) confined strictly to the jur- 
isdiction given to them, and take nothing by implica- 
tion (Jones -0. Eeed, 1 Johns. Cases, 20 ; Wells ». 
Newkirk, Id. 228 ; Way v. Carey, 1 Cai. 191 ; Wylie 
V. Hyde, 13 Johns. 249 ; Toof v. Bentley 5 Wend. 276 ; 
Watson e. Davis, 19 Id. 371 ; Yager v. Hannah, 6 HiZl, 
631 ; Payne v. Hathway, 4 N. T. Leg. Obs. 21 ; Bige- 
low V. Stearns, 19 Johns. 39 ; Loomis v. Bowers, 2.2 
Sow. 361 ; Graham on Jurisdiction, p. 4). The rule 
is, to be strict in holding them to the jurisdiction con- 
ferred, Ijut in all matters in which they have jurisdic- 
tion, to be liberal in reviewing their proceedings as re- 
spects form, regularity, and such like (Jones v. Reed, 
1 Johns. Oases, 20 ; Baker v. Dambolton, 10 Johns. 240 ; 
Day V. Wilbur, 2 Cai. 134 ; Baum v. Tarpenny, 3 Bill, 
75 ; Stafford v. Williams, 4 'Denio, 182 ; Bellows v. 
Sackett, 15 Barb. 96 ; Peters v. Diossy, 3 E. D. S?nit7i, 
115) ; and iu determining the powers of such courts, the 
substance and not the form, the thing itself and not the 
name by which it may be called, is regarded (Elwell v. 
McQueen, 10 Wend. 520; Mo Adam! s Marine Court 
Pr., Ist ed. p. 108). 



LAW OF SUMMART PROCEEDINGS. 217 

These general principles have been applied to sum- 
mary proceedings, and the courts have held that being 
in derogation of the common law, the statute must be 
strictly pursued in all the things upon vrhich jurisdic- 
tion depends (Farrington v. Morgan, 20 Wend. 207 ; 
Hill V. Stocking, 6 Hill, 314). Thus in Farrington v. 
Morgan (supra) it was held that where the statute di- 
rected the magistrate to nominate eighteen respectable 
persons, who were to be summoned as jurors, twelve of 
whom were to be ballotted for as the jury of trial, and 
the magistrate ordered twenty jurors, this was held to 
be erroneous under the tenant's objection, and the 
adjudication was for this reason reversed. The magis- 
trate at that time had no power, however, to try such a 
proceeding without a jury (Benjamin v. Benjamin, 5 
If. T. 383). The power has since been conferred by 
amendment of § 34 of the act (1857, chap. 684). 

In Benjamin v. Benjamin, 5 iV. Y. 385, the court 
said : ' ' This statutory remedy, by way of a summary 
proceeding, is in derogation of the common law by 
action, and must be strictly construed. A peculiar and 
limited jurisdiction is thereby conferred upon certain 
magistrates, which can be exercised only in the way 
prescribed." 

The statute, however, being a remedial one, is to be 
construed liberally, to carry into efifect its intent, by 
suppressing the mischief, and advancing the remedy, 
in all cases where there is jurisdiction in the magistrate 
(Lynde v. Noble, 20 Johns. 80 ; 17 Wend. 464 ; Farring- 
ton V. Morgan, 20 Id. 207 ; Smith v. Moffat, 1 Barb. 
65). 

The dictum of Beoxson, J., in Hill v. Stocking (6 
Sill, 317), that these proceedings are to be carefully 
watched, lest they be turned into the means of working 
injustice and oppression, is to be remembered by the 
practitioner in preparing the affidavit, and in conduct- 
ing the proceedings under the statute so that they may 
28 



218 LAJVTBLORB AND TESTAWT. 

bear the scrutiny and watching suggested by Judge 
Beonsojs", if that ordeal should become necessary. 

The remark, however, was evidently intended only 
for those cases in which, owing to peculiar circum- 
stances, the summary nature of the remedy worked 
injustice and oppression, and not to the ordinary class 
of cases, in which this remedy has since become a ne- 
cessity, and the proceeding being remedial in its char- 
acter is to be liberally construed, in cases where juris- 
diction has properly attached, so as to uphold the pro- 
ceeding if possible. Hill v. Stocking (supra) was of 
the class of cases where the justice never acquired jur- 
isdiction, and the strict rule of construction, before re- 
ferred to (p. 216, ante), was applied. If it had belonged 
to the opposite class of cases, where jurisdiction had 
fully attached, the liberal rule, as to remedial statutes, 
would most likely have been adopted. 



LAW OF SXJMMAEY PROCEEDIKGS. 219 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE LAW AND PRACTICE ON SUMMARY PEOCEEDIKGS — 

Continued. 

■ Judicial officers haTuig jurisdiction. 

The statute provides that the following judicial 
officers shall have jurisdiction of STimmary proceedings, 
viz. : "any judge of the county courts of the county, or 
any justice of the peace of the city or town where 
the premises are situated, or any mayor or recorder 
of the city where such premises are situated, or in the 
city of New York, by the Mayor, Recorder, any Justice 
of the Marine Court, or any one of the Justices of the 
District Courts of the city of New York (see § 28, S. S. 
ante, p. 184), or by the City J udge of said city (Marry v. 
James, 2 Daly, 437), or by the City Judges of the city 
of Brooklyn, where the premises are situated in Kings 
county (1849,. p. 174, § 26 ; 1870, chap. 470, § 13), or by 
any Justice of the Suprerior Court of the city of Buffalo 
where the premises are situated within that city (1857, 
vol. 1, p. 754, § 25), and the jurisdiction conferred by 
this statute is in a territorial point of view co-extensive 
with that of the officer upon whom it is conferred (Roach 
V. Cosine, 9 Wend. 227; Carlisle ?;. McCall, 1 HilL 
399). In the cases just cited, it was held that the juris- 
diction of a Justice of the District Court in the city of 
New York, extended over the whole city, and was not 
limited to the district in which the parties resided or 
the premises were situated. 

The officers hereinbefore named having jurisdiction 
of these proceedings, may be classified with reference 
to locality in manner following : 



220 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 



Where the premises are located within the city of New Torli. 

The Mayor. 

The Eecorder. 

The City Judge, 

The Justices of the Marine Court. 

The Justices of the District Courts. 

Where the premises are situated within the city of Brooklyn. 

The Recorder. 

The Judges of the City Court of Brooklyn. 
The County Judge of, Kings County. 
The Justices of the Peace. 

Where the premises are situated within the city of Buffalo. 

The Recorder. 

The Justices of the Superior Court of the city of 
Buffalo. 

The County Judge of Erie Couuty. 
The Justices of the Peace. 

Where the premises are not located within the three cities named. 

Any Judge of the County Court of the county in 
which the premises are located. 

Any Justice of the Peace of the city or town in 
which the premises are located. 



LAW OF SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. 221 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

THE LAW AND PRACTICE ON SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS- 

Continv£d. 

I. Definition of rent. 

II. Auxiliary remedies. 
in. Demand for rent — When and how made. 
IV. Demand upon joint tenants. 

V. Landlord's breach of covenant. 
VI. Payment of rent after commencement of proceedings. 



Definition of rent. 

Rent is a periodical return made by any pairticular 
tenant of land, either in money or otherwise, in retribu- 
tion for the land ; a rent must be certain, or capable of 
being made so by either party (1 EilUard on Real Prop- 
erty, 227), it is a certain profit issuin'g yearly out of lands 
and tenements corporeal {Co. Litt. i41g ; 2 Bl. Com. 
41), and is defined by Lord Chief Baron Gilbert to be 
an annual return made by the tenant, either in labor, 
money or provisions, in retribution for the land that 
passes {Ollb. Rents, 9 ; note to Co. Litt. iy Thomas, 
vol. 1, p. 508) ; but the general understanding of the 
term rent, is the payment of a specified amount of 
money on a day named in the lease, for the use and oc- 
cupation of the demised premises, and it is very doubt- 
ful, to say the least, whether a summary proceeding can 
be maintained in any case, where the agreement pro- 
vides for the payment of rent in anything but money 
(Oakley v. Schoonmaker, 15 Wend. 226) ; and the only 
practical method suggested for obviating the difficul- 



222 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

ties arising in a case where the rent is payable in labor 
or provisions, is to bring an ordinary civil action upon 
the contract, and by the judgment fix the amount of 
the rent in dollars and cents, and then perhaps a pro- 
ceeding might be maintained to compel the payment of 
the amount so determined upon as in the case of any 
other fixed rent, for while the judgment would be con- 
clusive as to the amount, it would not merge the sum- 
mary remedy, if applicable to such a case (see author- 
ities collated at p. 79, and for rent payable in kind, see 
Taylor' sL. & T. §§ 391, 392), and a demand for the rent 
as fixed, would of course be necessary, as in other 
cases. 

II. 

Auxiliary remedies. 

It is supposed that an ordinary civil action for the 
recovery of the rent, and a summary proceeding for the 
possession of the premises, may proceed at the same 
time, although there can be but one satisfaction (see 
Grridley o. Eowland, 1 E. D. 8. 670, and see ante, p. 
79). 

Landlord entitled to interest upon rent after default. 

Proceedings to disposses a tenant for non-payment 
of rent are not invalidated because of demand of the 
rent with interest, because the landlord is entitled to 
interest, as an incident to the principal, from the time 
of the default in payment (The People ». Dudley, 58 N. 
T. 323). 

Effect of foreclosure by lessor of mortgage npon lease. Joinder 
of parties as landlords in summary proceedings. 

S., being the lessor of certain premises, and also 
mortgagee of the lease and term, took possession 
under a warrant of dispossession against the lessees. 



LAW OF STJMMAET PROCEEDINGS. 223 

He then foreclosed his mortgage ; this, by its terras, was 
made subject to rents, covenants, &c., of the lease. 
The complaint in the foreclosure suit prayed, and the 
judgment directed, the sale of the premises and leases 
mortgaged ; neither contained the clause of the mort- 
gage, that the term conveyed was subject to the 
payment of rent. The judgment directed the sheriff to 
deduct from the proceeds of sale all rents due upon the 
mortgaged lease. The relators were parties to the 
foreclosure suit, and became purchasers upon the sale, 
and it was held, that the sale was simply of the lease, 
with its correlative obligations ; that by the purchase, 
relators became assignees of the lease and term, and 
took subject to the obligation to ipaj rent, which had 
not been released or extinguished. It also appeared 
that the lease given by S. included premises owned by 
him, and also further premises in which he had a lease- 
hold interest — that hfe died leaving a will, by which he 
devised and bequeathed all his real estate, and the 
residue of all his estate to his son N., and it was held, 
that there was sufficient unity of a right of possession 
inN., and the executors of S., as joint owners of the 
lease and representatives of the lessor, to justify pro- 
ceedings instituted in their names, jointly, to disposses 
the relators for non-payment of rent (The Yeo-ple ex rel. 
Grisslerw. Dudley, 58 if. Y. 323). 

III. 

Demand for rent— when and how made. 

Rent is demandable on the same day it becomes due, 
but the teuant has all day to pay it, and is not in de- 
fault until after midnight of the day it is made payable 
(Academy of Music «. Hackett, 2 Hilt. 217 ; Oothout ». 
Ballard, 41 Barl. 33: Smith t. Aylesworth, 40 Id. 
104). 

Before instituting summary proceedings under the 



224 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

statute, demand must be made for the rent either per- 
sonally of the tenant, or by the service of a three days' 
notice in writing, requiring the payment of the rent or 
the possession of the premises (§ 28, subd. 2, ante, p. 
184), and this notice may be served in the manner pre- 
, scribed for the service of the summons {Id. §§ 28, 32, 
aiite, pp. 184, 187). 

The notice may be in the following form : 



Demand for rent by the service of a tliree days' notice. 

New York, October 1, 1875. 
To Richard Roe, tenant. 

You will please take notice, that you are indebted to me in the sum 
of fifty dollars, for one month's rent of the house and premises, No. 1 
Broadway, in the city of New York, in advance, from September 1, 
1875, till October 1, 1875, and that I require the payment of said 
rent, on or before the fourth day of October, 1875 (three days' no- 
tice), or the possession of said premises. 

Yours, &c., 

JOHN DOB, Landlord. 

The act is in the alternative. The rent must be 
demanded, or a three day's notice in writing given, 
requiring payment — it is not necessary to do both 
(Eogers v. Lynds, 14 Wend. 173). In the case last cited, 
it was held that a demand of the rent might be made of 
the tenant in possession, but the Supreme Court, in 
The People exrel. Simpson®. Piatt {43Bari. 116), held 
that a demand on the under-tenant in possession was 
insufficient, and that the demand must be made of the 
tenant, or the three days' notice given according to the 
statute ; and in The People v. Gross (50 Barb. 231), it 
was held that a demand of the rent under the statute 
must be made personally of the tenant, and that if the 
landlord relies for his demand upon a written notice 
under the second clause of the act, he must show a 
notice in the alternative, requiring payment or posses- 
sion ; and in Wolcott?;. Schenk (16 How. Pr. 449), it was 
held that a demand made at the lessee's usual place of 
business, not on the premises, and of his agent, with- 



LAW OF SUMMARY PEOCEEDIM-GS. 225 

out saying who tlie agent was, or what was the nature 
of his agency, was insufficient. 

Demand of rent at commou law. 

At common law, the rules by which estates are for- 
feited or divested are very strict, and a landlord at- 
tempting to enforce a condition of re-entry on account 
of the ten ant's default in the non-payment of rent, must 
show compliance with the following things which must 
be previously done to entitle him to re-enter : 

1. A demand must be made of the rent. 

2. The demand must be of the precise rent due, for 
if a penny more or less be demanded, it will be ill. 

3. It must be made precisely upon the day on which 
the rent is due and payable by the lease, to save the 
forfeiture, as when the proviso is, that if the rent shall 
be behind and unpaid for the space of thirty or other 
number of days, after the days of payment, it shall be 
lawful for the lessor to re-enter. A demand in such a 
case must be made on the thirtieth or other last day. 

4. It must be made at a convenient time before sun- 
set. 

5. It must be made upon the land, and at the most 
notorious part of it, unless a place be appointed where 
the rent is payable, in which case the demand must be 
made at such place. 

6. A demand must be made in fact, and so averred 
in pleading, although there should be no person on the 
land ready to pay it. At common law, rent reserved, 
payable yearly, is to be paid on the land, because the 
land is the debtor, and that is the place of demand 
appointed by law. So if a man leases rendering rent, 
and the lessee binds himself in a sum to perform the 
covenants, this does not alter the place of payment of 
the rent, for it may be tendered on the land without 
seeking the obligor (Co. Litt. 201&), and this fis upon 
the principle that rent is a profit issuing out of lauds 
and tenements corporeal, 

39 



226 LANBIiOliD AKD TENANT. 



Statutory dcinaud for rent. 

The question has been raised as fo when and at 
what place, and in what words a personal demand for 
the rent should be made in order to satisfy the require- 
ments of the statute. 

The statute is silent on the subject, and only requires 
that a demand of the rent sliall have been made, and it 
v/ould seem to be a fair and reasonable oonsfruction, 
to hold, that any words of demand, by the landlord, 
intelligible to the tenant, made after default, ought to be 
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of a remedial stat- 
ute, endeavoring to shake oflf the intricacies and niceties 
by which the common law endeavored to prevent forfei- 
tures and actions to enforce them. The common law 
did not favor tlie forfeiture of estates, and was therefore 
technical in exacting great precision both as to the form, 
place and time of the demand required from those 
seeking to enforce them. The statute, however, fur- 
nishes every safeguard against forfeiture of the tenant's 
estate, by allowing him to pay rent, at any time before 
the warrant issues to remove him (§ 44, ante, p. 192), 
and by staying the issuing of the warrant of removal 
for ten days by giving a bond to pay the rent and costs 
within that time {Id.), and finally by allowing him one 
year after the execution of the warrant to redeem in 
cases wherein the tenant' s unexpired term at the time 
of issuing the warrant, exceeds five years (§ 54, ante, 
p. 196), and there is no case holding that the technical 
rule in regard to- forfeitures, laid down in IG Johns. 
2-Z2 ; 17 Id. 66 ; 18 Id. 447 ; 2 Hilt. 217, applies to 
these proceedings, excepting one of Justice Beowm" in 
Wolcott «. Schenck (16 How. 450), in which he says : 
"The right to re-enter for the non-payment of rent, both 
at the common law and in pursuance of the statute, is 
a matter stricti juris, and whoever asserts it, must see 
that every pre-requisite to its exercise, is exactly per- 
formed. It is a right which the law will enforce but 



LAW OF StrMMAEY I-BOCEEDINGS. 227 

will not favor. The statute requires that a " demand 
of such rent shall have been made," and it uses this 
expression in the sense in which it was used at the 
common law." A literal performance of the common 
law pre-requisites to a demand for rent seems contrary 
to the genius, spirit and purpose of the statute, and is 
in some respects contrary to the adjudications. A few 
illustrations will suffice. In the first place, at common 
law, a demand might lawfully be made upon the land, 
which was in theory considered the debtor, but the au- 
thorities hold that such a demand is insufficient under 
the statute, that it must be personal upon the tenant 
or by the service of the three days' notice provided 
by statute (see The People ex rel. Simpson v. Piatt, 
43 Barb. 116; The .People «. Gross, 50 Id. 231). In 
the next place, a common-law demand, to be effective, 
was required to be made upon the very day on which 
the rent is due and payable, and at a convenient 
hour before sunset. This pre-requisite if literally en- 
forced would seriously embarrass if not defeat what was 
designed to be a simple as well as speedy remedy. 
Landlords, particularly of tenements, would be incon- 
venienced, and their tenants considerably annoyed by 
demands for rent before sunset on the first day of the 
term, yet if the demand should be postponed to the 
second day of the term, the remedy would be forever 
gone. Therefore, we repeat, that it would be a fair and 
reasonable construction of this statute, to hold, that any 
words of demand by the landlord, intelligible to the 
tenant, made after default, satisfies the requirements 
of this remedial statute, which wag intended to super- 
sede the formula, circumlocution and verbosity peculiar 
to the common-law remedy of ejectment, by introduc- 
ing a new proceeding more terse, simple and summary, 
freed from the evils of the former remedy which by its 
intricacy and delay became of little practical utility 
to landlords ; of course the landlord must not be ex- 
cessive in his demand, he must not insist upon more 



228 LAWDLOED AND TENANT. 

than is actually due, for if lie does, the tenant is not 
placed in default by refusing or neglecting to comply 
with it, but the proceedings will not be invalidated 
because of the demand of the rent with interest ; be- 
cause the landlord is entitled to interest, as an incident 
to the principal, from the time of the default in pay- 
ment (The People ex rel. Gottlieb G-rissler w. Dudley, 
58 N. Y. 323). 

IV. 

Demand upon joint tenants. 

Where two tenants hold jointly a demand on either 
is sufficient (Geisler v. Weigand, 9 N. T. 227), and one 
of two joint landlords may demand the whole rent, and 
commence proceedings for its non-payment in the name 
of both (Griffin v. Clark, 33 Barb. 46 ; and see 3 Bosw. 
63) 



WJiere the landlord^ s breach of covenant constitutes 
no defense. 

It is not competent for the tenant in these proceed- 
ings to show a breach of the landlord' s agreement to 
construct the premises in a proper manner. The tenant 
can not withhold both the rent and the possession 
(The People «., Kelsey, 14 Abb. Pr. 372 ; S. C. 38 Bo.rb. 
269 ; La Farge v. Mansfield, 31 Id. 345 ; 1 Bosw. 646 ; 
S. C. 16 How. Pr. 164). 

VI. 

Payment of rent after commencement of proceedings. 

In Chapter VI. {ante, p. 47) the time and mode of 
payment of rent is fully stated, and in the same 



LAW OF STTMMAEY PEOCEEDINGS. 229 

chapter {ante, pp. fi2. 53), the effect of a tender before 
and after suit brought is also considered. 

The tenant may even after suit brought or summary 
proceedings commenced pay his rent, provided he pay 
the taxable costs therewith. 

The rent and costs may be paid in summary pro- 
ceedings, at any time before the warrant is actually is- 
sued. 

Demanding receipt. 

In Griffith v. Hodges (1 Car. & P. 419), Abbott, 0. 
J., said : "No man can insist on a receipt in full of all 
demands ; and if a man makes a tender of money, in- 
sisting at the same time on a receipt in full of all de- 
mands, I have no doubt that such, tender is bad" (see 
also ante, p. 53). ' 



230 X-AKDLOED AND TENANT. 



CHAPTEE XXVII. 

THE LAW AND PRACTICE ON SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS 

— Goiitinued. — proceedings for holding- otei{. 

I. Consequences of holding over. 
n. The cases contemplated by the statute. 

III. Who to commence the proceedings. 

IV. Further liability of overliolding tenants. 
V. Tenants at will and by siiflferauce. 



Consequences of holding over. 

Upon the determination of the tenancy, the land- 
lord is entitled to receive the fall and complete posses- 
sion of the demised premises from the tenant, who 
must, therefore, deliver up to his landlord the quiet 
and peaceable possession thereof, and if there be an 
under-tenant in possession, to whom the tenant has let 
the whole or part of the premises, the tenant must get 
him out, or the possession of the under-tenant will be 
regarded as the possession of the tenant, and the latter 
may be held liable for the consequences (Harding w. 
Crethorn, 1 Enp. 57 ; Ibbs «. Richardson, ^ A. & E. 
849 ; Bacon «. Brown, 9 Conn. 834) ; and tlie landlord 
may remove the under-tenant, so holding over, by sum- 
mary proceedings against the tenant, making the 
under-tenant a party, or the landlord may, at his 
option, treat the holding over by the under-tenant, as 
implying a new hiring by the tenant, upon the terms 
and conditions specified in the former lease (Digby «. 
Atkinson, 4 Camp, at p. 278 ; Brewer b. Knapp, 1 
Pick. 333 ; Ellis xi. Paige, U. 43 ; Frouty a. Wood, 2 
Eill (S. C), 367 ; Moore v. Beasley, 3 Ham. 294 ; 



LAW OF SUMMARY PEOCEEDINGS. 231 

Diller v. Roberts, 13 8. & B. 60 ; Bacon «. Brown, 9 
Conn. 834 ; Darril v. Stevens, 4 MeCord. 59 ; AVitt c. 
The Mayor, 5 lioM. 248 ; Hunt v. Wolfe, 2 Dalp, 298 ; 
Conway «. Starkweather, 1 Z)e?z. 113) ; and the Court of 
Appeals in Schuyler v. Smith (51 i7. Y. 309), hold that 
where a tenant, for one or more years, holds over after 
the expiration of his term, the landlord has the option 
to treat him as a trespasser or as a tenant for another 
year upon the terms of the prior lease, so far as appli- 
cable, and the right of the landlord to elect to continue 
the tenancy is not affected by the fact that the tenant 
refused to renew the lease, and has given notice 
that he has hired other premises, and that it is not in 
tile power of the tenant alone to throw off the character 
thus imposed upon him. 

II. 

The cases contemplated bp the statute. 

The statute in regard to holding over, only contem- 
plates cases in which the term has expired by lapse of 
time, and not by forfeiture for breach of conditions (Oak- 
ley w. Schoon maker, 15 Wend. 226 ; Beach v. Nixon, 9 N. 
Y. 35); and it was accordingly held in Beach ». Nixon 
{supra), that where a lease contains a clause, that in 
case of a violation of any of its conditions, the relation 
of landlord and tenant, at the option of the former, 
shall wholly cease, and the landlord shall be entitled to, 
and receive immediate possession of the premises, 
under the statute for holding over after the expiration 
of the term, without any notice other than by the 
usual summons, that default in the payment of rent 
does not constitute such a holding over as to authorize 
summary proceedings to recover the premises under 
the statute referred to, and that such a clause creates a 
condition only, and not a conditional limitation, and that 
the estate is not absolutely determined by the breach ; 



232 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

but in Miller v. Levi ( 44 N. T. 489), it was held that a 
provision in a lease that the lessor may " terminate the 
lease at the end of any year, by giving sixty days' pre- 
vious notice, in case he should sell, or desire to re- 
build," is not a condition, but a limitation, and the 
term expires by force of a sale and notice in sixty days 
thereafter, and without any further act on the part of 
the lessor, and if the tenant retains possession after the 
sixty days elapse, this is such a case of holding over 
after the expiration of the term, within the provisions 
of the Revised Statutes, as will give jurisdiction in 
summary proceedings for his removal. 

Under an agreement to quit on notice of ten days, 
it has been held that the date on which the notice is 
given must be excluded. 

When certain leases expire. 

The custom of the place determines whether a lease 
of premises from May 1, in one year, to May 1, in the 
succeeding year, includes or excludes the first day 
(Wilcox V. Woods, 9 Wend. 346), but a lease for years 
to end on May 1, expires at noon of that day, but a 
lease from a day named to May 1, expires on midnight 
on April 30 (The People ex rel. Elston «. Kobinson, 39 
Barb. 9) ; and where A executed to B a lease of certain 
premises for one year, containing a clause in these words: 
" B to have the privilege to have the premises for one 
year, one month and twenty days longer, but if he leaves 
he is to give four months' notice before the expiration of 
this lease, it was held, that the lease created a terra for 
the full period of two years, one month and twenty 
days, defeasible at the election of the tenant, after one 
year, by giving notice of his intention to leave the prem- 
ises, four months previous to the expiration of the year 
(Cretieii ». Doney, 1 N. Y. 419 ; and see House «. Burr, 
24 Barb. 525) ; and under a lease for a certain term 
yielding and paying a certain rent, and, at the election 



LAW OF SUMMARY PEOCEEDIJTGS. 233 

of the tenant, for a further term, yielding and paying 
an increased rent, the election of the lessee to hold for 
the additional terra at the increased rent may be infer- 
red from his continuing to occupy the premises and 
paying rent for two quarters at the increased rate, with- 
out proof of any formal election or notice to the lessor 
at the time of the expiration of the first term, and the 
court in so deciding said : " The provision in the lease 
is not a mere covenant of the plaintiff for renewal ; no 
formal renewal was contemplated by the parties. The 
agreement itself is, as to the additional term, a lease 
de futuro requiring only the lapse of the preceding 
term and the election of the defendant to become a lease 
in presenti ; all that is necessary to its validity is the 
fact of election (Kramer v. Cook, 7 Gray {Mass.) at p. 
553 ; and see ante, pp. 27, 28, 29). 

Without the landlord's premission. 

The statute provides that the holding over of the 
tenant must be without the permission of the landlord 
(§ 28 subds. 1, 2, ante., p. 184), but this provision evi- 
dently contemplates a permission given under circum- 
stances that make it irrevocable, and such as in law is 
tantamount to and possesses the [elements of a valid 
contract, so as to bind the parties to it. 

III. 

Who to commence the proceedings. 

As a rule proceedings under this statute should be 
commenced by the landlord, or some one on his behalf, 
or by the legal representatives or assignees of the land- 
lord, entitled to possession of the demised premises. 

And where a landlord prior to the expiration of an 
existing tenancy, has let premises to another, the ques- 
tion presents itself, whether the proceedings ought to be 

30 



234 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

commenced by the landlord, or by the tenant entitled 
to possession under the last demise. The question in- 
cidentally came up in the commission of appeals, in the 
matter of the application of Charles G. Miller, land- 
lord, V. Emanuel Levi, tenant (44 iV. T. 489), in which it 
appeared that the landlord had sold the reversion, con- 
ditioned upon the delivery of possession to the vendee, 
and the court held, that the legal title not having ac- 
tually passed, the relation of landlord and tenant was 
not terminated, and that proceedings to dispossess were 
properly brought in the name of the original lessor, and 
the court (per Hunt, Com'r), says: "There is no 
foundation for the objection that the relation of land- 
lord and tenant did not exist. The relation was estab- 
lished by the express agreement of the parties in writ- 
ing. The plaintiff remained the owner of the premises. 
Although he had made a contract of sale with Alexan- 
der & Black, the sale had not been consummated by 
the delivery of the deed. Indeed, the sale was condi- 
tional upon the delivery of possession, and the vendees 
refused to accept the deed or to execute their mortgage, 
until the possession of the premises was delivered to 
them. Some of the cases intimate that on the occurrence 
of a sale, this relation exists between the tenant and the 
purchaser, and that proceedings under this act may be 
instituted by the latter. JS'one of them, however, inti- 
mate that the proceeding may not be in the name of the 
original lessor, he still retaining the legal title (citing 
Gardner v. Keteltas, 3 Hill, 330 ; Bird sail v. Phillips, 
17 Wend. 464). It certainly seems to be the correct 
principle that the possession of property should be re- 
turned to the original parties from whom it was ob- 
tained, if they remain the landlords, and as such de- 
mand it, particularly where, as in the case above cited, 
they are under agreement to give the vendee or new 
tenant actual possession. 



LAW 01* StrMMAET PEOOEEDINGS. 235 



IV. 

Further liability of overJiolding tenant — Increased 
rent after notice. 

In Despart v. Walbridge (15 N. 7. 374), the ten- 
ant being notified by the lessor's assignee that if he held 
over, he must pay an increased rent, was held to have 
assented thereto by merely continuing to occupy after 
his lease expired (see also Hunt v. Bailey, 39 Mo. 257 ; 
Adriance n. Hafkemeyer, Id. 134 ; Borril v. Stephens, 
4 McQord, 59 ; McKinney n. Peck, 'mill. 174 ; Bennett 
». Ireland, Ellin, B. & E. 826). But this principle was 
held not to apply where a tenant succeeded a prior 
tenant, and agreed for a certain rent, but paid only at 
the rate the former tenant had paid, and the lessor was 
allowed to recover the balance of rent agreed to be paid 
(Mayor r>. Tyler, 8 Q. B. 95). 

V. 

Tenancies at will and ty sufferance. 

The character of these tenancies is fully discussed 
at p. 10 {ante), and the manner of terminating them is 
stated at pp. 15, 16 {ante). 

Upon the subject of notice to tenants by sufferance, 
the commission of appeals held in Smith v. Littlefield 
(51 N. J. 539), that a tenant who holds over a definite 
term for a brief period, without the consent of the land- 
lord, does not thereby become tenant by sufferance, and 
is not entitled to notice to quit before the commence- 
ment of summary proceedings or the bringing of an 
action to recover possession. That to entitle him to 
notice, the holding over must be continued for such a 
length of time and under such circumstances as to 
authorize the implication of assent upon the part of 



-236 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

the landlord. Accordingly, -where it appeared that the 
defendant entered into possession of certain premises 
under a lease, which expired April 18, 1865, and held 
over without the permission of the plaintiff, his' land- 
lord, until June 18, when the action was commenced to 
recover possession, and no notice to quit was served, 
it was held, that no notice was necessary, and that the 
plaintiff was entitled to recover. 

Land sold nnder execntion. 

The application for process to dispossess in these 
cases may be made by any one having title — ^it is not 
confined to the purchaser at the sale (Brown v. Betts, 
13 Wend. 30), and the proceedings may be had against 
the servant or agent of the debtor, or against a third 
person who entered in possession under title derived 
from the debtor subsequent to the attaching of the lien 
of the judgment under which the property was sold 
(Hallenbeck •». Grarner, 20 Wend. 22). Where a tenan- 
cy at will exists, and the landlord, whose interest in 
the estate has been sold under an execution, executes 
a quit claim to the purchaser, who subsequently ob- 
tains title under the sheriff's sale, the tenancy is not 
determined so far but that the purchaser may proceed 
to obtain possession under the statute respecting sum- 
mary proceedings to recover the possession of land, 
and the purchaser was entitled to proceed without the 
landlord's deed (Birdsall v. Phillips, 17 Wend. 463). 



liAW OF STJMMAET PJBOCEEDiNGS. 237 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

THE LAW AND PRACTICE ON STJMMAET PEOCEEDINGS — 

Continued. 

I. The affidavit — its requisites. 
II. The form of the affidavit. 

I. 

The affidamt and Us requisites. 

I The affidavit upon wMcli summary proceedings are 
to be commenced should be prepared with great strict- 
ness, and every fact necessary to give jurisdiction should 
be distinctly alleged (Campbell v. Mallory, 22 How. 183 ; 
Hallenbeck v. Gardner, 20 Wend. 22 ; Powers v. Witty, 
42 How. 352). It should make out a plain, direct, and 
full case, and not be uncertain or contradictory (Wiggin 
V. Woodruff IQBarh. 4.74. ; 22 How. 183 ; 24 Barb. 438 ; 
42 How. 353 ; 43 Barb. 168, aff'd in 38 N. Y. 451 ; 6 Hill, 
314 ; 5 How. 95), for the law will presume that the land- 
lord has stated his case in the most favorable manner to 
his own interest ; the landlord should therefore see that 
the facts favoring his right are fully set out, remember- 
ing that the affidavit must allege facts and not the 
evidence of facts, nor conclusions either of law or fact 
(Hill V. Stocking, 6 Hill. 317). In view of the impor- 
tance of the case last cited, it was thought advisable to 
insert the same in extenso, as it appears in the books. 

Syllabns of case. 

In summary proceedings to recover possession of demised premises, 
under 2 B. 8. 513, § 28, et seq., the preliminary affidavit of the land- 
lord or his agent must make out a plain case. Per Beonson, J., 
where the proceedings were instituted by 8., and the affidavit stated 
that J. demised the premises, &c. ; that he afterwards died leaving S. 
Ms widow ; that she became legally entitled to receive the accruing rents, 



28§ tAlJ-DLOED AND tSSTAlTT. 

ani to have possession of the premises, without setting forth any fact ex- 
plaining how she became entitled; held, not sufficient to show her 
right to proceed. 

So, even though the affidavit state further that the tenant and 
those claiming under him have recognised the widow's right to the pre/m- 
ises, by paying rent to her, and by other acts. 

The affidavit should show, among other things, that the person in- 
tended to be removed is in the occupation of the premises, together 
with his relation to the landlord; and the summons should be directed 
to the occupant by name. 

Where the affidavit was of a holding over by W. (the lessee), or his 
assigns or those claiming under him or them, on which the officer issued 
a summons directed to W. or any other person claiming possession of the 
premises, and it appeared that W. was not in possession, but that the 
premises were occupied by H., upon whom the summons was served; 
held, that the proceedings were void as against H, for want of juris- 
diction. 

Keport^of the case. 

On April 12, 1842, William Ketchatn went before 
a Supreme Court commissioner at Buffalo, and made 
affidavit as follows: "William Ketcham of said 
city, agent of Sarah B. Stocking of the same place, 
being duly sworn, deposes and says, that on or about 
the 24th day of January, a. d. 1834, Joseph Stocking, 
in his lifetime, since deceased, leased and rented unto 
Nathaniel Wilgus of said city, for the term of eight 
years from April 1, then next, the land and premises, 
&c. (describing certain premises in the city of BuiTalo, 
and referring to the lease then in the deponent's pos- 
session) ; and this deponent further says, that the term 
granted in and by the said lease has expired ; and that 
the said Wilgus, or Ms assigns, or those claiming 
under Mm or them, hold over and continue in pos- 
session of said premises, without the permission of this 
deponent or the said Sarah B. Stocking. Deponent fur- 
her says, that the said Joseph Stocking departed this life 
on or about September 3, 1835, leaving the said Sarah 
B. Stocking his widow, him surviving; that after the 
death of the said Joseph Stocking, the said Sarah B. 
Stocking hecame legally possessed of the said lease, 
and entitled to receive the accruing rents pursuant to 
the terms of the said lease, and is now entitled to the 



LAW OP StTMMABT PBOOEEDIIirGS. 239 

possession of the said premises. Deponent further 
says, that since the death of the said Joseph, the said 
Wilgus, and those claiming under Mm, have, by pay- 
ing rent to the said Sarah, and other acts, recognized 
her right to the said premises and to receive the rents 
thereof." 

Upon this affidavit the commissioner issued a sum- 
mons directed as follows: '■'■Ho NatJianiel Wilgus of 
the city of Buffalo, or any other person claiming pos- 
session of the premises hereinafter mentioned." The 
summons, after reciting part of the affidavit of Ketch- 
am, proceeded thus : " Therefore in the name of the peo- 
ple, &c., you and those claiming under you are hereby 
summoned and required," &c. Wilber, a constable, to 
whom the summons was delivered, made affidavit on 
the summons that he had served the same by giving 
personal notice thereof to Wilgus ; "also by leaving a 
copy thereof with Milo W. Hill, who claims possession 
of a portion of the premises within described^" Hill 
appeared and made objections to the sufficiency of the 
affidavit and summons, which were overruled by the 
commissioner ; and such proceedings were further had 
that Hill was put out of possession by virtue of a war- 
rant afterwards issued. He thereupon removed the 
proceedings into this court by certiorari. 

J. B. Lathrop, for Hill. 

B. S. Spalding, for S. B. Stocking. 

By the Oouet.— Beonsobt, J.— The affidavit of 
Ketcham was not sufficient to give the commissioner 
jurisdiction. It was not a proceeding to remove Wilgus, 
the lessee, for he was not in possession. But the object 
was to remove Hill, who was in possession, and who 
has in fact been removed, and yet he is not named in 
the affidavit. The allegation is, that "Wilgus, or 
his assigns, or those claiming under him or them 



240 LANBLOED AND TENATSTT. 

hold over." Upon this a roving commission was 
issued to summon Wilgus, "or any other person 
claiming possession of the premises." It was thus re- 
ferred to the constable to determine who was the proper 
party ; and he returned, that he had served the sum- 
mons by delivering a copy of it to Hill, "who claims 
possession." This is the first mention of Hill as the 
party intended to be affected by the proceeding. By 
the statute, any tenant or lessee, and the assigns, under- 
tenants, or legal representatives of such tenant or lessee, 
may be removed (2 R. S. 513, § 28). Unless the party 
is absent, the sum mons is to be served ' ' by delivering 
to the tenant to whom, it shall he directed, a true copy 
thereof, and showing him the original" {Id. § 32). The 
affidavit should have stated that Hill was in possession, 
and shown his relation to the landlord. And the sum- 
mons should have been directed to him by name. But 
instead of that, the power of determining who was the 
proper party was in effect delegated to the constable. 
It will never do to sanction such a practice in these 
summary proceedings to put a man out of the possession 
of real estate. The affidavit was also bad for another 
reason. It does not show that Mrs. Stocking was the 
landlord or lessor (2 R. S. 513, § 29). The allegation is 
that Joseph Stocking was. the lessor, and that he died 
in 1835, leaving Sarah B. Stocking his widow. It was 
not the widow, but the heir of Joseph Stocking, who 
was entitled to the reversion. There is a further allega- 
tion that Mrs. Stocking "became Ze^'aZ^?/ possessed of 
the said lease, and entitled to receive the accruing rents, 
&c., and is now entitled to the possession of the said 
premises." But how did she become entitled? The 
affidavit says, "legally." That is not swearing to a 
fact, but to the law ; and it is quite possible the depon- 
ent may be mistaken about that, for the only facts which 
he states are, that the lessor is dead, and Mrs. Stocking 
is his widow. The affidavit should have shown that 
she was the legal representative of the lessor, by stat- 



LAW OP SUMMARY PROOEEDIWaS. 241 

ing facts which would make out that relation, to wit, 
that she was assignee, heir, or devisee. Unless this is 
required, the occupant maybe termed out of possession 
by a stranger. He has the right to deny any or all of 
the facts on which the summons issued, and have a 
trial by jxiry {Id. 514, § 34). This privilege is not worth 
much, if the moving party may swear to the law, with- 
out giving the facts on which his title depends. 

The affidavit concludes by stating that " Wilgus, 
and those claiming under him, have, by paying rent to 
the said Sarah and other acts, recognized her right to 
to the said premises." This is subject to two objections. 
1. It is not a statement of facts, but of evidence. It 
does not give her title, but onlj^ alleges that she has 
evidence tending to make out a title. 2. There is no 
allegation that Hill had ever recognized her title in any 
'form. There is neither fact nor evidence against him. 

When one man wishes to put another out of the pos- 
session of a dwelling or a store, upon an affidavit, and 
a notice of two hours — the time allowed to Hill — it is 
not too much to require that he shall make out a plain 
case in the preliminary affidavit ; especially as he is 
allowed to be his own witness. These summary pro- 
ceedings must be carefully watched, or they will be 
turned into the means of working injustice and oppres- 
sion. 

Proceedings reversed. 

This case illustrates the danger of alleging conclu- 
sions instead of facts. It will be observed that the affi- 
davit stated that J. demised the premises, &c., that he 
afterwards died leaving S. his widow, that sTie became le- 
gally entitled to receive the accruing rents, andto have 
possession of the premises, without setting forth any 
fact explaining how she became entitled ; and that it was 
held, not sufficient to show her right to proceed, even 
though the affidavit stated further that the tenant and 
those claiming under him had recognized the widow's 



24-3 LANDLOED A.ND TENANT. 

rigM to the premises hy paying rent to her^ and hy 
otJier acts {lb). These statements were mere inferences 
or conclusions of the aiflant, and the facts themselves 
should have been alleged sothatthejudicial mind might 
have legally determined from the facts stated whether 
the applicant's supposed right to maintain the proceed- 
ing was well founded in law. It should also plainly ap- 
pear from the afBdavit in order to give the magistrate 
jurisdiction, that the conventional relation of landlord 
and tenant created by agreement and not by operation 
of law, exists between the parties, specifying which is 
landlord and which is tenant (Benjamin v. Benjamin, 5 
N. Y. 383 : Mitchell v. Simpson, 28 N. Y. 55 ; Roach v. 
Cosine, 9 Wevd. 227 ; Sims «. Humphrey, 4 Den. 185 ; 
The People v. Bigelow, 11 How. Pr. 83 ; Wright v. 
Mosher, 16 How. 454 ; Russell v. Russell, 32 Id. 400 ; . 
Deuel ». East, 24:, Barb. 438; Buck v. Binninger, 3 Id. 
391 ; People v. Matthews, 43 Id. 168, affirmed in 38 
N. Y. 451 ; People v. Annis, 45 Barb. 304 ; Hallen- 
beck V. Garner, 20 Wend. 22) ; and where it appeared 
upon the face of the affidavit that the person described 
as tenant entered into possession of the land as a pur- 
chaser, and refused to pay the purchase money, it was 
held that the statute did not embrace such a case, as 
there was no relationship of landlord and tenant ex- 
isting between the parties (The People ex rel. Williams 
V. Bigelow, 11 How. 83). 

The act provides {vide § 29, ante, p. 186), that any 
landlord or lessor, his legal representatives, agents, or 
assigns, may make oath in writing of the facts which, 
according to the preceding section, authorize the re- 
moval of a tenant, describing therein tlie premises 
claimed, and may present the same to one of the officers 
authorized to entertain such proceedings, and although 
the affidavit may be made by the agent of these 
respective parties {Id.), yet the agent must swear 
affirmatively that he is such agent ; merely describing 
himself as such is not sufficient (Cunningham v. Goe^ 



tAW OF SUMMAKT PROCEEDINGS. 243 

let, 4 Den. 71 ; and see 7 Hill. 177 ; 1 B.ow. 75 ; and 
1 Den. 662) ; and if the proceeding be for non-payment 
of rent, the aflBdavit need not state the date nor dura- 
tion of the Jease (The People «. Teed, 48 Barh. 424 ; S. 
C. 33 Row. 238). The affidavit should show with reas- 
onable certainty" that tlie tenant is in possession of the 
premises (Smith v. Haestis, Hill & Den. Sup. 236 ; 
Deuel V. Rust, 24 Barh. 438; Rogers v. Lynd, 14 
Wend, 172) ; and where the proceedings are against 
several persons, it should distinctly show which of the 
persons proceeded against is tenant, and which of 
them are under-tenants (Wiggins. Woodruff, 16 Barh. 
474 ; S. C. 11 JSf. J. Leg. Obs. 89), and should allege 
the holding over to be without permission (Campbell i\ 
Mallory, 22 Bow. 183 ; Prouty v. Prouty, 5 How. 81, 
95 ; 20 Wend. 103) ; and must show that the premises 
are within the jurisdiction of the officer before whom 
the proceeding is instituted (The People v. Boardraan, 
4 Keyes, 59), and must describe the premises intelli- 
gently (Campbell v. Mallory, 22 How. 183). 

Itiglits and remedies of grantees, assignees, and representatives. 

As to the rights and remedies of grauteea and assignees, vide pp. 
76, 98 {ante), and as to wlio are assignees, and as to their liabilities, liide 
pp. 83, 84, 85 {ante). 

Who are legal representatives. 

As to who are the legal representatiTes coptemplated by the stat- 
ute, vide p. 75, 76, ante, title Bemidies of Executors; and the affidavit 
in proceedings brouglit by heirs-at-law or executors should state fully 
all tlie facts, giving them the title and right of possession, and ad- 
ministrators can not maintain summary proceedings unless the title of 
their intestate was of a leasehold estate only, in which case that fact 
should be stated in the affidavit {vide ante, pp. 75, 76, 96, 314, 315). 

Sufficiency of affidavit. Tenancy at sufferance. 

As to sufficiency of affidavit in the case of a tenancy at sufEerance, 
see The People v. Ulrich (3 Abb. Pr. 38). 

Description of premises. 

Runnington on Ejectment, at page 121, says : A 
learned judge is reported to have said, that " he never 



244 LANDLORD AWD TENANT. 

coTild understand the manner of reasoning so often 
urged, that the description must necessarily be so cerr 
tain, that the sheriff might be exactly able to know, 
without any information from the plaintiff, of what to 
give possession, which was not true ; for such pre- 
cision was not necessary in ejectment." Thus an eject- 
ment was sustained for an orchard, because it is a 
word of certain signification ; though in a prcecipe it 
must be demanded by the name of a garden ; and be- 
ing well enough understood, the sheriff might with 
certainty deliver it in execution. So, and for the same 
reasons, for a stable and a cottage. Of a house, is 
good, though in the prcecipe it ought to be demanded 
by the name of a messuage. The ejectment is an action 
of trespass in its nature, and trespass has been uni- 
formly maintained, for breaking or entering a house. 
Besides, the import of the word domus is well under- 
stood in the law ; for instance, in action of waste, 
wherein it may be recovered, besides damages. So, of 
a chamber in the second story of a house, has been 
held good, there being certainty enough to direct the 
sheriff in the execution. In that case it was said, an 
ejectment de una rooma, has been adjudged good. It 
has even been held that an ejectment for part of a house 
in A, is well enough. But an ejectment for a Mtchen 
has been determined to be bad ; for though the word 
be well understood in common parlance, yet because 
any chamber in a house may be applied to that use, 
the sheriff hath not certainty enough to direct him in 
the execution ; and the kitchen may be changed be- 
tween judgment and execution. So it lies not of a 
close, because that is of uncertain extent ; nor will it 
aid the declaration, it is said, though the close be 
called by a particular name ; because that also leaves 
the extent of it so uncertain, that the sheriff can not 
tell the cLuantity of land to deliver in execution. For 
the same reason, it lies not of a piece of land. Nor for 
the third part of a close, or the fourth part of a 



tiAW OF SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. 24b 

meadow, without setting forth the particular contents, or 
number of acres. And the number of acres should be 
expressed with certainty ; and therefore it is said that 
an ejectment for forty acres of land, by estimation, was 
not good. And though the number of acres contained 
in the close, or piece of land, should be mentioned in 
the declaration, and be set forth as belonging to a 
messuage for which the ejectment is also brought, yet 
even tTiat was held too general ; because the nature and 
quality of the land was thereby left uncertain, so that 
the sheriff still must be at a loss what to deliver pos- 
session of, whether meadow, pasture, &c. These rules 
in actions of ejectment may by analogy throve some 
light upon the question of the particularity required in 
describing premises claimed in summary proceedings^ 
and the genera:l rule may be said to be that the descrip- 
tion of the premises should be stated if possible with 
sufficient certainty to enable the officer to deliver pos- 
session of the premises claimed without requiring infor- 
mation outside of the papers. In cases where real 
estate has been sold under execution, tlie facts must be 
alleged with particularity (Hallenbeck v. G-arner, 20 
Wend. 22). 

The' affidavit may be sworn to before any person 
authorized to administer an oath. 

II. 

Forms of aj^aavits in summary proceedings. 

[Fm'm iVb. 1.] 

Landlord's affidavit on proceeding for non-payment of rent on 
personal demand. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe of said city being duly sworn, says, that he is the land- 
lord of the premises hereinafter mentioned, and that, as such, he en- 
tered into an agreement with Richard Roe as tenant, and that by the 
terms of the said agreement the said tenant hired from deponent as such 
landlord, the five rooms on the second floor in the dwelling situated 
number 1 Broadway, in the city of New York, and he, the said tenant, 



246 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

in and by the said ngreement, undertook, and promised to pay this de- 
ponent, as rent, the sum of fifty dollars per month, payable monthly 
in advance, for the use and ocoupation of said premises ; that on the 
1st day of November, 1875, there was due, under and by virtue of 
said agreement, the sum of fifty dollars for one month's rent of the 
premises before described ; to wit: from the 1st day of November, 
1875, to the 1st day of December, 1875 ;* and tliis deponent further 
says, that he has demanded the said rent from the said tenant, since 
the same became due, and that the said tenant has made default in the 
payment thereof, pursuant to the agreement under wbicli the premises 
are held ; and that the said tenant f holds over, and continues in pos- 
session of the same, without the permission of the landlord, after de- 
fault in the payment of the rent as aforesaid. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn before me, this 2nd day of ) 
November, 1875. j 

John Smith, 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 



[Form No. 2.] 

Affldarit by agent of liindlord. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

Thomas Jefferson being duly sworn, says that he is the agent of John 
Doe in respect to the premises hereinafter mentioned, and ttiat the said 
John Doe is landlord of said premises, and that the said landlord entered 
into an agreement with Richard Roe as tenant, by the terms of which the 
said tenant hired from the said landlord, the five rooms on the second 
floor in dwelling situated No. 1 Broadway, in the city of New York, and 
he the said tenant, in and by the said agreement, undertook and piom- 
ised to pay the said landlord as rent the sum of fifty dollars per month, 
payable in advance, for the use and occupation of said premises; that 
on the 1st day of November, 1875, there was due, under and'by virtue 
of said agreement, the sura of fifty dollars for one month's rent of the 
premises before described, to wit: from the 1st day of November, 
1875, to the 1st day of December, 1875, and this deponent further 

* Wliere the demand is not personal, but is made by the service of a 
three days' notice, insert the following statement of the fact of service 
in the atfidavitat the place indicated by the star (*), viz. : — " by the 
service of a notice in writing, on the day of 1875, 

pursuant to the statute, requiring the payment of the said rent, so due 
as aforesaid, within three days thereafter, or the possession of said 
premises, and which notice was served upon the said tenant by {This 
notice may he seroed in the manner prescribed for the sereiee of the sum- 
mons in the 32nd section of the act, vide page 18T, ante, and for form of 
proof of service, see chapter XXIX., post, and the landlord'' a affidavit 
should show the particular manner of service, and as to form of three 
days' notice, vide ante, p. 334). 

t Where there are under-tenants in possession, the landlord's aflSda- 
vit, in alleging the holding over of the tenant, should state "and that 
the said tenant, and John Jones and Mary Smith, as vnder-tenants, hold 
over and continue in possession, &c.," as in the landlord's affidavit. 



LAW OF SUMMARY PEOOEEDIKGS. 247 

says, that he has demanded the said rent from said tenant, since the 

same became due : and that the said tenant has made default in the 

payment thereof, pursuant to the asireement imcier v/hich the said 

promises are held ; and that the said tenant holds over and contiinies 

in the possession of the same, without tlie permission of the landlord 

after deliault in the payment of the rent as aforesaid. 

„ . , f .u n A A +■ 1 THOMAS JEFPKRSON. 

Sworn to before me, the 3nd day oi / 

November, 1875. J 

John Smith, 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

When the affidavit is made by the agent he must 
swear affirmatively that he is such agent ; merely de- 
scribing himself as such is not sufficient (Cunningham 
V. Goelet, 4 Den. 71 ; and see 7 ffill, 177 ; 1 How. 75 ; 
1 JDen. 662). 

[Form No. 3.] 
AffidaTit of laudlord on expiration of tenant's term. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, sa. 

John Doe, being duly sworn, doth depose and say, that he is the 
landlord of the premises hereinafter described, and tliat on or about 
the 1st day of October, 1875, he rented unto Richard Roe, the second 
floor of premises. No. I Broadway, in tho city of New York, for the 
term of one month commencing ou the 1st day of October, 1875, and 
ending on the 1st day of November, 1875, which said terra has expired, 
and that the said tenant holds over and continues in possession of the 
said premises, without the permission of the said landlord, after the ex 
piration of the tenant's term therein. TOHN DOE 

Sworn before me, this 3nd day of ) 
November, 1875. ( 

John Smith, 
Notarv Public N. Y. Co. 



[FormM. 4.] 
Like affidavit in case of tenancy at irill. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe, being duly sworn says: That on or about the 1st day of 
September, 1875, he let and rented unto Richard Roe, during the will 
and pleasure of deponent, the house and premises known as No. 1 
Broadway, in the city of New York. And that the said Richard Roe, 
has held and occupied the said premises, as the tenant at will of this 
deponent, until the expiration of such tenancy, as hereinafter men- 
tioned. And deponent further says that he caused notice in writing 
to be served on the said Richard Roe, in due form of law, on the 1st 
day of October, 1875, requiring the said Richard Roe, to remove from 
the said premises on or before the 1st day of November , 1875. 
That the time within which the said Richard Roe was required so to re- 



248 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

move, has expired; and that the said Richard Roe holds over and 
continues in possession of the said premises, after the expiration of 
such time, without the permission of the deponent, his landlord. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn to before me this 2nd day of ) 
November, 1875. j 

Danibl T. Robbetsok, 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

See form of one month's notice to quit, p. 16, ante. 



[Form No. 5.] 

Like affldavit in case of sale under execution. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe,beiug duly sworn, says : That at the time of the sale herein- 
after mentioned, Richard Roe was the owner, and in possession of the real 
estate and premises known as No. 1 Broadway in the city of New York. 
That on the 1st day of June, 1874, this deponent recovered a judgment 
against the said Richard Roe, in the Marine Court of the city of New 
York, for $500 damages and costs. That the said judgment was duly 
made and given, and that on the same day, a transcript of said judg- 
ment was duly docketed in the ofiBce of the clerk of the city and 
county of New York ; and that thereafter and on the same day, an 
execution upon the said judgment was duly issued to the sheriff of the 
city and county of New York (the county within which the said 
premises were situated), commanding the said sheriff to collect said 
judgment out of the personal property of the judgment debtor within 
his said county, and that if suiHcient personal property could not be 
found, then out of the real property of said judgment debtor, in his 
said county, and that the said sheriff, being unable to find sufficient 
personal property of the said debtor, levied upon the real estate and 
premises hereinbefore mentioned, and that after duly advertising the 
same for sale, in the manner and in the form, and for the time pre- 
scribed by the statute in such case made and provided, the said sheriff, 
on the 31st day of July, 1874, sold the said real estate and premises, 
under the said execution at public auction unto this deponent for the 
sum of $100, that being the highest sum bidden for the same. And 
that the said sheriff thereupon executed unto this deponent the 
certificate of sale required by said statute, which said certificate was 
duly filed in the office of the clerk of the city and county of New 
York, and that thereafter, to wit, on the 25th day of October, 1875, 
deponent's title under such sale was fully perfected by the execution 
and delivery by said sheriff of the deed upon such sale, which said 
deed conveyed said premises to this deponent, and that the same 
was duly acknowledged and recorded in the office of the Register 
of the city and county of New York, and that after said title 
was fully perfected, this deponent at the said premises demanded the 
possession thereof from the said Richard Roe under and by virtue 
of said title, and that the said Richard Roe refused to surrender such 
possession, and that he holds over and continues in possession of the 
said premises after the perfection of such title, under said execution 



LAW OF SUMMAKT PEOCEEDINGS. 249 



sale and after such demand aforesaid, without permission of this de- 
ponent, who is entitled to the possession thereof. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn to me this 1st day of ) 
November, 1875. \ 

Daniel T. Robbbtson, 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 
[The demand for possession may be made in writing.] 

[Form No. 6.] 
Like alHcIaTit in case of sale under forclosure of mortgrage. 

State of New York, city and county of New Yorlr, ss. 

John Doe, being duly sworn says ; That at the timeof theexecution 
of the mortgage hereinafter mentioned, Richard Roe was the owner in 
possession of the real estate and premises known as No. 1 Broadway, in 
the city of New York. That on the 1st day of June, 1874, the said Rich- 
ard Roe executed, acknowledged, and delivered unto this deponent, an 
instrument under his hand and seal, whereby he granted and con- 
veyed the said premises unto this deponent as security for the pay- 
ment of $1,000 and interest within six months thereafter. That at the 
expiration of said term, default was made in the payment of said prin- 
cipal sum and interest, whereupon this deponent commenced an action, 
in the Supreme Court of the state of New York, in and for the city 
and county of New York, in which said action such proceedings were 
had, that after the said mortgagor and all persons having subsequent 
liens or claims upon or to said premises were brought before the said 
court as parties to said action, judgment was on the 3nd day of Jan- 
uary, 1875, duly made and given in favor of this deponent as plaintifE 
therein against the said defendants therein for the forclosure and sale 
of said property, by the sheriff of the city and county of New York. 

That thereafter and on the 10th day of February, 1875, the said 
sheriff of the city and county of :New York, under and pursuant to said 
judgment sold the said property at public auction unto this deponent for 
$100, he being the highest bidder, and that being the highest sum bid- 
den for the same, and that thereafter and on the 1st day of March, 1875, 
the sale under said judgment was perfected by the execution and de- 
livery by said sheriff, of a deed of said premises to this deponent, con- 
veying to him the title to said premises in fee simple, which deed was 
duly recorded in the office of the Register of the city and county of 
New York, and that this deponent after said title was fully perfected 
demanded possession of the said premises from said Richard Roe, 
under and by virtue of said title, and that the said Richard Roe re- 
fused to surrender such possession, and that he holds over and con- 
tinues in possession of the said premises after the perfection of said 
title under said foreclosure proceedings, and after such demand afore- 
said, without permission of thisdepondent, who is entitled to the pos- 
session thereof. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn to before me this 1st day of ) 
November, 1875. J 

Daniel T. Robertson, 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

[The demand for possession may be made in writing.] 
33 



250 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

[Of course, these various afladavits must be drawn 
with, reference to the peculiar facts of each case, and 
these forms are merely given as outlines to aid in such 
preparation.] 



LAW OF SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. 251 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

The law and practice on summary proceedings- 
. Continued. — the summons and its service. 

I. The summons. 

n. Its form. 
HL The service. 
rV. Proof of service. 



The sumTnons. 

The statute provides that on receiving the necessary 
affidavit, the magistrate shall issue his summons, de- 
scribing the premises of which possession is claimed, 
and requiring any person in possession of said prem- 
ises, or claiming the possession thereof, forthwith to 
remove from the same, or to show cause before the said 
magistrate, at a certain time to be named, why pos- 
session of said premises should not be delivered to the 
applicant (§ 30 Id. ante, p. 186). The statute does not 
prescribe any particular form of summons, and imposes 
only the above requisities. It is customary, however, 
for the magistrate to describe his office, so as to show 
on the face of the summons that he is one of the magis- 
trates authorized to issue it, although a misdescription 
of his office was in one case disregarded (McCarthy v. 
Noble, 5 Leg. Obs. 380). The summons is process, and 
must be issued in the name of the people (2 JEdm. E. S. 
p. 285, § 8), and the same statute, § 9, provides that "all 
writs, process, proceedings, and records in any court 
within this state, shall be in the English language (ex- 
cept that the proper and known names of process, and 
technical words, may be expressed in the language 



252 tAKDLOEI) ANi) TENANT. 

heretofore and now commonly used)j and shall be made 
out on paper or parchment, in a fair, legible character, 
in words at length, and not abbreviated ; but snch ab- 
breviations as are now commonly used in the English 
language may be used, and numbers may be expressed 
by Arabic figures, or Roman numerals, in the customary 
manner." 

It has been customary, and is prudent, if not nec- 
essary, to recite, in the summons all the jurisdictional 
facts. 

The summons must be directed to the tenant by 
name (Hill v. Stooking, 6 Hill, 316 ; Deuel v. Rust, 24 
Barb. 439 ; 30 Wend. 23), and a mere clerical error in 
spelling it will be disregarded (McCarthy «. Noble, 5 
Leg. Obs. 380), and where the proceeding is against 
several persons, it should like the affidavit designate 
which of them is tenant, and which of them are under- 
tenants (Wiggin V. Woodruff, 16 Barh. 474), and must 
be returnable before the magistrate, within the territorial 
limits of his jurisdiction. 

Time of return. 

If the proceeding be for holding over after the ex- 
piration of the term, the magistrate, if the summons be 
issued on the day the term expires, or the day next 
thereafter, may direct such summons to be made re- 
turnable on the same day, at any time after twelve 
o'clock noon, and before six o'clock in the afternoon ; 
in other cases it must be made returnable within such 
time as may be reasonable, not less than three nor 
more than five days {vide § 30, ante, p. 186, 30 How. 
93). 



LAW OF SUMMARY PR60ES!DING8. 253 

II. 

The form of summons. 
Snuiinons — Non-payment of rent on landlord's affldaWt. 

[Form No. 7.] 

Summons. — Non-payment of rent. — Landlord. — Personal demand. 
To Richard Roe, tenant; and each and every person in possession 

of the demised premises hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the 

possession thereof: 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, that he is the landlord of the premises hereinafter men- 
tioned; and that he entered into an agreement with you, and by the 
terms of said agreement, you, as tenant, hired from him, as landlord, 
the five rooms on the second floor in dwelling situated number 1 
Broadway, in the cily of New York; and that you, in and by the 
said agreement, undertook and promised to pay to him as rent the 
sum of fifty dollars per month, payable monthly in advance, for the 
use and occupation of said premises; that on the first day of Novem- 
ber, 1875, there was due, under and by virtue of the said agreement, 
the sum of fifty dollars, for one month's rent of the premises before 
described, to wit: from the 1st day of November, 1875, to the first 
day of December, 1875; that the said rent has been demanded of you 
by the said landlord, since the same became due, and that default has 
been made in the payment thereof, pursuant to the agreement under 
which the said premises are held ; and that you as tenant hold over 
and continue in possession of the same, without the permission of 
the landlord, after default in the payment of the rent as aforesaid. 

Therefore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, 
you are hereby summoned and required forthwith to remove from the 
said premises, or show cause before me, at the court house, southwest 
corner or Chambers and Centre streets, in the city of New York, on 
the 5th day of November, 1875, as ten o'clock in the forenoon, why 
the possession of the said premises should not be delivered to the 
landlord. 

Witness my hand this 2d day of November, 1875. 

DENIS QUINN, 

Justice of the District Court of the city of New York, 

for the First Judicial District. 

[Form No. 8.] 

Summons against tenant and under-tenants for non-payment of 
rent— upon affidavit of agent. 

To Richard Roe, tenant, and David Jones and Paul Jones, under-ten- 
ants, and each and every person in possession of the demised prem- 
ises hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the possession thereof : 
Whereas, John Peterson has made oath in writing, and presented 



^54 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

the same to me, that he is the agent of John Doe, who is the landlord of 
the premises hereinafter described ; and that the said landlord entered 
into an agreement with you as tenant, and by the terms of the said 
agreement, you, the said Richard Eoe, hired from him as landlord, 
the five rooms on the second floor in dwelling situated number 1 
Broadway, in the city of New York, and that you, said tenant, in and 
by the said agreement, undertook and promised to pay to said land- 
lord the sum of fifty dollars, per month, payable monthly in advance, 
for the use and occupation of said premises ; that on the 1st day of 
November, 1875, thei-e was due, under and by virtue of said agree- 
ment, the sum of fifty dollars for one month's rent of the premises 
before described; to wit, from the 1st day of November, 1875, to the 
1st day of December, 1875, that the said rent has been demanded of 
you, said tenant, since the same became due, and that default has 
been made in the payment thereof, pursuant to the agreement under 
which the said premises are held ; and that you, Richard Roe, 
as tenant, and David Jones and Paul Jones, as under-tenants, hold 
over and continue in possession of the same, without the permission 
of the landlord, after default in the payment of the rent as aforesaid. 
Therefore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, you, 
and each of you, are hereby summoned and required forthwith to re- 
move from the said premises, or show cause before me, at the court 
house, at the southwest corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in the 
city of New York, on the 5th day of November, 1875, at ten o'clock in 
the forenoon, why the possession of the said premises should not be 
delivered to the landlord. 

Witness my hand this 3nd day of November, 1875. 

DENIS QUINN, 

Justice of the District Court of the city of New York, 

for the First Judicial District. 

[Where the demand is not personal, but is made by the service of a 
three days' notice, the summons ought to recite the mode of demand 
stated in the affidavit, although not perhaps with the same particu- 
larity.] 



IFormNo. 9.] 
Summons for holding over, upon affldavit of landlord. 

To Richard Roe, tenant. 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, that he is the landlord of the premises hereinafter de- 
scribed, and that on or about the 1st day of October, 1875, he rented 
unto you, Richard Roe, the second floor of premises No. 1 Broadway, 
in the city of New York, for the term of one month, commencing on 
the 1st day of October, 1875, and ending on the 1st day of November, 
1875, which said term has expired, and that you hold over and con- 
tinue in possession of the said premises, after the expiration of your 
term therein, without the permission of the landlord. 

Therefore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, 
you are hereby summoned and required forthwith to remove from the 
said premises, or show cause before me at the court-room, southwest 
corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in the city of New York, on 



LAW OF STJMMAKT PEOCEEDHSTGS. 255 



the 2d day of November, 1875, at three o'clock in the afternoon, why 
possession of the said premises should not be delivered to the landlord. 
Witness my hand, this 3nd day of November, 1875, 

DENIS QUINN, 
Justice of the District Court of the city of NewYork 

for the First Judicial District. 



[Form No. 10. j 

Snmmons. — In case of tenancy at will. 

To Eichard Roe, tenant, and each and every person in possession of 
the demised premises hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the pos- 
session thereof : 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented 
the same to me, that on or about the 1st day of September, 1875. 
he let and rented uuto you, during the will and pleasure of the 
said John Doe, the house and premises known as No. 1 Broadway, in 
the city of New York, and that you have held and occupied the said 
premises as the tenant at will of the said John Doe, until the expira- 
tion of such tenancy as hereinafter mentioned. And that the said 
John Roe caused notice in writing to be served upon you, in due form 
of law, on the 1st day of October, 1875, requiring you to remove 
from the said premises on or before the 1st day of November, 1875 ; 
that the time within which you were required to remove from said 
premises has expired, and that you hold over and continue in posses- 
sion of the same, without the permission of the landlord, after the 
expiration of your term therein. 

Therefore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, 
you are hereby summoned and required forthwith to remove from the 
said premises, or show cause before me at the court house, southwest 
- corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in the city of New York, on 
the 2d day of November, 1875, at three o'clock in the afternoon, why 
the possession of the premises should not be delivered to the said 
landlord. 

Witness my hand, this 3d day of November, 1875. 

DENIS QUINN, 
Justice of the District Court of the city of New York, 

for the First Judicial District. 

[H'ormlHo. 11.] 

Snmmons in case of sale under execution. 

To Richard Roe, and each and every person in possession of the de- 
mised premises hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the possession 
thereof: 

Whereas, John Doe hath made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, that at the time of the sale hereinafter mentioned, you were 
the owner in possession of the real estate and premises known as No. 1 
Broadway, in the city of New York. That on the 1st day of June, 1874, 
the said John Doe recovered a judgment against you, in the Marine Court 
of the city of New York, for $500 damages and costs. That the said 



256 LAHDLORI* AND TENANT. 

judgment was daly made and given, and that on the same day a tran- 
script of said judgment was duly docketed in the office of the clerk 
of the city and county of New York; and that thereafter and on the 
same day an execution upon the said judgment was duly issued to 
the sheriff of the city and county of New York (the county within 
which the said premises were situated), commanding the said sheriff 
to collect said judgment out of the personal property of the judgment 
debtor within his said county, and that if sufficient personal property 
could not be found, then out of the real property of said judgment 
debtor, in his said county, and that the said sheriff, being unable to 
find sufflciKnt personal property of the said debtor, levied upon the 
real estate and premises hereinbefore mentioned, and that after duly 
advertising the same for sale, in the manner and in the form, and for 
the time prescribed by the statute in such case made and provided, 
the said sheriff on the 21st day of July, 1874, sold the said real estate 
and premises under the said execution, at public auction, unto the 
said John Doe for the sum of $100, that being the highest sum bid- 
den for the same; and tbat the said sheriff thereupon executed unto 
the said John Doe the certificate of sale required by said statute, 
which certificate was duly filed in the office of the clerk of the city 
and county of New York, and that thereafter, to wit, on the 25th day 
of October, 1875, the title of the said John Doe under such sale was 
fully perfected by the execution and delivery by said sheriS of 
the deed upon such sale, which said deed was duly acknowledged 
and recorded in the office of the Register of the city and county of 
New York; and that after said title was fully perfected, said John 
Doe, at the said premises, demanded the possession thereof from you 
under and by virtue of said title, and that you refused to surrender 
such possession, and that you hold over and continue in possession of 
the said premises, after the perfection of said title under said execu- 
tion sale, and after such demand aforesaid, without permission of the 
said John Doe, who was entitled to possession thereof. 

Wherefore in the name of the people of the state of New York, 
yori are hereby summoned and required forthwith to remove from the 
said premises, or show cause before me at the court room, southwest 
corner of Centre and Chambers streets, in the city of New York, on 
the 4th day of November, 1875, at ten o'clock, forenoon, why the 
possession of the said premises should not be delivered to the said 
landlord and applicant. 

Witness my hand, this 1st day of November, in the year 1875. 

DENNIS QUINN, 
Justice of the District Court of the city of New York, 

for the First Judicial District. 

[Form No. 12.] 

Summons in case of sale under mortgage foreclosure. 

To Richard Roe [and to each and every person, etc., as in the preced- 
ing form] : 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, at the time of the execution of the mortgage hereinafter 
mentioned you were the owner in possession of the real estate and prem- 
ises, known as No. 1 Broadway, in the city of New York; that on the 
1st day of June, 1874, you executed, acknowledged, and delivered 



LAW OF SUMMARY PBOOBTODIWG-S. 257 



unto the said John Hoe, an instrument under your hand and 
seal, whereby you conveyed the said premises unto the said John 
Doe, as security for the payment of the sum of |1,000 and interest, 
witiiin six months thereafter ; that at the expiration of said term 
default was made in the payment of the said principal sum and 
interest, whereupon the said John Doe commenced in action in 
the Supreme Court of the state of New York, in and for the city and 
county of New York, in whicli said action, such proceedings were 
had, that after the said mortgagor and all persons having subsequent 
liens or claims upon or to s:iid premises were brought before the said 
court as parties to said action, judgment was on the 2nd day of 
January, 1875, duly made and given in favor of this deponent as 
plaintiff therein, against the said defendants therein, for the fore- 
closure and sale of said property by the sheriff of the city and county 
of New York; that tiiereafter and on the 10th day of February, 1875, 
the said sheriff of the city and county of New York, under and pur- 
suant to said judgment, sold tlie said property at public auction unto 
the said John Doe for $100, he being the highest bidder, and that be- 
ing the highest sum bidden for the same, and that thereafter and on the 
1st day of March, 1875, the sale under said judgment was perfected 
by the execution and delivery by said sheriff of a deed of said prem- 
ises, which deed was duly recorded in the office of the Register of the 
city and county of New York, and that this deponent, after said title 
was fully perfected, demanded possession of said premises from you 
under and by virtue of said title, and that you refuse to surrender 
sucli possession, and that you hold over and continue in possession of 
said premises after the perfection of said title under said foreclosure 
proceedings, and after such demand aforesaid, without permission of 
the said John Doe, who is entitled to the possession thereof. There- 
fore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, you are 
hereby summoned and required to forthwith remove from the said 
premises, or show cause before me, at the court house, at the south- 
west corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in the city of New York, 
on the 4th day of November, 1875, at 10 o'clock in the forenoon, why 
possession of the said premises should not be delivered to the land- 
lord and applicant. 

Witness my hand, the 1st day of November, 1875. 

(Copy.) DENIS QUINN, 

Justice of the District Court of the city of New York, 

for the First Judicial District, 

[Of course, these various summonses must follow the affidavit as 
to the peculiar facts of each case, and these forms are merely given as 
outlines to aid in the preparation of the papers. ] 



IForm No. 13.] 
Endorsement npon somniong. 



The following is the form of endorsement required to be placed 
upon the copy of the summons intended for service (1868, ch. 838, § 



3): 

33 



258 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 



"LAWS OF NEW YORK. 
Chapter 828. 
Act relative to BwnvmaiTy Proceedings. 
Passed May 19th, 1868. 
§ 3. It shall be the duty of every person to whom a copy of a 
summons shall be delivered in. pursuance of subdivision two or three 
of section thirty-two of title ten, chapter eight, part three of the 
Revised Statutes, to deliver such copy to the tenant to whom the 
same is directed, or, if such tenant can not be found, to his agent for 
the demised premises, without any avoidable delay: and a copy of 
this section shall be written or printed upon the outside of every such 
copy. If neither the tenant nor his agent can be found for that pur- 
pose, then the person to whom such copy is delivered shall take the 
same to the magistrate by whom the summons is issued, at the time 
and place named therein, and inform him that the tenant can not be 
found. Every person who shall willfully violate any of the provisions 
of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon con- 
viction shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than thirty 
days nor more than one year. 



III. 

The manner of sermee. 

The statute prescribes the manner of service {vide 
§ 32, ante, p. 187), and this must be literally followed 
in order to give jurisdiction, and an omission to show 
the original summons renders the service irregular 
(Duel V. Rust, 24 Barh. 438) , and an affidavit of service 
was held defective, for not shovnng that the copy was 
left with a person of mature age, at the last or usual 
place of residence of the tenant (The People v. Matthews, 
48 Barh. 168), and an affidavit in proceedings against 
A, of service upon B, residing on the premises, A be- 
ing absent, is insufficient (Cameron «. McDonald, 1 
Rill, 512) ; and an affidavit which alleged service on an 
under-tenant on the demised premises, and that the ten- 
ant was absent from his last and usual residence, without 
stating that such residence was on the demised prem- 
ises, was held to be insufficient to give jurisdiction 
(People ». Piatt, 43 Barb. 116, aff d in 88 N. T. 451), 
and where the service is sworn to as being upon a date 
prior to that of the summons itself, the variance is 
fatal ; it is not a mere clerical error that may be cor- 



LAW OF SUMMARY PBOCfiEDINaS. 259 

rected after judgment, for it leaves the case without any 
proof as to the time of service, and if accepted, would 
give possible eflfect to an illegal service (The People v. 
Boardman, 4 Keyes, 59), and where the summons is 
directed to the original lessee, service upon the under- 
tenant in possession only is not sufficient. Service 
should be made upon both (Matter of Grlern, 1 How. 

313). 

Time of seryiee. 

The following decision reported in The New Yorh Daily Register, 
October 37, 1875, is important upon the question of the time within 
which the summons must be served: 



The People ex rel. Henby A. Pkost 
Marvin's Safe Company and Jambs 

W. FOWLBE. 



■ Landlord and Tenant. 



Centiorari to review summary proceedings under the Landlord and 

Tenant act. 

The only point made by the relator on the review was that the 
summons was served only two days before the day of its return. Sec- 
tion 2, ch. 828 of the Laws of 1868 (Session Laws, vol. 2, p. 1931), 
provides that "if the summons be returnable on the day on which it 
is issued, it shall be served at least two hours before the hour at which 
it is made returnable ; and if not returnable on the same day, it shall 
be served at least two days before the day on which it is made return- 
able." The summons in this case was issued on the 31st day of No- 
vember, 1874, and was returnable on the 25th day of that month. It 
further appeared in the case that the summons was served on the 33d 
day of the month, which was two days before the return day men- 
tioned therein. 

Seld, that the summons conformed to the requirements of the stat- 
ute, inasmuch as it was returnable in not less than three nor more 
than five days (§ 30, title 10, ch. 8, part 3, Hev. Stat., as amended by 
ch. 460 of Laws of 1851, and § 1, ch. 838, of the Laws of 1868). That 
the service being on the 23d, and the summons returnable on the 25th, 
it was clearly sufficient to satisfy the requirements of ch. 828 of the 
Laws of 1868, above referred to. 

Opinion by Davis, P.J. ; Daniels and Donohub, JJ. , concurring. 

IV. 

Proof of service. 

The proof of service is by affidavit, as indicated 
below. A form is given for each of the three different 



260 LABDLOfe0 A WD TENANT. 

modes of services allowed by the statute. It has been 
held however that a constable's oral evidence of the 
service of the summons is admissible before the justice, 
although the constable may have made an insufficient 
return by affidavit (Robinson v. McManus, 4 Lansing, 
380). 

Proof of personal seryice. 

City and county of New York, ss. 

of the said city, 
being duly sworn, says that he did, on the day of 

187 , at o'clock and minutes in the noon, 

at No. street, in the said city, serve the within sum- 

mons on the tenant therein named, by delivering to 

h personally, a true copy thereof, and at the same time showing 
h the original, and that Chapter 828, Laws of 1868, was endorsed 
on the copy summons so served. 
Sworn before me this ( 

day of 187 \ 

Notary Public N. T. Co. 

[As to the facts required to be stated in this form, see 
§ 32, subd. 1, p. 187, ante.'] 

Proof of service on person of mature age. 

City and county of New York, ss. 

of the said city, 
being duly sworn, says that he did, on the day of 

187 , at o'clock and minutes in the noon, 

serve the within summons on the tenant therein named, 

by leaving a true copy thereof, at his place of residence, No. 
street in the said city, with who is a person of mature age, who, 

at the time of the said service, was on, and who resides on the said 
premises, at the same time showing h the original, the said 
tenant being at the time absent from h said place of residence, 
and that Chapter 838, Iiaws of 1868, was endorsed on the copy sum- 
mons so served. 

Sworn before me, this ) 

day of 187 \ 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

[As to the facts required to be stated in this form, 
see § 32, subd. 2, p. 187, ante.] 



liAW OP SUMMAKY PEOOtiEDIT^GB. 361 

Proof of service npon conspicions part of premises. 

City and county of New York, ss. 

of said city and 
county, being duly sworn, says that he did, on the day 

of 187 at o'clock and minutes in the 

noon, serve the within summons on the tenant therein 

named, by aifixing a true copy thereof upon a conspicuous part — to 
wit, the entrance door — of the said demised premises in the within 
affidavit and summons described ; that at the time of said service 
the said tenant was absent from h last or usual place 
of residence ; that he could not find any person of mature age at such 
place residing on the premises ; that he could not find the said tenant 
upon the said demised premises; and further, that he could not find 
upon said demised premises any person of mature age, residing there- 
on or connected therewith by employment in any business for which 
the said premises are used, on whom he could serve the same, and 
that Chapter 838, Laws of 1868, was endorsed on the copy summons 
so served. 

Sworn to before me, this ) 

day of 187 \ 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 
[As to the facts required to be stated in this form, 
see § 32, subd. 2, p. 187, ante.] 



262 LANDtOED AND TENANT. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

THE LAW AND PRACTICE ON SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS- 

Continued. Feactioe upon eetuen dat. 

I. Return of the process. 

n. Objections to sufficiency of papers. 
ni. Filing counter affidavit. 
IV. Amendments in these proceedings. 

V. Demanding trial by jury. 
"VI. Adjournments. 



Beturn of the process. 

The landlord must see that the process is returned 
to the justice on the day of return with the proper re- 
turn of service endorsed thereon, the forms of which 
are given on pp. 259, 260 {ante). If the return should 
prove defective, it may be amended at any time before 
judgment, and in one case the oral evidence of the con- 
stable was allowed to cure imperfections in his written 
return, and it has been held that the refusal of a de- 
fendant in an action in a justice's court, to appear ill 
the action, after objections taken by him to the jurisdic- 
tion of the justice have been overruled, does not deprive 
the justice of the power afterwards to allow the amend- 
ment of the constable's return of the summons. The 
power of amendment does not depend upon the appear- 
ance of the defendant in the suit (Perry «. Tynen, 22 
Barb. 137). 

II. 

Objection to sufficiency of papers. 

The policy of the law seems to require that objec- 
tions, particularly to matters of form, should be pre- 



LAW Ol' SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. 263 

sented at the first opportunity, in order that the objec- 
tion may be cured if it be in respect to a matter capable 
of amendment, and if it be a matter not susceptible of 
amendment, that the landlord may, upon being informed 
of his error, withdraw his proceeding, and commence 
de novo. A striking illustration of the rule is fur- 
nished by the case of The People on the Eelation of 
McGruire «. Ulrich (2 Abh. Pr. 28), in which the New 
York Supreme Court, at general term, went to the ex- 
tent of saying that even the failure to appear before the 
justice on the return of a summons in summary pro- 
ceedings to remove a tenant, admits the right of the 
landlord, and precludes the tenant from afterwards ob- 
jecting to irregularity in the proceedings on certiorari. 
In another case, it was held that the appearance of 
the tenant before the justice without raising any objec- 
tions, is a waiver of any defect in the affidavit upon 
which the proceedings are founded (McCarthy v. No- 
ble, 5 Leg. Ohs. 380 ; 4 Den. 185 ; compare 22 How. 
Pr. 183), and in Cunningham v. Gfoelet (4 I>en. 71), it 
was held that a defect in not naming the tenant is not 
waived by his appearance/or tJie purpose of objecting 
to it, but in that case the objection was expressly taken 
and was not, therefore, waived. Another illustration 
is furnished by the case of the estate of Samuel Nors- 
worthy, deceased, v: Bryan, which came before the New 
York Supreme Court at general term, upon a certiorari 
from a judgment rendered by a District Court Justice, 
in summary proceedings. The case is reported in the 
38 Barbour S. 0. R. at p. 153, and the opinion as de- 
livered by BowwBY, Justice, is as follows : 

By the Court— Bonwey, J. — The only questions to 
be considered in this case are those arising between the 
landlord and the tenant Bryan. Bradley, stated to be 
under-tenant, assented to the judgment rendered by the 
justice on summary proceedings, and has not appealed. 
With him we have nothing to do. 



264 LANDLOED AND TEJifAWT. 

The appellant Bryan appeared, on the return of the 
summons, but filed no affidavit, and we have only to 
determine whether or not the affidavit by wMch the 
proceedings were initiated states facts sufficient to au- 
thorized the issuing of the summons and warrant for 
his removal. On examination of the affidavit it is 
found to state in substance and effect these facts: 

1. That the "estate of Samuel Norsworthy, de- 
ceased," is landlord of the premises in question. 2. 
That Amerman, who made tlie affidavit, is agent of said 
landlord, in respect to said premises. 3. That the ap- 
pellant (Bryan) is tenant of said premises, under an 
agreement made between him and said agent, at the an- 
nual rent of $3,600, payable in monthly payments. 4. 
That said tenant, on January 18, 1859, when the affida- 
vit was made, was indebted to said landlord in the sum of 
$200, due January 1st, 1859, for balance of rent for one 
month, from December 1, 1858, to January 1, 1859, for 
said premises. 6. That demand of such rent had been 
made of the tenant by said agent, after the rent became 
due. 6. That said tenant has made default in the pay- 
ment of said rent pursuant to the agreement under 
which the premises were held. 7. That said tenant 
held over, and continued in possession of said premises 
without the permission of the landlord, after such de- 
fault in the payment of the rent. None of the facts 
stated in the affidavit were denied by the tenant, and 
the service of the summons being proved, and the tenant 
appearing pursuant thereto, the justice rendered judg- 
ment in favor of the landlord, and issued a warrant for 
the removal of the tenant, under which he was removed. 

In my opinion the affidavit states all that is re- 
quired by the statute (8 R. S. 5th ed. 836, § 28, &c.), 
to authorize the removal of a tenant, and the judgment 
of the justice should be affirmed. The appellant ob- 
jects that the proceedings are in behalf of " The estate 
of Samuel Norsworthy, deceased," and insists that an 
estate can not be an actor. As to this, it is only neces- 



LAW OF STJMMAKY PEOOEEDIETGS. 265 

sary to say that the affidavit states that '^the estate 
of Samuel Norsworthy, deceased,^'' is landlord of 
these premises, and that statement is not denied. 
Consequently it is admitted, and we can not go behind it. 
Whether ' ' the estate of Samuel Norsworthy, deceased," 
is a corporation, or an individual, or an association of 
several individuals acting together under that name, 
we can not now inquire. If the tenant had denied the 
statement in the affidavit, proof might have been pro- 
duced to show that the estate of Samuel N orsworthy, 
deceased, was capable of being, and was in fact, land- 
lord as stated. It was also made ground of objection 
that the affidavit did not state that Bryan was either 
tenant at will or at sufferance, or for a year or years, 
or part of a year, and therefore was insufficient. To 
this it may be answered that if the hiring was precisely 
as stated in the affidavit, and nothing more, the ten- 
ancy, by law, would expire on the 1st day of May 
next after the making of the agreement. And if the 
contract of hiring is not fully stated in the affidavit, 
the tenant should have supplied the defect, or made 
some objection to it for this reason. It certainly was 
not necessary to state in the affidavit how the landlord 
acqLuired title to the premises, and it clearly does show 
that the relation of landlord and tenant was created be- 
tween the parties by an agreement of hiring made by 
the tenant with the agent of the landlord, and that the 
tenant made default in the payment of rent after it was 
due, and after demand for payment thereof made. 
The statement that Bradley, under-tenant of part of 
the premises in question, holds over with (instead of 
without) permission of the landlord, if not to be 
treated as a clerical error (which in fact it clearly is, in 
my opinion), and amended, can not enure to the bene- 
fit of this appellant, against whom alone judgment was 
rendered. 

The judgment should be affirmed, with costs. 

In the People ». Teed (48 Barl). at p. 427), it was 

34 



266 LAWDLOBD AND TEWAWT. 

objected that the return showed that the jury retired to 
deliberate upon their verdict, but did not show that 
an officer was sworn to keep the jury, &c., and the 
general term of the Supreme Court, in answering the 
objection, said: "The statute is directory in this re- 
spect. We can not infer that the jury were not kept 
by an officer, or that he was not sworn. The relator 
might have procured a further return, if the magistrate 
did, in fact, neglect the performance of his duty, and 
the relator had desired to make it appear. It was the 
duty of the magistrate to swear an officer, and it is the 
intendment, in the absence of proof to the contrary, 
that he performed his duty." 

III. 

Filing counter affldavit. 

The statute provides that any person in possession 
of the demised premises, or any person claiming pos- 
session thereof, may, at the time appointed in the sum- 
mons for showing cause, file an affidavit with the 
magistrate who issued the same, denying the facts upon 
which the summons was issued, or any of those facts ; 
and that the matters thus controverted shall be tried 
by the magistrate, or by a jury, provided either party 
to such proceeding shall at the time designated in such 
summons for showing cause, demand a jury, and at 
the time of such demand, pay to such magistrate the 
necessary costs and expenses of obtaining such jury 
{vide § 34, ante, p. 189). This provision of the statute 
has given rise to the question of the proper construc- 
tion of the words, " denying the facts upon which the 
summons was issued, or any of those facts," owing to 
the omission to provide for cases in which the tenant is 
obliged to admit the truth of all the facts alleged in the 
landlord's affidavit, and in which, notwithstanding such 
admission.he has still a perfect defense; for example, take 
the case of a tenant whose defense is payment ; he can 



LAW OP STJMJy^ABT PEOCEEDINGS. 267 

not dispute the hiring, nor its terms, nor can he deny 
that the rent became due as alleged by the landlord, 
nor can he deny that the landlord demanded it, and 
these admissions substantially make out the landlord's 
case, and yet the tenant, after admitting all these facts, 
may have paid the landlord at the time he demanded 
the rent. The legislature did not intend to exclude this 
affirmative defense. Take another case : Suppose the 
tenant has been evicted by title paramount before the 
rent claimed accrued, and was, in consequence, com- 
pulsorily obliged to attorn and pay rent to the para- 
mount owner, in order to protect his possession ; the 
tenant could not, in such a case, deny any of the facts 
required to be stated in the affidavit of the original land- 
lord, if he saw fit to institute a proceeding of dispos- 
session, and still the tenant has a complete defense in 
law. The legislature did not intend to exclude such 
an affirmative defense. The denial contemplated by 
the statute, means the denial by the tenant of the land- 
lord's claim for rent or possession by the pleading of 
facts, which of themselves constitute such denial, by 
showing that for some reason, recognized in law as valid, 
the claim made by the landlord, although it once exist- 
ed, has, by reason of the facts alleged, ceased to exist ; 
or, if the right never existed, the same result is accom- 
plished by a simple denial of the facts alleged by the 
landlord. That this was the intention of the legislature, 
is manifest from the spirit if not from the language of 
the statute, particularly when construed with reference 
to the plea of the general issue under the system of 
pleading in use at the time the statute was passed ; for 
under this plea almost every affirmative defense was 
admitted which went to defeat the plaintiff's claim. 
The modern system of pleading has, however, changed 
the former rule by requiring affirmative matter to be 
specially pleaded. 

The question of pleading in these proceedings 
incidentally came up in the Court of Appeals, in the 



268 LAKDLOED AISTD TifiNANT. 

case of Geisler et al. v. Acosta (9 F. T. at pp. 231, 
233), by an objection to the siaflBciency of a plea of 
former adjudication, and the court, speaking of the 
counter affidavit (per Denio, J.), said : " The first 
paper presented by Geisler and Wiegand did not pro- 
fess to deny any of the facts upon which the summons 
was issued. It did not, therefore, raise any issue, to 
try which a jury could be summoned ; and the magis- 
trate was right in his decision to that effect. As a plea 
of a former trial, and determination of the same matter, 
supposing that such a defense could be interposed, the 
paper was defective," because it did not show what 
issue was tried, nor upon what ground the judgment 
pleaded proceeded. And Willard, J., was of opinion 
that the statute did not contemplate pleading in these 
proceedings. 

The real question, however, decided by this case was 
the insufficiency and form of the counter affidavit itself, 
in not alleging the facts required in a plea, such as that 
which the tenant undertook to present. The denial 
contemplated by the statute must be express and posi- 
tive, and not circumstantial, argumentative, nor evasive 
(Niblo V. Post, 2.'5 Wend. 280). And where two tenants 
were jointly charged, in the affidavit of the landlord, 
with holding over after demand and non-payment of 
rent, the affidavit of one of them, stating that the rent 
had not been demanded of Mm, was held insufficient 
(Geisler et al. v. Acosta, 9 JV. T. 227). 

The denial by a tenant in his affidavit, of each and 
every allegation contained in the affidavit of the land- 
lord, is sufficient. Tlie affidavit is none the less a de- 
nial of the allegations of the landlord, because the 
allegations are not separately referred to. Where the 
tenant can not deny all the allegations, he must neces- 
sarily describe those which he wishes to deny. A 
tenant may seldom be able to deny all the allegations 
of the landlord, but in a case where he can deny all 
that has been stated by the landlord, the denial is as 



LATV OF StJMMAET PEOCEEDlH-QS. 269 

complete and well defined by a general denial of every 
allegation, as if every statement had been recounted 
and denied in detail (The People «. Coles, 43 Barb. 
96), and all the facts not denied by the counter affidavit 
are taken as admitted (McGuire ». Ulrich, 2 Ahb. 28 ; 
The People v. Teed, AS' Barb. 424; S. 0. 33 How. Pr. 
238). 

It is not competent, however, for a tenant in these 
proceedings, to show a breach of the landlord's agree- 
ment to construct the premises in a proper manner. 
The tenant can not withhold both the rent and the pos- 
session (People -0. Ward 14 Abb. Pr. 372 ; 38 Barb. 
269 ; Lafarge v. Mansfield, 31 Id. 845). 

General form of counter affldarit. 

Before Hon. , Justicfi. 



In the matter of the application 
by John Dob, as landlord, 

V. 

Richard Bob, as tenant. 



By tenan*- 



City and county of New York, ss. 

Richard Roe, the person described in the summons herein as tenant 
being duly sworn makes oath as follows, viz. : 

He denies each and every fact alleged in the affidavit of John Doe, 
upon which this proceeding was instituted. 
Sworn, &c. 

[Insert the denial according to circumstances. If it be a case in 
which the tenant can conscientiously make the above form of denial, 
he may do so. If not, insert such denials as the facts of the case may 
justify. If there be any affirmative defense, it should be specially 
pleaded with the same particularity required in ordinary actions in 
courts of record.] 

Counter affldavit by a person (not a party to the proceeding) either in 
possession or claiming possession of the demised premises. 

[Title of proceeding.] 

City and county of New York, ss. 

Paul Jones, being duly sworn, says that he is in the possession of 
the demises premises, and claims the possession thereof (state accord- 
ing to the fact), and for defense to this proceeding, he denies under 
oath, each and every fact alleged in the affidavit upon which this pro- 
ceeding was instituted. 
Sworn, &c, 



270 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

IV. 

Amendments in these proceedings. 

There seems to be no authority in the statute, to 
permit amendments to the affidavits, or summons in 
these proceedings ; and if they prove defective in any 
material respect the proceeding must be dismissed,, pro- 
vided the tenant in due time point out, by objection 
thereto, the particular defect complained of. And 
where a counter affidavit is once filed there seems to be a 
like v/ant of authority either to permit its amendment 
or to allow the filing of a supplemental affidavit to sup- 
ply defects in the one originally filed. It therefore be- 
hooves practitioners to be careful in the preparation 
of their papers, because incurable defects may preju- 
dice, if not defeat, the claim or defense prosecuted or 
defended. 

V. 

Demanding trial hy jury. 

The statute permits any person authorized to prosecute 
or defend these proceedings, to demand a jury to try the 
matters in controversy created and raised by the filing 
of the counter affidavit. But the right to a jury trial is 
waived, unless at the time designated in the summons 
for showing cause, a trial by jury be demanded by one 
of the parties to the issue to be tried, and unless such 
party shall at the time of such demand, pay to the 
magistrate, the necessary fees of obtaining such jury 
{vide sec. 34 of the statute as amended in 1857, ante, 
p. 189 ; The People v. Hovey, 4 Lans. 86). Prior to 
this amendment in 1857, the magistrate had no author- 
ity to try issues raised in these proceedings without a 
jury (Benjamin v. Benjamin, 1 Seld. 383), and in order 
to form the jury under the statute as amended in 1857, 
the magistrate with whom the counter affidavit is filed 



LAW OF StrMMAET PEOCEEDIITGS. 271 

is required, to nomiaate 'twelve reputable persons qual- 
ified to serve as jurors in courts of record ; and is re- 
quired to issue his precept directed to the sheriff, or 
one of the marshals of the county, or any marshal of 
the city or town, commanding him to summon the per- 
sons so nominated to appear before such magistrate, 
at such time and place as he shall therein appoint, not 
more than three days from the date thereof, for the 
purpose of trying the said matters in difference {vide 
sec. 35, ante, p. 189). 

Venire for jury. 

The people of the state of New York, to the sheiifE of the city and 
county of New York, or any marshal of the city of New York, 
greeting : 
We command you to summon 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
13. 
good and lawful men of the city and county of New York, qualified 
to serve as jurors in courts of record, who are in no wise of kin to 
, the landlord, nor to , the tenant, 

claiming possession of a certain house and premises, known as No. 
street, in the city of New York, between whom a contro- 
versy exists, to be and appear before me, the justice of the district 
court of the city of New York, for the first judicial district, at the 
court house, No. street, in said city, at ten o'clock in 

the forenoon of that day, to try the matters in difference between the 
said parties, and have you then and there the names of the jurors, 
and this precept ; the said jurors being nominated by me to serve as 
jurors in said proceeding. 

Given under my hand, the day of 187 . 

, Justice. 

Ofttcer's I'eturn of service of summons on jurors. 

New York, 187 . I certify and return that I served 

the within (or above) named jurors; those marked P. in person, and 
those marked C. by copy. 

, Sheriff. , 
, Marshal. 



272 LAKDLOED AND TENANl. 



Juror's sammons. 

Sib: You are hereby summoned to attend as a juror, before 

, Esq., the justice of the district court in the city of New 
York, for the first judicial district, at the court house, No. 

street, in said city, on the day of , 187 , at 

ten o'clock in the forenoon. Fine for non-attendance, ten dollars. 

, Sheriff. 
, Marshal. 

VI. 

Adjournments. 

The magistrate is authorized to adjourn the trial of 
the issues, upon the request of either party, for the 
purpose of enabling such party to procure his witnesses, 
whenever it shall appear to be necessary. The ad- 
journment in any case, can not, however, exceed ten 
days (§ 41 of the statute, ante, p. 191), and the pro- 
ceeding being summary in its character is seldom ad- 
journed longer than from one to three days, according 
to circumstances. Although it is customary to grant 
one short adjournment in these proceedings after the 
joining of issue, there is no law requiring it. In order 
to make it appear that the adjournment is necessary, 
an affidavit in the following form may be used. 

AffidaTit to adjourn trial. 

[ Title of proceeding.'] 

City and county of New York, ss. 

Kichard Roe, being duly sworn, says. That he is the person de- 
scribed as tenant herein; that issue has been joined by the filing of a 
counter affidavit herein, and that deponent is not ready for trial 
owing to the absence of material testimony, as hereinafter stated. 
That deponent, has fully and fairly stated the case herein to John 
Smith, his counsel, who resides in the city of New York, and that 
deponent has a good and substantial defense to said proceedings, on 
the merits thereof, as he is advised by said counsel, after sucli state- 
ment, and verily believes that he has stated to his said counsel what 
he expects and believes he will be able to prove on said trial, by 
Paul Jones, who is a material and necessary witness for deponent 
thereon, and that without the testimony of said Jones, deponent can- 
not safely proceed to the trial thereof, as he, deponent, is advised by 
his said counsel, and verily believes. That the proceeding is brought 



LAW OF STJMMAKY PBOOEEDINGS. 273 

to recover possession of the premises known as No. street, 

in the city of New York. {Mere state the nature of the proceeding and 
defense, and show the materiality of the evidence.) That deponent has 
made diligent efforts to find said witness, and could not ; that on the 
day of 187 , he procured a subpoena 

for him, for the purpose of procuring the attendance of said witness 
at this court, this day, and that said subpoena was not served, for the 
reason that after a vigilant search and inquiry for said witness, at his 
residence and place of business, it ■Was ascertained that he had left 
the city of New York, expecting to return on the day 

of , 187 , at which time, and not sooner, deponent be- 

lieves he will be able to procure his attendance as such witness herein 
(or offer such other excuse as the nature of the circumstances afford). 

RICHARD ROE. 
Sworn to before me, &c. ) 

[This affidavit should be varied according to circumstances, and 
the nature and materiality of the evidence should appear, so that the 
justice may determine whether the witness is really material or not, 
and to enable the other side to determine whether they will admit 
what is expected to be proved by the absent witness, and in that way 
render the adjournment unnecessary.] 
35 



274 LAMDLOED AND TETTANT. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

THE LAW AWD PRACTICE OUT STTMMAEY PE0CEEDING8 

— Continued. — pboceedings upon teial. 

I. Trial without a jury — Oath to witnesses. 
n. Trial by jury. 
m. The jury — Qualifioations — Drawing — Talesmen — ChaUenges 

— Oath to jurors. 
IV. Evidence upon the trial. 
V. The judge's charge and oath to officer. 
Yl. Deliberations of the jury. 
Vn. Verdict of the jury — its effect. ; 



Trial witTiout a jury. 

The statute provides that if a trial by jury be not 
demanded, and the necessary costs and expenses of 
obtaining such jury be not paid at the time designated 
in the summons for showing cause, that the matters in 
issue shall be tried and determined by the magistrate 
alone {vide% 34, ante, p. 189), and if either party, upon 
the return of the summons, demand a jury according 
to the provisions of the act, the person so demanding 
the same, may, upon the adjourned day, waive the 
jury, and elect to try the issue raised before the magis- 
trate alone. 

The trial is conducted with the same formalities and 
under the same rules of evidence applicable to ordi- 
nary actions. 

The oath to the witnesses may be administered in 
the following form : 

Oath to witnesses. 

You do swear, that the evidence you shall give in this matter, in 
difference between John Doe, as landlord, and BichardBoe, as tenant, 



LAW OF SUMMARY PEOCEEDINGS. 275 



will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help 
you God. 



II. 

Trial hy jury. 

Trials by jury are coBducted in the same manner as 
trials by tlie court. The party demanding the jury 
trial may afterwards waive it, if he choose, by consent 
in open court, and the magistrate may thereupon pro- 
ceed with the trial as if no jury had been demanded. 

III. 

The jury — Qualifleations — Drawing — Talesmen — 
Challenges — Oath to jurors. 

The statute, after directing the mode of summoning 
the jury {vide § 35 of the statute, p. 189), provides that 
twelve jurors are to be summoned, and that six of the 
persons so summoned are to be drawn in the same man- 
ner as jurors in justices' courts {vide § 36 of the stat- 
ute, p. 190). 

Talesmen. 

The statute farther provided that whenever a suffi- 
cient number of jurors, duly drawn and summoned, do 
not appear, or can not be obtained to form a jury, the 
magistrate may order any sheriff or marshal to sum- 
mon from the bystanders or from the county at large so 
many persons qualified to serve as jurors as shall be 
sufficient, and return their names to the magistrate 
{Id. and Laws 1862, ch. 868) ; prior to the act of 1862, 
the magistrate had no power to summon talesmen to 
form {a. jury (Miner v. Burling, 32ji?fflr5. 640), and if 
there was a default of jurors on the return of the venire 
he was consequently put to the necessity of issuing a 
second venire, and so on until a jury appeared (Roach 



276 LANDtOBD AITD TEKANT. 

V. Cosine 9 Wend. 227; Porter v. Cass, 7 flbw.l 441) ; 
but this difficulty no longer exists. 

Qaalifications of jurors. 

The section of the statute in regard to jurors (§ 36), 
it will be seen, gives the magistrate the power to nomi- 
nate the persons to form, a jury — the limitation is twelve 
— and the persons so nominated must be qualified to 
serve as jurors in courts of record. 

By the statute applicable to the city of New York, 
no person is allowed to serve as a juror unless he is an 
intelligent man, of sound mind, and good character, 
free from legal exception, and able to read and write the 
English language understandingly. But no person is 
exempt from serving as a juror by reason of age, 
unless he is more than seventy years old ; nor by rea- 
son of non-residence if he has dwelt or lodged in the 
city or county for the greater part of the time between 
the 1st day of October and the 30th day of June next 
thereafter ; and to render a person liable to do duty as 
a juror, it is not necessary that such person shall be as- 
sessed or vote in the city (1870, ch. 539), In consider- 
ation of certain labors performed for the state, the 
statutes give to certain persons a right to claim exemp- 
tion from jury duty. But as this right is a mere per- 
sonal privilege, and its existence does not disqualify 
the juror nor form a ground for challenge, it is unneces- 
sary to do more than to allude to it. The general law 
applicable to the counties in the state which have no 
special law upon the subject, provides that the persons 
qualified to do jury duty are, 1. Male inhabitants of the 
town, not exempt from serving on juries ; 2. Of the age of 
twenty-one years or upwards, and under sixty years old ; 
,3. Who are at the time assessed for personal property 
belonging to them in their own right, to the value of $250, 
or shall have a freehold estate in real property in the 
county belonging to them in their own right, or in the 
the right of their wives, to the value of $150 ; 4. In the 



LAW OF STTMMAET PROCEEDINGS. 2 7 

possession of their natural faculties, and not infirm or 
decrepit ; 5. Free from all legal exceptions, of fair 
character, of approved integrity, of sound judgment, 
and well informed (2 Edm. R. B. p. 428, § 13) ; certain 
exceptions are made in reference to persons residing 
in either of the counties of Niagara, Erie, ChautaucLue, 
Cattaragus, Allegany, Genesee, Orleans, Monroe, Liv- 
ingston, Jefferson, Lewis, St. Lawrence and Franklin, 
whereby such residents, who do not possess either of 
the qualifications specified in the third subdivision of 
the above section, but who are qualified in other re- 
spects, and who shall have been assessed on the last 
assessment roll of the town for land in his possession 
which he holds under contract for the purchase there- 
of, upon which improvements shall have been made to 
the value of one hundred and fifty dollars, and who 
shall own such improvements, shall be deemed quali- 
fied to serve as jurors {Id. % 14). 

The act allowing twehe jurors to try issues in the district courts by 
consent, relates only to actions, and not to the summary proceedings 
(1869, chap. 410, p. 932). 

Having given the mode of summoning, and the 
qualifications of the jurors who are to try these pro- 
ceedings, we next proceed to the manner in which they 
are to be drawn according to the statute. 

Manner of drawing jnrors in justices' courts. 

Before proceeding to draw the jury in the manner 
directed hereafter, the justice should call over the con- 
stable's list of persons returned served, entering the 
names of such as do, and such as do not appear and 
answer. This being done, the manner of drawing the 
jury is directed by the statute to be as follows {Qow. 
Tr. § 1287) : 

(§ 99.) At the trial of the cause, the names of the 
persons so returned, and who shall appear, shall be 
respectively written on several and distinct pieces of 
paper, as nearly of one size as may be, and the consta- 



278 LAKDLORD AND TENANT. 

ble, in the presence of the justice, shall roll up or fold 
such pieces of paper, as nearly as may be, in the same 
manner, and put them together in a box, or some con- 
venient thing {Cow. Tr. % 1287). 

(§100.) The Justice shall then draw out six (or such 
number as the parties may have agreed upon) of such 
papers, one after another, and if any of the persons 
whose names shall be so drawn shall be challenged * 
■and set aside, then such further number shall be 
drawn as will make up the number required, after al 
legal causes of challenge* allowed by the justice. The 
persons so drawn appearing, and approved as indiffer- 
ent, shall compose the jury to try the cause {flow. Tr. 
§ 1287). 

No peremptory right of challenge in these proceedings. 

The act of April 27, 1847, giving a right of peremp- 
tory challenge on the trial of issues of fact in civil 
actions, does not apply to such an issue in summary 
proceedings, and § 36 of the statute which declares that 
six of the persons so summoned shall be drawn in like 
manner as jurors in justices' courts, does not extend the 
premptory right of challenge to such cases (People v. 
Hamilton, 39 N. Y. 107, aflSrming 15 Abb. Fr. 328), but 
it is supposed that the right of challenge to the com- 
petency or to the favor of the juro.r still exists. 

The jury having been duly summoned, drawn, and 
empanelled, are next to be sworn ; the oath to the 
jurors may be in the following form : 

Oath to jurors. 

Tou do swear that you will well and truly hear, try, and deter- 
mine the matters in difEerence between John Doe, as landlord, and 
Bichard Roe, as tenant, and a true verdict render according to the 
evidence. So help you God. 

* No peremptory right of challenge is allowed in summary pro- 
ceedings. 



LAW or SUMMAEY PEOOEEDIIirGS. 279 



IV. 

Evidence upon the trial. 

The rules of evidence applicable to ordinary actions 
apply in like manner to these proceedings. If the 
tenant fails to appear upon the return of the summons 
and proof by affidavit of the due service of the summons 
is furnished to the magistrate, judgment is entered in 
favor of the landlord, as of course, without any further 
evidence. If the tenant or anyone claiming possession 
appear and contest the landlord' s right of possession, the 
counter affidavit determines the character of the issue, 
and whatever facts are not denied are by the mere 
omission to deny them admitted (People ex rel. McGuire 
«. Ulrich, 3 Ahi. Pr. 28 ; People v. Teed, 48 Barl. 424 ; 
S. C. 33 How. Pr. 238). In addition to the general 
rules above referred to, reference is made to a few of 
the decisions peculiarly applicable to this remedy. 
Thus, where the facts put in issue are, the ownership 
of the premises, and the hiring thereof to the tenant, 
proof of |.the conveyance to the landlord, and payment 
of rent to him by the tenant, establishes both these is- 
sues against the tenant (The People ». Teed, 48 Barb. 
424 ; S. C. 33 How. Pr. 238), and as to the evidence re- 
quired in cases where land is sold under execution 
see Brown ». Betts (13 Wend. 29), Hallenbeck v. Gar- 
ner (20 Id. 22), and Birdsall «. Phillips (17 Id. 463), 
and although a tenant as a rule is not permitted to dis- 
pute his landlord's title (see ante, p. 97, 1 Cai. 444 ; 2 
Id. 215 ; 7 John. 186 ; 10 Id. 358 ; 13 Id. 240 ; 6 Wend. 
246 ; 5 Den. 431 ; 38 Barh. 269), he may show that such 
title has terminated, either by its own limitation or by 
conveyance or by operation of law (Jackson «. Davis, 5 
Cow. 123 ; Buck ii. Binninger, 3 Barb. 391 ; Capet v. 
Parker, 3 Sandf. 662 ; Despard v. Walbridge, 15 N. 



280 LAETDLOED AND TENANT. 

Y. 374), and an infant is not estopped by a contract 
with, plaintiff from showing title in himself (McCoon v. 
Smith, 3 Bill, 147), but infancy is no defense, the pos- 
session after refusing to pay rent being wrongful. 

V. 

T7ie judge's charge. 

Upon the conclusion of the evidence it is custom- 
ary for the justice to charge the jury, although he is 
under no obligation to do so. 

If j however, specific requests to charge are put, which 
are pertinent to the issues to be determined, the justice 
might not be authorized to decline to charge them. 

In The People ex rel. Ward ». Kelsey (14 Abb. Pr. 
at p. 378), before the New York Supreme Court upon 
certiorari, it appeared that afte;r the evidence before the 
justice closed, and the questions involved were about 
to be submitted to the jury, the judge proceeded to 
charge them upon the law of the case. Whereupon the 
counsel for the tenants objected, that there was no le- 
gal right vested in the magistrate in summary proceed- 
ings to charge the jury. Several questions of law 
arose in the progress of the trial, with which it can not 
be supposed the jury were conversant, and which it 
was of some consequence should be rightly compre- 
hended, before they could act intelligibly and sensibly. 
The defendant insisted that they were not to obtain a 
knowledge of the law from the judge, and that whatever 
he said in respect thereto, however just and true, was an 
error, for which the court should reverse the proceed- 
ings, and the Supreme Court, general term in the 
second district ( per Beown, J.) said : "This is a most 
extraordinary proposition. There is no express au- 
thority and direction contained in the statute con- 
cerning summary proceedings to recover the posses- 
sion of lands (2 Bev. Stat. 417), that the judge shall 



LAW OP STTMMABY PROCEEDINGS. 281 

instnict the jury upon the law. Nor are there any ex- 
press words authorizing him to swear the witnesses, 
or to say what is to be received as evidence, and what 
not ; nor even to preserve order and decorum during the 
trial. Yet no one will think of disputing his authority 
to do all these things. Without it, the trial could not 
proceed, and the remedies provided by the act could not 
be obtained. All these powers, as well as that to instnict 
the jury, are to be implied. Where the facts upon 
which the summons was issued are denied by an affi- 
davit, the matters controverted are to be tried by the 
magistrate or by a jury, provided either party at the 
proper time demand a jury (§ 34). The matters con- 
troverted are those facts upon which the summons was 
issued and denied by the affidavit of the person in pos- 
session of the premises. The legal questions are still, 
however, to be determined by the judge holding the 
court or conducting the proceedings. There is to be a 
trial by a jury. Trial is the examination of the matter 
of fact in issue. ' Trial by jury, called also trial per 
pais, or hj the country, a trial which hath been used 
time out of mind in this nation, and seems to have been 
coeval with the first civil government thereof (3 Black 
Qom. 349). This commentator then proceeds to describe 
how the jury are to be summoned and selected, how 
the testimony is to be received, and the witnesses ex- 
amined, &c., and says, 'when the evidence is gone 
through on both sides, the judge, in the presence of 
the parties, the counsel, and all others, sums up the 
whole to the jury, omitting all superfluous circum- 
stances, observing wherein the main question and prin- 
cipal issue lies, stating what evidence has been given 
to support it, with such remarks as he thinks necessary 
for their direction, and gives them his opinion in mat- 
ters of law arising upon that evidence.' When our 
statutes speak of trial by jury, they mean a trial con- 
ducted in the manner described by the English com- 
mentator. Jurists and lawyers have no conception of 

36 



282 LANDLORP AXD TENAKT. 

a well conducted trial by jury, in which the charge of 
the judge upon the law of the case is onnitted." 

Oath to officer haying charge of jury. 

You swear in the presence of Almighty God, that you will, to the 
best of your ability, keep the persons sworn as jurors on this trial 
together in some private and convenient place, without any meat or 
drink except such as shall be ordered by me ; that you will not suffer 
any communication, orally or otherwise, to be made to them; that you 
will not communicate with them yourself, orally or otherwise, unless 
by my order, or to ask them whether they have agreed on their ver- 
dict, until they shall have been discharged ; and that you will not, 
before they render their verdict, communicate to any person the state 
of their deliberations or the verdict they have agreed on. 



VI. 
Deliberations of the jury. 

After hearing the proofs and allegations of the 
parties, the jury are to retire and the above oath 
should be administered to the ofiScer in charge {vide 
% 37, ante, p. 190), but this will be assumed to have 
been done in the absence of any objection or showing 
to the contrary (The People v. Teed, 48 Bari. 424). 

The omission or mis-recital of the oath to the officer 
having charge of the jury, can not be assigned for 
error, unless it appears that exception to such omission 
or form was taken at the trial {Cow. Tr. % 1316, 3 
Johns. 430). 

The jury should be kept together for such time as 
the magistrate shall deem reasonable, and if they can 
not agree, the magistrate may discharge them, and 
nominate a new jury and issue a new jury in the same 
manner as in the first instance ( vide §§ 37, 38, ante, p. 
190). If the jury do agree, they are to be brought be- 
fore the magistrate, and are required to announce their 
verdict in his presence, and the fact that the jury at- 
tempted to communicate the verdict to the party in 
whose favor it was rendered, soon after coming into 
court, and before the verdict was announced, was held 



LAW OF SUMMARY PEOCEEDIN^GS. 283 

not to affect the regularity or purity of the verdict 
(Fish V. Byrnes. 14 Abb. 12). 

Polling the jury. 

It is supposed that the jury may be polled, that is, 
asked individually, "Is that your verdict ? " (Lalor v. 
Koplin, 4 iV. Y. 547). If either answers no, it is sup- 
posed tliat the jury may again retire (2 Wend. 352 ; 3 
Jolins. 255). 

VII. 

Verdict of the jury. 

It has been settled by the highest court of authority 
in this state, that the verdict of a jury in summary pro- 
ceedings that no rent was due from the tenant to the 
landlord, was conclusive upon that question, and a 
bar to any other or further proceeding on the part of 
landlord for the rent (White «. Coatsworth, 6 N. Y. 
137). In a subsequent case it was held, that where the 
aflSdavit of the defendant in summary proceedings to 
dispossess for the non-payment of rent raises two ques- 
tions, and the jury finds generally for the defendant, 
both questions are presumptively res adjudicata, and 
in a subsequent proceeding, in which one of such 
questions arises, it is for the plaintiff to show it was 
not passed upon the jury, and that where the defend- 
ant's affidavit denied his indebtedness on various 
grounds, including that of eviction by title paramount, 
and also denied any demand of the rent, and the jury 
found a general verdict for the defendant, it was held 
that the verdict was presumptively res adjudicata on 
both, points, and that it was for the plaintiff to show 
that the jury only passed on the question of demand 
(The Yonkers & New York Fire Ins. Co. v. Bishop, 1 
Daly, 44flV 



284 LANDLOKD A.ND TENAWT. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

THE LAW AND PRACTICE ON STJMMAEY PROCEEDINGS — 

Continued,. — final determination and its effect. 

I. The adjudication, when and how made — its effect. 
II. Payment of rent after adjudication. 

III. Giving bond to stay warrant in proceeding for non-payment of 

rent — its form. 

IV. Issuing the warrant — ^its form and effect. 

V. Redemption in cases wherein the unexpired term exceeds five 

years. 
VI. Certified copy of adjudication as evidence. , .^ 



The adjudication, when and how made — its effect. 

Section 39 of the statute {liide ante, p. 191) provides 
that if the decision of the magistrate, or the verdict of 
the jury shall be in favor of the lessor, or landlord, or 
other person claiming the possession of the premises, 
the magistrate shall issue his warrant to the sheriff or 
to any constable of the county in which the premises 
are situated, commanding such officer to put such land- 
lord, lessor, or other person, into possession, as herein 
before directed, and section 33 {^Ide ante, p. 188) de- 
clares, that if at the time appointed in the summons, no 
sufficient cause be shown to the contrary, and due 
proof of the service of such summons shall be made to 
such magistrate, he shall thereupon issue his warrant 
to the sheriff of the county, or to any constable or 
marshal of the city or town where the premises are 
situated, commanding him to remove all persons from 
the said premises, and to put the landlord into the full 
possession thereof. Neither of these sections provide 



LAW OF SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. 285 

in words for any judgment, but this is necessarily im- 
plied (The People ex rel. Ward v. Kelsey, at p. 378). 
The power to hear, try, and determine these proceedings, 
of necessity vests in the magistrate the necessary author- 
ity to declare the result of his determination when made, 
and this formal determination is called in law a judg- 
ment. BouviER defines a judgment to be "the deci- 
sion or sentence of the law, given by a court of justice 
or other competent tribunal, as the result of proceed- 
ings instituted therein, for the redress of an injury." 

The form of the judgment usually adopted is en- 
dorsed upon the papers, as follows : 

Form of judgment by default. 

Before Jitsticb Quinn. 



John Dob | Landlord. 

\ 
RiCHAED Roe. I Tenant. 

-J 



Summons to show cause the 4th day of November, 187 . 

The landlord appeared on the 4th day of November, 1875, and de- 
mands the rent, and possession of the premises within mentioned, for 
the non-payment of the rent. The [tenant fails to appear, and no 
sufficient cause having been shown to the contrary] judgment 
is therefore rendered the 4th day of November, 1875, in favor of 
the said landlord, that he have possession of the premises within 
described, by reason of the non-payment of the said rent (or 
by reason of the expiration of the tenant's term, according to the 
fact), and that a warrant issue to remove the said tenant and all per- 
sons from the said premises, and to put the landlord into full pos- 
session. 

DENNIS QUINN, 

justice, &c. 
Warrant issued day of 187 . 

[The recitals in the judgment should be stated according to the 
fact. The filing of the counter affidavit, the adjournments, the de- 
mand of a jury trial, tlie verdict of the jury, all these things should be 
stated, if true, the design being to make the judgment a sort of 
postea or record.] 

Judgments in summary proceedings before justice of the "peace. 

The statute in reference to summary proceedings 
before a justice of the peace {vide § 51, ante, p. 195), 



286 LAKDLOKD AND TENANT. 

provides that the justice shall enter the finding of the 
jury, or in case no jury is called, his final decision, 
upon the application for the warrant on his docket, 
and render judgment therefor, and include in said 
judgment costs of such proceedings to the prevailing 
party, at the same rate of fees now allowed by law in 
civil actions in courts of justice of the peace, and lim- 
ited in like manner ; and in the warrant for delivery 
of possession, or by execution issued by him, the jus- 
tice is required to direct the collection of costs. This 
section is peculiarly applicable to justices of the peace, 
and differs essentially from the powers conferred upon 
the other officers authorized to entertain these proceed- 
ings {vide ante, § 39, p. 191, § 33, p. 188, and p. 185). 

Validity of judgments. 

To be valid, a judicial judgment must be given 
by a competent judge or court, at a time and place 
appointed by law, and in the form it requires. 
A judgment would be null, if the judge had not 
jurisdiction of the matter ; or, having such juris- 
diction, he exercised it when there was no court held ; 
or out of his district ; or if he rendered a judgment 
before the cause was prepared for a hearing {Bouvier's 
Law Dictionary ,_ vol. 1, p. 676). Whether these 
summary proceedings come within these requirements 
is a matter yet to be determined, although they have 
always been regarded as a proceeding out of court, and 
the jurisdiction one peculiar to the magistrate, and not 
to his court. The judgment must confine itself to the 
question raised before the court, and can not extend 
beyond it. For example, where the plaintiff sued for 
an injury committed on his land by animals owned 
and kept carelessly by defendant, the judgment may 
be for damages, but it can not command the defendant 
for the future to keep his cattle out of the plaintiff's 
land. That would be to usurp the power of the legis- 



LAW OF SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. 287 

lature. A judgment declares the rights which belong 
to the citizen ; the law alone rules future actions. The 
law commands all men ; it is the same for all, because it 
is general ; judgments are particular decisions, which 
apply only to particular persons, and bind no others ; 
they vary like the circumstances on which they are 
founded. Litigious contents present to the court facts to 
appreciate, agreements to be construed, and points of 
law to be resolved. The judgment is the result of the 
full examination of all these. Jurisdiction is that 
power or authority which the law has conferred upon 
courts, judges, or justices of the peace over the persons 
or the property of others, and over the subject-matter 
of actions or proceedings, to take cognizance of, to 
hear, try, and determine the rights of the parties in 
relation thereto ; to render a proper decision or judg- 
ment therein, and to carry that decision or judgment 
into execution. Consent can not confer jurisdiction, 
unless the court has jurisdiction of the subject-matter ; 
if it has jurisdiction of the subject-matter, consent will, 
as a rule, confer jurisdiction on the parties (§ 19, 20, 
Oow. Tr. ; see also 2 Hill. 657 ; 2 M. D. Smith, 22, 38 ; 
9 N. Y. 266, 267). 

And where the jurisdiction of a court of limited au- 
thority depends on a fact which must be ascertained by 
such court, and such fact appears, and is stated in 
the record of its proceedings, a party who appeared, 
and had an opportunity to controvert the jurisdictional 
fact, and did not, but contested on the merits, can not 
afterwards, in a collateral action, impeach the record, 
and show that the jurisdictional fact did not exist (Dyck- 
man v. The Mayor, 5 iV. Y. 434, affg. 7 Barb. 498). 

Time within which judgment must be rendered. 

If the proceeding is to be regarded as one within the 
peculiar jurisdiction of the magistrate, as a judge out of 
court, the statute imposes no limitation upon him as to 



288 LANDLORD AKD TENANT. 

the time within which he must render his decision, for 
by such a construction, the statute limiting the time 
within which ordinary actions in the court of the mag- 
istrate must be decided, has reference only to cases 
before the court, technically so called, as distinguished 
from those special jurisdictions conferred by statute 
peculiarly upon the magistrate as an officer out of 
court. 

The effect of such judgments. 

The adjudication of the magistrate or the verdict 
of his jury, is conclusive in all other controversies in 
which the same issues arise (White v. Coatsworth, 6 
JV. Y. 137 ; Kelsey b. Ward, 16 Abb. Pr. 98, aff'd 38 
N. Y. 83 ; Yonkers Ins. Co. v. Bishop, 1 Daly, 449), 
and the courts have even gone as far as to hold, that a 
judgment even by default in these proceedings was 
conclusive upon the parties to it in any other action or 
proceeding (Powers v. Witty, 42 How. Pr. 352 ; S. P. 
Morris ». Floyd, 5 Barb. 130). Although where in a 
summary proceeding the defendant's affidavit denied 
his indebtedness on various grounds'inclnding that of 
eviction by title paramount, and also denied any de- 
mand of the rent, and a jury found a general verdict 
for the defendant, it was held in a subsequent action 
for the same rent, where this record was offered ^by the 
defense, that it was presumptively res adjudicata, on 
both points, and that it was for the plaintiflf to show (if 
such was the fact) that the jury passed only on the 
question of demand (Yonkers Ins. Com. v. Bishop, 1 
Daly, 449). 

IT. 
Payment of rent after adjudication. 

As stated in Chapter XXVI. {ante, p. 228), the ten- 
ant has the right, in a proceeding for nonpayment of 
rent, even after judgment, to pay the rent claimed, pro- 



LAW OF STTMMAEY PKOOEEDINGS. 289 

vided he pays with it the taxable costs and charges, 
and the legally accrued interest, which is an incident 
to the rent (vide ante, p. 222), at any time before the 
warrant is actually issued {vide ante, § 44, p. 192). 

III. 

Gicing bond to stay warrant in proceeding for non- 
payment of rent, its form. 

The statute contains the following provisions as to 
staying proceedings upon giving security, viz. : 

In case of rent. 

§ 44. The issuing of such warrant of removal shall 
be staj'^ed in the case of a proceeding for the non-pay- 
ment of rent, if the person owing such rent shall, be- 
fore such warrant be actually issued, pay the rent due, 
and all the costs and charges of the proceedings ; or 
give such security as shall be satisfactory to the said 
magistrate, to the person entitled to such rent, for the 
payment thereof, and the costs aforesaid, in ten days. 
And in case the person giving such security shall not 
within the said ten days produce to the magistrate sat- 
isfactory evidence of the payment of the rent and costs, 
the warrant of removal may at any time thereafter be 
issued {vide ante, p. 192). 

Form of bond under aboye section. 

Know all men by these presents, that we, John Jones of 
Street, in the city of New York, and Paul Jones of street in 

said city, are held and firmly bound unto John Doe of the same place, 
in the sum of (double the amount of the rent and costs) to be paid to 
the said John 13oe, his executors, administrators, or assigns, for which 
payment well and truly to be made we bind ourselves, our heirs, 
executors and administrators, joihtly and severally, firmly by these 
presents, sealed with our seals and dated the day of 187 . 

Whereas, in a certain proceeding pending before Esq., 

the justice of the district in the city of New York for the first 
judicial district, by John Doe, landlord, against Richard Roe, ten- 
ant, it was on the day of 187 , adjudged that the said Richard 
37 



290 ' LANDLOED AND TEKA:N"T. 

Boe held over and continued in possession of the premises known as 
No.' street, in said city, without permission of his landlord, after a 
default in the payment of the rent, pursuant to the agreement under 
which said premises were held, and which said rent, with the costs 
of said proceeding, now amount to dollars ; now, therefore, in 

order to stay the issuing of the warrant of dispossession in said pro- 
ceedings, and pursuant to the statute in such a case made and pro- 
vided, the condition of this obligation is such, that if the said ten- 
ant shall pay to the said landlord, John Doe, his executors, adminis- 
trators, and assigns, the said rent and costs within ten days from 
the date hereof, then the said obligation shall be void, otherwise to 
remain in full force and virtue. 

JOHN JONES, [l. s.] 
PAUL JONES. [L. s.] 
-In presence of ) 

An affidavit in the usual form should be annexed, showing the 
sufficiency of the sureties, and the bond should be properly acknowl- 
edged, and should be thereafter endorsed by the magistrate with his 
approval in the following form : 

" The within security is satisfactory to me, and is therefore ap- 
proved." 

Justice, &c. 

In case where the tenant has taken the benefit of the insolvent 

act. 

§ 45. When the application to a magistrate is 
founded on the fact that the tenant or lessee has taken 
the benefit of any insolvent act, or been discharged 
under any act for the relief of his person from impris- 
onment, the proceedings shall be stayed, if at any time 
before issuing the warrant for removal, the tenant, or 
lessee, or his assignee, shall pay the costs of such pro- 
ceedings as have been had, and give such security to 
the person entitled to the rent, for the payment there- 
of, as it shall become due, as shall be sati sfactory to 
the magistrate {vide ante, p. 192). 

Form of bond under above section. 

The form of bond required under the above section is the same 
substantially as the bond, to stay the viarrant in proceedings for non- 
payment of rent (supra), excepting as to the recital of the particular 
character of the proceeding, which should be stated according to the 
fact, and excepting also the condition, which may be in the following 
words: 

"Now, therefore, in order to satisfy the requirements of the 
statute in such case made and provided, the condition of this obliga- 



LAW OF Sl^MMAKY PKOCEEDINGS. 291 

tion is such, that if the said tenant (or lessee, or assignee, according 
to the fact) shall pay to the said landlord, John Doe, his executors, 
administrators, or assigns, all rent now due or that may hereafter be- 
come due, under and by virtue of the terms of the demise under 
which the said tenant (lessee or assignee, as the case may be)- holds 
said premises, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise to remain 
in full force and virtue." 

In cases where the premises have been sold under execution. 

§ 46. When such application is founded upon 
an alleged sale, by execution, of the premises occupied 
by the defendant in such execution, the proceedings 
shall be stayed, if at any tin[ie before issuing the war- 
rant of removal, the occupant shall, 

1. Pay the costs of such proceedings. 

2. File with the officer before whom the application 
is pending, an affidavit that he claims the possession of 
such premises by virtue of some title or right acquired 
after such premises were sold ; or as guardian or tras-. 
tee for any other ; and, 

3. Execute a bond to the applicant for such war- 
rant, in such penalty and with such sureties as the 
magistrate shall approve, conditioned to pay the costs 
which may be recovered against him in any ejectment 
that may be brought by such applicant within six 
months, for the recovery of the possession of such- 
premises ; and to pay the value of the use and occupa- 
tion of such premises, from the date of such bond to 
the time such applicant shall obtain possession of the 
same by virtue of a recovery in such action of eject- 
ment ; and also conditioned not to commit any waste 
or injury to such premises, during his occupation 
thereof {vide § 46, p. 193). 

Form of bond under above section. 

Know all men by these presents, That we, Richard Roe, hereinafter 
named, John Jones of No. street, in the city of New York, 

and Paul Jones of street, in said city, are held and firmly bound 

unto John Doe of the same place, in the sum of (the magistrate 

is to approve the penalty of the bond) to be paid to the said John Doe, 
his executors, administrators, or assigns, for which payment, well and 



292 



LAWDLOED AND TENANT. 



truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, our executors, and 
administrators, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents, sealed 
with our seals, and dated the day of 187 . 

Whereas, in certain proceedings commenced before 
Esq., the justice of the district court, in the city of New York, for the 
judicial district, by John Doe, against Richard Koe, to recover 
the possession of certain real estate to wit, the premises known as No. 
street in the city of New York, sold on execution against said 
Richard Roe, and whereas said Richard Roe claims the legal title in and 
to the said premises, and has filed an alBdavit of such claim with said 
justice, now, therefore, the condition of the above obligation is such, 
that if the said obligors pay all the costs which may be recovered 
against the said Richard Roe, in any ejectment that may be brought 
by said John Doe, within six months, for the recovery of the posses- 
sion of such premises, and also pay to the said John Doe, the value of 
the use and occupation of said premises from the date hereof, to the 
time said John Doe shall obtain possession of the same by virtue of a 
recovery in said action of ejectment, and conditioned also that the 
said Richard Roe do not commit any waste or injury to said premises 
during his occupation thereof, then this obligation to be void, other- 
wise to remain in full force and virtue. 

RICHARD ROE. [l. s.] 
JOHN JONES. [L. s.] 
PAUL JONES. [L. S.J 
In presence of ) 

[The sureties are to justify, and the bond is to be acknowledged 
and approved in like manner as upon the bond to stay the issuing of 
the warrant in case of non-payment of rent] (vide ante, p. 389). 



Affidavit of claim in last case. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

Richard Ro?, being duly sworn says, that after the sale of the prem- 
ises described in the aflBdavit of John Doe [here state the facts showing 
tK& right in the affiant to the possession of the premises ly virtue of some 
title or right acquired after such premises were sold hy the sheriff or as 
guardian or trustee for any other, and then continue], and that by means 
of the premises said John Doe has no interest, claim or title, in or to. 
said premises, that deponent has paid the costs of these proceedings and 
has executed a bond with sureties to be approved by the magistrate 
who issued th^ summons, and which said bond deponent tenders to 
the said John Doe, the person prosecuting said proceedings. 

RICHARD ROE. 
Sworn to, before me this | 

day of 187 . f 



LAW OF SUMMABT PEOCEEDrNGS. 293 

IV. 

Issuing the warrant, its form and effect. 

The statute (§ 43, vide p. 192) provides that ' ' when- 
ever a warrant shall be issued by any such magistrate 
for the removal of any tenant from any demised prem- 
ises, the contract or agreement for the use of the prem- 
ises, if any such exists, and the relation of landlord and 
tenant between the parties, shall be deemed to be can- 
celled and annulled;" and after the adjudication, the 
magistrate is bound to issue his warrant as required by 
the statute (§ 39, ante, p. 191), and may be compelled 
to do so by mandamus (People ■«. Willis, 5 Ahh. Pr. 
205), unless the proceeding be for non-payment of rent 
and the statutory stay of ten days be procured by the 
execution of a bond to pay the rent within that time, as 
provided and allowed by § 44 {ante, p. 192), and if such 
bond be given, and the person giving it does not, 
within the ten days, produce to the magistrate satisfac- 
tory evidence of the payment of the rent and costs, the 
warrant of removal may at any time thereafter be is- 
sued (Jd.), but the provisions of the statute in regard to 
staying the warrant upon the execution of a bond, have 
no application to proceedings for holding over, and ap- 
ply only to those for non-payment of rent (Sage v. 
Harpening, 49 Barh. 166). 

The form ofj^the warrunt, . "i 

1. For non-payment of rent. 

2. For holding over. 
8. In other cases. 

1. For non-payment of rent. 

To the sherifiE of the city and county of New York, or to any marshal 
of said city, greeting : 
Whereas, John Due hath, made oath in writing, and presented the 



294 LANDLORD AND TEN ANT J 

same to me, that he is the landlord of the premises hereinafter de- 
scribed, and that Eichard Koe, as tenant, was justly indebted to the 
said landlord in the sum of fifty dollars, for one month's rent of the 
premises known as^No. 1 Broadway, in the city of New York, in ad- 
vance, from October 1st, 1875, till November 1st, 1875, that the said 
rent has been demanded from the said tenant since the same became 
due, and the said tenant has made default in the payment thereof, 
pursuant to the agreement under which the premises are held, and 
that the said Richard Roe, as such tenant, holds over and continues in 
possession of the same, without the permission of the landlord, after 
default in the payment of the rent as aforesaid. Whereupon I issued 
a summons, requiring the tenant, and each and every person in posses- 
sion of the said premises, or claiming the possession thereof, forthwith 
to remove from the said premises, or show cause before me, at a cer- 
tain time now past, why the possession of the said premises should not 
be delivered to the said landlord ; and no good cause having been 
shown, or in any way appearing to the contrary, and due proof of the 
service of such summons having been made to me. Therefore, in the 
name of the people of the state of New York, you are commanded to 
remove all persons from said premises, and put the said landlord into 
the full possession thereof. 

In witness thereof, I have subscribed these presents, this 4th day 
of November, in the year 1875. 

DENIS QUINN, 
Justice of the District Court in the city of New York, 

for the first Judicial District. 



2- For holding over. 

To the sheriff of the city and county of New York, or to any marshal 

of said city, greeting: 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, that he is the landlord of the premises hereinafter de- 
scribed, and on or about the 1st day of October, 1875, he rented unto 
Richard Roe as tenant, the premises known as No. 1 Broadway, in 
the city of New York, for the term of one month from the 1st day of 
October, 1875, which said term has expired, and that said tenant 
holds over or continues in possession of the same after the expiration 
of his term therein, without the permission of the landlord : Where- 
upon I issued a summons requiring the said tenant forthwith to re- 
move from the said premises, or show cause before me, at a certain 
time now past, why the posesssion of the said premises should not be 
delivered to the landlord ; and no sufficient cause having been shown 
to the contrary, and I, being satisfied by due proof of the service of 
the said summons. Do, therefore, in the name of the people of the state 
of New York, command you to remove all persons from the said 
premises, and put the landlord into the full possession thereof. 

In witness thereof, I have subscribed these presents, this 3d day of 
November, in the year 1875. 

DENIS QUINN, I 

Justice of the District Court in the city of New York, 

for the first Judicial District. 



LAW OP SUMMABY PBOOEEDINGS. 295 

3. In other cases. 

The direction and command in the warrant are the same in all 
cases, but the recitals in the warrant should follow those in the affi- 
davit, and if a trial be had that fact may be stated. With the affidavit 
and summons in the proceeding present, there can be but little diffi- 
culty in inserting the necessary recitals. 

Sheriff's, constable's, or marslial's return upon warrant. 

Pursuant to the command of the above warrant, I have this day 
put the landlord into the full possession of the premises therein men- 
tioned. Dated this day of 187 . 

, Sheriff. 

, Marshal. 

, Constable. 

The effect of the warrant. 

The effect of the warrant is declared in § 43 of the 
act ( ante, p. 192) ; it cancels and annuls the lease and 
extinguishes the relation of landlord and tenant, but 
only from the time of the default (Hinsdale v. White, 
6 Hill, 507) ; all rent prior to the default may be recov- 
ered (Johnson v. Oppenheim, 55 N. Z. 280 ; A E. D. S. 
339 ; 2 Hilt. 217 ; 1 Duer, 266 : 3 Den. 452 ; 12 Abb. 
If. S. 6). The remedy after default is not on the lease, 
but against the tenant wrongfully holding over, as a 
wrong-doer (Hinsdale «. White, 6 Hill, 507 ; Davison 
V. Donadi, 2 M D. Smith, 121 ; Hackett v. Richards, 
3 Id. 21 ; Crane v. Hardman, 4 Id. 339 ; Featherston- 
haugh V. Bradshaw, 1 Wend. 134; see also 1 £J. D. S. 
at p. 419 ; 3 De?i. 456 ; 2 H. T. 336 ; 30 Barb. 386 ; 5 
Hobt. 180 ; 23 How. 239 ; 1 Duer, 276 ; 1 Dalp, 46), and 
rent payable in advance, is not affected by an eviction oc- 
curing subsequent to the day it is payable (Giles v. 
Comstocfc, 4 If. T. 270 ; Johnson v. Oppenheim, 55 If. 
Y. 280). The effect of a re-entry for condition broken 
upon a lease reserving such right, and agreeing to pay 
any deficiency thereafter was considered in Hall v. 
Gould (13 If. r. 127). 

Protection of the warrant. '' 

A warrant of dispossession properly issued, protects 
all who act under it without regard to the state of the 



296 LANDLOBD AND TENANT. 

weather, unless they act wilfully and maliciously (Hig- 
enbothan v. Lowenbein, 28 How. 221 ; S. O. 3 Bob. 32), 
and where the landlord and owner in fee, claiming that 
the term has expired, enters without process and with- 
out force, during the temporary absence of the tenant, 
the latter has no right to take the law into his own 
hands, and attempt to dislodge the former by force. 
The landlord, being in actual possession, has a right to 
maintain it, and to use force for that purpose, if neces- 
sary (Sage V. Harpending, 49 Barb. 166; S. C. 34 ; 
Sow. Pr. 1), and where a dispossessing warrant has 
been issued in summary proceedings against a tenant, 
and is regular and valid, and the landlord has been put 
into possession of the premises by virtue of it, he is 
justified in using so much force as is necessary to de- 
fend himself, and maintain his possession ; and is liable 
in damages to the tenant, in an action for alleged as- 
sault and battery in repelling the attempt of the tenant 
to re-enter, only for excess of force used {Id.). 

Kight to remoTe persons not named In warrant. 

In Connecticut it was held that an execution issued upon a judg- 
ment in summary process, commanding the oflBcer to put the defend- 
ant and all others out of the possession of the premises, is irregular, 
and will not protect the officer if he dispossess any other than the 
defendant (Colt «. Eves, 12 Omn. 259, 261). 

Constables and marshals. 

The office of constable in the city of New York was 
abolished in 1862, and the office of marshal created in 
its place, with the like powers and duty (1862, ch. 484, 
§18). 

Costs of dispossessing. 

In the city of New York, a lessor who has dispos- 
sessed the lessee may recover by action the expenses 
of the. proceedings (Crane ». Hardman, 4 M. D. 8. 
339). 



LAW OP StrMMAET PEOOJEEDHiTGS. ,297 



Redemption in cases wherein the unexpired term 
exceeds five years. 

In case of proceedings for non-payment of rent, if 
the unexpired term of the lease under which the prem- 
ises are held exceeds five years at the time of -issuing 
the warrant upon such proceedings, the lessee, his as- 
signs, or personal representatives, may at ariy time 
within one year after possession of the demised preip- 
ises shall have been delivered to the landlord, pay or 
tender to the lessor, his representatives or attorney, or 
to the officer who issued the warrant, all rent in arrear 
to the time of such payment or tender, and all costs and 
charges incurred by the landlord — and in such case the 
premises shall be restored to the lessee, who shall hold 
and enjoy the same without any new lease thereof ac- 
cording to the terms of the original demise ; and any 
mortagee of the lease, or of any part thereof, who shall 
not be in possession of the demised premises, or any 
judgment creditor of the lessee who shall within one 
year after the execution of such warrant, pay all rent 
in arrear, all costs and charges as aforesaid, and per- 
form all the agreements which ought to be perforrned 
by the first lessee, shall not be affqcted by such' recov' 
ery ; and such judgment creditor may file a suggeistion 
of such payment upon the record, and may issue ex- 
ecution for the amount of the original judgment and of 
Such payment {vide § 54, ante, p. 196). 

There seems to be no adjudication of cases under this 
Section, but the right to redeem is absolute in the cases 
mentioned in the statute, and the landlord and all 
others claiming under him, must yield possession to 
to the tenant or mortagee upon the redemption being 
perfected according to these provisions. 

The landlord is bound to accept the tender which 

38 



Sb'S •' LANDLORD AND TEKANT. 

the tenant or mortagee is authorized by the statute to 
make, and his refusal to do so may operate to discharge 
his right of the possession, or Hen for the rent, as in 
the case of a mortagee (Kortright v. Cady, 21. ..M.. T. 
343). 

IV. 

Certified copy of adjudication as emdence. 

The act in reference to District Courts in the city of 
New York, provides that "a transcript of any pro- 
ceedings had before either of said justices, or of any 
other paper filed with him, or of the minutes of any 
testimony, taken by or before him, certified by . him 
to be correct, shall be presumptive evidence of the 
facts therein contained (1857, chap. 344, p. 728, § 78) ; 
and in the absence of some statute making a certified 
copy or transcript evidence, it is supposed that the 
original record must be produced in connection with 
other evidence showing its authenticity. 

Effect of tenant's death. 

It was held in Hughes v. Sebre (3 A. K. Marsh. 327) that where; a 
tenant died intestate the landlord could not distrain before adminis- 
tration, and in Hovey «. Smith (1 Ba/rb. at p. 377) it was held that the 
converse of the rule held good ; viz., that the landlord could distrain 
' cefter administration. 



ENJOINING 8UMMAKY PROCEEDINGS. 299 



CHAPTEE XXXIII. 

INJUNOTIONS TO ENJOIN SUMMAET PK0CEEDING8 — IN 
WHAT CASES GRANTED. 

Section 47 of the statute giving certiorari to review 
summary proceedings to obtain possession of land, and 
declaring that such proceedings can not be stayed by 
order of any court or officer, is effective in all cases 
where the act gives the tenant an adequate remedy, *. e., 
where his defense is of a legal character, which can, if 
true, be effectually established before the magistrate 
'-{HigJh on Injunctions, § 46; Kerr's Injunctions in 
Equity, p. 15 ; Smith v. Moffat, 1 Barl. 65 ; Words- 
worth V. Lyon, 5 How. Pr. 463 ; Hyatt ?;. Burr, 8 Id. 
.168; Duigan «. Hogan, 1 Bosw. 645; S. C. IQ Bow. 
Pr. 164 ; Bokee -o. Hamersley, Id. 461 ; Mclntyre v. 
Hernandez, 7 Abi. Pr. N. S. 214; Seeback n. Mc- 
Donald, 11 Abh. Pr. 95 ; S. 0. 21 Mow. Pr. 224 ; Marks 
*. Wilson, 11 Abh. Pr. 87 ; Ward v. Kelsey, 14 Id. 
106 ; McGrune v. Palmer, 5 Robertson, 607 ; Rapp ». 
Williams, A T. <& O. Bept's iV. Y. Supreme Ct. 174). 
-Nor can an injunction issue, because of a counterclaim 
against the rent on which the tenant may recover in 
an action at law, the landlord being solvent (Brown ®. 
The Metropolitan Gas Light Company, 38 How. Pr. 13S). 
And the exceptions to this general rule exist only (1) 
where the peculiarcharacter of the defense is of an equit- 
able nature, so that the justice by reason of his limited 
powers can not administer the adequate relief demanded 
by the equities and exigencies of the case (Valloton ». 
S&ignett, 2iL55. Pr. 121 ; 7 Abb. N. S. 214) ; or wheria 
(2) there was fraud in the proceedings, as in the cases of 
Griffith ». Brown (3 Hobt. 627 ; S. C. 28 How. Pr. '4) ; 



•300 LAWBLOED AKD TENANT. 

Cure V. Crawford (5 How. Fr. 293), in which it ap- 
peared that the tenant had not time to arrive at the 
court room before the hearing after the service of the 
summons ; (3) or in a case of surprise such as Forrester 
«. Wilson (1 Duer, 624), in which the court continued 
an injunction upon the immediate payment of the rent ; 
or in case" (4) of fraud or collusion in the proceedings 
generally (Bokee w. Hamersley, IQ How. Pr. 461). In 
the case just cited, the New York Supreme Court 
hold that the only cases in which the court will interfere 
by injunction to stay summary proceedings, between 
landlord and tenant, are: 

1. Where there has been fraud or collusion. 
, 2. Where the justice has not obtained jurisdiction ; 
and, 

3. Where the tenant, from the peculiar circum- 
stances of the case, is precluded from setting up his 
defense before the justice. 

The Superior Court, however, deny the existence of 
this second ground, deciding that where the justice has 
no jurisdiction the remedy is by prohibition (Bean «. 
Pettingil, 7 BoM. 7, affg. 2 Abb. Pr. N. S. 58). 

In Huggins v. King (3 Barb, at p. 619), Judge 
Hakbis says : " Among the grounds of equitable jur- 
isdiction enumerated by the elementary writers, is 
relief against frauds in verdicts, judgments, decrees, 
and other judicial proceedings (citing 1 Story's Eq. 
% 252 ; Fonbl. Eq. B. 1, ch. 1, § 3, note f). To induce 
a Court of Equity to grant relief against a judgment, it 
must appear that the party seeking relief was pre- 
vfented from availing himself of his defense against the 
judgment by fraud or accident, or the act of the oppo- 
site party, unmixed with negligence or fault on his 
part (citing Foster », Wood, 6 Johns Ch. 87 ; Vilas «. 
Jones, 1 ComstooJc, 281). The plaintiff had a good de- 
fense to the action in which the judgment was 
recovered against him. He was prevented from setting 
up that defense by a gross fraud practiced upon Mm 



ENJOINING aUMMAET PEOCEEDINGS. 301 

by the defendants. Here was no negligence or fault 
on his part. Under these circumstances, assuming the 
bill to be true, as the demurrer does, it is a proper case 
for counteracting the judgment obtained by the defen- 
dant's fraud, by the interposition of the equitable jur- 
isdiction of the court." 

It is diflScult to define the exact nature of the fraud 
which entitles a plaintiff to an injunction, perhaps, be- 
cause the manifestations of fraud are so various that 
it is impossible to embrace its varieties of form within 
the limits of a precise definition {High on Injunc- 
tions, § 24, p. 18). The right to an. injunction in an 
action for specific performance was sustained in Capet 
«. Parker (3 Sandf. 662), in which form of action 
the tenants had filed a bill against their landlord, 
praying, among other things, for an injunction 
enjoining the landlord from prosecuting summary 
proceedings to remove the tenants from the prem- 
ises, which the tenants claimed the landlord had 
previously contracted to convey to them, and the 
tight to the injunction was claimed until their right 
to specific performance had been decided. The 
landlord and his counsel questioned the right of thp 
court to grant the injunction, and disregarded it, and 
proceeded with the summary proceedings to judgment 
and warrant. The court held that it had power, and 
committed the landlord for contempt, unless, he con- 
sented to vacate all proceedings to disposses and paid 
the tenant' s costs, and the court in criticising upon the 
conduct of the landlord' s counsel, said : "It was very 
different from what should have been pursued. He 
was an officer of the court. He ought, therefore, to 
have advised his client to respect its authority, even 
though in his opinion the court had erred. We live 
under a government of law, and it is one of the peculiar 
felicities of our condition, that the moral sense of the 
community is so strongly on the side of obedience to 
law, that, in the civil administration of justice, resort to 



302 LAITOLOKD AND TENANT. 

physical force is seldom necessary to carry the judg- 
ments of the courts into effect. They are submitted to 
as a matter of course. It is peculiarly the duty of those 
who profess the law, to cherish this feeling, and to 
elevate and strengthen the spirit of obedience to judi- 
cial authority. And it is a matter of deep regret, when 
any of those whose province it is to aid in the adminis- 
' tration of justice, encourage resistance to or disregard 
of the decisions of the court or of its judges," (see 
also 9 N. Y. at p. 266). 

. In another case, it was held that a tenant suing his 
landlord, to compel the execution of a renewed lease, 
if he shows himself equitably entitled to the renewal, 
may have an injunction pendente lite, restraining, the 
landlord from removing him by summary proceedings 
(G-raham v. James, 7 RoM. 468), but an injunction 
shonld not be granted to one not a party to the sum- 
mary proceedings merely upon an allegation that he is 
likely to be disturbed in his rightful possession (Aaron 
V. Baum, 7 BoM. 340; and see Marry «. James, 2 Daly, 
487), and the fact that the magistrate is a witness is not 
ground for an injunction, except in an extreme case 
(Marry ». James, supra), and the injunction may in a 
proper case be granted after the warrant has been issued 
(Forrester «. Wilson, 1 Duer, 624 ; GriflBth v. Brown, 3 
IloU. 627 ; S. C. 28 How. Pr. 4), but not after its exr 
ecution (Koberts e. Mathews, 18 Abb. Pr. 199). 



BA-WDT HOtrSES. 303 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

BAWDY HOTJSES AND ILLEGAL TRADES. 

I. The statute relating to bawdy houses. 
n. The statute relating to illegal trades aud manufactures. 

III. Proceedings thereunder. 

IV. The forms required in such proceedings. 



Bawdy-house act. 

Chapter 764. 

An Act to amend title ten of chapter eight of 
part three of Revised Statutes relative 
to bawdy houses. 

Passed May 9, 1868 : three-fifths being present. 

The people of the state of New York, represented 
in senate and assembly, do enact as follows : 

Section 1. Title ten of chapter eight of part three of 

the Eevised Statutes is amended by adding thereto the 

following sections : 

[The preceding sections, 1 to 23, compose Chapter XX., ante, p. 
174; §§ 24 to 54 compose Chapter XXI., ante, p. 182.] 

Application for warrants of dispossession when honses are occnpied 
as bawdy honses. , 

§ 55. When any house or other real property is used 
or occupied as a bawdy house, or house of assignation 
for lewd persons, the owner or landlord thereof may 
apply to any officer mentioned in section twenty -eight 
of this title, for a warrant of dispossession, as herein- 
after set forth. 

Vide % 28 above referred to, ante, p. 184. . ' 



304 LANITLOED" AN©' TENANT. ' 

Application, what to state, and to be verified. 

■§ 56. Such application shall be made upon ati affi- 
davit setting forth that- thehause or -'premises in ques- 
tion, or some part thereof, is used or occupied as a 
bawdy house or house of assignation for lewd persons, 
describing the premises, and naming, if it can be done, 
the persons occupying the same, or some one of them. 

Magistrate to issue summons to occnpants to remoTO or sho'ir 

cause. 

§ 57. Upon such application, accompanied by such 
affidavit, the magistrate shall issue a summons describ- 
ing the premises, and requiring the persons named, or 
described in the affidavit, to remove therefrom forth- 
with, or show cause before him why they should not 
do so, in the same time and manner as is prescribed by 
this article' in case of non-payment of rent. : ■ 

Summons, how served. Warrant commanding removal of Occupants, 
when to issue. 

§ 58. The summons shall be served. in the manner 
prescribed, by section thirty -two of this title, and if, at 
the return day, no cause be shown to the contrary, the 
magistrate shall, upon due proof of service of the sum- 
mons, issue his warrant to the proper officer, command- 
ing him to remove from the premises aforesaid theper- 
sons on whom the summons was served. 

Vide § 33, above referred to, ante, p. 187. 

Octsnpants may appear and be tried by a jury. Warrant, &c. 

§ 59. The person on whom the summons was serve)!, 
or any other person in possession of the premises afore- 
said, may appear and show cause against the applica- 
tion in the manner prescribed by section thirty-four of 
this title ; such proceedings shall thereupon be had ;as 
are prescribed by sections thirty-four, thirty -five, thirty- 



BAWDY HOUSES. 305 

six, thirty-seven, thirty-eight, forty-one and forty -two ; 
and if the decision of the magistrate, or the verdict of 
the jury, be in favor of the complainant, the magistrate 
shall issue the warrant mentioned in the last section. 

Vide §§ 34 to 42, above referred to, ante, pp. 189, 190, 191. 

Issue of warrant to annnl contracts. 

§ 60. A warrant issued under either of the last two 
sections, shall have the effect prescribed by section 
forty -three of this title. 

Vide § 43, above referred to, ante, p. 193. „ . 

Persons residing in neig'hborliood of bawdy liouses may make appli- 
cation in case the owner or landlord fails to do so. 

§ 61. Any owner or tenant of real property in the 
immediate neighborhood of other real property, used or 
occupied as a bawdy house, or house of assignation for 
lewd persons, may give written notice to the owner or 
landlord of the property so used, to make the applica- 
tion hereinbefore mentioned ; and if such owner or 
landlord do not, within five" days after personal service 
of such notice upon him or his agent, make such appli- 
cation, or if, having made it, he do not, in good faith, 
prosecute the same, the owner or tenant giving such 
notice, may apply to any officer, mentioned in section 
twenty-eight of this title, for a warrant of dispossession, 
as is hereinafter described. 

Vide § 38, above referred to, ante, p. 184. 

Proceeding's of case of such applications. 

§ 62. Such application shall be accompanied by an 
affidavit similar to that required by section fifty-five, 
and further setting forth the facts necessary to bring the 
the case within provisions of the last section, and there- 
upon the officer to whom the a,pplication is made shall 
issue a summons describing the premises, and requiring 

39 



306 LAWDLOBD AND TENANT. 

the defendant to show cause before such officer in the 
same time and manner as is prescribed by this article 
in case of non-payment of rent, why he should not be 
compelled to remove from such property. 
Vide § 55, above referred to, ante, p. 303. 

Serrice of summons upon owners or occupants of bawdy houses. 
Warrant, &c. 

§ 63. Such summons shall be served in the manner 
prescribed by section thirty- two of this title, on the 
owner or landlord, or his or their duly aiithorized agent, 
and also on the tenant, if any, occupying the premises 
as a bawdy house, or house of assignation for lewd per- 
sons ; and if, at the return day, no cause be shown to 
the contrary, the magistrate shall, upon due proof of 
service of the summons, issue his warrant to the proper 
officer^ commanding him to remove from the premises 
the persons on whom the summons was served, within 
two days from the issue of such warrant. 

Vide § 32, above referred to, ante, p. 187. 

Owners of houses as well as occupants may demand jury trial. 
Warrant, &c. 

§ 64. The owner or landlord of the premises, and 
also any tenant occupj'ing the same, may appear and 
show cause against the application in the manner pre- 
scribed by sections thirty-four, thirty-five, thirty-six, 
thirty-seven, thirty-eight, forty-one and forty -two ; and 
if the decision of the magistrate, or the verdict of the 
jury, be in favor of the complainant, the magistrate 
shall issue a warrant requiring the defendant to be 
removed, as is mentioned in the last section. 

Vide §§ 34 to 43, above referred to, ante, pp. 189, 190, 191. 

Act, what to affect. 

This act shall affect only lettings or leases hereafter 
made. [§ 2 of the Act.] 



BAWDY HOUSES. 307 



Certain leases, when void. 



Whenever the lessee of any dwelling house shall be convicted of a 
misdemeanor in keeping the same as a bawdy house, the lease or agree- 
ment for the letting of sucli house, shall thereupon become void ; and 
the landlord may enter upon the premises so let, and shall have the 
same remedies to recover possession thereof as are given by law in 
case of a tenant holding over after the expiration of his lease (3 Edm. 
R. S. p. 725, § 29). 

Keeping a bawdy house was indictable at common law, and the 
accused have a right to a trial by jury. Hence the statute authorizing 
them to be proceeded against criminally as disorderly persons is un- 
constitutional (Warren b. People, 3 Park Gr. B. 544). 

A house kept as a house of ill-fame, and a resort for thieves and 
other disreputable persons, is a public and common nuisance (Ely «. 
Supervisors, 36 N. T. 297). The principle of the rule that the owner 
of a house who rents it to be used and kept as a house of prostitution 
is to be deemed to keep such house, and is liable to indictment and 
conviction as the keeper of a bawdy house; applies to any person who 
is personally concerned in the keeping of such a house, e. g., an agent 
who knowingly lets his principal's proBcrtv for such use (Lowenstein 
«. The People. 54 Barb. 299). 

II. 

77ie statute relating to illegal trades 

Chapter 583. 

An act to define some of the rigMs and responsibili- 
ties of landlords and tenants. 

Passed May 22, 1873. 

The people of the state of New York, represented 
in seriate and assembly, do enact as follows : 

When tenant uses bnilding to carry on illegal business, lease to be- 
come void. 

§ 1. Whenever the lessee or occupant other than 
the owner of any building or premises, shall use or 
occupy the same, or any part thereof, for any illegal 
trade, manufacture, or other business, the lease or 
agreement for the letting or occupancy of such build- 
ing or premises shall thereupon become void, and the 
landlord of such lessee or occupant may enter upon 



308 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

the premises so let or occupied, and shall have the 
same remedies to recover possession thereof as are 
given by law in case of a tenant holding over after the 
expiration of his lease. 

Vide proceedings for holding over, ante, § 38, p. 184 and p. 230. 

Liability of owner leasing building for illegal business. 

§ 2. The owner or owners of any building or prem- 
ises knowingly leasing or giving possession of the 
same, to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, for 
any illegal trade, manufacture or business, or know- 
ingly permitting the same to be used for any illegal 
trade, manufacture, or business, shall be jointly and 
severally liable with the tenant or tenants, occupant 
or occupants, for any damage that may result by reason 
of such illegal use, occupancy, trade, manufacture, or 
business. 

§ 3. This act shall take eflfect immediately. 

Where there is an express covenant against using a house for im- 
moral purposes, yet if tlie lessor permits a breach of the covenant, 
and derives gain from it, he can not aftei'wards recover upon his cove- 
nant (Smith V. White, 35 L. J. Oh. 454; 5 Bing. N. 0. 666). 

III. 

Proceedings under said statutes. 

The proceedings under these statutes, with the ex- 
ception of the forms, are substantially like those in the 
ordinary summary proceedings, which have been fully 
explained in preceding chapters. 

As to bawdy houses. 

If the owner, landlord, or agent of the bawdy 
house, neglect to bring and in good faith prosecute the 
proceedings authorized by th.e act, after being reqLuested 
so to do, any stranger being the owner or occupant of 



BAWDY HOUSES. 309 

otter real property in the neighborhood may under 
§ 61 of the act commence and prosecute the said pro- 
ceedings in his own name, without the consent and 
even against the will of the owner or landlord of the 
premises complained against. 

In this respect, the proceedings under this act 
essentially differ from those under any of the other 
summary remedies. 

As to illegal trades, manufactures, or businesses. 

It is supposed that the trades, manufactures, or businesses contem- 
plated by the act, are those which are forbidden by the statute or 
local law, or which are not recognized as legitimate and legal at the 
common law, or which, in their character, are per se nuisances at com- 
mon law, and hence illegal. 



IV. 

The forms used in said proceedings — arranged as 

follows : 

1. Affidavit upon complaint of landlord under bawdy-house act. 

2. Summons to be issued upon said affidavit. 

3. Affidavit upon complaint of owner or tenant of neighboring 

property. 

4. Summons to be issued upon last-mentioned affidavit. 

5. Affidavit upon complaint of landlord under the act relating to 

unlawful trades. 

6. Summons to be issued upon said affidavit. 

7. Endorsement on copy summons. 

8. Forms of judgment. 

9. Forms of warrant. 



1. Affidavit upon complaint of landlord under bawdy-house act. 

To Hon. Denis Quinn, Justice of the District Court in the city of New 

York, for the first Judicial District. 

The subscriber applies for a warrant of removal against Richard 
Roe, the tenant and occupant of the premises hereinafter described 
on the grounds of complaint in the accompanying affidavit set forth' 

JOHN DOE. 

New York, November 1st, 1875. 



310 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe, being duly sworn, says that he is the landlord of the 
premises hereinafter mentioned. That on or about the 1st day of 
September, 1875, deponent entered into an agreement with Kichard 
Roe as tenant, by the terms of which agreement the said tenant hired 
from deponent, as landlord, the dwelling-house situated and known 
as No. street, in the city of New York, for the term of one year, 
from September 1st, 1875, at an agreed rental. That the said tenant 
entered into the occupation of said premises, and is now in possession 
and occupation of the same. That said premises are now used and 
occupied by the said tenant (and by other persons connected with him 
therein, whose names deponent can not ascertain) as a bawdy house 
and house of assignation for lewd persons for purposes of prostitution, 
and as a place of resort for such persons for similar purposes, contrary 
to the statute of the state of New York, in such case made and pro- 
vided, and that said tenant continues in the possession of the same, 
and uses and occupies said premises as such bawdy house and house of 
assignation, in violation of law, and without the permission of the 
landlord. 

JOHN DOB. 
Sworn before me, this 1st day of ) 
November, 1875. J 

John Smith, 
Notary Public, N. Y. Co. 

2. Summons npon landlord's application under bawdy house act. 

To Richard Roe, tenant, and each and every person in possession of 
the demised premises] hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the pos- 
session thereof: 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, that he is the landlord of the premises hereinafter de- 
scribed, and that he, the said landlord, entered into an agreement 
with you as tenant, on or about the 1st day of September, 1875, by 
the terms of which said agreement, you hired from him, as landlord, 
the dwelling situated and known as No. street, in the 

city of New York, for the term of one year from September 1st, 1875, 
at an agreed rental. That you, said tenant, entered into the occupa- 
tion and possession of said premises under said hiring, and that you 
now use and occupy the same (in connection with persons whose 
names are not known to said landlord) as a bawdy house, and house 
of assignation for lewd persons, and for purposes of prostitution, and 
as a resort for such persons, contrary to the laws of the state of New 
York, and that you continue to use said premises as such bawdy 
house and house of assignation, in violation of law, without the per- 
mission of the landlord. 

Therefore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, 
you, and each of you, are hereby summoned and required forthwith 
to remove from the said premises, or show cause before me at the 
court house, on the southwest corner of Chambers and Centre streets, 
in the city of New York, on the 4th day of November, 1875, at ten 
o'clock in the forenoon, why the possession of the said premises 
should not be delivered to the said landlord. 



BAWDT HOrrSES. 311 



Witness my hand at the city of New York, this 1st day of Novem- 
ber, 1875. 

DENIS QUINN, 
Justice of the district court of the city of New York, 

for the first Judicial District. 

3. Affidavit upon complaint of owner or tenant of neighboring 

property. 

Insert application as in Form No. 1, ante, p. 309, and then proceed 
as follows: 
State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe, being duly sworn says, that he is the owner (or tenant, 
as the fact may be), of the real property known as No. 
street, in the city of New York, in the immediate neighborhood of 
the other real property known as No. street, in said city, 

which said last mentioned real property is used and occupied by 
Richard Roe as a bawdy house, and house of assignation for lewd 
persons, for purposes of prostitution, and a place of resort for such 
persons, and has been so used and occupied for some time past, and 
that while the said house was so used and occupied, to wit, on the 
day of 187 , this deponent caused a notice to be 

personally served upon the owner (or landlord, or their agent, as the 
case may be) of the said last mentioned property, informing him (or 
them) of the character of the occupation of said house, and requiring 
such owner (landlord or agent, as the case may be) to make applica- 
tion under the statute relative to bawdy houses, to remove said Richard 
Roe from said premises for the cause aforesaid, and that the said parties, 
each and all of them, have neglected to make the application afore- 
said, and have not in good faith or otherwise prosecuted the same, 
although more than five days have elapsed since the personal service 
of said notice aforesaid, and this deponent therefore avails himself 
of the right given by said statute to any owner or tenant of real 
property, in the immediate neighborhood of the property complained 
of, to prosecute in case of such neglect aforesaid. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn before me, this day of ) 

187 . \ 

John Smith, 
Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

4. Summons to be issued on last mentioned affidavit. 

To Richard Roe, and each and every person in possession of the 
premises hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the possession thereof. 
Whereas John Doe has made oath in writing and presented the 
same to me, that he is the owner (or tenant as the fact may be) of the 
real property known as No. street, in the city of New York, 

in the immediate neighborhood of the other real property, known as 
No. street in the said city, which last mentioned real property 

is used and occupied by you, Richard Roe, as a bawdy house and 
house of assignation for lewd persons, for purposes of prostitution, 
and a place of resort for such persons, and has been so used and occu- 
pied for some time past, and that while the said house was so used 



312 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

and occupied, to wit, on the day of the , 187 , the said 

John Doe caused a notice to be personally served upon the owner (or 
landlord, or their agent, as the case may be) "of the said last men- 
tioned property, informing him (or them) of the character of the 
occupation of said house, and requiring such owner (landlord, or 
agent as the case may be) to make application, under the statute 
relative to bawdy houses, to remove you, the said Richard Roe, from 
the said premises for the cause aforesaid, and that the said parties 
each and all of them, have neglected to make the application afore- 
said, and have not in good faith or otherwise prosecuted the same, 
although more than five days have elapsed since the personal service, 
of said notice aforesaid, and that said John Doe therefore availed 
himself of the right given by said statute to any owner or tenant of 
real property in the immediate neighborhood of the property com- 
plained of, to prosecute in case of such neglect aforesaid. 

Therefore, in the name of the people of the state of New York, 
you and each of you are hereby summoned and required forthwith to 
remove from the said premises, or show cause before me, at the court 
house, at the southwest corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in the 
city of New York, on the day of 187 , at ten 

o'clock in the forenoon, why possession of the said premises should 
not be delivered to the landlord. 

"Witness my hand the day of 187 . 

DENIS QUINN, 

Justice of the District Court of the city of New York, 

for the First Judicial District. 



5. Affidavit upon complaint of landlord under the act relating to 
unlawful trades. 

Insert application as in Form No. 1, ante, p. 309, and then pro- 
ceed as follows : 
State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe, being duly sworn, says that he is the landlord of the 
premises hereinafter mentioned ; that on or about the day of 

187 , deponent entered into an agreement with Richard Roe 
as tenant, by the terms of which agreement the said tenant hired 
from deponent as landlord, the dwelling-house situated and known 
as No. street, in the city of New York, for the term of 

years, from the day of 187 , at an agreed ren- 

tal. That the said tenant entered into the occupation of said premi- 
ses, and is now in possession and occupation of the same. That the 
said premises are now used and occupied by the said tenant for an 
illegal trade (" manufacture or other business," state the facts fully, 
so that it may appear to the judicial mind as matter of law that the 
trade, manufacture, or other business is really illegal), contrary to the 
statute in such case made and provided, and that the said tenant 
continues in such illegal use and occupation of said premises, without 
the permission of this deponent, and in violation of said statute. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn to before me, this ) 

day of 187 \ 

John Smith, 
Notary Public N. Y. Co. 



BAWDY HOUSES. S13 



6. Snmmons under the statute as to illegal trades, &c. 

To Richard Roe, tenant, and each and every person in possession of 
the demised premises hereinafter mentioned, or claiming the pos- 
session thereof: 

Whereas, John Doe has made oath in writing, and presented the 
same to me, tliat he is the landlord of the premises hereinafter de- 
scribed, and that he, the said landlord, entered into an agreement 
with you as tenant, on or about the day of 187 , by 

the terms of which said agreement, you hired from him as landlord, 
the dwelling situated and known as No. street, in the 

city of New York, for the term of years from the day of 
187 , at an agreed rental. That you, said tenant, entered into the oc- 
cupation and possession of said premises under said hiring, and that 
you now use and occupy the same for an illegal trade [recite facts in re- 
lation thereto as in affidavit] contrary to the statute in such case made 
and provided, and that you, the said tenant, continue in such illegal 
use and occupation of said premises without the permission of the 
said landlord, and in violation of said statute. Therefore, in the 
name of the people of the state of New York, you are hereby sum- 
moned and required forthwith to remove from the said premises, or 
show cause before me at the court house, on the southwest corner of 
Chambers and Centre streets, in the city of New York, on the day 
of 187 , at ten o'clock in the forenoon, why the posses- 

sion of the said premises should not be delivered to the said land- 
lord. 

Witness my hand at the city of New York, this of 
187 . 

DENIS QUINN, 
Justice of the District Court in the city of New York, 

for the first Judicial District. 



7. Eudorsement upon summons. 

As to this endorsement, see form at pp. 357, 258 (ante), and see 
statute, § 3, p. 188 (ante). 

8. Form of judgment. 

The form of judgment is substantially the same as that given on 
p. 285 (ante), excepting as to the recital of facts. 

9. Form of warrant. 

In preparing the warrant in these proceedings, the form may be 
taken from those at pp. 393, 394, by substituting the facts recited in 
the summons in these particular proceedings, instead of those recited 
in said forms. 
40 



314 LANDLORD AKD TENANT. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

OEETIOEAKI TO REVIEW PROCEEDINGS -AND PRACTICE 
THEREON. 

I. To review proceedings on forcible entry and detainer. 
II. To review summary proceedings. 

I. 

To review proceedings on forcible entry and detainer. 

Certiorari to review proceedings on forcible entry 
and detainer, maybe granted, and the proceedings may 
be removed thereby into the Supreme Court, at any 
time after the finding of the inquisition by the jury of 
inquiry, and before the trial of the traverse of the in- 
quisition by the second jury (Haines v. Backus, 4 
Wend. 213 ; Carter v. Ne'wbold, 7 How. 16G) ; and a 
certiorari will not lie until after inquisition found 
(Haines «. Backus, svpra). The certiorari must be 
allowed by a Justice of the Supreme Court (§ 19, 
ante, p. 180), or by a county judge (1847, p. 324, § 17, 
m How. 181). And the writ will not be allowed unless 
security be given as provided by section 20 of the stat- 
ute {Id. ante, p. 180). The judge is required to annex 
and file the bond on his retarn [to the writ (§ 21, ante, 
p. 181). And if the defendant omits to traverse the in- 
quisition within such time as the court by rule shall 
direct, restitution shall be awarded by the court with 
costs, and if upon the trial of the traverse, the defend- 
ant be found guilty, the court shall also award restitu- 
tion with costs, and in either case the court may au- 
thorize the complainant to prosecute the bond given on 
the allowance of the writ of certiorari (§ 22, [ante, 



CEETIOEAEl TO EEVIEW rnOCEEDINGS. 315 

p. 181). Where tLe proeeedings are removed by cer- 
tiorari into the Supreme Court, and the issue therein 
is ordered to be tried at the circuit, if the complainant 
do not proceed to trial, judgment as in case of non-suit 
will be granted with costs, samp as in ordinary civil 
actions (Tbe People v. Hickox, 3 Hill, 446). And 
where the complainant is successful in the Supreme 
Court he is also entitled to costs as in ordinary civil 
actions (3 Rill, 446 ; 6 How. 178 ; Code, § 318). And 
any party aggrieved by the decision of the Supreme 
Court, may have the decision reviewed by the Court of 
Appeals by writ of error, but not by appeal (Codfe, § 
471 ; 19 ]Sr. T. 584 ; 20 Id. 529 ; 18 Id. 487). 

rditlon for ceiliorari (o rcmorc proceedings. 

To the Honorable the Supreme Court of the state of New Yorlc. 

The Vetition of Richard Roe, respectfully shows to this Honorable 
court, that on or about the day of , 1875, proceedings 

under the statute in re " Forcible Entry and Detainer," were instituted 
by John Doe against your petitioner, before Hon. Justice 

of the Marine Court of tbe city of New York, founded upon the com- 
plaint of the said John Doe, charging your petitioner with a forcible 
entry into and upon certain premises in said proceedings particularly 
described as follows (Here insert description): and with a forcible 
holding out therefrom. 

That on the same day the said justice issued his precept to the 
sheriff of the city and county of New Yorlj, commanding him, accor- 
ding to the statute, to summon twenty-four inliabitants of said city, 
duly qualified as jurors, to appear before said justice ut a time now 
past, as a jury of inquiry into the aforesaid complaint, aud on the 
same day the said justice caused a notice of the issuing of said pre- 
cept tobe served on your petitioner, notifying him of the issuing of the 
precept, and that an inquisition would be held to inquire into the 
alleged forcible entry or detainer as aforesaid, on the day of 
, 1875, before said justice. 

Your petitioner further shows tliat upon the return day, in said no- 
tice named, at the hour and place therein stated, your petitioner ap- 
peared before the said justice by his couns'jl Esq., 
for the purpose of objecting to the jurisdiction of said justice, and 
defending against the allegations contained in the complaint of the 
said John Doe, and that said counsel thereupon made the following 
objections, viz. (State them, although it is unnecessary, l)ecause the 
statute gives the absolute right of removal after inquisition, and be- 
fore the trial upon the traverse tliereto) : which said justice overruled, 
and thereupon the inquiry proceeded, and the jury after being impan- 
elled and swoni, and after evidence was had on the part of both 
parties, made, sigaed, and delivered to the justice, an inquisition, 



316 LANDLOKD AND TEKANT. 

wherein and whereby they found an inquisition, wherein and whereby 
they found, that on the day of , 1875, your petitioner, 

forcibly, unlawfully, and with strong hand, entered into, and expelled 
the said John Doe from the land and premises in such complaint and 
inquisition mentioned, and that the said John Doe then had, and_ now 
has, such a subsisting interest in said lands and tenements, as is re- 
ferred to in the statute, and that the traverse to said inquisition has 
not yet been tried, and your petitioner desires to avail himself of the 
right given to him by statute of removing the trial of the said inquisi- 
tion into this court upon the conditions montioned in said statute. 

Wherefore your petitioner prays that this court grant its writ of 
certiarari, and remove the trial of the said inquisition according to 
the statute in such case made and provided. 

And your petitioner will ever pray. 

RICHARD ROE. 

Dated New York, 187 . 

[TTsual verification.} 

Certiorari to remore proceeding's. 

The people of the state of New York to justice of the 

Marine Court of the city of New York,. Greeting : 

Whereas, we have understood, on the complaint of Richard Roe, 
that lately before you, a certain inquisition was found against him, 
for, &c. (state the findings of the jury). And we being willing for 
certain reasons, that the said inquisition, and ail other proceedings 
concerning the same before you remaining, should be certified and 
returned by you into our Supreme Court of judicature, before our 
justices thereof, do command you that you certify and return the 
same into our justices of the Supreme Court of judicature, with all the 
proceedings thereto appertaining, at the next term of this court, to 
be held at the special term thereof at the court house. New York city, 
on the day of next, so that our said justices 

may further act thereon, as of right and according to law ought to be 
done ; and have then there this writ. 

Witness, Hon. Presiding Justice of the Supreme 

Court at the court house. New York city, this day of 

187 . Wm. Walsh, Clerk. 

(Indorsed.) On the application of Q. F. L., Attorney for Richard 
Roe, and upon the within petition dated the day of 

187 , 1 allow the within writ of certiorari to issue. 

Justice of the Supreme Court. 

Bond of allowance of certiorari. 

(See ante, § 20, p. 180.) 

Know all men by these presents. That, &c. [in the usual form the 
obligee is the complainant ; there must be two sureties, or, in case the 
defendant is absent, three sureties ; penalty not less than one hun- 
dred dollars.] 

The condition of the above obligation is such that if Richard 
Roe shall appear at the return of a certain writ of certiorari, issued 
out of the Supreme Court of this state, tested on the day 

of ^187 , and returnable on the day of 



CEETtOEAEl TO REVIEW PEOCEEDlNaS. 317 



187 , and directed to Justice of the Marine Court 

of the city of New York, commanding him to certify the in- 
quisition, and all other proceedings concerning a certain forcible 
entry alleged to have been made into certain lands nnd premises of 
John Doe, the obligee above named, by the said Kiohard Roe; and if 
the said Richard Roe shall answer to the inquisition found against 
him as aforesaid, and abide such order and judgment as the said 
Supreme Court shall make in the premises, and pay all costs that shall 
be awarded against Mm, then the above obligation to be void, other- 
wise to remain in full force and virtue. 

Signed, sealed, and delivered ) Signatures and seals of obligors, 

in presence of j 

[Add acknowledgment and affidavit of sureties in the usual form ; 
also approval of sureties as follows :] 

"I approve of the sureties in the above bond, and of the sufficiency 
thereof. 

Justice of the Supreme Court." 

Betnrn of justice to certiorari. 

(See ante, § 21, p. 181.) 

The answer or return of , Justice of the Marine Court 

of the city of New York, to the writ of certiorari hereto annexed. 

By virtue of, and in obedience to the writ of certiorari, hereto an- 
nexed, and to me directed, I do hereby certify, and return to the Jus- 
tices of the Supreme Court, that on the day of , last, 
the complaint of John Doe of the city of New York duly verified, was 
presented to me; which complaint, with the affidavit verfiying the 
same, is hereto annexed. 

That I did thereupon &c. [proceed in the same manner, and make 
return of all the proceedings down to the time of the service of the 
writ of certiorari]. 

All of which I do hereby certify and return, as within I am com- 
manded. 

In testimony whereof, I have hereinto set my hand and seal, this 
day of , in the year 187 . 

Justice of the Marine Court. 

Traverse in Supi-eme Court. 

(See ante, §§ 21, 23, p. 181.) 
(Same substantially as Id. p. 206.) 



II. 

To review summary proceedings. 

Summary proceedings (except in cases before jus- 
tices of the peace) can be reviewed only by certiorari to 
tlie Supreme Court (The People v. Willis, 5 Abb. 205 ; 



318 lANDLOED AKD TENANT. 

The People «. Bigelow, 11 How. 83 ; Romaine «. Kin- 
shimer, 2 Hilt. 520, disapproving Davis v. Hudson, 5 
Abh. 61). Tile office of the writ, is to correct errors of 
a judicial character (The People v. Board of Health, 
33 Barh. 344 ; The People n. Yan Alstyne, 32 Id. 131). 
And the Supreme Court has jurisdiction to award a 
certiorari, not only to inferior courts, but to persons in- 
vested by the legislature with power to decide on the 
property or rights of the citizen, even in cases where 
they are authorized by statute finally to hear and de- 
termine, if the jurisdiction be not taken away by ex- 
press words (Lawton v. Commissioners, &c. 2 Gai. 179 ; 
Le Roy ». Mayor, &c., 20 Jolms. 430 ; Lynde o. Noble, 

20 Id. 80 ; 16 Id. 8 ; 23 Wend. "ill). It is not to be 
allowed before the final adjudication below (Lynde b. 
Noble, supra ; Delvin «. Piatt, 11 AUb. Pr. 398) ; and 
the granting of the certiorari is in the discretion of the 
court (The People v. Supervisors, &c., 15 Wend. 198 ; 
The People v. Mayor, 2 Hill, 9 ; Id. 14 ; People ». 
Mayor, &c., 5 Barb. 43 ; People v. City of Rochester, 

21 Id. 656 ; People v. Stilwell, 19 N. T. 531 ; and see 
1 Hill, 195 ; 33 Barb. 344). 

At common law, and generally, the certiorari sus- 
pended the proceedings of the officer to whom it was 
directed (13 Wend. 664 ; Launitz v. Dixon, 5 Sandf. 
249). And in the case of summary proceedings under 
the statute to recover the possession of laud, the rule 
has been altered so far as the proceedings upon the ap- 
plication to the justice are concerned. Hence when a 
certiorari is issued it suspends the effect of the judg- 
ment of the justice, In every collateral matter, and in 
everything else except what remains to be done by the 
justice himself. It does not prevent him from issuing 
his warrant, but this is all (Launitz v. Dixon, supra). 
And the statute declares that the certiorari to review 
proseedings to dispossess shall not stay or suspend such 
proceedings (§ 47, ante, p. 193), And a motion to 
quash will ba entertained where the writ has been is- 



CEETIOEAEI TO EEVIEW PEOCEEDINGS. 319 

sued in an improper case (5 How. 378 ; 4 Cow. 73 ; 12 
Wend. 241 ; 5 Abb. Pr. 194; 15 Wend. 198 ; 1 Hill, 
195 : 2 Idj. 9). And the magistrate to whom the writ 
is directed, may test its regularity by not obeying its 
mandates (5 How. 378). 

The writ must be retTirnable on the first day of the 
next general term, and the motion to quasli should be 
there heard, and on a statutory certiorari under section 
47, to review summary proceedings, the evidence should 
be returned, and the court may review its sufficiency, 
as well as questions of jurisdiction (Niblo v. Post, 25 
Wend. 280, 311, following Anderson v. Prindle, 23 Id. 
616, overruling Birdsall ». Phillips, 17 Id. 464 ; Prin- 
dle 0. Anderson, 19 Id. 391 ; Simpson v. Rhinelanders, 
20 Id. 103 ; Wilson x. Green, Id. 189 ; Morewood v. 
Hollister, 6 N. Y. 309 ; 5 Id. S83). And the fact that 
summary proceedings are conducted in a harsh and op- 
pressive manner, and that the tenant may not have had 
actual notice of them are not grounds upon which the 
proceedings can be reversed on certiorari (The People 
■e. Simpson, 37 Barb. 432). The general term on such 
certiorari may not on^y reverse the proceedings of the 
court below but may order restitution (§ 48, ante, p. 
194), but restitution should not be awarded to the ten- 
ant if his term has expired before the judgment of re- 
versal was rendered (Chretien v. Doney, 1 iV. Y. 420). 
And on the reversal of such proceeding, the parties are 
restored to the position occupied before the proceedings 
were instituted entitling the plaintiff, however, by the 
express provisions of the statute (§ 49, ante, p. 194), to 
his action for damages ; and the ground of reversal is 
wholly immaterial (Hayden v. The Florence Machine 
Co., 54 if. Y. 221). 

Costs. 

As to costs in these proceedings (see §§ 318 and 471 
of the Code, and Laws of 1854, ch. 270, p. 592). 



320 LAKDLOED AKD TENANT. 



The rule in England as lo the remoTal of conyictions by certiorari. 

In England certiorari is a writ issuing out of the 
crown office in the name of the king, or queen regnant, 
and tested by the chief justice, which the court of 
Queen's Bench, by virtue of its superintending author- 
ity over all courts of inferior criminal jurisdiction in 
the kingdom, has power to award, for the purpose of 
procuring an inspection of their proceedings. No writ 
of error lies on summary convictions, and therefore 
the writ of certiorari is the only mode by which a re- 
vision of these proceedings by the Superior Court can 
be obtained. It requires no special law to authorize 
this writ ; for it is a consequence of all inferior juris- 
dictions of record, to have their proceedings removable, 
for the purpose of being examined by the court of 
Queen's Bench. In this respect the proceeding by 
certiorari differs from the right of appeal ; for, where- 
as the latter does not exist, unless created by express 
provision, the other lies of course, unless expressly 
taken away by statute {Foley on Convictions, pp. 277, 
278). 

HForm of petition for certiorari to review snmmary proceedings. 

To the Honorable the Suprelne Court of the State of New Tork. 

The petition of Richard Roe respectfully shows to this Honorable 
court, that on or about the day of 187 , proceedings 

under the statute to recover the possession of land in certain cases, 
were instituted against your petitioner by John Doe, before 

Esq., Justice of the Court, on the grotind of 

(state the ground), and that on the return of the summons in said 
proceeding, your petitioner filed an affidavit denying all (or if not all, 
which) of the facts on which the summons was issued ; and that the 
said justice then and there adjourned the trial of the issue raised in 
said proceeding until on which said last named day 

the said justice proceeded with the trial of said issue, and after hear- 
ing the testimony adduced, decided in* favor of the said John Doe, 
and issued his warrant to dispossess your petitioner from said prem- 
ises. That on said trial the said justice admitted testimony not 
legally admissible, and rejected testimony that ought to have been 
received, that is to say (state the facts) ; and that said decision was 
contrary to and against the evidence adduced before said justice, and 



CERTIOEABI TO REVIEW PROCEEDINGS. 321 

the said justice committed other errors of law and fact in the course 
of said trial, and of the proceedings connected therewith (state the 
errors in detail), as will appear on the face of said proceedings, and, 
by reason of tlie matters aforesaid, your petitioner has been greatly 
injured by being dispossessed from said premises, and otherwise to his 
great damage. Wherefore your petitioner prays that a writ of certiorari 
may issue, directed to the said justice, commanding him to return 
said proceedings, with the proofs and exhibits therein, to this Honor- 
able court, to the end that the said errors may be corrected, and justice 
be done. And your petitioner will ever pray. 
Dated New York, 187 . 

[Usual verification.] 

Order directing certiorari to issue to rcTiew summary proceedings. 

At a special term of the Supreme Court of 
the state of New York, held at the City 
Hall, in the city of New York, on 
day of 187 . 

Present Hon. Justice. 



The People ex rel. Richaed Roe, 

V. 

John Doe. 



On reading and filing the petition of Richard Roe, praying that a 
c ertiorari issue to Esquire, Justice of 

Court, to certify certain proceedings had before him, to recover the 
possession of certain premises, described in the affidavit and summons 
annexed to said petition, as follows: (describe premises). 

It is therefore, on motion of attorney and of counsel 

for said Richard Roe, hereby ordered that a certiorari for the purpose 
aforesaid, issue to the said Esq., the Justice aforesaid, 

commanding him to certify and return to this court the said proceed- 
ings and ' the adjudication by him thereon had, and all proofs and 
exhibits in any manner relating thereto. 



Writ of certiorari to review summary proceedings. 

The people of the state of New York to Justice of 

the Marine Court of the city of New York, send greeting: 
We being willing for certain reasons to be certified of certain 
proceedings lately instituted and had before you between John Doe 
as landlord, and Richard Roe as tenant, upon application of, the said 
John Doe to remove the said Richard Roe from certain premises in 
the city of New York, under the statute to recover the possession of 
land in certain cases, for holding over and continuing in the posses- 
sion thereof, without the permission of the said landlord, after the 
expiration of the term of the said tenant as is alleged, in which such 
proceedings were had upon the application aforesaid before you, that 
an adjudication was made thereon against the said Richard Roe as it 
is said: Do command you that you certify and return all and 
41 



322 LANDLORD AND TEITAITT. 

singular the original proceedings and adjudication aforesaid, and all 
things in any manner appertaining or relating thereto, to our Supreme 
Court of judicature, at the Court House, City Hall park, in the city 
of New York, on the day of 187 , under 

your hand, as fully and amply as the same remain before you, so that 
our said Supreme Court may further cause to be done thereupon what 
of right and according to law ought to be done, and have you then 
and there this writ. 

Witness, Hon. Presiding Justice of our said 

Supreme Court at the Court House in the city of New Tork, the day 
of 187 . 

By the Court. 

Wm. Walsh, 
'Endorsed.) Clerk. 

Allowed 187 . 

Justice. 

Eetnrn of justice. 

The answer or return of , Justice, to the writ of certiorari 

hereto annexed is as follows: ' 

In obedience to the said writ, to me directed, I do hereby certify 
and return. 

[Here state all the facts, with the adjudication thereon ; annex all 
the original papers or copies of them.] 

All of which is respectfully submitted. New York, , 

187 . 

Justice. 

[See form of justice's return at pp. 335, 336, post.} 

Order of I'erersal of summary proceedings. 

At a General Term of the Supreme Court, 

of the state of New York, held at the 

City Hall, in the city of New York, on 

the day of , a. d. 187 . 

Present Hon. , Justices. 



The People ex rel. Richakd Rob j 
John Doe. | 



The certiorari herein to ' Esq., Justice of the 

District Court, in the city of New ,York, for the judicial dis- 

trict, coming on for argument in its order on the calendar, and after 
hearing , counsel for the relator herein, and 

, counsel for the respondent, 
It is hereby ordered that the judgment and adjudication of the said 
, justice, be, and the same is hereby in all things 
reversed, with costs. — And it is further ordered, that 

, the relator herein, be restored and put into possession of the 
premises from which he was dispossessed under the warrant issued by 
said justice upon the said judgment hereby reversed, said premises be- 



OEETIOEAEt TO EEVIEW' PEOOEEDINGS. 323 



ing described as follows : " the rooms on the floor, in the 

dwelling known as No. street, ia said city of New 

York, and for that purpose it is ordered that a writ of restitution 
issue, directed to the sheriff of the city and county of New York, 
commanding said sheriff forthwith to restore the said relator to the 
immediate possession of the said premiaes. 

Writ of restitution in summary proceedings. 

The people of the state of New York, to the sheriff of the city and 

county of New York, send greeting : 

Whereas, Richard Roe, of said city and county of New York, by 
certain proceedings, had before Esq., Justice of the 

District Court in the city of New York, for the judicial district, 

under the provisions of article second, title ten, of chapter eight, of 
part third, of the Revised Statutes, entitled " summary proceedings to 
recover the possession of land in other cases," was removed from the 
possession of the rooms on the floor of the dwelling, 

known as No. street, in the city of New York, and sit- 

uate in said street, and which proceedings we caused to be removed 
into our Supreme Court of Judicature, by our writ of certiorari ; and 
whereupon it was considered in our said court, after argument before 
our said justices, that the said Richard Roe should be restored to the 
possession of the said premises, whereof the said Richard Roe is con- 
victed, as appears to us of record. — Now, therefore, we command you 
forthwith to restore the said Richard Roe to the full possession of the 
aforesaid described premises; and how, and in what manner you shall 
have executed this our writ, make appear to our Supreme Court, at 
the city and county of New York, on the day of , a. d. 

187 , and have then and there this writ. 
Witness Hon. , Presiding Justice of the Supreme 

Court, at the City Hall, in the city of New York, this day 

of , 187 . 

[l. s.] Wm. Walsh, Clerk. 

, Attorney for relator. 
(Endorsed.) 

AUowed, 187 . 

Justice. 



324 LANDLOiBl) AWb TENANT. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

EEVIEW BY APPEAL OF STJMMAET PHOCEEDINGS BE- 
FOEB JirSTICES OF THE PEACE. 

I. The verdict of the jury or decision of the magistrate to be en- 
tered in the justice's docket. 
n. Form of warrant by justice of the peace. 
[in. Eeview of adjudication upon appeal by the county court with the 
forms required upon such appeal. 

I. 

The verdict of the jury or decision of the magistrate 
to he entered in the justice's docJcet. 

In case of prooeedicgs before a justice of the peace 
under the statute, the justice shall enter the findings 
of the jury, or in case no jury is called according to 
the provisions pf the statute, his final decision upon 
the application for a warrant, in his docket, and ren- 
der judgment therefor, and include in such judgment 
costs in such proceeding to the prevailing party at the 
same rate of fees now allowed by law in civil actions 
in courts of justices of the peace, and limited in like 
manner, and in the warrant for delivery of possession, 
or by execution issued by him, the justice shall direct 
the collection of such costs. 
, The justices' docket may be in the following form : 

I Form of justice's docket, i 

Before Esq., Justice of the Peace. 



John Dob, landlord, 



RiCHABD Rob, tenant. 



Summary proceedings to 

remove Richard Roe, 

tenant of premises No. 

street, in the 

town of 



1875. Nov, 1. Landlord presents oath in writing under the act. 



REVIEW BY AiPPEAL. 325 

1875. Nov. 1. Issued summons returnable Nov. 4, 1875, at 1 p. m. 
at my office. 

" " 4. Tenant appeared and filed counter affidavit, and de- 
manded jury trial, and paid fees $ , and 
proceedings adjourned for trial, till Nov. 6, 1875, 
1 p. M. 

" " 4. Issued precept for jury, and delivered same to con- 
stable Smith. 

" " 6. Proceedings tried by a jury, ■who rendered a verdict 
for the landlord. Plaintiff's costs [here state the 
costs], judgment for possession of the premises 
claimed, with $ costs, 

" " 6. Issued warrant to Constable Smith, for the delivery 
of possession to plaintijffi, and also to collect the 
said judgment. 



II. 

Form of warrant hy justice of the peace. 

■the warrant to be issued by justices of the peace in these proceed- 
ings may be in the forms suggested at pages 393, 394; adding at 
their conclusion, and just above the attestation clause, a direction 
to collect the costs in the form following: "And you are also 
hereby commanded, in the name of the people of the state of 
New York, to levy and collect the sum of dollars, for the costs 

of the said proceedings, out of the goods and chattels of the said 
tenant (Eichard Eoe), excepting such as are by law exempt from 
execution, and to bring the money which you shall collect within 
sixty days from the date hereof, before me at my office, in the town 
of in the county of New York, to satisfy the 

same." 

Given under my hand at the town, county, and state aforesaid, 
this day of 187 . 

Justice of the Peace. 

III. 

Meview of adjudication upon appeal, with the forms 
required upon such appeal. 

The review by appeal to the county court of the 
county in which the proceeding was had, can only be 
had in the case of a proceeding before a justice of the 
peace (see § 51 of the statute, ante, p. 195, and see cer- 
tiorari, Chapter XXXV. ante, p. 317). The statute 
provides that the proceedings before said justice may 
be removed by appeal to the county court of the 



326 LAITDLOED AND TENAKT. 

county, in the same manner and with like effect, and 
upon like security as appeals from the judgment of 
justices of the peace in civil actions, except that the 
decision of such county judge shall be an affirmance or 
reversal of such judgment, and be final (§ 52 of the 
statute, ante, p. 195). But in addition to the security 
for such judgment as required by law in case of such 
appeal, in order to stay the issuing of the warrant or 
execution there shall, in case of appeal by the tenant, 
be security also given for the payment of all rent accru- 
ing or to accrue upon said premises, subsequent to the 
said application to such justice {Id.). 

No appeal under the act is allowed unless such se- 
curity for said judgment shall be given and approved 
by the judge at the time of allowing such appeal, and 
served on the justice with the affidavit of appeal {Id. 
% 53, ante, p. 195). The section just cited, provides that 
the security shall be approved of by the judge, but that 
means when the proceedings are before a justice of the 
peace, it may be approved by him. 

The notice of appeal must be in writing stating the 
grounds thereof, and must be served within twenty 
days after the judgment is rendered. 

The statute in regard to appeals from justices of the 
peace is contained in the Code (§§ 351 to 371, both in- 
clusive), and is as follows : 

Existing laws repealed and 'this cliapter substituted. 

Code, part of § 351. All statutes now in force provid- 
ing for the review of judgments in civil actions, rendered 
by courts of justices of the peace * by the municipal 
court of the city of Brooklyn, and by the justices' 
courts of cities, and regulating the practice in relation 

* The Marine Court and District Courts in the city of Kew York, 
are omitted from the section to prevent confusion, the remedy for er- 
rors committed by the justices of those courts in summary proceed- 
ings being by certioraii to the Supreme Court and not by appeal (see 
Chapter XXXV., mte^ p. 317). 



EEVIEW BT APPEAL. 327 

to such review are repealed ; and hereafter, the only 
mode of reviewing such judgments shall be an appeal, 
as prescribed by this chapter. 

By what courts judgments are to be review ed. 

Code, part of § 352. In the city of Buffalo, the ap- 
peals from the courts of justices of said city shall be to 
the Superior Court of said city. When rendered by 
any of the other courts enumerated in section 351, the 
appeal shall be to the county court of the county where 
the judgment was rendered. 

The note to section 351, is also applicable to this section, and the 
provision for a new trial in the county court is omitted because inap- 
plicable to these proceedings for the decision of the county judge on 
appeals from judgments in summary proceedings is by statute required 
to be only an affirmance or reversal of the judgment, and is declared 
to be final (see § 53 of statute, ante, p. 195). The appellate jurisdic- 
tion in these proceedings is merely of errors in the court below ; the 
judgment is merely affirmed or reversed, and the whole proceedings 
are like those formerly had on certiorari (Pruyn v. Tyler, 18 Mow. 331 ; 
Whitney «. Bayard, 2 Sandf. 634). 

Notice of appeal to state g^ronnds tliereof. 

Code, § 353. The appellant shall, within twenty 
days after judgment, serve a notice of appeal, stating 
the grounds upon which the appeal is founded. If the 
judgment is rendered upon process, not personally 
served, and the defendant did not appear, he shall 
have twenty days, after personal notice of the judg- 
ment, to serve the notice of appeal provided for in this 
and the next section. 

Must specify the grounds. 

The notice of appeal should clearly specify the errors relied on for 
reversal (1 Hilt. 73, 199; Id. 893; Id. 537; 6 All. 183; 15 How. 33; 
16 Id. 471), and although the notice of appeal must be served within 
twenty days after the judgment (1 Code i2. 54; 7 How. 108), the ob- 
jection that the service was not made in time, must be by motion to 
iismiss (3 E. D. Smith, 139). j 



328 LANDLOBD AISTD TENANT. 

Form of notice of appeal. 

Before Esq., Justice of the Peace. 



John Dob, as landlord, 

V. 

Richard Eob, as tenant. 



To the said justice, and to John Doe, the landlord above referred to, 

Gent. 

Take notice that the tenant above named hereby appeals to the 
county court of county, from the judgment rendered in 

favor of said landlord and against said tenant, in the proceedings 
tried before said justice, on the day of 187 , -where- 

in John Doe as landlord was the applicant for the possession of the 
premises known as No. street in the town of 

in the county of in the state of New York, and in which 

Richard Roe was the tenant, and that the following are the grounds 
of such appeal [here state with particularity the grounds of appeal in 
detail]. 

Dated 187 

Tenant. 
By John Fbkguson. 
his attorney. 
No. street, 

Town of 

county. 

[The statute in reference to these appeals speaks of an "affida- 
vit for appeal " (vide § 53, ante, p. 195), as if to require such 
affidavit, with the notice ; but the explanation to this probably is that 
by the Revised Statutes (2 B. S. 358) an appeal from a judgment ren- 
dered by a justice of the peace in a civil action was not of course, and 
was effected only by the presentation by the aggrieved party to a 
justice of the Supreme Court of an " affidavit " setting forth his ground 
of appeal as upon certiorari ; and if the judge deemed the alleged 
ground sufficient, he endorsed on the affidavit an allowance of the appeal. 
By the Code this' mode of appeal was changed, and the only mode now 
recognized is that prescribed by § 351 (ante, p. 326). This provision 
was no doubt overlooked at the time the reference to an affidavit was 
made in § 53.] 

The right to appeal under the Code is absolute, while under the 
former rule it was not. 

Service of notice of appeal. Undertaking to be given. 

Code, part of § 354. The notice of appeal must, 
within the same time, be served on the justice person- 
ally, if living and within the county, or on his clerk, if 
there be one, and on the respondent, personally, or by 
leaving it at his residence with some person of suitable 
age and discretion ; or in case the respondent is not a 



REVIEW BY APPEAL. 329 

resident of such county, or can not after due diligence 
be found therein, in the same manner on the attorney or 
agent, if any, who is a resident of such county, who 
appeared for the respondent on the trial ; and if neither 
the respondent nor such agent or attorney can be found 
in the county, the notice may be served on the re- 
spondent, by leaving it with the clerk of the appellate 
court ; and the appellant must, at the time of the ser- 
vice of the notice of appeal on the justice, or on his 
clerk, as herein provided, pay to such justice or clerk, 
the costs of the action included in the judgment, to- 
gether with two dollars costs of the return, which shall 
be included in the judgment for costs on reversal ; and 
the appellant shall also execute, on the appeal, a 
written undertaking on his part, with one or more 
sufficient sureties, to the effect that the appellant will 
pay all costs, disbursements, and extra costs awarded 
against him in the court below, if such judgment shall 
be affirmed by the appellate court, on such appeal, to- 
gether with all costs and damages which may be awarded 
against him thereon ; such sureties to justify in double 
the amount specified in the undertaking, such under- 
taking and the sufficiency of the sureties to be 
approved by the justice of the court below, or one of 
the judges of the Court of Common Pleas ; or the appel- 
lant may deposit with the clerk of the Court of Com- 
mon Pleas the costs, disbursements, and extra costs 
included in the judgment in the court below, and the 
sum of fifteen dollars, to meet any costs that may be 
awarded against him in such appeal ; the undertaking, 
when executed and a,pproved, to be filled with the 
clerk of ihe Court of Common Pleas ; the amount so de- 
posited shall be repaid by said clerk to the appellant, 
if he succeed on the appeal ; and in case the judgment 
be affirmed, the said clerk shall, after-execution is 
issued, pay over the amount so '^deposited, to the 
respondent, which shall be credited on the execution 

issued' on the judgment of affirmance, to the extent 
43 



330 LATSTDLOED AKD TEITANT. 

thereof, and the balance, if any, on the execution 
issued on the judgment appealed from. 

[The note to § 351 is applicable to this section. The reference to 
the Common Pleas in the part of this section retained evidently refers 
to appeals from the Marine and District Courts in the city of New 
York. As to approval of undertakings on appeal to the county court, 
see § 356, post, p. 331.] 

SevTice of notice of appeal. 

Where the respondents are joint owners, service of the notice of 
appeal on one will suffice for all (Geisler v. Acosta, 9 N. Y. ^'it ; Man- 
deville b. Reed, 13 Ahh. Pr. 173). And unless the costs and return 
fee are first paid, the justice can not be compelled to make a return 
(Aldrich v. Ketchum, 13 N. T. Leg. Obs. 319; Van Heusen v. Kirk- 
patrick, 5 Eow. 432; S. C. 1 Code B. (iV. S.) 74; Bray v. Redman, 6 
Cal. 387). If the non-payment of the fee is the reason why the re- 
turn is not made, that fact is ground for dismissing the appeal (Van 
Heusen v. Kirkpatrick, supra). If the justice has made his return 
without payment of his costs and fee, that fact is no ground for dis- 
missing the appeal (Bray v. Redman, 6 Gal. 387 ; Van Heusen v. 
Kirpatrick, supra). 

2. Security upon appeal to county court without stay of proceedings. 

Before Esq., Justice of the Peace. 



1 

In the summary proceedings where- 
in John Dob is landlord 
and 
Richard Rob is tenant. 

"Whereas on the day of 187 , in proceedings 

under the statute in relation to summary proceedings to recover the 
possession of land, John Doe as landlord recovered a judgment against 
Richard Roe as tenant, for the possession of the premises known as 
street, in the town of in the county of and 

state of New York, with $ costs. And the above named ap- 

pellant, feeling aggrieved thereby, has appealed therefrom to the 
county court of the county of 

Now, therefore, we, Richard Roe, of No. street in the 

town of county of New York, and John Smith, of 

No. street in said town do hereby, pursuant to the 

statute in such case made and provided, undertake that the said ap- 
pellant will pay all costs, disbursements, and extra costs awarded 
against him in the court below, if such judgment shall be affirmed, or 
if the appeal be dismissed, together with all costs and damages which 
may be awarded against the said appellant thereon; and do also un- 
dertake that if judgment be rendered against the appellant, and exe- 



EEVIEW BY APPEAL. 331 

cution thereon be returned unsatisfied, in whole or in part, we will pay 
the amount unsatisfied. 

Dated, the day of 187 . 

RICHARD ROE. 
JOHN SMITH. 
AffldaTit of surety. 

County of New York, ss. 

John Smith, being duly sworn, doth depose and say, that he re- 
sides at No. street, in the town of in the 
county of in the state of New York, and is a house- 
holder (or freeholder) therein; that he is worth the sum of 
dollars, over and above all his debts and liabilities, and exclusive of 
property exempt by law from execution. 



Sworn to before me, &c. 



JOHN SMITH. 



s 

Acknowledgment. 

County of New York, ss. 

On this day of 187 , before me per- 

sonally came Richard Roe and John Smith, to me personally known to 
be the same persons described in, and who executed the foregoing in- 
strument, and they severally acknowledged that they executed the 
same. 

3. Security upon appeal for the purpose of staying proceeiings, 

(See § 53, of statute, ante, p. 195.) 

This form is the same as the preceding one with the addition of the 
following condition : And we further undertake and promise that we 
will pay all the rent that has accrued or may accrue upon said prem- 
ises mentioned, and described in said proceedings, subsequent to the 
said application to said justice. 

Witness our hands this day of 187 . 

RICHARD ROE. 
JOHN SMITH. 

The usual justification of the surety as to his qualifications and ac- 
knowledgment of execution by the parties are to be added. When the 
undertaking is to stay the warrant, the justice must be guided as to 
the number of the sureties, and the amounts in which they must justify, 
by the amount of the annual rents, and the probable time that will 
elapse before a decision on the appeal can be obtained, and the under- 
tabang should be proved or acknowledged (Benedicts Pr. pp. 703, 704, 
5th ed.). 

Form of undertaking. 

§ 356. The security shall be a written undertaking, 
executed by one or more sufficient sureties, approved 
by the county judge, or by the court below, to the 
effect that if judgment be rendered against the appel- 
lant, and execution thereon be retui;ned unsatisfied in 



33^ LANDLORD AND TEKAN*. 

whole or in part, the sureties will pay the amount un- 
satisfied. 

[As to form of undertaking, vide pp. 330, 331, §§ 52, 58 of statute, 
ante, p. 195. "■ 

Errors and omissions. 

A misstatement of the date of judgment in an appeal bond is fatal 
(3 Wend. 436) ; it is erroneous, however, to dismiss an appeal because 
the bond omits the date (2 Wend. 292) ; and an undertaking which 
substantially conforms to the above section is sufflcieat (31 N. T. 350), 
and an appeal without an undertaking is a nulity (88 Ba/rb. 338). 

tExecntion, how stayed. 

§ 357. The delivery of the undertaking to the court 
below shall stay the issuing of execution ; or if it have 
been issued, the service of a copy of the undertaking, 
certified by the court below, upon the oflScer holding 
the execution, shall stay further proceedings thereon. 

Effect of appeal and extent of stay. 

The undertaking stays all further proceedings, but does not affect 
those already had (2 E. B. Smith, 259). And the provision in relation 
to summary proceedings to recover the possession of land which au- 
tborizes such proceedings, when instituted before a justice of the 
peace, to be removed by appeal to the county court, in the same man- 
ner and with the like effect, as appeals from the judgments of justices 
of the peace in civil actions, and which directs, that in case of appeal 
by the tenant, in order to stay the issuing of a warrant or execution, se- 
curity shall also be given for the payment of all rent accruing, or to 
accrue upon the premises subsequent to the application to the justice, 
does not apply — so far as relates to a stay — to proceedings instituted 
against a tenant solely on the ground that he is holding over after the 
expiration of his term. That section of the statute does not create a 
right to stay the issuing of a warrant in a case where it did not pre- 
viously exist, but it merely provides that in order to exercise the right 
to stay, in cases where it previously existed, security shall be given as 
therein prescribed, and an appeal to the county court, taken by virtue 
of the act of 1849, of itself, merely transfers the proceedings to the 
county court for the purpose of review, but does not affect the power 
of the justice to issue a warrant to enforce his judgment, and a war- 
rant so issued, being regular and valid, and the landlord having been 
put into possession of the premises by virtue of it, he is justified in 
using so much force as is necessary to defend himself and maintain 
his possession. And in an action against him by the tenant, for an 
alleged assault and battery committed in repelling the attempt of the 
tenant to re-enter, the only question for the jury is whether the de- 
fendant used an excess of force. And even though it be assumed that 
a justice of the peace has not power to issue a warrant to dispossess a 
tenant after an appeal by the latter to the county court, yet his judg- 



EEVlEW Bt APPEAL. 33B 

ment until reversed or set aside, is of force as an adjudication, and it 
determines tliat the lease has expired, and the landlord is entitled to 
the possession of the premies. The fact that an appeal has been taken 
does not afiEect the conclusive nature of the judgment as a bar, while 
it remains unreversed. It is, therefore, erroneous to charge that the 
judgment ceased to be res adjudicata, when the appeal was perfected. 
Where the landlord and owner in fee, claiming that the term has ex- 
pired, enters without process and without force, during the tempor- 
ary absence of the tenant, the latter has no right to take the law into 
his own hands and attempt to dislodge the former by force. The 
landlord, being in the actual possession, has a right to maintain it, 
and to use force, if necessary, for that purpose (Sage v. Harpending, 49 
Bari. 166). 

In case of death of justice, undertaking to be filed. 

Code, § 358. Where, by reason of the death of a 
justice of the peace, or his removal from the county, 
or any other cause, the undertaking on the appeal can 
not be delivered to him, it shall be filed with the clerk 
of the appellate court, and notice thereof given to the 
respondent, or his attorney or agent, as provided in 
§ 354 ; it shall thereupon have the effect as if delivered 
to the justice. 

Filing notice of appeal instead of service. 

Code, § 359. When, by reason of the death of a 
justice of the peace, or his absence from the county, or 
any other cause, the notice or appeal can not be served 
as provided by § 353, it may be served by leaving the 
same with the clerk of the connty. 

Keturn, when and how made and compelled. 

Code, § 360. The court below shall thereupon, after 
ten days, and within thirty days after service of the. 
notice of appeal, make a return to the appellate court 
of the testimony, proceedings, and judgment, and file 
the same in the appellate court. The return may be 
compelled by attachment. But no justice of the peace 
shall be bound to make a retarn unless the fees pre- 
scribed by the last section of this chapter be paid on 



S34 



LANDLORD AKD TENAM"!. 



the service of the notice of appeal ; provided, however, 
that in cases where the amount for which judgment is 
demanded by either party in his pleadings in the court 
below exceeds fifty dollars, or where the value of the 
property recovered, as appears from the verdict or 
judgment, shall exceed fifty dollars, the testimony 
need not be returned ; but in such case the court be- 
low shall return the process by which the action was 
commenced, with the proof of service thereof, and the 
pleadings or copies thereof, the proceedings and judg- 
ment, together with a brief statement of the amount 
and nature of the claim or claims litigated by the 
respective parties, and in all cases the notice of appeal 
shall be annexed to the return ; but in cases where the 
appellant shall, in accordance with the provisions of 
§ 352 of this act, state in the notice of appeal, that such 
appeal is taken upon questions of law only, the court 
below shall return to the appellate court the testimony, 
proceedings, and judgment. 

[It is evident that on appeals from judgments In summary proceed- 
ings the testimony must be returned -without any regard to the amount 
recovered, or the vaUie of the property in controversy. The excep- 
tion made in cases where the recovery exceeds fifty dollars relates only 
to ordinary civil actions in which new trials may be had in the county 
court, and on that account the portion of § 353 referred to in the 
above section (360) was not printed herein.] 

The return, what to contain. 

The return should set forth the day whereon judgment was ren- 
dered, the date of thetrial, the day issue was joined, the adjournments, 
to what time, and the date when the process was returnable (Peters 
v. Diossy, 3 jEJ. D. Smith, 115). The pleadings as well as the evidence, 
must be contained in the return (Roulston v. McClelland, 3 Id. 60). 
See, also, Smith v. Van Brunt {Id. 584). All the testimony received 
by the justice on the trial must be contained in the return to an appeal 
under the Code (Orcutt v. Cahill, 34 iV. T. 578 ; Ogden «. Sanderson, 
3 B. D. Smith, 167. See, however, Low v. Payne, i N. T.; 4 Gomst. 
347; Prosser a. Secor, 5 Barb. 607). The return of the court below 
must contain all the testimony and proceedings. Where the return is 
not sufficient to present the whole case, the parties must call for a 
further return (McCafferty «. Kelly, 3 Sandf. 637 ; Belshaw v. Colie, 
3 Code B. 184). 

The appeal will be dismissed where no notice of appeal is attached 
to the return (Gabre v. Sturgas, 1 Bilt. 160 ; Bush «. Dennison, 14 
Baw. 307). Unless the contrary distinctly appears, it will be pre- 



REVIEW BY APPEAL. 335 



sumed, where the justice's return sets forth evidence in detail, that 
the whole testimony is given ; it will not be presumed that the justice 
had evidence before him on the trial which he does not embody in the 
return (Orcutt v. Cahill, 24 N. Y. 578; Hance v. Cayuga and Susque- 
hanna Kailroad Co., 36 W. T. 438; Calligan v. Mix, 13 IJow. 495; the 
head-note in this case is incorrect ; 13 Sow. 96, corrects it. See, how- 
ever, Low ». Payne, 4 iV". Y., 4 Const. 347; Prosser v. Secor, 5 Barb. 
607). The return of the justice must show what judgment was 
rendered; unless this is done the appeal will be dismissed, with 
costs (Woodside ». Pender, 2 E. D. Smith, 390; conf/ra, Klenck ». De- 
Forest, 3 Code B. 185). 

If the return is lost, the parties may consent that the justice sign 
the copy submitted, and add the pleadings, or obtain a new return. 
Unless the papers are properly submitted, the appeal will be dis- 
missed (Smith V. Van Brunt, 2 E. B. Simth, 534). 

Impeaching return. 

The justice's return is conclusive as to the statements contained in 
it; it cau not be impeached or contradicted by affidavit. The only 
way that the return can be corrected is bv motion to the court (Spence 
«. Beck, 1 Hilt. 376; Kilpatrick v. Carr, 3 Abb. 117; Mitchell «. Men- 
kle, 1 Eilt. 143; Kelly v. Brower, Id. 514), and the averment that it 
is untrue, or incorrect and defective in its statements, or that it con- 
tains immaterial matters, is not sufficient. Nor is the fact that the 
attorney for the defendant in error drew up the return, and that it was 
afterwards "corrected, altered, and fixed, "by the justice, unless abuse 
is clearly shown (Smith i). Johnson, 30 How. 374 ; see, also. Hunter v. 
Graves, 4 Cow. 537), and the return of the constable, that he served 
the summons, is conclusive. It gives the justice jurisdiction to pro- 
ceed with the cause at the hour when the summons was returnable ; 
and it can not be impeached or brought in question on an appeal from 
the judgment. If the constable did not serve a copy of the summons, 
the defendant must seek his remedy against the constable by an ac- 
tion for a false return (Haughey v. Wilson, 1 Bilt. 359). But in some 
of the cases it was held that upon an appeal the false return may be 
questioned, if such point is raised as error in fact (See the following 
cases: Col. Insurance Co. v. Force, 8 How. 353; Putman v. Man, 3 
Wend. 302; Allen v. Martin, 10 Id. 300; Elwell v. McQueen, Id. 519; 
Case V. Redfleld, 7 Id. 398 ; Beaty ». Perkins, 6 Id. 382 ; Brintnall v. 
Foster, 7 Id, 103). 

False return. 

A justice of the peace is liable for a false return to an appeal, for 
any damages which a party to such appeal may sustain by reason of 
such false return. He acts mininisterially in making a return to an 
appeal (MacDonell v. Buffum, 31 How. 154 ; Houghton v. Swarthout, 1 
I)e?iio, 589 ; see, also, Tompkins v. Sands, 8 Wend. 463 ; Cunningham 
». Bucklin, 8 Cow. 178; Scott ». Rushman, 1 Id. 212). 

Form of justice's return. 

[ Title of proceedings.^ 

To the County Court of the county of 

In obedience to the requirements of section 360 of the Code of 



336 liANDLORD AND TENAWT 

Procedure, I a justice of the peace of 

in said county, do hereby certify and return to said court, that on the 
day of 187 , a summary proceeding 

under the statute was commenced before nie, by John Doe as landlord, 
against Richard Roe as tenant, by the presentation of the affidavit by 
said landlord, which is hereto annexed marked No. 1. Upon which 
the summons hereto annexed, marked No. 3, was issued by me, and 
was afterwards returned to me with the proof of service thereon en- 
dorsed, marked No. 3. 

That at the time and place designated in said summons, for the re- 
turn thereof, the said landlord appeared in person, and the said 
tenant appeared by his attorney and filed the counter affidavit hereto 
annexed, marked No. 4, and demanded a trial by jury and paid the 
necessary fees to entitle him thereto. Issue being thus joined, the 
proceedings were adjourned on motion of until the 

day of 187 , at two o'clock p. m. 

at my office aforesaid. 

I thereupon issued a venire for a jury, returnable at said time and 
place, and the constable to whom the venire was delivered, returned 
the same with the panel of jurors duly summoned, and the said venire 
and return are also annexed hereto, marked respectively Nos. 5 and 6. 

At the time and place to which said proceedings were adjourned, 
the parties again appeared and answered ready for trial. 

Of the jurors so summoned and appearing, the following persons 
were duly drawn, and by me sworn as the jury to try said proceed- 
ings, to wit (Here insert the names). 

The plaintiff to maintain his proceeding called 
who being duly sworn testified as follows (Here state the testimony 
upon both sides in the order in which it was given, stating which 
side called the witness, together with all the objections made by either 
party, and the decision of the court upon each one). 

The landlord's testimony here closed, and the tenant moved to 
dismiss the landlord's proceedings upon the grounds (Here state them, 
if any, and the decision). 

And I further certify that the foregoing is all the testimony given 
on said trial. 

The cause was then submitted to the jury; and I further return 
that, after the proceeding was so submitted, a constable was by me 
duly sworn to attend the jury, and the jury then retired, under the 
charge of such constable, to deliberate upon their verdict. 

After deliberating together, the jury returned into court, before 
me, and the parties being called, and answering, the jury announced 
their verdict in open court, whereby they found in favor of the said 
landlord for the possession of the premises claimed, and forthwith, upon 
the rendering of said verdict, to wit, on the day of 

187 , I rendered judgment upon the said verdict, with $ 
costs against said tenant, and entered the findings of said jury in my 
docket, together with said judgment, and included therein the said 
costs according to the statute in such case made and provided. 

And I aiso certify, that the annexed is the notice which was served 
upon me for the appeal in said proceedings, on the 
day of 187 , and that my fees for return were paid. 

All of which is respectfully submitted. 

Dated 187 . 

Justice of the Peace, 



EEVIEW BT APPEAL, 337 

How made, if justice be ont of offlce. 

Code, § 361. When a justice of the peace, by 
whom a judgment appealed from was rendered, shall 
have gone out of office before a return is ordered, he 
shall, nevertheless, make a return in the same manner, 
and with the like effect, as if he were still in office. 

Fuvllier return may be ordered. 

Code, § 362. If the return be defective, the appel- 
late court may direct a further or amended return as 
often as may be necessary, and may compel a compli- 
ance with its order by attachment ; and the court shall 
always be deemed open for these purposes. 

Keturn conclusive. 

Affidavits can not be used to modify or impeach the return ; the 
appellate court must be bound by it. If all the facts are not stated, 
the party agcrrieved must procure an amendment (Lynsky ». Pende- 
grast, 3 E. D. Smith, 43; Kilpatrick ■». Carr, 3 Abb. 117; Capewell v. 
Ormsby, 3 E. D. Smith, 180; Trust a. Delaplaine, 8 Id. 319; Hyland 
V. Slierman, 3 Id. 334; Riwson v. Grow, 4 M. 18; Bates v. Conkling, 
10 Wend. 389). In such a case, an amended return will be ordered, 
and upon proper application the justice will be required to answer 
specific interrogatories in regard to any matters clearly material to 
the case (Smith ». Johnston, 30 Hoio. 374). And a party may compel 
the return of evidence that was stricken out ia the court below, in 
order that he may bring more distinctly before the appelate court 
the points relied upon for a reversal of the decision (Id.). 

How to procure amended retnm. 

If either party be dissatisfied with the return made by the justice, 
he can move the county court at any time for an order requiring an 
amended return. The motion should be made upon affidavits show- 
ing the inaccuracies and omissions complained of, and may be brought 
on upon an order to show cause in the following form, or upon a no- 
tice of motion of the same purport. 

Order to show cause why amended return should not be made. 

County court of the county of 



John Doe, 

Respondent, 

V. 

RiCHAED Rob, 

Appellant. 



Upon the annexed affidavit, let the justice be- 

43 



338 LANDLOED A10> TENANT. 

fore whom this proceeding was tried, file an amended return herein, 
answering the interrogatories hereinafter propounded, or show cause 
before the county court of county, on the 

day of 187 , at ten a. m. of that day, at the court, 

house, at in said county, why the said justice should 

not make a further and amended return in said proceeding, by an- 
swering the following interrogatories, viz. : 

First. Whether or not John Jones, a witness called and sworn for 
the landlord, testified on his direct examination as follows (Here state 
the testimony called for). 

Second. Whether or not Paul Jones, a witness called and sworn 
for the tenant, testified on his cross-examination as follows (Here 
state the testimony called for). 

Third. Whether or not the tenant objected to the testimony of 
(Here state the particular testimony objected to, with the objection 
thereto and exception). 

Fourth. Whether or not, at the close of the testimony, the tenant 
moved for a non-suit on the grounds (Here state the grounds fully). 

Fifth. Whether or not the paper referred to in said affidavit as 
Exhibit No. 1, was offered in evidence by the tenant's counsel, and 
whether it was excluded by you, and whether he excepted to your 
decision ruling it out. 

Sixth. (State any other proposition or interrogatory that may be 
proper), and why the tenant should not have such other and further 
relief as may seem proper in the premises ; and that a copy of this 
order be served upon the attorney for the landlord herein before the 
hearing of said motion. 

Dated 187 

County Judge. 

If justice be dead, insane, or absent from State, witnesses to be 
examined ; if in another coanty, return may be compelled. 

Code, § 363. If a justice of the peace, whose judg- 
ment is appealed from, shall die, become insane, or 
remove from the state, the appellate court may exam- 
ine witnesses, on oath, to the facts and circumstances 
of the trial or judgment, and determine the appeal, as 
if the facts had been returned by the justice. If he 
shall have removed to another county within the state, 
the appellate court may compel him to make the re- 
turn, as if he were still within the county where the 
judgment was rendered. 

Betarn in case of justice whose term of ofBce has expired. 

A return to a writ of certiorari or to an appeal, may be made by 
a justice of this coiu't, and is valid, notwithstanding the judge's 



EEVIEW BY APPEAL. 339 

ofScial term has expired. The rule is the same whether or not the 
■writ is served or the appeal brought, or before or after he has gone 
out of office (Conover v. Devlin, 15 How. 470 ; 8. 0. 6 Abb. 328, sub. 
nom. People «b rel. Devlin v. Peabody, and numerous cases cited in 
this case (Harris v. Whitney, 6 Sow. 175, overruling Peck v. Foot, 4 
Id. 425). 

Hearing upon return. Dismissing appeal if not brought on. 

Code, part of § 364. If a return be made, and the 
appeal is from a judgment where a new trial may not 
be had, as provided by this chapter, it may be brought 
to a hearing at a general term of the appellate court, 
upon notice by either party of not less than eight days. 
It shall be placed upon the calendar, and continue 
thereon without further notice until finally disposed 
of. But if neither party bring it to a hearing before 
the end of the second term, the court shall dismiss the 
appeal, unless it continue the same by special order 
for cause shown. 

The balance of this section relates to new trials in the county 
court, and has no application to summary proceedings, and is there- 
fore omitted. 

Only one notice necessary. 

After an appeal has been once regularly noticed for argument by 
either party, and regularly placed on the calendar, it remains thereon 
without further notice until finally disposed of ; and where an appeal 
was once noticed for argument and placed on the calendar by the ap- 
pellant, and was called at a subsequent term, and the appellant not 
appearing, the respondent took a judgment of affirmance by default, 
without any proof of his having noticed the appeal for argument; 
held regular (Townsend v. Keenan, 2 Hilt. 544). 

To be heard on original papers. 

§ 365. The appeal shall be heard on the original 
papers, or certified copies thereof; and no copies 
thereof need be furnished for the use of the court. 

Hearing in county court. 

On such appeal the appellate court will not review matters of 
discretion or questions of practice (1 Eilt. 143) ; and wiU look only to 
the justice's return (1 Id. 143) ; and are bound by it ; affidavits in 
addition thereto can not be used (3 H. D. Smith, 43; Id. 180; Id. 234; 



340 LANDLOitt) AND TENANT. 

Z Id. 319; 4 Id. 18; 3 Abb. 117); and every reasonable intendment 
will be made to support the judgment (4i Barb. 459) ; and the court 
should give the proceedings a fair and liberal construction (38 N. T. 
117) ; and a judgment should not be reversed unless it clearly appears 
that the evidence does not justify it, even although the appellate court 
might have arrived at a different conclusion (31 if. 7. 480; 35 How. 
465; 1 Daly, 383; ZXHow. 373). The fact that irrelevant or improper 
evidence was admitted, is no ground for reversing the judgment, 
where there was abundant competent evidence presented (Spencer v. 
Saratoga and Washington Railroad Co., 13 Barb. 383; Bort v. Smith, 
5 Id. 383; Moore ». Somerindyke, 1 Rilt. 199; Buck v. Waterbury, 
13 Barb. 116; Andrews®. Harrington, 19 Id. 343). It is a well- 
settled rule that a judgment will not be set aside, even on a bill of 
exceptions, for testimony erroneously admitted, when the court can 
see clearly that it has occasioned no injury to the party objecting 
(Welles V. Cone, 55 Barb. 585, 589. See, also, Bort v. Smith, 5 Id. 
383, 385; Crary «. Sprague, 13 Wend. 41; Benjamin v. S>m\\h, Id. 
404). If, however, the evidence is clearly illegal, and affects a 
material issue in the case, and a proper objection is taken, if it is 
admitted, and judgment is rendered against the party, it is good 
ground for reversing the judgment (Williams «. Pitch, 18 N. T. 
546; Erben v. Lorillard, 19 N. T. 399, rev'g S. C. 33 Barb. 82; 
Worrall v. Parmelee, 1 N. 7. 519; Wilmot v. Richardson, 6 Duer, 
338; Murray «. Smith, 1 Id. 413; Tuttle v. Hunt, 2 Oow. 436; 
Whiting ». Otis, 1 Boaw. 430, 434; Dresser «. Ainsworth, 9 Barb. 
619; Ward v. Washington Insurance Co., 6 Boaw. 230; Penfield «. 
Carpenter, 13 Johns. 350; Weber v. Kingsland, 8 Boaw. 415, 443; 
Hahn v. Van Doren, 1 E. B. Smith, 411; Main «. Eagle, Id. 
019, 630; Beldens. Nlcolay, 4 J<i. 14, 17; Anthoine v. Coit, 3 Hall, 
40; 4: E. D. Smith, 171); and the court will not consider objections 
urged for the first time on appeal (1 N. K 93 ; 1 Hilt. 537 ; Id. 531 ; 
Id. 161; Id.1%; 3 E. D. Smith, 310; 3 Sandf. 399; 4 Id. 109; 4 E. 
D. Smith, 473). Where the matters relied upon as the grounds for 
reversing the judgment are omitted in the return, the appellant 
should procure an amended return that will show fully the alleged 
errors and irregularities (Baum v. Tarpenny, 3 Hill, 75 ; Stafford v. 
Williams, 4 Denio, 183 ; Rawson «. Grow, 4 E. D. Smith, 18 ; Cape- 
well ». Ormsby, 3 Id. 180; Warring v. Loomis. A^Barb. 485; Fairbanks 
V. Corlies, 3 E. D. Smith, 583; S. C. 1 Abb. 150j. The original return 
should be filed, as required by statute, and if an amendment is 
regarded necessary, aflSdavits may be used for the purposes of the 
motion (Lynsky v. Pendergi-ast, 3 E. D. Smith; 43 ; Fish v. Ferris, 3 
/«!. 568, 569; Capewell ®. Ormbsy, 3 Id. 180). The appeal should 
not be argued until the return is complete, for the reason that it is 
conclusive as to what transpired at the trial in the court below. 
AlHdavits can not be used to support a defective return (McAllister v. 
Sexton, ^ E. D. Smith, 41; Hyland v. Sherman, 3 Id. 335; Trust «. 
Delaplaine, ^ Id. 319; Rawson v. Grow, i Id. 18; Kilpatrick v. Carr, 
3 Abb. 1 17). The rule is tlie same with regard to the charge of the 
justice to the jury (Garrison i>. Pierce, 3 E. D. Smith, 355). 

Objections and exceptions. 

Any objection that by possibility could be obviated on the trial 
must be then and there made, or is unavilable on appeal (1 iV. Y. 92 ■ 



EEVIEW BY APPEAL. 341 

8 Sandf. 399; 4 Id. 109; 4 E. D. Smith, 478; 1 Hilt. 587; Id. 531; 
Id. 161; /c^. 73; 3 ^. D. Smith, 310). And see effect of appearance 
at pagea 77 and 78, and a general exception to a charge of a justice is 
unvailable, unless it is entirely erroneous (11 Barh.i^^Q; 4 B. B. 
Smith, 25\.; 4 Bosw. 140; Id. 325; 11 JST. Y. 416; 6 Id. 338; 7 Id. 
266 ; 24 Hno. 173 ; Id. 236 ; 30 Barb. 346 ; 8 Bosw. 357 ; 44 Bari. 42; 
88 Id. 445; 25 i\r. 7. 315; 26 N. T. 460). 

Re-hearing of appeal. 

A re-hearing will not be granted where it is apparent no advantage 
can result from it (3 Abb. 359) ; nor because the counsel was not 
prepared to argue the case, and fears the court did not therefore fully 
understand the questions involved (2 Hilt. 135). 

Respondent must appear. 

On an appeal taken from a justice's judgment, the appellate court 
will reverse the judgment, if the respondent does not appear to argue 
the appeal (Whitney i\ Bayard, 3 Sandf. 634; Qeraghty v. Malone, 1 
Id. 7-34; S. C. 1 Code B. 94. See, however, Bellony v. Alexander, 1 
Sandf. 734; S. C. 1 Code B. 64, aubnom. Bellamy ». Alexander). 

Judgment, how given. 

Code, part of § 366. Upon the hearing of the appeal, 
the appellate court shall give judgment according to 
the justice of the case, without regard to technical 
errors and defects which do not affect the merits. In 
giving judgment, the court may affirm or reverse the 
judgment of the court below, in whole or in part, and 
as to any or all the parties, and i'or errors of law or fact. 
If the appeal is founded on an error in fact in the pro- 
ceedings, not affecting the merits of the action, and not 
within the knowledge of the justice, the court may de- 
termine the alleged error in fact on affidavits, and may, 
in its discretion, inquire into and determine the same 
upon examination of the witnesses. If the defend- 
ant failed to appear before the justice, and it is shown 
by the affidavits served by the appellant, or otherwise, 
tiaat manifest injustice has been done, and he satisfac- 
torily excuses his default, the court may, in its discre- 
tion, set aside or suspend judgment, and order a new 
trial before the same or any other justice in the same 



342 LANDLORD AND TEKAITT. 

county, at such time and place, and on such terms as 
the court may deem proper. Where a new trial shall 
be ordered before a justice, the parties must appear 
before him according to the order of the court, and the 
same proceedings must thereupon be had in the action 
as on the return of a summons personally served. 

The balance of this section relates to new trials in the county 
court, and is inapplicable to summary proceedings, and is, therefore, 
omitted. 

Judgement roll. 

Code, % 367. To every judgment upon appeal there 
shall be annexed the return upon which it was heard, 
or a certified copy thereof, the notice of appeal, with 
any offer, verdict, decision of the court, exceptions, 
case, and all orders and papers in any way involving 
the merits, and necessarily affecting the judgment, 
which shall be filed with the clerk of the court, and 
shall constitute the judgment tqU. 



Code, § 368. If the judgment be affirmed, costs shall 
be awarded to the respondent. If it be reversed, costs 
shall be awarded to the appellant. If it be affirmed in 
part, the costs, or such part as to the court shall seem 
just, may be awarded to either party. 

Ordering restitution. 

Code, § 369. If the judgment below, or any part 
thereof, be paid or collected, and the judgment be after- 
wards reversed, the appellate court shall order the 
amount paid or collected to be restored, with interest 
from the time of such payment. The order may be ob- 
tained on proof of the facts made at or after the hear- 
ing, upon a previous notice of six days, and, if the 
order shall be made before the judgment is entered, the 
amount may be included in the judgment. 

Where the appellant succeeds on the appeal, and a judgment of 
reversal is entered generally, without any award of a new trial in the 



REVIEW BT APPEAL. 343 



court below, the statute is imperative that the County Court shall or- 
der restitution of all that the appellant has lost (Estus v. Baldwin, 9 
How. 80; Jacks w. Darrin, 1 Abb. 233). In such a case, there will not 
be a complete restitution, unless the appellant is allowed the costs of 
defending the action before the justice, and of prosecuting his appeal 
in the county court (Id.). If the return of the justice shows that the 
judgment has been paid, this will be sufficient proof of the fact, and 
the appellate court will order restitution as a part of the judgment, 
which may be collected by execution, in the usual manner, with costs 
(Jacks V. Darrin, 1 Abb. 233 ; Kennedy «. O'Brien, 3 K D. Smith, 41 ; 
Sheridan v. Mann, 5 How. 301 ; S. C' 3 Code B. 313). So, where it 
appears from a transcript of the docket of the justice that the judg- 
ment has been paid, tlie appellant court, upon a reversal of the judg- 
ment, will order restitution (Hunt ». Westervelt, 4 E. D. Smith, 335). 
On a motion for restitution the order becomes part of the judg- 
ment, and can be collected on execution with the costs (3 E. H. Smith, 
41). 



Setting off costs, and recovery. 

Code, § 370. If upon an appeal a recovery be had by 
one party, and costs be. awarded to the other, the ap- 
pellate court shall set off the one against the other, and 
render judgment for the balance. 

Costs on appeal ; appellant to state in his notice of appeal fvherein 
the judgment shall be more favorable. 

Code., % 371. Costs shall be allowed to the prevailing 
party in judgments rendered on appeal in all cases, 
with the following- exceptions and limitations : In the 
notice of appeal, the appellant shall state in what par- 
ticular or particulars he claims the judgment should 
have been more favorable to him. If he claims that the 
amount of judgment is less favorable to him than it 
should have been, he shall state what should have been 
its amount. Within fifteen days after the service of the 
nptice of appeal, the respondent may serve upon the 
appellant and justice an offer, in writing, to allow the 
judgment to be corrected in any of the particulars men- 
tioned in the notice of appeal. The appellant may, 
thereupon, and within five days thereafter, file with the 
justice a written acceptance of such offer, who shall 



344 LANDLOED AND TENANT. 

thereupon make a minute thereof in his docket, and 
correct such judgment accordingly, and the same so 
corrected shall stand as his judgment, and be enforced 
accordingly ; and any execution which has been issued 
upon the judgment appealed from, shall be amended 
by the justice to correspond with the amended judg- 
ment ; and no undertaking given to stay execution 
shall be enforced for more than the amount of the cor- 
rected judgment. If such offer be not made, and the 
judgment in the appellate court be more favorable to 
the appellant than the jndgment in the court below, or 
if such offer be made and not accepted, and the judg- 
ment in the appellate court be more favorable to the 
appellant than the offer of the respondent, the appel- 
lant shall recover costs ; provided, however, that the 
appellant shall not i-ecover costs unless the judgment 
appealed from shall be reversed on such appeal, or be 
made more favorable to him, to the amount of at least 
ten dollars. If the offer be made, and accepted by the 
appellant, the appellant shall recover all his disburse- 
ments on appeal, and all his costs in the court below. 
But the appellant shall not recover costs except as pro- 
vided in this chapter. The respondent shall be en- 
titled to recover costs where the appellant is not. 

Whenever costs are awarded to the appellant, he 
shall be allowed to tax as part thereof the costs and 
fees paid to the justice on making the appeal, as dis- 
bursements, in addition to the costs in the appellate 
court ; and when the judgment in the suit before the 
justice was against such appellant, he shall further be 
allowed to tax the costs incurred by him, which he 
would have been entitled to recover in case the judg- 
ment below had been rendered his favor. If, upon an 
appeal, a recovery for any debt or damages be had by 
one party, and costs be awarded to the other party, the 
court shall set off such costs against such debt or dam- 
ages, and render judgment for the balance. 



EEVIEW BY APPEAL. B45 



Amount of costs. 

The costs shall be as follows : 

To the appellant, on reversal, fifteen dollars. 

To the respondent, on the affirmance, twelve dol- 
lars. 

If the judgment appealed from be reversed in part 
and affirmed as to the residue, the amount of costs 
allowed to either party shall be such sum as the appel- 
late court may award, not exceeding ten dollars. If 
the appeal be dismissed for want of prosecution, as 
provided by section three hundred and sixty-four, no 
costs shall be allowed to either party. In every appeal 
the justice of the peace before whom the judgment ap- 
pealed from was rendered, shall receive two dollars for 
his return. If the judgment be reversed for an error 
of fact in the proceedings, not affecting the merits, 
costs shall be in the discretion of the court. If in the 
notice of appeal the appellant shall not state in what 
particular or particulars the judgment should have 
been more favorable to him, he shall not be entitled to 
costs unless the judgment appealed from be wholly re- 
versed. 

A portion of this section relates to costs in new trials in the 
County Court, and being inapplicable to summary proceedings, it was 
on that account omitted. 

Certiorari, or appeal by one not a party. 

Summary proceedings can not be reversed on certiorari, brought 
by one not a party to the proceedings, though dispossessed under the 
warrant, where by the record the proceedings appear to have been 
regular, and the only grounds of irregularity appear by extrinsic 
facts alleged in his affidavit on the application for the certiorari 
(Starkweather v. Seeley, 45 Bari. 164). If, however, a husband is in 
fact the tenant of premises, and has been removed from the possession 
by summary proceedings under the statute, instituted against tlie wife 
for non-payment of rent, the husband is alone entitled to judgment of 
restitution ; and he alone should be the relator in a certiorari to review 
and reverse the proceedings and judgment, for the court can not 
award restitution in favor of the wife or other person not a party to 
the proceedings (The People ex rel, Lawson v. McCaffrey, 43 Bwrb, 
530). 
44 



346 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

SQUATTER ACT. 

I. The act. 
II. Forms thereunder. 



The act. 

Chapter 396. 

Ail act to punish nuisances, and malicious tres- 
passes on lands. 

Passed April 13th, 1857. 

The people of the State of New York, represented in 
senate and assembly, do enact as follows : 

Trespassers on lands. Penalty therefor. 

§ 1. Any person who shall hereafter intrude or 
sqaat upon any lot or piece of land situated within 
the bounds of any incorporated city or village without 
license or authority from the owner thereof, or who 
shall place thereon any hut, hovel, shanty, or other 
structure, without such license or authority, or who 
shall place, erect, or occupy within the bounds of any 
street or avenue of such city or village, any hut, hovel, 
shanty, or other structure, shall be deemed guilty of 
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall 
be punished by imprisonment in a county jail not 
exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding 
five hundred dollars, or by both such fine and im- 
prisonment. 

Serying of notices. 

§ 2. The owner of any lot or piece of land within 



SQTJATTEB ACT. 347 

the bounds of any incoi-porated city or village, may 
give notice to any intruder or squatter who may have 
heretofore intruded or squatted thereon, or who shall 
have succeeded to any other intruder or squatter 
thereon, to quit the same on a day to be specified, 
which shall not be less than ten days thereafter ; which 
notice may be left upon the premises, addressed to the 
occupant or occupants thereof, vpithout specifying 
their names ; and in case such intruder or squatter 
shall not quit the said premises at or before the expir- 
ation of the time specified in such notice, he and they 
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon 
conviction may be punished by fine or imprisonment 
or both, in the manner and to the extent provided in 
the preceding section. 

Kemoral of nuisances. 

§ 3. The owner of said lot or piece of land upon 
which any ^hut, hovel, shanty, or other structure 
shall or may have been placed without his previous 
license or authority, may cause the same to be removed 
and abated, and the intruders or squatters thereon to 
be removed from the said lot or piece of land at any 
time after the expiration of the ten days, or other time 
specified in the notice in the next preceding section 
mentioned. 

II. 

Forms under said act. 

1. Notice to quit under squatter act. 

2. Complaint against Squatter. 

3. Warrant against Squatter. 

1. Form of notice to quit, under Squatter. Act. 

■ 1 



Owner, 



Occupant. 



\ 



J 



Please to take notice, that I am the o«fner of the lot or piece of 



348 LANDLORD AND TENANf. 

land, situate [here insert description of premises] in the city of New- 
York, upon which you have intruded and squatted, and that I require 
you to quit the same on the day of 187 , pursuant 

to the statute entitled "An act to punish nuisances and malicious 
trespasses on land " (Laws 1857, chap. 396), and fail not, under the 
pains and penalties of the law. 

Dated New York, 187 

Owner. 
To ) 

the occupant of said premises. ) 

2. Complaint against sqnatter. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

John Doe, of the said city and county, complains of Eichard Roe, 
of the same place, and for cause of complaint, the said John Doe, after 
being first duly sworn according to law, under oath, says, that he is 
the owner in fee simple of the lot and premises in said city and county, 
described as follows, to wit: (Here describe premises) and that the 
said Richard Roe did, contrary to the act of the legislature of the 
state of New York, entitled, ' ' An act to punish nuisances and mali- 
cious trespasses on lands," passed April 13, 1857 (chap. 396), intrude 
and squat upon the said lot and piece of land aforesaid (the same be- 
ing within tlie limits of an incorporated city), without license, or au- 
thority from the owner thereof, and that the said Richard Roe did, in 
further violation of said act, place upon said lot and piece of land, a 
shanty [or other structure] without license or authority from the owner 
of said lot and piece of land, and still continues said shanty upon 
said lot and piece of land, without any lawful license or authority, and 
in violation of law. — That on the day of , 187 , this 

deponent, as such owner aforesaid, caused a notice to be served upon the 
said Richard Roe, of which the annexed is a copy, wherein and whereby 
the said Richard Roe was required to quit the said lot and piece of land, 
on the day of 187 (ten days' notice), pursuant to the pro- 

visions of said statute, and that notwithstanding said notice, the said 
Richard Roe still continues in possession of said lot and piece of land, 
without any legal authority, and in violation of law. 

The said John Doe, therefore, prays that the said Richard Roe may 
be apprehended, and proceeded with according to law. 

JOHN DOE. 
Sworn to, &c.* ) 

3. Warrant against sqnatter. 

State of New York, city and county of New York., ss. 

To any of the policemen of the city of New York, or to any mar- 
shal of said city, Greeting : 

Whereas, complaint has this day been made by John Doe, of said 

city and county, on oath, before me, , Justice of 

, that he, the said John Doe, is the owner in fee 

* To be sworn to before the magistrate. 



SQUATTER ACT. 349 

simple of the lot and premises in said city and county, described as 
follows, to wit: (Here describe premises) and that Richard Roe of said 
city and county, did, contrary to the act of the legislature of the state 
of New York, entitled "An act to punish nuisances and malicious 
trespasses on lands," passed April 13, 1857 (chap. 396), intrude and 
squat upon the said lot and piece of land aforesaid (the same being 
within the limits of an incorporated city), without license or author- 
ity, from the owner thereof, and that said Richard Roe did, in further 
violation of said act, place upon said lot or piece of land, a shanty or 
other structure, without license or authority from the owner of said 
lot and piece of land, and still continues said shanty upon said lot and 
piece of land, without any lawful authority, and in violation of law. 
That on the day of 187 , said John Doe, as such 

owner aforesaid, caused a notice to be served upon the said Richard 
Roe, wherein and whereby the said Richard Roe was required to quit 
the said lot and piece of land, on the day of , 187 , 

pursuant to the provisions of said statute; and that, notwithstanding 
said notice, the said Richard Roe still continues in posse.^ision of said 
lot and piece of land, without any legal authority, and in violation of 
law. — You are, therefore, commanded forthwith lo take the said Rich- 
ard Roe, and bring him before me, the said justice, at my court room. 
No. street, in the city of New York, for examination 

upon said complaint, under said statute, and to be dealt with accor- 
ding to law. 

Witness my hand and seal, at the said city and county aforesaid, 
this day of , 187 . 

To be signed by the justice, [l. s.] 

With his name and title of office. 

If, upon the prisoner's examination, sufficient evidence is produced 
to justify the holding of the prisoner, he should be committed for trial 
before the appropriate tribunal, and if convicted upon the trial, the 
usual record of such conviction is to be made and signed. 



360 lANDLOED AWD TEWANT. 



OHAPTEK XXXVIII. 

LIABILITIES INCIDENTAL TO KEMEDIES. 

I. Liability of justice and of landlord, in cases in which the justice 
had no jurisdictioa. 

n. Liability of landlord to action for damages in cases in which the 
adjudication in summary proceedings is reversed upon cer- 
tiorari. 

I. 

In cases in which the justice had no jurisdiction. 

It is a general principle that the jurisdiction of all 
courts and officers may be questioned whenever the 
proceedings or decision of such courts or officers are 
made the foundation of any claim (Broadhead v. 
McConnell, 3 Barb, at p. 183, citing Borden «. Fitch, 
15 Johns. Rep. 141 ; Thompson, 0. J., Mills n. Martin, 
19 Id. 33 Spbwoee, Ch. J. ; Latham v. Edgerton, 9 
Oow. Rep. 227, Sutherland, J., and the other cases 
referred to in Gowen & HilV s Notes to Phil. Ev. p. 
801, note 551, and Clinton, Senator, in Yates v. Lans- 
ing, 9 JoJm. Rep. 431 to 487). This principle applies 
to all courts, whether of general or special jurisdiction, 
and to all questions of jurisdiction, whether over the 
subject-matter or over the parties. There is, however, 
a practical difference between the modes of raising the 
question of jurisdiction, dependent upon the character 
of the court, whether it be a court of general or special 
jurisdiction. The authority of courts of general juris- 
diction, both over the subject-matter of the suit and 
the parties, is always presumed, and those who deny 
it must take upon themselves the burden of over- 
turning this presumption ; while nothing is presumed 



LIABILITIES INCIDENTAL TO REMEDIES. 351 

in favor of courts or officers of special jurisdiction, 
those who claim a right under their proceedings or 
decisions, must show the authority to make them. If 
the court has no authority, to make the decision, the 
decision has no efficacy whatsoever, and is entitled 
to no legal respect or recognition. So that the juris- 
diction of the court making the decision is always 
a proposition embraced in the above general rule 
(Broadhead ». McConnell, supra). The court of 
appeals in the recent case of The People w. Wm. M. 
Tweed (not yet reported), in sustaining ''these same 
principles (per Allen, J.), said : " It is no new 
feature in the law that inferior magistrates may, when 
thereunto called, sit in judgment upon the jurisdiction 
of the highest courts, when their process or judgment 
comes collaterally before them. Trespass will lie for 
property seized, or for the imprisonment of a person by 
virtue of the judgment of the highest court of the state, 
if it has not jurisdiction of the person, or to give the 
judgment ; and a justice of the peace must pass upon 
the jurisdiction, if the action chances to be before him 
for trial. It matters not what the general powers and 
jurisdiction of a court may be, if it act without 
authority in the particular case, its judgments and 
orders are mere nullities, — not voidable, but simply 
void, — protecting no one acting under them, and con- 
stituting no hindrance to the prosecution of any right. 
The distinction between courts of limited and of 
general jurisdiction is this, that when their acts and 
judgments are relied upon, either as giving a right or 
furnishing a defense, the latter is presumed, while that 
of the former must be proved." 

The rule is that inferior jurisdictions, not proceed- 
ing according to the course of the common law, are 
confined strictly to the authority and power given by 
the statute. They take nothing by implication, and 
must show the power given them, under which they act, 
in every instance ; but when jurisdiction has been, ac- 



352 LANDLORD AND TEISTABTT. 

quired, courts are to be liberal in construing their pro 
eeedings as respects regularity and form. If the justice 
have jurisdiction, and merely errs in its exercise, he is 
not liable to an action for the consecLuences, for the act 
is voidable only, and can be taken advantage of only on 
appeal, for, having jurisdiction, he is not liable for 
errors committed in its legitimate exercise. This free- 
dom from action and suit is given to judges, not so 
much for their own sake as for the' sake of the public 
and for the advancement of justice, "that, being free 
from actions, they may be free in thought and independ- 
ent in judgment, as all who are to administer justice," 
observes Lokd Tenterden, " ought to be." 

But if the justice act without jurisdiction, or if he 
transcend his powers, his proceedings will be absolutely 
void, and he will be liable to an action at the suit of 
the aggrieved party for all damages sustained thereby. 
If he proceeds in a cause — e. g., by issuing a warrant 
of restitution in proceedings for forcible entry and de- 
tainer — after his power is taken away by certiorari, he 
becomes a trespasser (Case v. Shepherd, 2 John. Cas. 
27). So, too, if he issues a dispossessing warrant on an 
affidavit which does not show the conventional relation 
of landlord and tenant (Evertson v. Sutton, 5 Wend. 
281); and in Vosbuxgh v. Welch (11 Johns. 175), it was 
held that if a justice of the peace issues an attachment 
against the property of a person as an absent debtor, 
without any proof on oath, before him, of absence or 
concealment of the debtor, he is liable as a trespasser, 
and that satisfactory proof, as required by the act, 
means legal evidence, or such as would be received in 
the ordinary course of judicial proceedings (see also 
Tallman v. Bigelow, 10 Wend. 421 ; Kerr v. Mount, 28 
If. Y. 659) ; and in Miller v. Brinkerhoff (4 Ben. 118), 
it was held that where certain facts are required to be 
proved to warrant the issuing of process in a court of 
special and limited jurisdiction, if there be a total defect 
of proof as to any essential point the process will be void. 



LIABILITIES INCIDENTAL TO KEMEBIES. 353 

But where the proof, thought slight and inconclusive, 
legally tends to establish all the essential facts, the 
process will be valid when questioned collaterally, 
and can only be avoided by a direct proceeding to set 
it aside. 

By the common law, the regularity of the proceedings 
under a summary conviction may be questioned in a 
collateral action. The following case, in which the sub- 
ject was examined, affords a rule, by which to deter- 
mine what acts done under a limited jurisdiction can 
be made the subject of a civil action. In an action of 
trover for goods, levied by warrant of the commissioners 
of excise, the question was, —if they adjudge low wines 
to be strong wines, perfectly made, upon the statute, 12 
Gar. 2, c. 23, whether it may be drawn in question 
again by an action, so as to make the officer charge- 
able? For the affirmative, the case of a justice of the 
peace was relied upon ; in which it was held, that an 
officer was liable to an action for taking a distress pur- 
suant to his warrant, in case of a rate made upon one 
who was not liable {mde Gro. Gar. 395, and Dyer, 135). 
On the contrary, it was insisted, that, the statute having 
given an appeal, the party had no other remedy ; and 
that, the commissioners being made judges by the 
statute, no action lay against them, if they had erred, 
in a matter of l^ct. The court decided unanimously, 
that the action was maintainable. Hale, Ch. B. — 
"First, the matter is not within their jurisdiction, 
which is a stinted limited jurisdiction ; and implies a 
negative, viz., that they shall not proceed at all in 
other cases. But if they should commit a mistake in 
a thing that were within their power, that would not 
be examinable here. It is to be considered, that special 
jurisdictions may be circumscribed : 1. With respect 
to place, as a leet or corporation. 2. With respect to 
. persons. 3. With respect to the subject-matter of their 
jurisdiction: and here the statute limits their jurisdic- 
tion in all these three respects ; and, therefore, if they 
45 



354 LAIS^DLOED AND TENAJTT. 

give judgment in a cause arising in another place, 
or in other matters, all is void and coram nonjudice, 
— as if they should, adjudge rose-water to be strpng 
water ; and here low wines are waters of the first 
extraction. And though the information before them 
supposes the matter to be within their power and jur- 
isdiction, yet the party is not thereby concluded, but 
he may aver the contrary." And the chief Baron held, 
against the opinion of Baron Eainsford, " that it would 
have been against the defendants, even though they 
had pleaded specially. But it would be otherwise in 
the case of a brewer or retailer, who are expressly com- 
prised in the act, — as if the commissioners should ad- 
judge small beer to be strong ; for they have a jurisdic- 
tion there, and an appeal lies from their sentence. 
But where they have no power over the thing, as here 
they have not, tlie case is altered." Judgment was 
given for the plaintiff (Terry v. Huntington, Hardr. 
480). This doctrine is recognized with the same dis- 
tinction by Lord Holt (Fullers v. Potch, Holt, 287 ; 
Garth. 346), and is confirmed by subsequent authori- 
ties {Cowp. 240 ; 8 East. 404 ; 1 Burr. 595 ; 2 Bl. Rep. 
1146). 

It is however established, that in an action of 
trespass brought against a magistrate, a subsisting con- 
viction, — good upon the face of it, in a case to which 
his jurisdiction extends, — being produced at the trial, 
is a bar to the action, provided the execution also has 
been regular ; although the magistrate may have 
formed an erroneous judgment upon the facts ; for that 
is properly the subject of appeal ; and, therefore, in 
cases where an appeal lies, no action can be maintained 
till the merits have been heard, and the conviction 
cLuashed thereupon (Fullers «. Fotch, Holt, 287, and 
Strickland v. Ward, 7 T. R. 631, infra, and see 2 B. 
& P. 391 ; Massey v. Johnson, 12 East, 81, 82; see 
also 16 East, 31, per Lord Ellenbokough). 

In an action of trespass against two magistrates, for 



LIABILITIES INCIDENTAL TO KEMEDIES. 355 

giving the plaintiff's landlord possession of a farm as a 
deserted farm, under 11 Geo. 2, c. 19, s. 16, where the 
defendants produced in evidence a record of their 
proceedings under that act, vrhich set forth all such 
circumstances as were necessary to give them jurisdic- 
tion, and by which it appeared that they had pursued 
the directions of the statute ; it was held, that this was 
conclusive as an answer to the action. On that occa- 
sion, Abbot, C. J. said ; " It is a general rule and 
principle of law, that where justices of the peace have 
an authority given to them by an act of Parliament, 
and they appear to have acted within the jurisdiction 
so given, and to have done all that they are required 
by the act to do in order to originate their jurisdiction, 
a conviction dra.wn up in due form, and remaining in 
force, is a protection in any action brought against them 
for the act done (Basten v. Carew, 3 B. & O. 649 ; 5 
Bowl. & By. 558 ; 2 Dowl & By. Mag. Ca. 563 ; see Dos- 
well V. Impey, 2 Dowl & By. 350 ; 1 B. & C. 163). 
But in cases where the want of jurisdiction appears 
upon the papers or by the conviction itself, an action 
may be supported before the conviction is reversed or 
quashed. If, however, the subject-matter be one over 
which the magistrate has a general jurisdiction, evi- 
dence exterior to the conviction is not admissible to 
prove that in a particular case the magistrate drew an 
erroneous conclusion. 

■ II. • 

Liability of landlord to action for damages in cases 
in which the adjudication in summary pro- 
ceedings is reversed upon certiorari. 

The. statute affirmatively affixes a liability upon the 
landlord for damages in cases in which the adjudica- 
tion is reversed by the Supreme Court, by the provision 
providing that " if the proceedings shall be reversed 



356 LANDLOED AND TENAISTT. ■ 

or quashed by the Supreme Court, the tenant or lessee 
may recover against the person making application for 
such removal, any damages he may have sustained by 
reason of such proceedings, with costs, in an action on 
the case {vide, § 49 of the stat., ante, p. 194), and effect 
was given to this provision by the commission of ap- 
peals in Hay den v. The Florence Sewing-machine Com- 
pany (54 If. Y. 221). 

Bestitution in summary proceedings. 

By § 48 of the statute {vide, p. 194), the Supreme 
Court may, in the reversal of proceedings, award resti- 
tution to the party injured, with costs, and may make 
such orders and rules, and issue such process, as may 
be necessary to carry their judgment into effect. But 
the court will not award restitution to the tenant, if 
the term has expired before the judgment of reversal is 
rendered (Cretien v. Doney, 1 JV. T. 419), and as to 
costs, vide ante, p. 319. 

Bestitntion in proceedings of forcible entry and^detainer. 

As to restitution in these proceedings {vide §§ 22, 
23, anie, p. 181), and as to costs (vide ante, p. 315). 



Chapter of fokMS. 367 



CHAPTEE XXXIX. 

CHAPTER OF FORMS. 

I. Subpoena. 
n. Proof of service. 

m. Order for attachment against witness. 
IV. Attachment against witness. 
V. Complaint in ordinary civil action against tenant for 
rent. 
VI. Complaint in ordinary civil action against surety of ten- 
ant for rent. 
Vn. Ijease, with covenants. 
Vin. Other covenants for lease. 
IX. Security for rent. 
X. Assignment of lease. 

XI. Mortgage on lease, interest, and insurance clause. 
XU. Bond to accompany same. Interest clause. 
Xn. Party wall agreement. 

XIV. Permission to insert beams in adjoining house. 
XV. Builder's contract. 
XVI. Different forms of acknowledgment. 



Subpcena. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 
The People of the state of New York, to John Smith and John' Jones, 
Greeting: 
We command you, and each of you, that, all business and excuses 
being laid aside, you, and each of you, do appear, in your proper per- 
sons, before Denis Quinn, Justice of the District Court of the city of 
New York, for the first .Judicial District, at the court room southwest 
corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in the city of New York, on 

day, the day of 

187 , at ten o'clock in the forenoon of the said day, then and there 
to testify those things which you or either of you know, in a certain 
proceeding now pending before said justice, between John Doe, land- 
lord, and Richard Roe, tenant, on the part of the landlord. And this 



B58 LANDLORD AWD TENANT. 

you, or any of you, are not to omit, under the penalty of fifty dollars, 
for you, and every of you. 

Witness my hand at the said city, the day of 

in the year of our Lord, 187 . 

DENIS QTJINN, 

Justice, &c. 

[The subpoenas in these proceedings must be signed by the justice.] 

II. 

Proof of subpoena. 

City and county of New York, ss. 

John Peterson, being duly sworn, says, that on the 
day of 187 , at No. street, in the city 

of New York, he served the within subpcsna personally, on John 
Smith and John Jones, the persons named therein as witnesses, by 
then and there showing to each of them the said subpoena, and deliv- 
ing to each of them a subpoena ticket, containing the substance of 
the said subpoena, and paying [or tendering] to each of them at the 
same time the witness fee of twenty-five cents. 
Sworn to before me, &c. ) 

III. 

Order for attaehinent against witness. 

[ Title of cause and of court.'] 

On reading and filing the affidavit of John Peterson showing that 
a subpoena was duly served on John Smith, on the day of 

187 , whereby he was required to appear before me this 
day, to testify and give evidence in this proceeding on the part of 
the landlord, and that said John Smith has wholly neglected to attend 
as therein required, on motion of landlord's attorney, 

it is hereby ordered that an attachment issue, directed to any marshal 
of the city of New York, commanding him to attach the said John 
Smith, and bring him [forthwith, or] on the day of 

187 , at 10 A. M., personally before me, the Justice 
of the District Court of the city New York, for the first Judi- 
cial District at the court room of said court. No. Chambers street, in 
the city of New York, to answer for a certain contempt in not obey- 
ing said writ of subpoena, and commanding the said marshal to detain 
the said John Smith in his custody, until discharged by me. 

Justice, &c. 

The subpoena, with proof of service, should be annexed to this 
order, and filed with the clerk, so as to make a record authorizing the 
attachment, and the attachment must be returnable before the same 
judge who issued it (Kelly v. McCormick, 38 N. T. 318). 



CHAPTER OF F0KM8. SSi) 

IV. 

Attachment against witness. 

The People of the state of New York, to any marshal of the city of 

New York, Greeting : 

We command you to attach John Smith, if he may be found in said 
city, and bring him [forthwith, or] on the day of 

187 , at 10 A. M., before me, the Justice of the District Court, of the 
city of New York, for the First Judicial District, at the court room, 
southwest corner of Chambers and Centre streets, in said city, to 
answer for a certain alleged contempt in not obeying the writ of 
subpoena, commanding him to appear this day before me, as such 
justice, to testify and giye evidence in a certain proceeding then to 
be tried between John Doe as landlord, and Ricliard Roe as tenant, 
on the part of the landlord, and you are further commanded to detain 
him in your custody, until he shall be discharged by me, and have 
you then and there this writ. 

Witness the hand of the said justice, at the said city, this 
day of A. D. 187 . 

DENIS QUINN, 

Justice, &c. 

(Seal of court.) 

Duty and punishment of witness. 

A witness duly subpoened to attend court, is bound to make 
extraordinary efEorts to obey the writ ; nothing but extreme poverty 
and utter inability to attend, or sickness of himself or family, con- 
clusively proved, will excuse his non-attendance. Unless the con- 
tempt is purged, the witness will be fined, not only the costs of the 
attachment, but to the full amount of the costs of the term incurred 
by the party who subpoened him, if the trial was put off in con- 
sequence of his non-attendance (15 Wend. 603 ; BurriU'a Practice, vol. 
1, page 452). 

V. 

Complaint in ordinary civil action against tenant for 

rent. 

Court New York. 



Plaintiff, 
Defendant. 



Complaint for rent against 
tenant. 



The complaint of the plaintiff against the defendant shows to 



360 



LANDLOKD AND TENAWT. 



this court, that the plaintiff, as landlord, by agreement in writing, 
bearing date on the day of - 187 , executed by 

him as landlord and by the defendant, as tenant, the said plaintiff let 
and rented unto the said defendant as tenant, the premises known as 
No. in the city of New York, for the term of 

years from 187 , at the yearly rent, or sum of 

dollars, payable monthly in advance, which the said defendant, in 
and by said lease, agreed to pay. 

2. That on the day of 187 , there became, 
and was due, under said lease, the sum of dollars, for 

rent from 187 to 187 , which 

he promised to pay, but has not. 

3. That by means of the said several premises a cause of action 
hath accrued to the plaintiff against the said defendant to have and 
to recover the indebtedness aforesaid. 

Wherefore the plaintiff demands judgment against the defendant 
for said sum of $ , and interest from 

187 , together with costs. 

Plaintiff's Attorney, 

No. street. 

City and county of New York, ss. 

being duly sworn, says that he is the 
plaintiff in this action, and that the foregoing complaint is true to 
the knowledge of this deponent, except as to those matters stated on 
information and belief, and as to those matters he believes it toj be 
true. 
Sworn to, before me this ) 



day of 



187 



Notary Public, New York city. 

VI. 

Complaint in ordinary civil action against surety 
of tenant for rent. 



Court 



New York. 



Plaintiff, 



Defendant. 



J 



Complaint for rent against 
surety. 



The complaint of the plaintiff against the defendant shows to this 
court that tlie plaintiff, as landlord, by agreement in writing, bearing 
date on the day of , 187 , executed by 

him as landlord, and by , as tenant, the said 

plaintiff let and rented unto the said tenant, the premises known as 
No. , in the city of New York, from the term of 

years, from , 187 , at the yearly rent, or sum 

of dollars, payable monthly in advance, which the said 

tenant in and by said lease agreed to pay. 



OHAPTEE OP FOKMS. 361 

3. That on the day of , 187 , there became, 

and was due, under said lease, the sum of dollars, for rent 

from , 187 , to , 187 , which the said 

tenant promised to pay, but did not, of which the defendant was duly 
notified. 

3. That the said defendant in consideration of the said letting, did 
by an instrument in writing, under seal, bearing even date with said 
lease, and duly executed by him, covenant and agree to and with 
the said plaintiff that if default should be made by the said tenant in 
the payment of the rent or performance of the covenants in said lease 
contained on the part of the said tenant, he, the said defendant, would 
well and truly pay the said rent and all arrears thereof, and also all 
damages that might arise iu consequence of such non-pertbrmance. 
without requiring notice of such default. 

4. That by means of the said several premises a cause of action 
hath accrued to the plaintiff against the said defendant to have and 
to recover the indebtness aforesaid. 

Wherefore the plaintiff demands judgment against the defendant 
for said sum of dollars, and interest, from 

187 , together with costs. 

Plaintiff's attorney, 

No. street. 

City and county of New York, ss. 

, being duly sworn, says that he is the plaintiff 
in this action, and that the foregoing complaint is true to the Itnowl- 
edge of this deponent, except as to those matters stated oa informa- 
tion and belief, and as to tiiose matters he believes it to be true. 
Sworn to before me this day of ) 

187 . f 

Notary Public, New Tork city. 

VII. 

Lease, with go tenants. 

This indenture, made the day of 

187 , between of the city of New York, party 

of the first part, and of the same place, party of 

the second part, witnesseth. That the said party of the first part hath 
letten, and by these presents doth grant, demise, and to farm let, unto 
the said party of the second part the premises known as No. 
street, in the city of New York, with the appurtenances, for the term 
of years from the day of one 

thousand eight hundred and , at the yearly rent or sum of 

to be paid in equal monthly payments in advance on 
the first day of each and every month during said term. And it is 
agreed that if any rent shall be due and unpaid, or if default shall 
made be in any of the covenants herein contained, then it shall 
be lawful for the said party of the first part to re-enter the said 
premises, and to remove all persons therefrom. And the said party 
of the second part hereby covenants to pay to the said party ot the 
46 



362 LANDLOED AND TBNAKT. 



first part, the said yearly rent as herein specified. And also, to pay 
the regular annual rent or charge, which is or may be assessed or im- 
posed according to law, upon the said premises, for the croton water, 
on or before the 1st day of August in each year during the tenn ; and if 
not so paid, the same shall be added to the rent then due. And the 
said party of the second part further covenants that he will not assign 
this lease, nor any interest therein or let nor underlet the whole or any 
part of the said premises, nor make any alterations therein, without 
the written consent of the said party of the first part, under the pen- 
alty of forfeiture and damages: and that he will not occupy or use the 
said premises, nor permit the same to be occupied or used for any 
business deemed extra-hazardous on account of fire or otherwise without 
the like consent under the like penalty. And the said party of the 
second part, further covenants that he will permit the said party of the 
first part, or his agent, to show the premises to persons wishing to hire 
or purchase, and on and after the first day of February next preceding 
the expiration of the term, will permit the usual notice of "to let," or 
"for sale " to be placed upon the walls or doors of said premises, and 
remain thereon without hinderance or molestation. 

And at the expiration of the said term, the said party of the 
second part, will quit and surrender the premises hereby demised, in 
as good state and condition as reasonable use and wear thereof will 
permit, damages by the elements excepted. And the said party of the 
first part, doth covenant that the said party of the second part, on 
paying the said yearly rent, and performing the covenants aforesaid, 
shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the said 
demised premises for the term aforesaid. And it is further under- 
stood and agreed, that the covenants and agreements, contained in the 
within lease, are binding on the parties hereto and their legal repre- 
sentatives. 

In witness whereof, the parties to these presents have hereunto set 
their hands and seals the day and year first above written. 

[L. 8. 
[L. 8. 

Sealed and delivered in the presence of ) 

vin. 

« 

other covenants for lease. 

1. Covenant for renewal. 
3. Covenant for repairs. 

3. Covenant to pay taxes and assessments. 

4. Covenant for performance of the requirements of municipal Boards. 

1. Covenant for renewal. 

" And the said party of the first part, for and in consideration of 
the premises, hereby promises and agrees, to and with the said party 
of the second part, to make and execute unto him a new lease, similar 
in all respects to this, and to run for the same period of years, 



CHAPTER OF FORMS. 363 

of the premises aforesaid, upon receiving from the party of the second 
part a notice in writing claiming such renewal, at any time within 
three months prior to the expiration of the term granted by these 
presents." * 

2. Covenant for repairs. 

" And the said party of the first part, for and in consideration of 
the premises, hereby promises and agrees, to and with the said party 
of the second part, to put and keep the said premises in good tenant- 
able order and repair, at his own cost and expense, during the whole 
of the term hereby demised." 

3. CoTenaut to pay taxes and assessments. 

"And the said party of the second part hereby covenants to bear, 
pay, and discharge all such taxes, duties, and assessments, whatso- 
ever, as shall or may, during the said term hereby granted, be charged, 
assessed, or imposed upon the said demised premises." 

4. Covenant for performance of the requirements of mnnicipal 

Boards. 

" And the said party of the second part hereby covenants to 
respect and fully perform all the ordinances and requirements of the 
Board of Health, and of all other local and municipal authorities, and 
to protect and save the said party of the first part harmless there- 
from." 



IX. 

Security for rent to he endorsed on lease. 

In consideration of the letting of the premises within mentioned 
to the within named and the sum of one dollar 

to me paid by the said party of the first part, I, 

do hereby covenant and agree, to and with the party of the first part 
above named, and his legal representatives, that if default shall at 
any time be made by the said in the payment of the 

the rent or performance of the covenants contained in the within 
lease on his part to be paid and performed, that I, will 

well and truly pay the said rent, or any arrears thereof, that may re- 
main due unto the said party of the first part, and also all damages that 
may arise in consequence of the non-performance of said covenants, 
or either of them, withotit requiring notice of any such default from 
the said party of the first part. 

Witness ray hand and seal this day of in the 

year 187 . 

Witness, ) Ti. s.] 



364 LAlfDLOED AND TENANT. 



The surrender of a term, does not operate to dis- 
charge the tenant or his sureties from rent already 
accrued and payable, and a reletting of the demised 
premises, by the direction of the surety for the pay- 
ment of the rent, for the account and benefit of the 
surety, after the tenant has failed and abandoned the 
premises, does not operate as a surrender, so as to dis- 
charge the surety from further liability (McKensie ». 
Farrell, 4 Bosw. 192). 



Assignment of lease. 

Know all men by these presents, that I, , ' of the 

city of !New York, for and in consideration of the snm of 
lawful money of the United States, to me duly paid, by 
of the same place, have sold, and by these presents do grant, con- 
vey, assign, transfer, and set over, unto the said 
a certain indenture of lease, bearing date the day of 

in the year 187 , made by to 

of premises known as No. street, in the city of New York, 

and recorded in the office of the Register of the city and county of 
New York, on the day of 187 , in Liber 

of conveyances, p. with all and singular the premises therein 

mentioned and described, and the buildings thereon, together with the 
appurtenances. To have and to hold the same unto the said 
and liis assigns, from the day of 187 , 

for and during all the rest, residue, and remainder yet to come of and 
in the term of years mentioned in the said indenture of 

lease, subject, nevertheless, to the rents, covenants, conditions, and 
provisions therein also mentioned. And I do hereby covenant, 
grant, promise, and agree, to and with the said that 

the said assigned premises now are free and clear of and from all for- 
mer and other gifts, grants, bargains, sales, leases, judgments, execu- 
tions, back rents, taxes, assessments, and incumbrances whatsoever. 

In witness thereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal this 
day of 187 . 

Sealed and delivered in the presence of ) [l. s.] 



CHAPTER OF FOEMS. 365 

XI. 

Mortgage on lease. — Interest and insurance clause. 

This Indenture, made the day of in the year 187 , 

between John Doe of the city of New York, party of the first part, and 
Bichard Roe of the same place, party of the second part. Whereas, 
John Brown did, by a certain indenture of lease, bearing date the 
day of in the year 187 , demise, lease, and 

to farm let, unto said John Doe, and to his executors, administra- 
tors and assigns, all and singular, the premises hereinafter mentioned 
and described, together with their appurtenances: To have and to 
hold the same unto the said John Doe, and to his executors, adminis- 
trators and assigns, for and during, and until the full end and term 
of twenty-one years, from the first day of May, a. d. 1775, and fully to 
be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefor unto the said John 
Brown, and to his executors, administrators, or assigns, the yearly rent 
or sum of dollars, payable quarterly in advance, on the 

first days of May, August, November, and February in each and every 
year during the said terra, and which said lease was duly recorded in 
the office of the Register of the city and county of New York, on the 
first day of May, 1875, in Liber 1000 of conveyances, p. 100. And 
whereas, the said party of the first part is justly indebted to the said 
party of the second part, in the sum of one thousand dollars, lawful 
money of the United States of America, secured to be paid by his cer- 
tain bond of obligation bearing even date with these presents, in the 
penal sum of two thousand dollars, lawful money as aforesaid, condi- 
tioned for tlie payment of the said first-mentioned sum of one thou- 
sand dollars, on the day of , which will be in the 
year 187 ,*and the interest thereon to be computed from the date 
thereof, at and after the rate of seven per cent, per annum, and to be 
paid half-yearly, which said bond also contains an agreement, that 
should any default be made in the payment of the said interest or any 
part thereof, on any day whereon the same is made payable, as above 
expressed, and should the same remain unpaid and in] arrear for the 
space of thirty days, that then, and from thenceforth, that is to say, 
after the lapse of the said thirty days, the aforesaid principal sum of 
with all the arrearages of interest thereon, shall, at 
the option of the said party of the second part, or his legal represen- 
tatives, become and be due and payable immediately thereafter, 
although the time limited for the payment thereof may not then have 
expired; anything in the said bond contained to the contrary thereof 
notwithstanding, as by the said bond or obligation and the condition 
thereof, reference being thereunto had, may more fully appear. 

Now this indenture witnesseth, That the said party of the first 
part, for the better securing the payment of the said sum of money 
mentioned in the condition of the said bond or obligation, with 
interest thereon, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, 
and also for and in consideration of the sum of one dollar, to him in 
hand paid by the said party of the second part, at or before the enseal- 
ing and delivery of these presents, the receipt whereof is hereby 
acknowledged, hath granted, bargained, sold, assigned, transferred, 



366 LANDLORD AKD fE3!fANT. 



and set over, and b^ these presents doth grant, bargain, sell, assign, 
transfer, and set over unto the said party of the second part, all that 
certain lot, piece, or parcel of land situate, lying, and being in the 
ward, of the city of New York, bounded and 
described as follows : (Here insert the description by metes and 
bounds) and which said premises are also known, and by the 
street, No. street, in said city. Together 

with all and singular the edifices, buildings, rights, members, 
privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging, or in any 
wise appertaining. And also all the estate, right, title, interest, term 
of years yet to come and unexpired, property, possession, claim and 
demand whatsoever, as well inlaw as in equity, of the said party of 
the first part, of, in and to the said demised premises, and every part 
and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances ; and also, the said in- 
denture of lease, and every clause, article and condition therein 
expressed and contained ; to have and to hold the said indenture of 
lease, and other hereby granted premises, unto. the said party of the 
second part, his executors, administrators and assigns, to his and their 
only proper use, benefit and behoof, for and during all the rest, 
residue, and remainder of the said term of years yet to come and un- 
expired: subject, nevertheless, to the rents, covenants, conditions and 
provisions in the said indenture of lease mentioned. Provided 
always, and these presents are upon this express condition, that if the 
said party of the first part, shall well and truly pay unto the said party 
of the second part, the said sum of money mentioned in the condition 
of the said bond or obligation, and the interest thereon, at the time 
and in the manner mentioned in the said condition, according to the 
true intent and meaning thereof, that then and from thenceforth, 
these presents and the estate hereby granted, shall cease, determine, 
and be utterly null and void, anything herein before contained to the 
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And the said party of the 
first part doth hereby covenant, grant, promise and agree to and with 
the said party of the second part, that he shall well and ■T;ruly pay 
unto the said party of the second part, the said sum of money men- 
tioned in the condition of the said bond or obligation, and the interest 
thereon, according to the condition of the said bond or obligation. 
And that the said premises hereby conveyed, now are free and clear 
of all incumbrances whatsoever, and that he hath good right and 
lawful authority to convey the same in manner and form hereby con- 
veyed. And if default shall be made in the payment of the said sum 
of money above mentioned, or in the interest which shall accrue 
thereon, or of any part of either, that then and from thenceforth it shall 
be lawful for the said party of the second part, and his assigns, to sell 
transfer, and set over, all the rest, residue and remainder of the said 
term of years then yet to come, and all other the right, title, and 
interest of the said party of the first part, of, in and to the'same, at 
public auction, according to the act in such case made and provided: 
And as the attorney of the said party of jthe first part for that purpose 
by these presents duly authorized, constituted and appointed, to make, 
seal, execute and deliver to thfe purchaser or purchasers thereof, a 
good and sufiBcient assignment, transfer, or other conveyance in the 
law for the same premises, with the appurtenances, and out of the 
money arising from such sale to retain the principal and interest 
which shall then be due on the said bond or obligation, together with 
the costs and charges of advertisement and sale of the same premises, 



CHAPTER OF FORMS. 367 



rendering the overplus of the purchase money (if any there shall be), 
unto the said party of the first part, or his assigns, which sale, so to be 
made, shall be u perpetual bar, both in law and equity, against the 
said party of the first part, and against all persons claiming or to 
claim the premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under him, them 
or any of them. And it is also agreed by and between the parties to 
these presents, that the said party of the first part, shall and will keep 
the buildings erected and to be erected upon the lands above con- 
veyed, insured against loss and damage by fire, by insurers, and in 
an amount approved by the said party of the second part, and assign 
the policy and certificates thereof to the said party of the second part, 
and in default thereof, it shall be lawful for the said party of the 
second part to eflfect such insurance, and the premium and premiums 
paid for effecting the same shall be a lien on the said , mortgaged 
premises, added to the amount of the said bond or obligation, and 
secured by these presents, and payable on demand, with interest at 
the rate of seven per cent, per annum. 

In witness whereof, the party of the first part to these presents 
hath hereunto set his hand and seal, the day and year first above 
written. 

JOHN DOE. [l. 8.] 
Sealed and delivered in the presence of ) 
John Pbtkrsois. \ 

XII. 

Bond to accompany foregoing mortgage — interest con- 
dition. 

Know all men by these presents, that I John Doe, of the city 
of New York, am held and firmly bound unto Richard Roe, of the 
same place in the sum of two thousand dollars, lawful money of the 
United States of America, to be paid to the said Richard Roe, his 
executors, administrators or assigns: for which payment well and 
truly to be made, I bind myself, my heirs, executors and administrators 
firmly by these presents. Sealed with my seal dated the 
day of 187 . 

The condition of the obligation is such, that if the above bounden 
John Doe, his heirs, executors or administrators, shall well and truly 
pay, or cause to be paid, unto the above named Richard Roe, his ex- 
ecutors, administrators, or assigns, the just and full sum of one thou- 
sand dollars, on the day of which 
will be in the year 187 , and the interest thereon, to be computed from 
the date hereof, at and after the rate of seven per cent, per annum, 
and to be paid half yearly, then the above obligation to be void, other- 
wise to remain in full force and virtue. 

And it is hereby expressly agreed, that should any default be made 
in the payment of the said interest, or any part thereof, on any day 
whereon the same is made payable as above expressed, and should the 
same remain unpaid and in arrear for the space of thirty days, then 
and from thenceforth, that is to say, after the lapse of the said thirty 
days, the aforesaid principal sum of one thousand dollars with all ar- 
rearge of interest thereon, shall, at the option of the said Richard Roe 



368 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

or his legal representatives become and be due and payable imme- 
diately thereafter, although the period above limited for the payment 
thereof may not then have expired, any thing herein before contained 
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. 

JOHN DOE. [L. s.] 
Sealed and delivered in the presence of f 
John Pbtbksoh. 

XIIL 
Party wall agreement. 

This agreement made the day of 187 , 

between John Doe of the city, county, and state of New York of the 
first part, and Eichard Roe of the same place, party of the second 
part, witnesseth: 

That whereas the said John Doe is the owner of the house and lot 
known as No. street in the said city of New York, 

and the said Richard Roe is the owner of the lot adjoining the same, 
on the northerly side thereof, on which last mentioned lot the said 
Richard Roe is about to erect a brick building; now, therefore, the 
said John Doe, in consideration of the sum of $ , to him 

in hand paid, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, doth for 
himself, his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, covenant, 
grant, promise, and agree to and with the said Richard Roe, his heirs, 
executors, administrators and assigns, that he the said Richard Roe, 
his heirs and assigns, shall and may, in the erection of the brick build- 
ing about to be built, as aforesaid, freely and lawfully, but in a work- 
manlike manner, make use of the northerly gable end wall of the said 
John Doe's house, or so much thereof as the said Richard Roe, his 
heirs or assigns may desire, as a party wall, to be continued and used 
as such forever. 

And the said John Doe and Richard Roe do hereby mutually cov- 
enant and agree, for and with themselves, and their respective heirs 
and assigns, that if it shall hereafter become necessary to repair or 
rebuild the whole, or any portion of the said party wall, the expense 
of such repairing or rebuilding shall be borne equally by the said 
John Doe and Richard Roe, their respective heirs and assigns, as to 
so much and such portion of the said wall as the said Richard Roe, 
his heirs and assigns, shall or may use for the purpose aforesaid ; and 
that whenever the said party wall, or any portion thereof, shall be 
rebuilt, it shall be erected on the same spot where it now stands, and 
be of the same size, and the same or similiar materials, and of like 
quality, with the present wall. 

It is further mutually understood and agreed between the afore- 
said parties, that this agreement shall be perpetual, and at all times 
be construed into a covenant running with the land ; and that no 
part of the fee of the soil upon which the wall of- the said John Doe, 
above described, now stands, shall pass to, or be vested in, the said 
Richard Roe, his heirs and assigns, in or by these presents. 

In witness whereof the said parties have hereunto set their hands 
and seals the day and year aforesaid. 

In presence of ) JOHN DOE. [l. s.J 

f RICHARD ROE. [l. s.J 



CHAPTER OF FORMS. 369 



Another form of party wall agreement. 

This agreement made the day of 187 , -between 

John Doe of the city, county, and state of New York, party of the 

first part, and Richard Roe of the same place, party of the second 

part, witnesseth : 

That whereas the said John Doe is the owner of the lot of land 
known as No. street, in the city of New York, and the 

said Richard Roe is the owner of the lot adjoining the same on the 
northerly side thereof; and whereas the said .lohn Doe is about to 
erect on his said lot a five-story brick building, fifty feet in height, 
and sixty feet in depth, the northerly division walls of which are to 
be of brick and sixteen inches thick, and the foundation wall of 
which is to be of stone twenty inches thick, and is to be put down 
fifteen feet below the curb. 

Now, therefore, in consideration of the mutual covenants herein 
contained, and for the purpose of making the said northerly wall a 
party wall, the said parties have mutually agreed to and with each 
other as follows : 

First. That the said wall shall be built by the said John Doe, in 
manner aforesaid, equally upon the land of each of the parlies 
hereto. 

Second. That the said Richard Roe will pay to the said John Doe 
at the time he makes use of the said party wall, one half of the ex- 
pense of erecting the same, with the interest added. 

Third. That in case there shall be any dispute as to the amount of 
such expense, and the parties hereto shall be unable to agree upon 
the amount thereof, the same shall be left to the arbitrament of John 
Jones, an indifEerent person hereby chosen as arbiter to determine the 
same ; and the award to be made by the said Jones is to be final and 
conclusive upon each of us, and the amount so determined is to be 
paid on demand. 

Fourth. This agreement is to apply to and bind the parties hereto, 
and their respective heirs, grantees, and assigns, as a covenant run- 
ning with the land. 

In witness whereof, &c. [as in last form]. 



XIV. 

Permission to insert beams in wall of the adjoining 

house. 

This agreement made this day of 187 , between 

Jonn Doe of the city, county, and state of New York, party of the 
first part, and Richard Roe of the same place, party of the second 
part, as follows: 

Whereas the said John Doe is the owner of the house and lot 
known as No. street, in the said oity of New York, and 

the said Richard Roe is the owner of the lot adjoining the same, on the 
northerly side thereof, on which last-mentioned lot the said Richard 
Roe is about to erect a brick building, and desires permission to in- 
47 



370 LANDIiOKD AND TENANT. 

sert the beams thereof into the said northerly wall of the said John 
Doe's building. Now therefore this agreement witnesseth : 

That the said John Doe, for and in consideration of the sum of 
dollars, to him in hand paid, the receipt whereof is hereby 
acknowledged, doth covenant, grant, promise, and agree, to and with 
the said Eichard Eoe, his heirs, executors, administrators, and as- 
signs, that he, the said Eichard Eoe, his heirs and assigns, shall and 
may, in the erection of the brick building about to be built by him, 
insert the beams thereof into the said northerly wall of the said jTohn 
Doe's house aforesaid, and that the same may there remain as long 
as the said wall stands. 

The covenants aforesaid are to run with the land, and bind the 
parties hereto, the heirs, grantees, and assigns. 

In witness whereof, &c. [as in Form XIU.] 

XV. 

Builder's contract. 

Articles of agreement, made this day of 187 , 

between John Doe, of the city of New York, party of the first 

part, and Eichard Eoe, of the same place, party of the second part. 

First. The said party of the second part doth hereby for himself, 
his heirs, executors and administrators, covenant, promise and agree 
to and with the said party of the first part, his executors, adminis- 
trators or assigns, that he, the said party of the second part, his exe- 
cutors or administrators, shall and will, for the consideration hereinafter 
mentioned, on or before the day of 

187 , well and sufficiently erect and finish the new building upon the 
lot known as No. street, in said city, agreeably to 

the drawings and specifications made by John Jones, architect, and 
signed by the said parties and hereunto annexed, within the time 
aforesaid, in a good, workmanlike and substantial manner, to the sat- 
isfaction and under the direction of the said Jones, to be testified by a 
writing or certificate under the hand of the said Jones, and also shall 
and will provide such good, proper and sufficient materials, of all 
kinds whatsoever, as shall be proper and sufficient for the completing 
and finishing all the and other works of the said 

building mentioned in. the specification for the sum 

of % And the said party of the first part, doth hereby 

for himself, his heirs, executors, and administrators, covenant, prom- 
ise and agree, to and with the said party of the second part, his 
excutors and administrators, that he, the said party of the first. part, 
his executors or administrators, shali and will, in consideration of the 
covenants and agreements being strictly performed and kept by the said 
party of the second part, as specified, well and truly pay, or to cause to 
be paid unto the said party of the second part, his executors, admin- 
istrators or assigns, the siim of $ , lawful money of 
the United States of America in manner following : that is to say. 

1st Payment f when 

2nd " $ when 

3rd " % when 

4th " $ when 

Last " $ when the said work is en- 

tu-ely completed, according to said drawings and specifications. 



OHAPTEE OF FOEMS. 3?1 

Provided, that in each of the said cases, a certificate shall be ob- 
tained and signed by the said architect, John Jones. 

And it is hereby further agreed by and between the said parties : 

Mrst. The specifications and the drawings are intended to co-oper- 
ate, so that any works exhibited in the drawings, and not mentioned in 
the specifications, ' or vice versa, are to be executed the same as if it 
were mentioned in the- specifications and set forth in the drawings, to 
the true meaning and intention of the said drawings and specifica- 
tions, without any extra charge whatsoever. 

Second. The contractor, at his own proper cost and charges, is to 
provide all manner of materials and labor, scaffolding, implements, 
moulds, models, and cartage of every description, for the due perform 
mance of the several erections. 

Third. Should the owner, at any time during the progress of the 
said building, request any alteration, deviation, additions, or omis- 
sions, from the said contract, he shall be at liberty to do so, and the 
same shall in no way affect or make void the contract, but will be 
added or deducted from the amount of the contract, as the case may 
be, by a fair and reasonable valuation. 

Fourth. Should the contractor at any time during the progress of said 
works, refuse or neglect to supply a sufliciency of materials or workmen, 
the owner shall have the power to provide materials and workmen, 
after three days' notice in writing being given, to finish the said 
works, and the expense shall be deducted from the amount of the 
contract. 

Fifth. Should any dispute arise respecting the true construction or 
meaning of the drawings or specifications, the same shall be decided 
by said architect, Jones, and his decision shall be final and conclusive; 
but should any dispute arise respecting the true value of the extra 
work, or of the works omitted, the same shall be valued by two com- 
petent persons — one employed by the owner, and the other by the 
the contractor — and those two shall have power to name an umpire 
whose decision shall be binding on all parties. 

Sixth. The owner shall not in any manner be answerable or ac- 
countable for any loss or damage that shall or may happen to the said 
works, or any part or parts thereof respectively, or for any of the 
materials or other things used and employed in finishing and comple- 
ting the same (loss or damage by fire excepted). 

Seventh. [Here insert any other conditions.] 

In witness whereof, the said parties to these presents have here- 
unto set their hands and seals, the day and year above written. 

JOHN DOE. [L. 8.] 

RICHARD ROE. [l. s.] 
In presence of ) 
John Brown. \ 



372 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

XVI. 

Forms of proof and acknowledgment of instruments. * 

1. By one or more persons. 
3. By subscribing witness. 
3. By husband and wife. 

1. By one or more persons. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

I certify that on this day of 

187 , before me personally appeared known to me 

to be the individual described in, and who executed the foregoing 
instrument, and acknowledged that he executed the same. 

Notary Public, N. Y. Co. 

2. By subscribing witness. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

On this day of a. d. 187 , before me 

personally came to me known to be the subscribing 

witness to the foregoing instrument, who, being by me duly sworn, 
did depose and say, that he resided in the city of New York; that he 
knew the individual described in, and who executed 

the foregoing instrument ; that he was present, and saw [him or them] 
execute the same; that [he or they] acknowledged the execution 
thereof; whereupon he, the said affiant, became subscribing witness 
thereto. 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

3. By husband and wife. 

State of New York, city and county of New York, ss. 

I certify that on this day of 187 , before 

me personally appeared and his 

wife, known to me to be the individuals described in, and who exe- 
cuted the foregoing instrument, and severally acknowledged that they 
executed the same ; and the said on a private 

examination by me made, separate and apart from her husband, 
acknowledged to me that she executed the same freely, without any 
fear or compulsion of or from her said husband . 

Notary Public N. Y. Co. 

* Of course the various forms must be made to suit the peculiar 
circumstances of each particular case. 



APPENDI'lX:. 



Party walls. 

In the case of Nash v. Kemp (reported in the New 
York Daily Register, October 25th, 1875), tried before 
Judge Van Voest, at the Special Term of the Supreme 
Court, and decided by him on the fourth of that month, 
it appeared that the plaintiff was the owner of a lot of 
land on the easterly side of Fifth Avenue, in the city 
of New York. Sarah A. Livermore, the defendant's 
grantor, was the owner of a lot adjoining the north- 
erly line of the plaintiffs lot. The plaintiff being 
about to erect a building upon his land, entered into 
an agreement, in writing, with Sarah A. Livermore, in 
respect to the northerly wall of the building to be 
erected by him, in which it was agreed that the north- 
erly wall of such building so to be erected, should be 
constructed partly upon the land of the plaintiff, and 
partly upon the land of Sarah A. Livermore ; that is 
to say, two inches of the wall should be upon the land 
of the plaintiff, and fourteen inches thereof upon the 
land of Sarah A. Livermore, and should be a party 
wall between the building so to be erected by the 
plaintiff, and any building which might be erected 
upon the land of Sarah A . Livermore. The wall in 
question was to be built by the plaintiff, at his individ- 
ual cost, in a substantial manner. He agreed to build 
it sixteen inches thick throughout its entire length and 



374 landloJbI) awd tenan*. 

ieight. It was to be seventy feet in length along the 
north side of the plaintiff' s building, and to be at least 
four stories high. It was agreed that Sarah A. Liver- 
more and her assigns might, without cost or expense 
to her or them, use " the party wall so to be con- 
structed," whenever she or they should erect any 
building upon her land. 

The plaintiff proceeded at once to erect his build- 
ing, and completed the same, including the north wall 
in question. 

The plaintiff built the front wall of his house at the 
same time with the northerly wall, except carrying the 
latter up one story ahead, the brick work of the two 
walls constituting, in fact, one structure, blocked and 
toothed in at their junction at the northwest corner of 
the building. The front wall was faced with brown 
stone. The ashlar was anchored to the brick wall be- 
hind, as that went up. 

The brick work of the front wall, to which the ash- 
lar was anchored, at its junction with the northerly 
wall, although toothed and blocked in, was further 
secured thereto, by means of anchors firmly imbedded 
in the brickwork, of which there are two in each story, 
about eight feet apart. These anchors run diagonally 
from about the centre of the northerly or party wall to 
the centre of the front wall. The object of this further 
security being to tie and hold the two walls more firmly 
together. The front wall of the plaintiff's house, ex- 
clusive of the ashlar, is about fifteen inches in thick- 
ness. The northerly or party wall was constructed of 
the agreed thickness up to a point ten inches from the 
line of the avenue, where, as to the north half of the 
wall, the same terminated. The south half, however, 
was continued, and interlaced with the front wall, as 
already observed, until within about four inches of the 
street line, leaving a space of four inches between it 
and the front line for the ashlar. 

By this method of construction, there was a jog in 



APPEBDIX. 376 

the northwest corner of the wall, ten inches in depth 
and eight inches in width, formed by the intersection 
of the face of the north half and the north line of the 
wall, as carried by the plaintiff towards the street line 
of the lots, in front. This jog was left by the plaintiff, 
extending from the foundation to the top of the wail, 
to be occupied by the owner of the adjoining lots in 
connecting his front with and supporting the same 
thereon. After the completion of the plaintiff's build- 
ing, the defendant acquired title to the land of Sarah 
A. Livermore, and erected thereon a building known 
as the "Buckingham Hotel." When the defendant 
came to connect his front wall with the party wall, he 
complained to the plaintiff that he had occupied with 
his front wall, including the ashlar, more space of the 
party wall than he was j ustly entitled to. 

The claim of the defendant being that, as to his 
front wall, the plaintiff was entitled to occupy or over- 
lap the party wall to the extent of two inches only, and 
up to the northerly line of his lot, whereas he had 
covered the same with his front wall to its centre, and 
had in this manner appropriated to himself a frontage 
of six inches of the defendant's land lying in front of 
the party wall and up to the line of the avenue. The 
defendant commenced to cut away six inches of the 
plaintiff's ashlar, lying immediately south of the 
centre line of the party wall, when he was restrained 
by an injunction order obtained in this action, and the 
plaintiff, by his complaint and upon the trial, asks that 
it be adjudged that he, the plaintiff, is entitled to use 
the front of the said party wall up to the centre line 
thereof, and that the defendant be enjoined from in- 
terfering with the plaintiff in such use. 

The plaintiff claims in his complaint to have built 
the party wall as agreed, and to have used eight inches 
of its front, and up to the centre line thereof with the 
front of his building. He would appear to concede 
that the party wall proper, which he agreed to build, 



376 LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

was not itself to extend in front to the street line of the 
lots. 

The court, after remarking that the precise c[uestion 
as to how much of the face of the wall in question, 
regarded as a party wall, the plaintiff might use to 
connect therewith his front, had not been decided by any 
case to which reference had been made by the counsel 
for the parties herein, finally decided that the plaintiff 
was not entitled to the relief demanded, that he was 
only entitled to use so much of the face of the wall as 
was erected upon his own land (which in the present 
case was two inches), and the injunction restraining 
the adjoining owner from cutting away that portion of 
the face of the plaintiff's wall which (in excess of the 
two inches) overlapped the defendant's premises, was 
removed by the dismissal of the plaintiff's complaint. 

AffldaTit for appeal to county court. 

In addition to the explanation given on p. 328, in 
reference to the affidavit upon appeal to the county 
court it was deemed advisable to give the form of the 
affidavit required for such appeal, prior to the method 
provided by the Code, § 351. 

State of New York, county, ss. 

Eichard Roe, being duly sworn, deposes and says : That on the 
day of 187 , John Doe of 

in said county, made and presented to justice of the 

peace in and for said county, his affidavit, of which the, following is a 
copy, to wit : 

(Insert here the affidavit.) 

Whereupon the said justice issued his summons, dated on the 
day of 187 , requiring this de- 

ponent forthwith to remove from the premises, in the said affidavit 
of the said John Doe mentioned, or to show cause before the said jus- 
tice, at his office in on the day of 
187 , at o'clock in the noon, why pos- 
session should not be delivered to the landlord (If the summons is in- 
formal, insert a copy of it) ; on which said day, to wit, the 
day of 187 , the said John Doe and the said 
Richard Roe, appeared before the said justice, whereupon the follow- 
ing proceedings were had (Here state the proceedings, with the evi- 
dence of the witnessess, if any were sworn). 

Deponent further says, that upon such hearing the justice gave 
judgment for the said John Doe, that the said premises in his said 



APPENDIX. 377 

affidavit mentioned, should be delivered to him as the landlord (oi-, 
against the said John Doe, and that the said premises in his said 
affidavit mentioned, should not be delivered to him as the landlord). 

And deponent assigns the following grounds of error, upon which 
he appeals to the county court of the said connty of , to 

wit: 

(State the grounds of error distinctly and concisely.) 

RICHARD ROE. 
Sworn to before me, &c. ) 

I hereby allow the within appeal, this day of 

187 . 

Justice of Supreme Court, 
(or) County Judge. 
48 



GENERAL INDEX. 



For Index to Chapters, see Table of Contents, at page 5. 
For Index to Forms, see that title, page 10. 



Abatement — by tenant's death, 298. 
Acknoirlcdgments — Forms of, 373. 
Act — in reference to untenantable premises, 129. 

" " Construction of, 129. 

" Forcible Entries, 174. 
" Summary Proceedings, 183. 
" Bawdy Houses, 303. 
" Illegal Trades, 307. 
" Squatters, 346. 
Action for rent — See titles "Rent," "Use and Occupation," and 

"Remedies." 
Adjoining — building, damages from, 73, 134. 
See "Party Walls." 

Rights under covenant as to character of, 163. 
Inserting beams in, 147, 369. 
Excavations, damages from, 134. 
Owners, other acts of, 143. 
Adjournments — When and for what time, 191, 372. 

Affidavit to adjourn, form of, 272. 
Adjudication — by magistrate, its effect, 385, 386, 388. 
by Jury, 283. 

Certified copy as evidence, 289. 
Administnilors — When to commence proceedings, 75, 76. 
Remedies of, 75, 76, 77, 96, 214, 315, 248. 
Preference in payment of rent, 63. 
Liability of, if possession taken, 85. 
Admissions — See title Counter Affidavit. 
Attidarit — in proceedings of forcible entry, 175, 200, 301. 
of service in same proceedings, 203. 
of facts in summary proceedings, 186. 
in summary proceedings, who to make, 186. 

" " its requisites, 337 to 349. 

Sufficiency of, tenancy at sufferance, 343. 
Whom to be sworn before, 345. 
Forms of in summary proceedings, 345 to 350. 
Form of by landlord for non-payment of rent, 345. 
" agent " " 246. 

" landlord, expiration of term, 247. 

" " tenancy at will, 347. 

" on sale under execution, 248. 



380 INDEX. 

Affidavit — Form of on mortgage foreclosure, 249. 

of service of summons, forms of, 359 to 261. 

to adjourn trial, form of, 273. 

of claim, proceeaings on execution sale, 393. 

under bawdy house act, by landlord, 309. 
" " " neighbor, 311. 

" illegal trades act, 313. 

on appeal to county court, 376. 
Affirm — .Election to,, in case of fraud, 415. 
Ag:eiit — Power of agent to execute lease, 29. 

Effect of lease signed by agent without disclosing the owner's 
name, 30. 

Power to accept surrender, 119. 

of landlord, may remove certain tenants, 186. 
Agreements — for occupation of land in city of New York, 8. 

effect of tenant entering and refusing to accept lease, 14, 61, 813. 

for lease, and lease distinguished, 30. 

annulled by warrant, 192, 295. 

for party wall, forms of, 368, 369. 

for inserting beams in adjoining house, forms of, 369. 
Aldermen — have jurisdiction on "forcible entries," 199. 
Amendments — in summary proceedings, 370. 
Amended Return — How procured, 337. 
Amount of Costs — Appeal to County Court, 345. 
Answer — See title " Counter Affidavit." 
Appeals — See titles " County Court," and "Certiorari." 

to Court of Appeals, in summary proceedings, 193, 194. 

from Justices of Peace to County Court, 195, 334. 

security thereupon, 195, 330. 

from Justices of Peace, 834 to 345. 

notice of, form, 328. 

by one not a party, 345. 
Appearance — want of, admits facts alleged by landlord, 263. 
Appendix, 373. ' 

Application — of payments, 54, 55. 
Appropriation — of payments, 54, 55. 
Appurtenances — defined, 31. 
Argument— upon appeal, 339, 340. 

Notice of, 339, 340. 
Assignment — of lease, form, of, 364. 
Assigrnation Houses — Of proceedings against, 303 to 313. 
Assigning — lease, in violation of covenant, 71, 73. 

" 83, 84. 

Assignees— of landlord, remedies of, 76 to 78, 96, 214, 315, 243 
Who are, 84. 

Liability of. 84, 85. 

Discharged by further assigment, 85. 

of lessor, may remove certain tenants, 186. 
General, lor "Benefit of Creditors ' when liable, 85. 
Liability as, of party buying at foreclosure sale of leasehold 
interest, 222. 



Assignor — remains liable after assignment, 84. 

Attachment — against witness, form of 359. 

Order for, 358. 
Auxiliary remedies, 232. 
Avoiding— lease for fraud, 34, 36, 37. 
Award — of restitution after inquisition, form of, 205. 
" " Verdict, form of, 310. 

See title "Restitution." 
Bawdy House Act, 303 to 313. 
houses, a nuisance, 307. 
houses, criminal liability, 307. 
Beams — ^inserted in adjoining house " Form of agreement," 369. 
Bills — ^Payment of rent in, 47 to 62. 
Board and lodging' — Illegal contracts for, 37, 38, 39. 

" Agreement for does not create relation of landlord 

and tenant, 313. 
Boarders — Eights of, 30. 

Bond — on removal of forcible entry proceedings, 180, 316. 
how returned thereon, 181. 
to stay warrant, form of, 389. 
Insolvent tenant, 290. 
Tenant on execution sale, 391. 
Certiorari, "Forcible Entry Proceedings," 316. 
Ordinary form, 367. 
Bowling alley — Premises let for, 40. 

Breach of covenant — When no defense to summary preceedings, 338. 
Brooklyn — City Judges have jurisdiction of summary proceedings, 319. 
Brothel — Houses occupied as, 36 to 40, 303 to 313. 
Buffalo — Justices of Superior Court have jurisdiction. 
In summary proceedings, 319. 

Bnilder's contract— " Form of," 370. 
Buildings — Tenant's right to remove, 87, 88. 

See "Adjoining buildings." 
Caveat emptor — Maxim of, applies to lettings, 34. 
Certified copy — Adjudication as evidence, 398. 
Certiorari — to remove proceedings on forcible entry, 180, 314. 

Bond to be given thereupon, 180, 316. 

proceedings in Supreme Court, 181. 

to review summary proceedings, 193, 317. 

not to stay proceedings, 193. 

to review proceedings on forcible entry and detainer, with 
forms, 314 to 317. 

Petition for, form of, 317. 

to remove proceedings, form of, 316. 

Bond on allowance of, form, 316. 

Beturn of justice to, 317. 

to review summary proceedings, 317. 

Writ of, how obtained, and how returnable, 317 to 319. 

Rule in England as to removal of convictions upon certiorari, 830. 

Petition for to review summary proceedings, form of, 330. 



i382 TKDEX. 

Certiorari — Order directing, form of, 331. 

Return of justices upon, 333, 335, 336. 

Reversal of judgment upon, form of order, 3a3. 

Restitution upon form of writ, 333. 

by one, not a party, 345. 

See " Appeals to County Court.'' 
Challenges — to jury, 378. 

Character — of previous occupant, effect on lease, 34. 

See "Bawdy Houses " and "Validity of Lease." 
Charge— of judge, 380 to 383. 
Chattels — Real, 5. 

Check — Payment of rent, in, 47 to 53. 
City — Judge of New York, has certain jurisdiction, 199, 319. 

Judges of Brooklyn, have certain jurisdiction, 199, 319. 

of New York, agreements for lettings, 8. 
Common law — Demand for rent, 335. 
Common Pleas — Jurisdiction on forcible entries, 199. 

See "County Courts," 
Complaint — for forcible entry, 175, 300. 

Form of, 300. 

to be in writing, affidavit therewith, 175, 301. 

Form of, 301. 

to be filed, 301. 

against squatter, 348. • 

tenant for rent, " form of," 359. 
surety for rent, "form of," 360. 
Concealing — oliaracter of former occupant, 84, 35. 

other facts, 43, 48. 
Conclusive — Return of justice, 337. 
Condition — of premises, when to be disclosed, 34, 35. 
Conditions — enforcing compliance of by action, 64. 
Constable — to summon jury, in summary proceedings, 189, 371. 
Constable's — return to venire, in summary prooceediugs, 371. 

to execute process on forcible entry, 179. 

return to precept on proceedings on forcible entries, 303. 

in city of New York are marshals, 396. 
Construction — Rules applicable to summary proceedings, 316. 
Contents — See " table of," in front of book. 
Contract-Builder's, form of, 370. 
Conyentional — relation of landlord and' tenant, when it exists, 59 to 

63, 311, 313. 
Cornish — of adjoining house overhanging, 73, 73. 
Corporations — Leases by, and to, 103, 103. 
Costs — on reversal of summary proceedings, 194, 319. . 

Forcible entry proceedings, 815. 

Appeal to County Court, 348 to 345. 

Setting ofl in County Court, 843. 

How awarded, 843. 

of summary proceedings in city of New York, how col- 
lected, 296. 



INDEX. 383 

Cultiyation — tenants under agreement for, 185, 313. 

Counter aliidavit — in summary proceedings, 189, 366 to 369. 

Counter claim — for want of repairs, 104, 105. 

County Courts — Appeals to, from justices of peace, 193, 334 to 345. 

Review of adjudication before justices, 335, 336. 

Notice of appeg,! to state grounds, 337. 

Form of notice of appeal, 338. 
" appeal, 338. 

Service of notice of appeal, 338, 330. 

Security upon appeal, form of, 330, 331. 

Errors and omissions in, 333. 

Execution, how stayed pending appeal, 333. 

Efiect of appeal and extent of stay, 833. 

Death of justice and filing undertaking, 333. 

filing notice of appeal instead of service, 333. 

Return when and how made and compelled, 333. 
" what to contain, 334. 

Impeaching return, 335. 

False return. 335. 

Form of justice's return, 335, 336. 

Return how made, if justice out of ofBce, 337, 338. 

Further return may be ordered, 337. 

Return conclusive, 337. 

How to procure amended return, 337. 

Form of order to show cause, 337. 

In case justice be dead, insane, or absent, 338. 

hearing upon return, 339, 340. 

dismissing appeal if not brought on, 339. 

Only one notice necessary, 339. , 

To be heard on original papers, ;339. 

Objections and exceptions, 340. 

rehearing, 341. 

Respondent must appear, 341. 

Judgment, how given, 341. 

Judgment roll, 343. 

Costs, how awarded, 342. 

ordering restitution, 343. 

setting off costs, 343. 

Costs on appeal, 343 to 345. 

By one not a party, 345. 

rehearing upon appeal, 341. 

Respondent must appear at argument, 341. 

Affidavit upon appeal to, 876. 
County Judges — Jurisdiction, forcible entries, 175, 180. 

" " in summary proceedings, 184, 319. 

Court of Appeals — Review by, in summary proceedings, 193, 194. 

" forcible entries, 815. 

Covenants — express and implied, 37. 

to renew, see "Renewals " and "Foi'ms of." 

Enforcing by action, 64. 

" Forfeitures for breach, 69. 

to repair, 106 to 108. 

" includes what, 108. 

" effect of, 108. 



384 INDEX. 

CoTenants — Artion for breach, 109, 110. 

running with the land, 111. 

as to character of adjoining buildings, 163. 

in leases, 361 to 363. 
Creation — and division of estates, 5. 

Criminal Courts — may award restitution for forcibles entries, 181. 
Damages — to property by malicious injury, 57, 68. 

" " from adjoining buildings, 73 to 74, 134 to 143. 

for withholding possession of property from tenants, 83. 

to evicted tenant, 83. 

UBon reversal of summary proceedings, 194, 319, 350, 355. 

Summary proceedings in cases in which magistrate has no jur- 
isdiction, 350. 
Death— of landlord, rent to go to whom, 75, 76, 96, 314, 315, 343. 

" , who to commence proceedings, 76, 314, 315, 343. 

" tenant, effect of, 398. 

Decision — of magistrate, 384. 

" " its effect, 384, 388. 

" " when to be rendered, 387. 

Default — of tenant on return day admits facts, 363. 
Defense — filing counter affidavit. 189, 366 to 369. 

breach of covenant, 238. 

See eviction, surrender, untenantable premises. 

Validity of leases. 
Definition — of year, half year and quarter of year, 9. 

of month, 10. 

of leases, 19. 

of certain terms, 30. 

of rent, 31, 331. 

of covenants running with the land, 111. 

of surrender, 115. 

of easement, 161. 

of real estate, 33. 
Deliberations — of jury, 383. 
Demand— for rent, 185, 333 to 338. 

" when and how made, 333 to 228. 
" on joint tenants, 328. 

for jury trial when to be made, 370. 
Denial — See title, "Counter Affidavit." 

Demise — The act of granting, an estate is called a demise, 19. 
Description — of premises, what sufficient, 343 to 345. 
Deserted Premises — Statute in reference to, 183. 

When justice to view, 183. 

When landlord to be put in possession, 183. 

Appeal by tenant when and how made, 183. 

Power of county court restitution, 184. 
Detainer — forcible, see title forcible entry and detainer. 
Determination — of particular estate by notice to quit, 13. 

of certain leases, 28. 
Disclosing' facts — See title, concealment and svppressio veri. 
Dismissing appeal — if not brought on, 339. 



INDEX. 385 

Disorderly house- Proceedings against 303 to 313. 
Dispossession — Remedy after, 395. 

Dispossessing proceedings — The statute relative to, 183 to 196. 
Law and practice upon, 311 to 398. 
Injunction enjoining, 399 to 303. 
against bawdy houses, 303 to 313. 
against illegal trades, 307 to 313. 
District Conrt — Justices jurisdiction, forcible entries, 180, 199. 

" " " Summary proceedings, 184, 185, 

319. 
Division — of estates, 5. 

Docliet — of justice of peace, 195, 834. 

Double Kent, 17. 

Easements Certain, 161. .. 

" Definition of, 161. 

" See title, "Party Walls." 

Eaves — of adjoining-buildings overhanging, 73, 73. 
Effect— of tenant's death, 398. 
Eiection — to affirm in case of fraud, 45. 

between inconsistent remedies, 79. 

Purposes rooms hired for, 40. 
Eminent — Domain, effect of exercising right of, 137. 
Endorsement — upon summons in summary proceedings, 188. 

" form of, 357, 358. 

Enjoining — summary proceedings, 399 to 303. 
Entries — upon land to be peaceable, 174, 197, 198. 
Estates — creation and division of, 5. 

Of inhei'itance, 5. 

for life, 5. 

for years, 5, 8. 

at will, 5, 10, 15, 335. 

by sufferance, 5, 10, 15, 335. 

of freehold, 5. 

Determination of, see Holding over, 7. 

at will and by sufferance terminated by notice to quit, 13. 
Estoppel — Tenant estopped from disputing landlord's title, 97. 

" Extent of rule, 97. 

Eviction — and what amounts to, 131 to 138. 

Effect of erections on adjoining lot, 137, 141. 

Effect of, 137, 128. 

" ' acts of adjoining owners no eviction, 137, 141. 

Eminent domain, 137. 

Damtiges for, 83. 
Evidence — upon trial, 379. 

Certified copy adjudication, 398. 
Excavations— 133 to 144. 

Right to make, 133. 

as affecting adjoining owners, 134. 

Effect of adjoining upon tenants, 134. 
"? , Other acts of adjoining owners, 143. 

adjoining highway, 143. 
49 



386 INDEX. 

Exceptions — and objections, 340. 

Execution — sale on judgment tenant holding over after, 185, 236. 
proceedings founded upon bond therein, form of, 391. 
Sale, affidavit in such case, 392. 
liow stayed upon appeal to county court, 333. 
form of other affidavits in proceedings on sale, 348. 
Executors — Preferance by in payment of debts, 63. 
Remedies of, 75, 76, 96, 314, 215, 243. 
When to commence proceedings. 75, 76, 96, 314, 215, 243. 
E.xpinitioii — of term, see title Holding-over. 

of certain leases, 28, 333. 
Express covenants, 27. 
Extension of lease — s'ee title. Renewal. 
False — Representation, see title Fraud. 

Return of justice, 335. 
Farms — Cultivation agreement for, 186, 213. 
Fee — Simple absolute, 5. 
Feudal — Tenures in this country, 1 to 4. 

Tenures iu England, 1 to 4. 
T'Mxtures — Right of tenant to remove, 86, 87, 88. 
Forcible entry and detainer — Statute relating to, 174. 

" " Index to said statute, 174. 

" " The law and practiice upon, with all 

the forms used therein, 197 to 210. 
" " Proceedings how instituted, 199. 

" " Review by certiorari, 314 to 317. 

" '' Officers having jurisdiction, 180, 198. 

Foreelosnre— of mortgage, tenant holding over after, 185. 
" " upon lease, effect of, 323. 

Foi'feiture — for breach of condition, enforcing, 69. 
Former adjudication— Effect of, 383, 384, 288. 
Forms — See index to, in front of book. 

under forcible eatry proceedings, see pp. 197 to 810. 

under summary proceedings, see pp. 211 to 303. 

under bawdy house proceedings, see pp. 309 to 813. 

under illegal trade proceedings, see pp. 309 to 313. 
Fraud — Effect of, upon lease, 34 to 44. 

in misrepresenting rental, 41. 
" " value, 41. 

Remedy in case of, 44. 

Election to affirm, 45. 

Effect of taking possession, 45. 

See title Rescission. 

Rescission for, 91. 
Freehold estate, 5. 

Furnished house — Implied warranty in letting, 123. 
Further return— of justice, how pro(!ured, 337. 
Gutter — of adjoining building, damages from, 72, 73. 
Grantees— Remedies of, 76 to 78, 214, 215, 243. 
Hearing— Notice of, 339, 340, 



INDEX. 387 

Hearing —Notice of only one notice necessary, 339, 340. 

" " of on original papers, 339. 

" " of objections and exceptions, 340. 

" " of judgment how given, 341. 

" See title, " Trial." 
Hereditaments — defined, 31. 

Heirs-iit-law— right of, to rent, 75, 76, 96, 314, 215, 343. 

when to commence proceedings, 76, 314, 315, 343. 
Highway — work upon, and assessment therefor, 100. 

Excavations iipon, see Excavations. 
Holdiiig-OTCr — ^liability for, after determination of certain estate, 7. 

Effect of, 8, 25, 230, 331, 332. 

after notice to quit, eflect of, 17. 

tenants to be removed, 184. 

after expiration of term, 185. 

after sale on excution of mortgage, 185. 

after taking insolvent act, 185. 

after term on agreement to cultivate, 185. 

the cases contemplated by statute, 331. 

must be without landlord's permission, 333, 

wbo to commence proceeding for in certain cases, 333, 334. 

increased rent after notice, 335. 

remedy of landlord for rent against over-holding tenants, 39f . 
House— and messuage are synonymous terms, 31. 

" ' " What is included in the term, 31. 

Tenant's rights to remove house erected by him, 87. 
Illegal— purposes, houses hired for, effect of, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 307. 
" knowledge required, 88, 39, 40. 

leases, see titles signifying illegal purposes. 

Trades, proceedings against, 307 to 313. 

Ill-fame — Houses of, proceedings against, 303 to 818. 

Immoral— purposes, hiring for, effect of, 36, 37, 38, 39, 308. 

Impeaching — Justice's return, 335. 

Luplied — covenants, 37. 

warranty in lettings, 84, 85, 133. 

Incoming Tenant, 338. 

Inconsistent — Remedies, election between, 79. 

Increasing— rent by notice, 335. 

Infants — leases to, 100. 

removal of by summary proceedings, 100. 
Infancy — no defense to summary proceedings, 315. 
Inheritance — Estate, of, 5. 

Injunction — to enjoin summary proceedings, 399 to 303. 
Injury — maliciously done to property, 57, 58. 
Inquisition — Jury to examine and return, 176. 

Form of, 304. 

Traverse of, 176. 

Traverse, form of, 306. 

when to stay proceedings, 176.- 

when and on what terms landlord may traverse, 176, 



3§8 IlfDE^. 

Insolrenl Act — Tenant taking may be removed, 185. 

Bond to stay proceedings, form of, 390. 
Interest — on rent, landlord entitled to, 333. 
Intruders — are not Tenants, 314. 
Joinder — of parties as landlord in summary proceedings, 333, 333, 

334. 
Joint — Tenants, Remedies of, 96. 

Tenants, Demand upon, 338. 
Judge's— Charge, 380 to 383. 
Judgment — for defendants if not guilty on forcible entry, 178. 

sale under execution upon tenant holding over, 185. 

How given, 384, 385. 

Form of, 385. 

Validity of, 386. 

Within what time, 387. 

Effect of, 388. 

before justice of the peace, 195. 

" " " " form of, 385, 334. 
" " " " docket of, 334. 

Form of, under Bawdy House Act, 313. 
" " Illegal Trades Act, 313. 

How given upon appeal, 341. 

Roll, " " " 343. 

Effect upon other remedies, 79. 
Jurisdiction — ^in forcible entry proceedings, 180, 198. 

in summary proceedings, 184, 319. 

of district court justices, 185. 

Rule in reference to, 850 to 356. 
Juror's — summons, Form of, 373. 

Drawing of, 377. 

Talesmen, 375. 

Form of oath to, in summary proceedings, 378. 
" " "on forcible entry, 303, 309. 

In forcible entry proceedings, fine, &c., 179. 
Jury — ^Precept for, on forcible entries, 175, 303. 

Form of, 301. 

Number composing, 303. 

to be sworn to examine and return inquisition, 176. 

Form of oath, 303. 

to be summoned to try traverse, 177, 307. 

Form of precept, 308. 

to be sworn, proceedings before them, 177. 
" form of osfth, 309. 

■when to be discharged, and whenever one to be summoned, 
177. 

trial in summary proceedings, 189, 370, 371, 375. 
" waived if not demanded, 370. 

how summoned, 189, 370, 371. 

drawn and sworn, 190, 375, 376, 377; 

Talesmen, when and how summoned, 190, 375. 

how kept, 190, 383. 

Officer in charge to be sworn, 190, 365, 366, 383. 

form of. oath, 383. . 



Jury — When disoliarged and new one formed, 190. 
Venire, form of, 371. 
Officers' return of service, 371. 
Deliberations of, 383. 
Polling, 383. 

Justice ot the peace — Judgments before, 195, 385, 334. 

Appeal from to county court, see title, " County Court." 
Justices — Liability in certain cases, 850 to 356. 

return on forcible entry proceedings, 317, 335. 
" on summary " " 333, 334 to 836. 

charge to jury, 380 to 383. 
Keeper of poor-houses — may be removed, 186. 
King — The source of title in England, 4. 
Land —defined, 30. 

entries upon to be peaceable, 174, 197, 198. 

sold on execution proceedings upon sale, 336. 
Lands — Title to, in certain cases in the people of the state, 1. 

" " " United States, 4. 

Landlord — Eights of after service of notice to quit, 17. 

duty as to informing tenant of character of previous occupants, 
34, 35. 

Remedies of the, 56 to 80. 

Remedy of use and occupation, 59 to 63. 

enforcing covenants and conditions by action, 64. 

Liability for withholding possession, 81, 83. 

and tenant, certain rights and disabilities, 97. 

Tenant can not dispute landlord's title, 97. 

" " " " extent of rule, 97. 

Liaiblity to third persons, 165 to 173. 

may remove certain tenants, 184, 186, 311. 

and tenant, when relation exists, 59 to 63, 311 to 314. 

" liabilities incidental to remedies, 350 to 356. 
Law and practice — On forcible entries, 174 to 181. 

" " summary proceedings, 311 to 398. 

" " enjoining " 399 to 303. 

" " Bawdy houses, 303. 

" " Illegal trades, 807. 

" " Squatters, 346. 

Lease — Expiration of, see .title. Holding-over. 

defined, 31, 19. 

void, possession under, effect of as to term, 9, 14, 30. 

Definition, nature and validity of, 19. 

Parties to, 19. 

Words necessary to constitute, 19. 

by correspondence, 30. 

and agreement for distinction, 30. 

How far receipts operate as a lease, 31. 

certain to be in writing, 35. 

different covenants, 363. 

Effect of refusal to accept after entry, 14, 61. 

Leases — ^for years are no longer deemed terms, but estates, 36. 
how subscribed, 36. 
Validity of future terms, 36. 



390 INDEX. 

Leases — Validity of covenants, 37. 

Eenewal of, 37. 

" Option of renewal, 38. 

When certain lease expire, 28, 39, 333. 

Power of agent to execute, 39. 

Execution of by agent, owner's name not disclosed, 30. 

Recording of, 33. 

Validity of, as affected by fraud, 34. 

Rescinding for fraud, 34, 36, 37 to 46. 

See titles "Fraud," "Recission." 

Restrictions in, effect of. 64 to 73. 

Assigning, 83, 84, 85, 86. 

annulled by warrant in summarv proceedings, 193. 284 to 388. 

Other rights not affected, 194, 288. 

Effect of foreclosure of mortgage upon, 332. 

Certain, void, 34 to 46, 303, 307. 

with covenants, form of, 361, 363, 363. 

Covenants in, 363, 363. 

Assignment of form of, 364. 

Mortgage on, form of, 365. 
Leasehold Estate — Sale of, 86. 

" " " conditions of, 86. 

Legal — representatives may remove certain tenants, 75, 76, 96, 186, 
314, 315, 343. 

meaning of certain terms, 30, 31. 

Lessees^uader Brooklyn tax sales may institute summary proceed- 
iDgs, 186. 

Lessor — may remove certain tenants, 184, 186, 311. 

Letting — See title, "Leases." 

Liability — for holding over after determination of certain estates, 7. 

of "Landlord," "Tenant," and of "Justice," see those titles. 

of landlord withholding possession, 81, 83. 

See titles Assignee, Assignor, Landlord, Tenant. 

to third persons, 165 to 173. 

of third persons to landlord, 173. 

incidental to remedies, 350 to 356. 

Life— Estates for, 5, 6. 

Tenancy for, 5, 6, 7. 

Incidents of estate for life, 6, 7. 

Estates for incidents of, 6, 7. 

Remedy on leases for, 7. 

rents dependent upon life of another, 63. 
Lodgers —Rights of, 30. 
Lodging — ^Illegal contract for, 34 to 41. 
Magistrates— having jurisdiction of forcible entries, 180, 198. 

" " " '' summary proceedings, 184, 219. 

Malicious — injury to property, remedies for, 57, 58. 
Marine^Court justices have no jurisdiction of forcible entry pro- 
ceedings, 180, 199. 

Court justices have jurisdiction of summary proceedings, 184, 
319. 
Marshals — to execute process on forcible entries, 179, 296. 



INDEX- 391 

Marshals — in the city of Wew York are constables, 396. 
return to precept on forcible entry, 303. 
to suQimon jury in summary proceedings, 189j 370, 371. 
return to venire in summary proceedings, 371. 
Master — and servant, relation of, 314. 
Maxims— 37, 34. 
Mayors — of cities liave jurisdiction on forcible entries, 180, 199. 

of cities have jurisdiction in summary proceedings, 184, 319. 
Messnaare — and House are synonymous terms, 31. 

and House, what is included in term, 31. 
Misrepresentation — See "Fraud." 
Mistake — ^Recision for, 91. 
Month — Definition of, 10. 
Monthly— Tenancies, 9, 14, 31, 33 to 35 
More — or less defined, 31. 
Mortgage— on lease, form of, 365. 

on lease, eflfect of foreclosure, 333. 
Nature of leases, 19. 

New York City — Agreements for occupation of lands in, 8, 9, 14, 31 
to 35, 30. 
" " Officers having jurisdiction, see titles, "Forcible 

Entry," " Summary Proceedings. " 
Note — payment of rent in, 47 to 53. 

Notice to quit — in what cases necessary, 13 to 18, 31 to 35, 333, 385. 
" form of, 16. 

service of, 16. 
" rights of landlord after notice, 17. 

" by tenant, eflfect of not yielding possession, 17. 

Eflfect of possession as, 33. 
to defendant in forcible entry proceeding, 175. 

" form of, 303. 

of appeal to county court, form of, 338. 
termination of certain estates by, 333, 338. 

" " " " see Tenancies at will and by 

suflEerance. 
Hearing, 339, 340. 

" only one notice necessary, 339, 340. 
to quit to squatters, 847. 
Nuisances — upon adjoining property, 34, 35, 73, 73, 74, 137, 134. 
Eight to abate, 34 to 46, 73, 74. 
Effect of, upon hiring, 34 to 46. 
Oath — to jurors in summary proceedings, form of, 378. 
to officer having charge of, form of, 383. 
to witnesses in summary proceedings form of, 374. 
to jurors in forcible entry proceedings, 176, 177, 303, 309. 
form of in suchi proceedings, 303, 308. 
to witnesses in forcible entry proceedings 304, 309. 
form of, 303, 309. 

Objections — ^to be made or be deemed waived, 363 to 366. 

and exceptions, 340. 
Occnpatiou — Covenants as to mode of, effect of, 66 to 73. 



392 IKDEX. 

Occupation — Effect of as notice, 33 . 

" See Use and occupation. 

Occnpants — character of, former effect on lease, 34 to 36. 
Officers — having jurisdiction, see "Forcible Entry," Summary pro- 
ceedings. 
Openings — on sidewalk, liability for, 173. 
Option — on renewal, 28. 
' rder— directing certiorari to issue, form of, 331. 

of reversal of summary proceedings, form of, 333. 

to show cause for amended return, 337. 
Parties — Joinder of as landlords in summary proceedings, 333, 333, 

334. 
Partners — leases to, 101. 
Payment of rent — Time of, 47. 

Mode of, 47. 

in check, note, or bill, 47 to 52. 

Tender of, when and how made, 53, 53. 

after commencement of proceedings, 338, 288. 
Payments — application of, 54, 55. 
Party-walls, 145 to 160, 373. 

When ageementruns with land, 114, 145 to 164, 373 to 376. 

exist by grant or prescription, 145. 

when by verbal agreement, 143. 

when certain walls become, 148 to 151. 

not an incumbrance, 151. 

Provisions of building law as to, 151 to 154. 

increasing thickness, 154. 

diminishing thickuess, 155. 

increasing heighth and depth, 155. 

repairing, 156. 

taking down, 157. 

rebuilding, 159. 

Agi'eement as to three forms, 368, 369. 

Right to use face of, 373 to 376. 
Peace — Justices of. Proceedings before, 195. 

" Judgment and docket, 195, 385, 386, 334. 

" Appeals to County Court. See title "County 

Court." 
" Jurisdiction of summary proceedings, 184, 219. 

Penalty — on tenant not yielding possession, 17. 

" holding over after notice, 17. 

Peremptory — right of challenge not allowed in summary proceedings, 
378. 

Permission— holding over must be without, 333. 
Petition — ^for certiorari on forcible entry, form, 315. 

" " on summary proceedings, forms, 330. 

Pier — or wharf, when within the act, 313. 
Polling— the jury, 388. i 

Poor House — keeper may be removed, 186, 212. 
Possession — under void lease, effect of, 9, 14, 30, 84 to 46. 

under lease void for fraud, 45. 



INDEX. 393 

Possession — when remaining in amounts to election to renew, 37. 

Effect of as notice, 33. 

right of, and damages for withholding, 81, 83. 

of sub-tenant, possession of tenant, 86. 

Certain provision affecting tenant's, 99. ' 

of tenant when deemed possession by landlord, 99. 

any person in possession may file counter affidavit, 189, 366 
to 369. 
Practice — upon forcible entry proceedings, 174 to 181. 

upon summary proceedings, 311 to 398. 

upon return day, 363. 
Precept — for jury on forcible entry proceedings, 175. 
" " " form, 301. 

" notice of, 173. 

" " proof of service of notice, form, 303. 

" " officer's return to, form of, 303. 

or writ of restitution, form, 306. 

for jury to try inquisition, form, 308. 
Preface — see front of book. 
Premises — sufficiency of description, 243 to 365. 
Process — Keturn of, 363. 
Proof — of service on tenant, what to contain, 188. 

" " " • forms of, 359 to 361. 

Prostitution — Rooms hired for, 36, 38, 39. 

Houses, proceedings against, 303 to 313. 
Protection — of warrant, 395. 
Quit — Notice to, in what cases necessary, 13, 335. 

" " see title "Notice to Quit." 
Bace-course — ^Premises let for, effect of, 41. 
Beal — chattels, 5. 

estate defined, 32. 

Receipt — operates as a lease, when, 21 to 25. 
How far open to explanation, 21. 
Tenant" not entitled to, 53, 339. 
Eesclnding- — ^lease for fraud, 34 to 37, 44, 45, 46. 
Kescission — for fraud or mistake, 91. 
Recording — leases, 32. 

Recorders — of cities have jurisdiction in forcible entry proceedings, 
180, 199. 

" " " " summary proceedings, 184, 

319. 

Redemption — Right of, after warrant, 196, 397. 
Refiisal — -lllffect of giving tenant's refusal on renewal, 27. 

Option of tenant, 28. 
Relation — of landlord and tenant, when and between whom it exists, 

59 to 63, 211 to 214. 
Remedies — on leases for life, 7. 

in cases of fraud, 44. 

of the landlord, 56 to 80. 

Executors and administrators, 75. 
50 



394 INDEX. 

Bemedie^ — Grantees and assignees, 76 to 78. 

Effect of judgment upon other, 79. 

Election between inconsistent, 79. 

of the tenant, 81 to 90. 

of the tenant for wrongful entry, 94. 

of assignees and representatives, 96. 

of legal representatives, 96, 314, 315, 343. 

Joint tenants, 96. 

see titles "Forcible Entries," " Summary Proceedings. " 

of landlord for rent after issuing warrant, 395. 

Auxiliary, 333. 

Liabilities incidental to, 350. 
Kemoval — of squatters — see title Squatters. 

Renewal — of leases, 37, 38. 

What amount's to, 37, 38. 

Covenant for, how construed, 38. 

whether new lease necessary, 38. 
Rent — when payable on void lease, 9, 14, 30. 

when payable nn void lease, 14, 30. 

defined, 31, 331. 

Time of payment, 47. 

Mode of payment, 47. 

Payment by check, note or bill, 47, 48. 

depending "upon life of another, 63. 

Preference in payment of by executor, 68. 

To whom it belongs in case of landlord's death, 75, 76. 

not suspended by adjoining excavations, 137, 141. 

Payment by sub-tenant, 89. • 

Tenants failing to pay may be removed, 184. 

Demand for, 185. 333 to 338. 

In kind, how collected, 331, 333. 

Interest upon, landlord entitled to, 333. 

Payment of, after commencement of proceedings, 338, 388. 

increased by notice, 335. 

Security for, form of, 363. 

Complaint against tenant for rent, form of, 359. 

Complaint against surety for rent, from of, 360. 

See title, " Use and Occupation." 

after dispossession, 395. 
Rental — ^Misrepresenting effect on lease, 41. 
Repair — Obligation to, 104. 

Obligation to, under covenant, 106 to 108. 

Action for breach of covenant to, 109. 

Extent of landlord's liability, 109, 110. 

Effect of covenant, 108. 
Representatires — Legal, may remove certain tenants, 186. 

Legal remedies of, 75, 76, 96, 314, 315, 343. 

Legal who are, 343. 
Res adjudicata— 383, 384, 388. 
Restitution — and collection of costs, forcible entry proceedings, 178. 

to issue if there be no traverse, 179. 

Form of award, 305. 

to be awarded in certain cases, 181, 305. 



IWDEX. 395 

Restitution — Criminal courts may award, 181. ! 
Precept or writ, form of, 206. 
after verdict, form of award, 210. 
" " " writ, 210. 

by Supreme Court in summary proceedings, 194, 319. 
in summary proceedings, writ of, 838. 
Restraint — of trade, 64 to 72. 
Restrictions — in lease, effect of, 64 to 72. 
Returnable — when summary proceedings to be made, 186, 353. 
where summary proceedings to be made, 185, 384 to 288. 
Return day — Practice upon, 262. 

of Justice to certiorari, forcible entry, 817. 
"' " " summary proceedings, 822, 333 to 336. 

" of justice, how compelled, 833. 

" what to contain, 334. 

" impeaching, 335. 

false, 835. 
form of, 335, 336. 
" how made if justice out of office, 337, 338. 

" further return may be ordered, 387. 

" concluaive, 337. 

" How to procure amended return, 387. 

" form of order to show cause, 387. 

" in case justice be dead, insane, or absent, 388. 

'• in case justice in another county, 338. 

" Hearing upon return, 339, 840. 

Kerersal — of summary proceedings, order on, 333. 

" " " damages on, 355, 356. 

Reversioner — ^Rights of 58. 
Review — See "Appeal," "Certiorari." 
Riglits — of landlord after service of notice to quit, 17. 
of lodgers, 30. 

of tenants. See "Rights of Lodgers," 30. 
of the tenant, 81 to 90. 
" under-tenant, 88. 

of way, 161. 

annulled by warrant, 192, 194, 295. 
of redemption, 196, 297. 
Rules — of construction, 316. 

Sale execution — Bond in proceedings, form of, 391. 
Affidavit of claim in same case, form of, 392. 
or foreclosure — tenant holding-over after, 185, 386. 
of leasehold estate, 86. 
landlord's affidavit on, 348. 
Sales — Tax in Brooklyn, lessees may institute summary proceedings, 

186. 
Security — upon appeal to county court, 195, 380, 331. 

" " " form of, 830, 381. 

" errors and omissions in, 333. 

for rent, form of, 868. 
Servant — and master, relation of, 314. :^, 

Service — of subpcena, proof of, 858. , ;- ^^ 



396 IITDEX 

Service — of summons, manner of, 338. 
of summons time of, 359. 
" " proof of, 359 to 361. 

" " forms of, proof of, 359 to 361. 

" " how made, 187, 358. 

" " proof of what to contain, 188. 

" " 359 to 361. 

Setting — off costs upon appeal, 343. 

Sheriff — ^to execute process on proceedings for forcible entry, 179. 
Eeturn of on precept, proceedings for forcible entry, 183. 
to summon jury in summary proceedings, 189, 370, 371. 
Eeturn of to venire in summary proceedings, 371. 
Sidevralk — openings upon liability, for, 173. 
Socage — tenure, 3. 
Sovereignty — title of the People, 1. 
Specific performance, 64 to 73, 86. 
Squatter act, 846 to 849. 

Removal of squatters, 346, 347. 
Penalty, 346. 
serving of notices, 346. 
Notice to quit, 347. 
Complaint against squatter, 348. 
warrant against squatter, 348. 
Proceedings upon, 349. 
Statute — relating to occupation of lands in the city of New York, 8. 
" the creation and division of estate, 5. 

" untenantable premises, 139. 

'• forcible entries and detainers, 174 to 181. 

" summary proceedings, 183, 311 to 398. 

" " " object of, 311. 

" " " construction of, 316. 

" Review of summary proceedings upon certiorari, 

193, 317. 
" bawdy houses, 308. 

" illegal trades, 307. 

" squatters, 346. 

Statutory — demand for rent, 336. 
Staying^ — warrant in case of rent, 193. 

•' " insolvent tenant, 193. 

" " land sold under execution, 193. 

proceedings by certiorari, see Certiorari, 
proceedings by appeal, see Appeal, 
summary proceedings, form of, bonds for, 389 to 393. 
summary proceedings by injunction, 399 to 303. 
Subpoenas — for witness on forcible entries, 179. 

" " on summary proceedings, 857. 

" " form of, 357. 

" " proof of, service of, 358. 

Substitution — of tenant's power of, agent to consent to, 39. 

" " see Surrender. 

Sufferance — tenancy by terminated by uotice to quit, 13 to 18, 31 to 
35, 335. 



Index 397 

Snfferance — Estates by, 5, 10, 15, 335. 
Tenancies by, 5, 10, 15, 235. 

Tenant by proceedings against proof required, 187. 
Notice to quit, see title Notice to Quit . 

Snfflciency — of papers, objections to, 362. 

Suggestio Falsi, effect of, 42. 

Summary proceedings — The statute relating to, 183 to 196, 311 to 398. 
Index to statute, 183. 
Law and practice, 311 to 398. 
Who may institute, 186, 238. 
The object of the statute, 311. 
Construction of statute, 316. 
Review of, upon certiorari, 193, 317. 
See title Joinder of Parties, 
against bawdy houses, 308 to 813. 
against illegal trades, 307 to 313. 
Reversal upon certiorari, form of order, 822. 
Restitution upon certiorari, form of writ, 832. 
Officers having jurisdiction, 180, 184, 198, 219. 
Summons — What to contain, 251, 252. 
Time of return, 252. 
Forms of, 253 to 258. 

Forms of for non-payment of rent on landlord's affidavit, 353. 
" " agent's affidavit, 353. . 

proceedings against tenant and under-tenants, 358. 
for holding-over, 354. 
tenancy at will, 355. 
Sale under execution, 355. 
Mortgage foreclosure, 356. 
Endorsement upon, 357, 358. 
Proof of service of, 359 to 361. 
Manner of service, 187, 358. 
Time of service, 359. 

Forms of proof of service, 359 to 361. i 

for jurors, form of, 373. 
Endorsement required upon, 188. 
to tenant when and what to contain, 186. 
Proof required iu certain cases before issuing, 187. 
under bawdy house act, affidavit landlord, 810. 
" " neighbor, 311. 

under illegal trades " landlord, 318. 

Endorsements upon, 813. 
Superior Court — of Buffalo, justices have jurisdiction of summary 
proceedings, 319. 
Jurisdiction of forcible entries, 199. 
Snppressio veri — Effect of, 43, 43. 

Supreme Court — Justices of, have jurisdiction of forcible entry pro- 
ceedings, 180, 199. 
General term to review adjudication of magistrates upon cer- 
tiorari, 193. 
Proceedings in upon certiorari on forcible entries, 181. 
Traverse in forcible entry proceedings removed into Supreme 
Court, 817. 



398 INDEX. 

Surrender, 115 to 130. 

HoTV made and what amounts to, 115 to 130. 

Agent's power to accept, 119. 

by accepting new lease, 119. 

of tenant's power of agent to consent to, 39. 
Talesman — in summary proceedings, how summoned, 190, 375. 
Tax sale — in Brooklyn, leesses under may institute summary pro- 
ceedings, 186. 
Tenancy — ^for life, 5. 

for years, 5. 

at will 5, 10, 335. 

by sufferance, 5, 10, 15, 335. 

by the month, 9, 14, 31 to 35. 

at will, and by sufferance how terminated, 18, 335. 

from year to year, 15, 35, 385. 
Tenant — entering and refusing to accept lease, 14, 61. 

Penalty for not yielding possession, 17. 

Penalty for holding-over after notice, 17. 

not entitled to receipt, 53, 339. 

Rights of, 81 to 90. 

right of possession or damages, 81, 83. 

Damages to evicted tenant, 83. 

right to remove fixtures, 86 to 88. 

Remedies of, 91 to 96. 

Remedy for wrongful entry, 94. 

estopped from disputing landlord's title, 97. 
" extent of rule, 97. 

to deliver certain writs to landlord, 99. 

Possession of, when deemed landlord's, 99. 

Liability of for want of repairs, 104. 

Liability of to third persons, 165 to 178. 

See Holding-over, Rent, Lodgers, and other titles. 

may be removed in certain cases, 184, 311. 

" " for holding-over, 184, 330. ' 

" " for not paying rent, 184,331. 

" " if he takes the benefit of Insolvent Act, 185. 

" " on execution or mortgage sale, 185. 

" " for holding-over under agreement to cultivate 

land on shares, 185. 

may file counter affidavit, and have trial, 189, 366 to 369. 

may redeem after warrant, 196. 

Death of, effect of, 398. 

See titles Bawdy Houses, Illegal Trades. 

Tender — of payment, 53, 58. 

Plea of, 58. 

demand for receipt defeats, 53, 339. 
Tenement — defined, 81. 
Tenure — of real property, 1. 

signifies a holding, 8. 
Termination — of estates — see under titles of the Particular Estates. 

of certain estates by notice, 13 to 18, 31 to 25, 333, 335. 

of certain leases, 38, 333. 
Three days' notice — Demand of rent by service of, 234. 



INDEX. 399 

Time— See "Holding Over." 
Title — to certain lands in the people of the state, 1, S. 

" " " United States, 4. 

Trades— Illegal, 307 to 313. 

Restraint of, 64 to 72. 
Traverse of iHquisition — ^in forcible entry proceedings, 176. 

Form of, 306. 

■when to stay proceedings, 176. 

When landlord may, 176. 

Jury to try, 177. 

Supreme Court, 317. 
Trespassers — upon lands, 57, 58. 

See titles " Squatters," "Intruders." 
Trial — of inquisition in forcible entry proceedings, 176. 

of traverse of inquisition, " 177. 

Matters to be shown thereon, proceedings, 178, 307, 209. 

by jury in summary proceedings, 375 to 378, 383, 383. 

Adjournment of, 373. 

Affidavit to adjourn, form of, 373. 

Proceedings upon, 374 to 283. 

without a jury, 374. 

Oath to witnesses, form of, 374. 

by jury, 375. 

Talesman, 375. 

Qualifications and drawing of, 376, 377. 

Evidence upon, 379. 
Underletting, 83, 84. 

Right of, 89. 
Undertaking — upon appeal to county court, 195. 

" " " " form of, 830, 831. 

Errors and omissions upon, 833. 

Under-tenant — Rights of, 88. 

right of to pay original landlord, 89. 

right to sub-let, 89. 
Untenantable premises — Statute in reference to, 139. 

Construction of said statute, 139. 
Use — and occupation, 59 to 63. 
Validity— of judgments, 386. 

of leases, 19, 30, 34 to 44. 

" future terms, 36. 

Value — Fraudulently misrepresenting, 41. 
Various — statutes relative to summary proceedings, 311 to 398. 
Vendee — of real estate, 60, 61, 313. 
Vendor— " " 60, 61, 313. 
Venire — for jury summary proceedings, 189. 

" " " form of, 371. 

Verbal — agreements, 35, 36. 

Leases, 35, 36. 
Verdict— of the jury, 383, 383. 

" EfEectof, 388. 

Void lease — ^Possession under efEect of, 9, 14, 30. 

Effect of occupation thereunder, 30. 



400 INDEX. 

Tfaiver— of objections, 263 to 365. 

" jury trial, 370. 

Walls — of adjoining house over-hanging, 73 to 74. 

. Party. See title " Party Walls," and title "Excavations. " 
Warrant — Annuls lease, 193, 395. 

Not to effect other rights, 194. 

How stayed in case of rent, 193. 

How stayed in case of sale, 193. 

How stayed in case of insolvent tenant, 193. 

How stayed under execution, 193. 

Bond to stay, different forms of, 389, 390, 391. 

Issuing of, its form and effect, 393. 

Forms of, 393, 394, 395. 

Effect of, 395. 

Remedy of landlord after issuing of, 395. 

Protection of, 395. 

Right to remove person not named in, 396. 

Form of, under bawdy house act, 313. 

Form of, under trade illegal act, 313. 

Form of, by Justices of the Peace, 825. 

Form of, against squatter, 348. 

to issue if no cause shown, 188. 

to issue if decision or verdict be for landlord, 191. 

how executed, 191. 
Warranty — when and to what extent implied in a letting, 34, 35. 

in case of furnished house, 133. 
Waste, 6, 7, 57. 
Way— Right of, 161. 

Widow — of deceased, tenant proceeding against, 314. 
Will— Estate at, 5, 10, 15, 335. 

Tenancy at, 6, 10, 15, 335. 

" terminated by notice to quit, 13, 335. 

Tenant at proceedi&gs against certain proof required, 187. 
Wharf — or pier, when within the act, 313. 
Witnesses — Subpoenas for on forcible entries, 179. 

Penalty for neglecting to attend, 179. 

Oath to, on proceedings for forcible entry, 304, 309. 

How compelled to attend and testify summary proceedings, 191. 

Oath to, form of upon trial, summary proceedings, 274. 

Attachment against, 359. 

Order for, 358. 
Writ — of error in certain proceedings, 315. 

of restitution on forcible entries, form of, 306. 

" " " " after verdict, 310. 

of certiorari to reivew forcible entry proceedings, 314 to 317. 
" " " " form of, 331. 

of error, see " Court of Appeals." 
Writing — Certain leases to be in, 35, 36. 

Wrongful acts— See titles Trespassers, Holding-over, Eviction, Damages. 
Tear — Definition of, 9. 
Yearly tenancy, 15. 
Tears — Estates for, 5. 

Tenancy for, 5, 16. 



LAW PUBLICATIONS 

OF 

WARD & PELOUBET. 

AUGUST, 1877 



ABBOTT'S NATIONAL DIGEST OF UNITED STATES 
REPORTS AND STATUTES. A Complete and Accurate 
Epitome of the Jurisprudence and Legislation of the Gov- 
ernment of the United States from the earliest period to the 
year 1875. By Benj. Vaughan Abbott. 6 vols. 8vo. $45.00 

ABBOTT'S NATIONAL DIGEST OF UNITED STATES 
REPORTS AND STATUTES. Vol. 7 ; being the third sup- 
plement, and embracing all the statutes and decisions to 
September, 1877. Ready Sept. 15th, 1^77. 

ABBOTT'S TREATISE ON THE JURISDICTION AND 
PRACTICE IN THE UNITED STATES COURTS. 
This work gives a Full and Satisfactory Account of the 
Powers of the Various Federal Courts, and the Procedure 
usually employed in them. With all the Statutes of Practical 
Utility and Rules of Court, together with a Complete Col- 
lection of Forms. Third edition, entirely re-written and 
enlarged, embracing the law as declared in 1876. By Benj. 
Vaughan Abbott. 2 vols. 8vo. $15.00. 

ABBOTT'S UNITED STATES CIRCUIT AND DISTRICT 
COURT REPORTS. Reports of Decisions rendered in 
the Circuit and District Courts of the United States. By 
Benj. Vaughan Abbott. 2 vols. 8vo. $15.00. 

ABBOTT'S NEW YORK COURT OF APPEALS DECIS- 
IONS. This Official Collection comprises Full Reports of 
all such cases not contained in the series known as Nevi^ 
■York Reports as on careful examination have been found 
worthy of permanent preservation. Prepared under the 
sanction of the court, and recognized by the judges as au- 
thority. Edited by Austin Abbott. With extensive notes 
and references. 4 vols. 8vo. $24.00. 

ABBOTT'S PRACTICE REPORTS, NEW SERIES. A Se- 
lection of Cases from the Various Courts of the State of New 
York which are likely to be oi permanent value and authority. 
Edited by Austin Abbott. 16 vols. $So.oo. These Re- 
ports will not lose their authority by the operation of the 
New Code as many of the decisions in the series, will be of 
value in interpreting and explaining its meaning. They also 
contain many cases not elsewhere reported. 



2 LAW PUBLICATIONS OF WARD & PELOUBET. 

ABBOTT'S NEW CASES. Selected Cases and Notes of Cases 
of general interest, and not elsewhere reported, on all sub- 
jects of Law and Equity-. Edited by Austin Abbott. Vol. 
I. $6.00. Vol. 2 now being issued in numbers. 

BAKER ON THE LAW OF MANUFACTURING COR- 
PORATIONS OF NEW YORK STATE. This work 'em- 
braces the Laws of 181 1 and 1848, with all the Amendments 
down to the present time, arranged under sections, and ci- 
ting all the Cases bearing upon the question of the Rights, 
Duties, and Liabilities of Trustees and Stockholders, as be- 
tween themselves, and as affecting the Rights of Creditors 
of Corporations. 8vo $4.00. 

BANKRUPT LAW AS IT NOW IS. Together with the 
Amendment of June 22, 1874. An Essay on the present. 
Condition of the Bankrupt Law, with Notes and References. 
By A. Blumenstiel. $0.25. 

BENCH AND BAR OF NEW YORK. Containing Biogra- 
phical Sketches of Eminent .Judges and Lawyers of the New 
York Bar, Incident!* of the Important Trials in which they 
were engaged, and Anecdotes connected with their Profes- 
sional, Political, and Judicial Career. By L. B. Proctor. 
I large vol. of 779 pp. Extra cloth, $5.00; library sheep, 
$5.50; half calfj I6.50. 

CODDINGTON'S DIGEST OF TRADE-MARK CASES. 
A complete digest of Trade-Marks, as embraced in the Eng- 
lish and American Reports and Statutes. By C. E. Co'd- 
DIKGTON, 8vo. $6.00. 

CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1877. Containing the 
original text with the amendments inserted in their proper 
places. The whole carefully compared with official copies 
on file. Together with the sections of the old Code of Pro- 
cedure that will remain in force after September, 1877. 
Bound in flexible cloth. Small 8vo. $4.00. 

DENGLER'S WARD MAPS WITH BLOCK INDEX. A 
Key to all Maps on Record in the Register's Office, in 1,300 
Libers of Conveyances, locating the Maps on the blocks 
affected thereby. By Adolph Dengler. f i.oo. 

EDMOND'S REPORTS OF SELECT CASES. Reports of 
Cases Decided in the Supreme Court of New York. By John 
W. Edmonds, formerly Justice of the Supreme Court. Judge 
Ingraham says: ''The cases are of much interest, and con- 
tain historical information which cannot be obtained else- 
where." 8vo. $7.50. 

FOX'S DIGEST TO THE LAW OF PARTNERSHIP. A 
General Digest of the Law of Partnership, presentino- the 
American and English Adjudications. By Charles Fox 
late Judge of the Superior Court of Cincinnati, i vol 8vo' 
$6.50. ' 



LAW PUBLICATIONS OF WARD & PELOUBET. 3 

Judge Fox has cited no case which he has not personally 
examined, and the profession may rest assured they will not 
be disappointed when they compare the dig'csted case with 
the case cited. 

GUERNSEY'S KEY TO EQUITY JURISPRUDENCE, De- 
signed for the use of law students. This work is for the 
express purpose of Aiding Law Students in the study, and 
to clearly understand this great branch of the law as a system, 
complete within itself, and as founded upon Logical and 
Scientific Principles. The arrangement is such that it can 
be used with any work on Equity Jurisprudence. By R. S. 
Guernsey. 8vo. $4.00. 

HILLIARD'S ELEMENTS OF AMERICAN LAW. A com- 
prehensive treatise on American Law, designed for the prac- 
tising lawyer, as well as for the student and general reader. 
By Francis Milliard, author of "Torts," "Mortgages," &c. 
Vol. I. $7.50, ready in September 1877. Vol. 2 in press. 

HOFFMAN 0\ REFEREES. The Powers and Duties of 

Referees, with Numerous Forms. By Hon. Murray Hoff- 
man. 8vo. 16. 50. 

INDEX TO THE MAPS ON RECORD IN THE REGIS- 
TER'S OFFICE IN NEW YORK CITY. Compiled by 
Adolf Dengler. Cloth. $2.00. 

JOHNSON.'S REPORTS OF CHASE'S DECISIONS. This 
volume contains the Decisions of Chief Justice Chase in the 
United States Circuit Court for the Fourth Circuit, during 
the years 1865 to 1869 inclusive. It contains a Complete 
Record of the Case of Jefferson Davis, the only State Trial 
growing out of the Civil War, besides many other Important 
Cases. By Bradley T. Johnson, Esq., of the Virginia Bar. 
I vol. 8vo. $7.50. 

LANGBEIN'S DISTRICT COURT PRACTICE. Practice 
in the District Courts of the City of New York. With a Full 
Collection of Forms. By Langbkin Brothers. $4.50. 

LYNCFI ON REAL ESTATE BROKERS. A Treatise on 
the Law of Real Estate Brokers, in which are discussed all 
questions relating to this important subject. By Wm. R. 
Lynch, i vol. $i.S°- 

LYNCH'S NOTARY PUBLIC AND FORM BOOK. This 
work affords a Complete and Accurate Guide to the Duties 
of Notaries and Commissioners of Deeds. By Wm. R. 
Lynch. $1.50. 

McADAM ON TERMS OF COURT. An essay on Dies Juri- 
rt'^Vz, or Law Days. By Hon. David McAdam. Paper. $0.50. 



4 LAW PUBLICATIONS OF WARD & PELOUBET. 

McADAM'S LANDLORD AND TENAI^T.- A Practical 
Treatise on the Law of Landlord and Tenant. .By Hon. 
David McAdam. 8vo. $S-5°- 

McADAM'S MARINE COURT PRACTICE. Practice of the 
Marine Court of the City of New York, with the latest statu- 
tory enactments, and a Complete Collection of Forms. By, 
Hon. David McAdam. 3d edition. $4.50. 

NEW YORK SUPERIOR COURT REPORTS. Vols. 33 
to 41. Jones and Spencer, vols, i to g inclusive. Reports 
of cases decided in the Superior Court of the City of New 
York. By Samuel Jones and James C. Spencer, Offi-cial 
Reporters. Per vol., $7.00. Vol. 10 now being issued in 
■serials. 

PENNINGTON'S NEW JERSEY REPORTS. 2 vols. $15.00. 

REMARKABLE TRIALS. A Collection of Fifteen of the 
Most Remarkable Trials on Record, with notes, and speeches 
of counsel, &c. Compiled by Dunphy & Cummings. Cloth, 
$3.50 ; sheep, $4.50. 

RIDDLE ON SUPPLEMENTARY PROCEEDINGS. The 
Law and Practice of So pplementar}' Proceedings, with Forms. 
By D. S. Riddle. 8vo. $7.50. 

ROYALL'S DIGEST OF GRATTAN'S VIRGINIA RE- 
PORTS. A Digest of Grattan's Va. Reports from 1844 to 
1873. By Wm. L. Royall, of the Virginia Bar. 8vo. $8.00. 

STONE'S ANALYTICAL INDEX TO THE NEW YORK 
REPORTS. An Analytical Index of Parallel References to 
the cases cited in the "New York Reports." By Chas. 
Francis Stone. $4.50. 

SUPPLEMENT TO RIDDLE'S SUPPLEMENTARY PRO- 
CEEDINGS. Tracing the law down to 1876. With many 
Notes and References. By John F. Baker. $2.00. 

TAYLOR'S DEFENSE OFINSNAITY. Opening Address of 
John A. Taylor in the trial of John J. Burroughs. $0.75. 



WARD & PELOUBET, 

LAW PUBLISHERS, 
80 Nassau Street, Ne-w York. 



