1282 


Cornell  University  Law  Library 

The  Moak  Collection 


PURCHASED  FOR 

The  School  of  Law  of  Cof nell  University 

And  Presented  February  14,  1893  ; 

IN  HEnORY  OF 

JUDQE  DOUGLASS  BOARDMAN 

FIRST  DEAN  OF  THE  SCHOOL 

By  his  Wife  and  Daughter 
A.  M.  BOARDMAN  and  ELLEN  D.  WILLIAMS 


Cornell  Unlveralty  Library 
KF  590. W87  1888 
V.2 

A  treatise  on  the  law  of  landlord  and  te 


3  1924  018  801   328 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  bool<  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924018801328 


A  TEEATISE 


ON 


THE  LAW  OF  LANDLORD  AND  TENANT 


WITH  COPIOUS  NOTES  AND  EEFEEENCES. 


SECOND  EDITION. 


By  R  gI^^OD, 


AUTHOR  OP   "THE  LAW  OF  FIKE  INSXJEANCE,"  ETC.,   ETC. 


Vol.  II. 


1888. 
BANKS  &  BROTHERS, 
New  York.  Albany. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress  in  the  year  eighteen  hundred  and  eighty-one 

By  banks  &  BROTHEES, 

In  the  office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington, 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress  in  the  year  eighteen  hundred  and  eighty-eight 

Bt  banks  &  BROTHEES, 

In  the  oface  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington. 


838  Eepairs.  [§  380. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

REPAIRS.      (CONTINUED.) 

Sec.  380.  Rent  issues  out  of  the  estate,  and^  liability  exists  so  long  as 
estate  remains. 

Sec.  381.     Instances  in  which  landlord  is  bound  to  repair. 

Sec.  883.     Where  there  are  several  lessors. 

Sec.  383.     When  landlord  has  repaired. 

Sec.  384.     Damages  against  assignee  of  lease. 

Sec.  385.     When  action  is  brought  at  the  end  of  the  term. 

Sec.  386.     Subsequent  erections. 

Sec.  387.     Damages  must  arise  from  the  defendant's  neglect. 

Sec.  388.  Meaning  of  a  covenant  to  repair. — What  amount  of  repair 
is  necessary.  —Evidence  of  previous  disrepair. 

Sec.  389.     Where  there  is  a  conditional  precedent. 

Sec.  390.     Action  against  the  lessor. 

Sec.  391.     Effect  of  entire  destruction  of  the  estate. 

Sec.  392.     Fiurnished  houses  or  apartments. 

Sec.  393.     No  implied  covenants  to  repair  by  tenant. 

Sec.  394.    Proof  of  Custom. 

Sec.  395.     To  vs^hat  tenancies  applicable. 

Sec.  896.     Covenants  to  repair. — When  implied. 

Sec.  897.     How  to  declare  on  a  new  implied  tenancy. 

Sec.  398.  Implied  liability  of  tenant  at  will,  or  from  year  to  year,  as 
to  repairs. 

Sec.  399.  Remedies  of  landlord  for  non-repair. — By  entry  or  eject- 
ment. 

Sec.  400.     Damages  recoverable. 

Sec.  380.  Bent  issues  out  of  the  estate,  and  liability  exiatg 
so  long  as  estate  remains.— The  ground  upon  M^hich  this 
doctrine  rests  is,  that  the  rent  reserved  on  a  demise  issues 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EeNT  and  LIABILITY.  839 

out  of  the  land,  and  is  payable  in  every  event  and  in 
every  state  and  condition  of  the  demised  premises;^  and 
so  long  as  the  estate  remains,  there  is  a  liability  to  pay- 
rent,  whatever  may  be  its  state  or  condition."  In  South 
Carolina  it  is  held,  that  where  there  is  a  substantial 
destruction  of  the  subject-matter  out  of  which  the  rent 
is  reserved  in  a  lease,  by  the  act  of  God  or  of  public  ene- 
mies, the  tenant  may,  if  he  elects  to  do  so,  surrender  the 
possession  of  the  entire  premises  to  the  landlord,  and  thus 
absolve  himself  from  the  payment  of  rent ;  and  this  rule 
is  applied  in  all  cases  where  the  tenant  is  deprived  of  the 
beneficial  enjoymenttf  the  premises  according  to  the  intent 
of  the  lease,  within  the  meaning  of  the  terms  used,  whether 
there  is  a  physical  destruction  of  the  premises  or  not. 
But  in  order  to  relieve  himself  from  liability  under  this 
rule,  the  tenant  must  surrender,  or  offer  to  surrender,  all 
the  benefits  that  remained  to  him  under  the  lease.  Thus, 
where  a  tenant  set  up  in  defence  to  an  action  for  rent, 
that  he  had,  by  the  casualties  of  war  been  deprived  of 
the  beneficial  use  of  the  premises  for  a  large  part  of  the 

'  Richard  Le  Travemer's   Case,  exclusion    of     the    lessee.       The 

Dyer,  56  a ;  Lord  Mountjoy's  Case,  plaintiflE  brought  an  action  for  the 

5  Coke,  4a;  Spencer's  Case,  5  id.  rent,  and  the  defendant  thereupon 

17  a.  applied  to  the  court  of  equity  for 

^  Gilbert  on  Eents,  33  ;  Noble's  relief,  upon  the  ground  that  he  had 
Case,  4  Coke,  80  b;  Holder  v.  no  remedy  over  against  the  govern- 
Taylor,  Hob.  1?.  In  Paradine  v.  ment,  but  the  court  refused  to 
Jones,  Alleyn,  k;7,  the  defendant  interfere.  In  Carter  v.  Cummins, 
plead  that  Prince  Rupert  and  an  cited  in  1  Ch.  Cas.  84,  the  plaintiff 
army  of  aUens  entered  upon  the  was  the  lessee  of  a  wharf  for  a 
demised  premises  and  drove  away  term,  which  was  carried  away  by 
his  cattle,  and  expelled  him  from  an  extraordinary  rise  of  the  water, 
the  premises,  and  kept  him  out  so  and  he  brought  a  biU  in  equity 
that  he  lost  the.use  of  the  premises  praying  to  be  relieved  against  the 
for  the  balance  of  the  term  ;  but  lessor's  action  for  rent,  and  in  this 
the  court  held  that  this  did  not  re-  case  also  the  court  refused  to 
lieve  the  tenant  from  liability  for  interfere,  except  to  relieve  him 
the  rent  for  the  whole  term.  And  from  the  penalty  of  his  bond  for 
in  Richard  Le  Taverner's  Case,  the  non-payment  of  the  rent.  Thus 
Dyer,  56  a,  the  court  say: — "  If  the  it  wiU  be  seen  that,  in  the  absence 
sea  gain  upon  part  of  the  land  of  an  express  stipulation  to  that 
demised,  or  part  be  burned  with  effect,  there  is  no  exemption  from 
wild  fire,  the  entire  rent  shall  issue  liability  for  the  rent  of  the  premises 
out  of  the  remainder."  In  Harri-  for  the  full  term,  even  though  the 
son  v.  North,  1  Ch.  Ca.  84,  the  premises  are  partly  destroyed  by 
lessee  of  certain  buildings  was  ex-  the  elements,  or  the  lessee  is  de- 
pelled  therefrom  by  the  govern-  prived  of  their  beneficial  enjoy- 
ment, and  the  Buildings  taken  ment  by  any  cause  other  than  that 
possession  of  and  used  for  a  which  results  from  the  act  of  the 
hospital,  and  were  so  occupied  by  lessor  himself  or  his  agents.  Gates 
it  for  se  reral  years,  to  the  entire  v.  Green,  4  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  354. 


840  Eepaies.  [§  380. 

term  for  which  rent  was  sought  to  be  recovered,  but 
there  was  no  allegation  that  he  surrendered,  or  offered 
to  surrender,  the  premises  to  the  lessor,  and  it  appeared 
in  evidence  that  he  in  fact  remained  in  possession  of  the 
premises  until  the  end  of  the  term,  it  was  held  that  he 
was  not  relieved  from  the  payment  of  rent  for  the  whole 
term.'  In  New  York,  by  statute,"  it  is  provided  that 
"the  lessees  or  occupants  of  any  building  which  shall, 
without  any  fault  or  neglect  on  their  part,  be  de- 
stroyed or  be  so  injured  by  the  elements,  or  any  other 
cause,  as  to  be  untenantable  and  unfit  for  occupancy, 
shall  not  be  liable  or  bound  to  pay  rent  to  the  lessors  or 
owners  thereof,  after  such  destruction  or  injury,  unless 
otherwise  expressly  provided  by  written  agreement  or 
covenant,"  and  further  providing  that  the  tenant  may 
thereupon  surrender  and  quit  the  possession  of  the  prem- 
ises \  and  even  when  in  the  lease  itself  there  is  a  condition 
which  exonerates  the  tenant  from  rent  in  case  the  build- 
ing is  rendered  untenantable  by  fire,  it  is  held  that  the 
tenant  is  not  exonerated,  unless  the  entire  building  is 
rendered  untenantable,"  nor  unless  he  surrender  the  entire 
possession  of  the  premises  to  the  landlord,  because  of 
their  becoming  untenantable  during  the  period  of  his 
actual  occupancy.'  The  surrender  is  not  an  additional 
privilege,  but  is  a  condition  upon  which  the  exemption 
from  rent  depends ;  and  if  he  retains  any  part  of  the 
premises,  the  statutory  exemption  is  not  available  to 
him  ; "  and  the  fact  that  the  premises  were  untenantable 
when  he  went  into  possession,  or  that  they  became 
untenantable  after  he  quit  possession,  will  not  be  avail- 
able under  the  statute.  They  must  be  shown  to  have 
become  untenantable  during  the  period  of  his  actual 

'  Coogan  V.  Parker,  2  S.  C.  255.  tlie  premises  the  next  day  after  he 

'  Laws  of  1860,  Sec.  354.  took  possession,  and  it  was  held 

'  Kip  V.  Merwin,  34  N.  Y.  Su-  that  in  order  to  exempt  himself 

perior  Ct.   531;  Home,  &c.,  Ins.  from  liability  for  the  rent  for  the 

Co.  V.  Sherman,  46  N.  Y.  370.  whole  term,  he  must  show  that 

"•  In  Murray  v.  Waller,  42  How.  they  were  rendered  untenantable 

Pr.  (N.  Y.)  64,  the  premises  were  while  he  was  in  the  actual  occu- 

rendered  unfit  for  occupancy  by  pancy  of  them. 

blasting  done  upon  an  adjoining  ^  Johnson   v.    Oppenheimer,  13 

lot,  and  the  tenant  moved  from  Abb.  N.  Y.  N.  8.  449 ;  55  N.  Y.  280. 


CHAP.  XXXV.  J         Landlord  Bound.  841 

occupancy ; '  nor  does  the  statutory  exemption  apply  to 
relieve  him,  when  by  the  terms  of  the  lease  the  tenant  is 
bound  to  repair  the  premises,  and  the  premises  become 
or  are  untenantable  by  reason  of  a  failure  on  his  part  to 
make  repairs  according  to  the  terms  of  his  contract ; '  nor 
when  he  knew  at  the  time  that  the  lease  was  made  that 
they  were  to  be  made  untenantable,  by  repairs  to  be 
■made  thereon,  or  otherwise,  and  the  lease  was  made  with 
a  view  to  the  occupancy  while  they  were  in  that  condi- 
tion.' Nor  does  this  statute  protect  the  tenant  against 
natural  wear  and  deterioration,  or  absolve  him  from 
making  ordinary  repairs.*  In  Louisiana'  the  tenant, 
upon  the  destruction  of  a  buUding  by  fire,  may  exempt 
himself  from  liability  for  after-accruing  rent  by  cancelling 
the  lease,  or  surrendering  the  premises  to  the  landlord 
and  demanding  an  abatement  of  the  rent.  But  under 
this  statute  it  is  held  that  the  tenant  must  cancel  the  lease 
in  toto  or  surrender  the  entire  premises,  and  that  he  can 
claim  no  abatement  of  the  rent  if  he  retains  possession 
of  any  part  of  them." 

Sec.  381 .  instances  in  wMch  landlord  is  bound  to  repair. 
— There  are  instances  in  which  the  landlord  is  bound  to 
repair,  whether  the  lease  contains  a  covenant  to  that 
effect  or  not ;  as,  where  the  law  imposes  a  certain  duty 
upon  him  with  respect  to  the  premises,  which  cannot  be 
said  to  devolve  upon  the  tenant  under  the  lease,  as  where 
he  is  by  law  required  to  furnish  the  building  with  suit- 
able fire-escapes.  In  such  a  case,  if  he  fails  either  to 
furnish  suitable  fire-escapes,  or  to  keep  them  in  a  safe 
condition,  he  is  liable  to  the  tenant  for  all  damages 
resulting  to  him,  without  negligence  on  his  part,  from 
the  use  of  such  fire-escapes.'    And  the  same,  rule  applies 

'  Murray  v.  Waller,  ante  ;  Bloom-  ^  Perm  v.  Kearney,  31  La.  An.  31. 

erv.  Merrill,  1  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)485.  A  tenant  for  one  year  who  holds 

^  TruesdeU  v.  Booth,  6  T.  &  C.  over  for  however  short  a  period,  is 

(N.  Y.  S.  C.)  379  ;  Wolcott  v.  Sul-  liable  for  the  rent  for  the  whole 

livan,  1  Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  899.  year,   although   the  premises  are 

=  Alseheimer  v.  Krohn,  45  How.  destroyed    by    fire.      Hibbard   v. 

Pr.  (N.  Y.)  137.  Newman,  58  Tenn.  385. 

^  Suydam   v.  Jackson,  54  N.  Y.  ■>  McAlpine  v.  Powell,  1  Abb.  (N. 

550;  Johnson  v.Oppenheimer,  ante.  Y.)  Cas.  437.     But  in  this  case  it 

'  La.  Civ.  Code,  §  3667.  was  held  that  the  landlord  could 


842 


Eepairs. 


[§381. 


in  the  case  of  any  statutory  duty  imposed  upon  the  land- 
lord ;  where,  however,  the  defect  is  one  that  comes  under 
the  head  of  ordinary  repairs,  the  fact  that  the  law 
imposes  the  duty  of  keeping  the  premises  in  repair  upon 
the  landlord  will  not  render  the  landlord  liable  to  the 
tenant  for  injuries  from  non-repair,  or  exempt  him  from 
liability  to  third  persons  sustaining  injuries  from  such 
want  of  repair,  even  though  the  tenant  has  covenanted 
to  repair ;  but  where  a  nuisance  results  from  such  want 
of  repair,  and  there  is  no  covenant  to  repair  upon  the 
part  of  either  the  landlord  or  tenant,  an  action  may 
be  maintained  against  either  of  them  therefor,'  and 
the  tenant  cannot  avail  himself  of  the  legal  obligation 
of  the  landlord  to  the  public,  and,  as  to  him,  compel 
the  landlord  to  repair,  or  make  him  answerable  to  him 
for  damages  resulting  to  him  from  non-repair."    Another 


not  be  held  chargeable  to  the  ten- 
ant for  injuries  resulting  to  a  child, 
by  reason  of  the  defective  condition 
of  the  fire-escape,  who  was  improp- 
erly thereon. 

1  Swords  V.  Edgar,  59  N.  Y.  38. 

^  Hartford,  &c.,  Steamboat  Co. 
V.  New  York,  19  N.  Y.  S.  C.  550. 
Lockrow  V.  Horgan,  58  N.  Y.  685. 
According  to  these  cases,  the  duty 
of  repairing  cannot  be  implied  from 
the  relation  of  the  parties,  or  any- 
thing contained  in  the  lease.  That 
the  obligation  of  the  lessor  to  the 
public  wiU  not  render  him  liable  to 
the  tenant  for  disrepair  see  Taylor 
T.  Atlantic  Ins.  Co.,  37  N.  Y.  378; 
Bavenportv.  Euckman,  37  id.  568; 
Robinson  v.  Chamberlain,  34  id. 
389;  McCarty  v.  Syracuse,  46  id. 
194 ;  although  as  to  the  pubUc  and 
third  persons  injured  by  reason  of 
such  disrepairs,  both  might  and  un- 
doubtedly would  be  liable.  In 
Witty  V.  Matthews,  53  N.  Y.  513, 
the  complaiat  alleged  that  the  de- 
fendant leased  to  the  plaintifiE  a 
wharf  for  ten  years  from  'May  1, 
1865 ;  that  in  1867  the  wharf  fell 
down,  and  upon  defendant's  refus- 
al to  rebuild  the  same,  plaintiff  did 
so  at  a  cost,  including  damage  to 
business,  exceeding  $30,000;  that 
the  wharf  was  old  and  insecure 
from  natural  wear  and  decay  and 
hidden  defects  at  the  time 
the  lease  was  made,  and  that  these 


defects  were  the  cause  of  its  fall ; 
that  the  defendant,  previous  to  and 
at  the  time  of  the  making  of  the 
lease,  represented  to  plaintiff  that 
the  substantial  repairs  would  be 
made  by  it,  and  that  plaintiff  would 
have  to  make  only  the  ordinary 
and  usual  repairs.  The  lease  con- 
tained a  covenant,  by  which  the 
plaintiflf  covenanted  to  repair  and 
keep  the  said  wharves  in  good  re- 
pair at  its  own  proper  cost  and 
charges,  and  surrender  the  same 
at  the  expiration  of  said  term  in 
as  good  condition  as  they  were  at 
the  time  it  took  possession  thereof, 
the  natural  wear  and  decay  ex- 
cepted ;  that  all  alterations  and  im- 
provements and  repairs,  of  what- 
soever kind,  would  be  made  at  its 
expense,  and  that  they  would  keep 
the  wharves  in  good  condition  and 
in  safe  and  proper  repau-,  includ- 
ing especially  the  string-pieces  and 
other  superficial  portions  thereof, 
for  safe  usage.  It  was  held  that, 
as  no  fraud  or  concealment  on  the 
part  of  the  defendant  was  alleged, 
the  express  covenants  of  the  writ- 
ten lease  could  not  be  varied  by 
proof  of  the  alleged  representa- 
tions. Also  that  whatever  duty  to 
keep  the  wharf  in  good  repair  the 
defendant  might  owe  to  persons 
lawfully  traversing  and  using  the 
wharf  as  a  public  street,  the  plaint- 
iff could  not,  as  against  its  express 


CHAP,  XXXV.]         Landlord  Bound.  843 

instance  is,  where  the  landlord  retains  the  possession  of 
a  part  of  the  building.     In  the  latter  case  he  is  bound  to 
keep  the  part  retained  by  him  in  proper  repair  and  con- 
dition, so  that  the  tenant  will  not,  through  his  (the  land- 
lord's) fault  or  negligence,  be  damaged  or  injured  either 
in  his  person  or  goods.'    Where  the  landlord  retains  the 
possession  and  control  of  part  of  a  building,  he  is  liable 
for  injuries  resulting  to  a  tenant  from  the  negligent  use 
of  the  portion  of  the  premises  so  controlled  by  him.   Thus, 
in  a  Georgia  case'  the  defendants  rented  the  first  four 
stories  of  a  building  in  the  city  of  Savannah,  in  which 
they  were  cai-rying  on  a  grocery  business.     Their  goods 
suffered  damage  by  reason  of  an  overflow  from  the  water- 
closet  and  bath-room  in  the  fifth  story,  and  they  brought 
suit  against  their  landlord  to  recover  their  losses.     It 
was  held  that  where  a  tenant  on  a  lower  floor  is  injured 
by  the  flowing  of  water  from  the  bath-tubs  and  water- 
fixture  situated  above,  he  has  a  right  of  action  against 
the  landlord,  if  the  overflow  results  from  their  improper 
construction,  and  this  liabihty  exists  without  reference 
to  the  occupation  of  the  upper  apartment  by  another 
tenant.     Also  that  if  the  construction  is  skilfully  planned 
and  safely  executed  against  overflow,  and  the  upper  apart- 
ments are  rented  to,  and  in  the  exclusive  control  and 
possession  of,  a  tenant,  then  the  landlord  is  not  liable, 
and  the  person  damaged  must  look  to  his  co-tenant  for 
his  losses,  if  he  can  fix  negligence  upon  him.    But  where 
the  upper  rooms  are  not  rented  to  or  in  the  exclusive 
control  of,  a  tenant,  but  both  landlord  and  tenant  have 
the  right  of  possession,  and  neither  the  exclusive  right, 
then  the  landlord  is  liable  to  the  tenant  below. 

Crawford,  J.,  said:  "The  law  having  been  thus  set- 
tled by  this  court  in  this  case,  it  is  necessary  only  to 
inquire  whether  the  landlord  had  parted  with  his  right 
of  possession  and  control  over  the  bath-room,  fixtures 

covenant,  avail  itself  of  it  in  this  plaintiff  could  not  impose  any  lia- 
action  and  that  even  if  it  was  the  bihty  upon  it  by  its  action  m  re- 
duty  of  the  defendant  to  keep  the  buUding  the  same. 
wharf  in  repair,  yet  when  it  fell  '  Toole  v.  Beckett,  67  Me.  534. 
down,  whether  or  not  to  rebuild  it  =  Jones  v.  Friedenberg,  66  Ga.  505. 
was  a  question  resting  in  the  dis-  See  also  Friedenberg  v.  Jones,  63 
cretion  of  the  defendant,  and  the  Ga.  613. 


844  Eepairs.  [§  381. 

and  apartments  from  whence  the  damage  flowed,  as  upon 
this  turns  the  error  assigned.  It  appears  from  the  testi- 
mony that  there  were  in  the  fifth  story  two  rooms  in  that 
end  of  the  building,  a  north  room  and  a  south  room, 
.separated  from  each  other  "by  a  partition  with  windows, 
a  glass  partition."  At  the  front  side,  and  south-west 
corner  of  the  north  room  is  cut  off  a  little  vestibule,  and 
bath-room  with  water-closet,  which  belonged  and  were 
appurtenant  to  each  room,  and  were  put  in  for  the  com- 
mon benefit  of  both.  "When  the  south  room  was  rented 
to  Brown,  nothing  was  said  about  the  water-fixtures,  as 
he  had  the  right  to  use  them  by  reason  of  his  occupancy 
of  the  room.  He  wanted  only  one  of  the  rooms,  pre- 
ferred that  and  rented  it,  which  gave  him  its  exclusive 
use,  with  a  right  simply  to  use  the  closet,  but  not 
exclusively. 

If  then,  he  had  no  exclusive  right  to  the  closet,  there 
must  have  been  another  who  shared  it  with  him,  and  if 
unrented,  it  could  have  been  none  other  than  the  land- 
lord. Unless  therefore  we  are  to  reverse  the  judgment 
pronounced  in  this  case,  or  there  be  some  fact  to  take  it 
out  of  the  ruling  heretofore,  he  would  be  liable  to  an- 
swer in  damages. 

But  it  is  said  that  the  tenant  had  the  only  key  to  the 
folding  doors  opening  into  a  common  haU.  If  that  fact 
were  true,  it  did  not  give  him  the  right  of  possession  to 
both  rooms  and  the  closet,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  land- 
lord or  any  tenant  to  whom  he  might  rent.  By  the  rul- 
ing in  this  case,  until  the  landlord  had  put  the  rooms  in 
the  exclusive  possession  and  control  of  a  tenant,  he 
could  not  discharge  himself  from  habiUty  as  the  landlord, 
whose  duty  it  was  to  protect  his  tenants  below  from 
damage  from  that  portion  of  the  building  over  which  he 
had  not  parted  with  control. 

Brown  rented  only  one  room;  from  that  he  could 
exclude  the  landlord,  but  from  none  other.  If  the  land- 
lord allowed  him  the  use  of  a  key  which  also  led  into 
the  other,  his  use  of  the  key  and  the  room  was  the  land- 
lord's, and  not  of  right  his  own.  The  liability  arises 
from  negligence,  and  that  there  was  negligence  there  is 


CHAP,  xxsv.j         Landlord  Bound.  845- 

no  question.  It  is  immaterial  whether  the  landlord  did 
the  damage  by  his  own  act  or  that  of  another.  As  to 
the  bath-room  and  closet,  the  agent  of  the  defendants, 
in  the  court  below,  testifies  that  Brown  was  not  the 
tenant  of  that  room  only  by  reason  of  its  being  appur- 
tenant to  both  north  and  south  rooms,  that  there  was 
nothing  said  about  it  on  the  rental.  If  not  the  tenant, 
and  he  had  the  access  to  it,  then  he  was  quoad  hoc  the 
agent  of  the  landlord  and  he  must  answer  for  his  acts. 

The  landlord  must  see  to  it  that  he  does  not  imperil  the 
safety  of  the  property  of  his  tenants,  by  intrusting  to 
another  the  control  and  management  of  business  that 
requires  diligence ;  if  he  does,  and  damage  ensues,  he 
will  not  be  permitted  to  reply  that  because  it  was  not 
his  own  personal  act,  he  is  not  to  be  held  responsible. 
It  is  mistakenly  stated  in  the  notes  to  Taylor's  L.  &  T.  7 
that  the  doctrine  of  Georgia  cases  upon  this  subject,  is 
predicated  upon  a  statute.  There  is  no  statute  in 
that  State  relating  to  the  matter.  Indeed,  in  an 
earlier  case'  where  the  tenant  had  the  exclusive 
control  of  the  building,  it  was  held  that  the  landlord 
was  not  responsible  for  injuries  resulting  to  the  defend- 
ant from  defects  in  bath  tubs,  and  arising  during  the 
tenancy.  The  court  says,  "the  use  of  the  tenements 
reaUy  belongs  to  the  tenant  during  the  lease ;  they  are 
his  property  to  use  for  the  term  for  which  they  are  rented 
and  the  landlord  has  no  right  to  enter  upon  them  except 
by  permission  of  the  tenant."  In  a  later  case"  the  court 
in  commenting  upon  the  doctrine  laid  down  in  this  case, 
says,  "Of  course,  in  such  a  case,  where  the  bath  tubs 
were  properly  constructed,  the  landlord  is  not  and  ought 
not  to  be  liable  ;  but  in  a  case  where  he  has  a  right  to 
enter,  where  he  has  the  joint  right  of  possession  of  the 
bath  room,  through  the  entry  of  which  he  must  go  to 
get  to  that  part  he  has  not  rented  to  anybody  and  where 
he  keeps  a  janitor  to  keep  it  in  repair,  then  he  is  liable." 

J 

>  White  V.  Montgomery,  38  Ga.  389 ;  Toole  v.  Beckett,  6  7  Me.  544 

304.  •  Milford     v.    Holbrook,     9    Allen 

^  Friedenberg  v.  Jones,  63  Ga.  (Mass.)17;  Salsburyv.  Herohenroe- 

613.  der,  106  Mass.  458 ;  Shepley  v.  Tif  ty, 

3  See  Glickanf  v.  Mauver,  75  HI.  Associates,  106  id.  194.       ' 


846  Eepairs.  [§  381. 

So,  too,  it  seems  that  if  he  owns  adjoining  prem- 
ises and  permits  them  to  be  or  remain  out  of  repair 
so  as  to  render  the  demised  premises  untenantable, 
the  tenant  may  treat  such  act  or  neglect  as  an  eviction, 
and  abandon  the  possession.  As,  where  he  permits  a 
drain  in  the  cellar  of  adjoining  premises  owned  by  him 
to  remain  out  of  repair,  rendering  the  demised  premises 
unhealthy  and  unfit  for  occupancy.'  This  liability 
grows  out  of  the  fact  that  the  landlord  impliedly 
covenants  not  to  do  any  act  that  will  render  the 
demised  premises  untenantable,  and  to  so  exercise 
his  control  over  the  parts  of  the  premises  retained 
by  him  as  to  inflict  no  injury  upon  his  tenants.  If  he 
does  not  exercise  proper  care  and  prudence  in  the 
management  of  those  parts  of  the  building  over  which 
he  retains  control,  and  the  tenant  sustain  damages  thereby, 
he  is  liable  to  them  therefor."  But,  unless  he  is  guilty  of 
negligence  in  the  construction,  repair,  or  care  of  the  build- 
ing, and  injury  results  from  such  want  of  care,  he  cannot 
be  held  chargeable  for  damages  resulting  to  a  tenant,  as 
for  an  injury  restdting  from  the  flooding  of  a  cellar, 
because  of  its  faulty  construction  during  an  extraordinary 
storm.'  Nor  is  he  responsible  for  the  neghgent  or  iUegal 
use  of  the  premises  by  other  tenants,  or  from  such  tenant's 
failure  to  keep  premises  in  proper  repair  where  they 

'  Alger  V.  Kennedy,  49  Vt.  109.  in  process  of  erection,  and   stip- 

"  Petebs,  J.,  in  Toole  v.  Beckett,  ulated,  in  the  lease,  that  he  would 

ante ;  Priest  v.  Nichols,  116  Mass.  have     said    store     "  well    fitted 

401 ;  Norcross  v.   Thoros,  51   Me.  up."     The    store,   as   well  as   an 

503 ;    Karby  v.   Boylston   Market  adjoining  one  built  on  the  same 

Association,  14  Gray  (Mass.)  249 ;  premises,    extended     back    some 

Gray  V.  Boston  Gas  Light  Co.,  114  distance   beyond  ■  the  upper   sto- 

Mass.  149.     In  the  case  of  Toole  v.  ries.     D    afterwards    rented    out 

Beckett,  supra,  the  defendant  let  the  upper  portion  of  the  building, 

the  lower  portion  of  the  building  to  be  used  as  a  boarding-house, 

to  the  plaintiff  for  a  store,  the  up-  and,   for    accommodation    of  the 

per  portion  remaining  in  the  pos-  tenant,  constructed  a  kitchen  over 

session  of  the  defendant,  and  un-  the  extensions  of  the  stores.    The 

der  his  care  or  control.    A  rain  accumulation  of  trash  under  this 

storm  poured  a  great  volume  of  kitchen  choked  the  gutters,  and 

water  between  the  roof  and  the  C's  stock  was  damaged  by  water 

chimney  down  upon  the  plaintiff's  in  consequence.     Held,  that  D  was 

goods,  causing  some  injury.     He  liable  to  C  for  the  damage  sus- 

was  held  hable  for  the  damage.  tained.    Center  v.  Davis,  39  Ga. 

In  a  Georgia  case  D  leased  to  C,  to  210. 

be  used  as  a  store  a  room  on  the  ^  Loupe  v.  Wood,  51  Cal.  586. 
ground  floor  of  a   building  then 


CHAP.  XXXV.]         Landlord  Bound. 


847 


were  in  proper  repair  when  the  tenant  went  into  posses- 
sion,'unless  the  landlord  has  expressly  covenanted  to  keep 
the  premises  in  repair,  nor  then  if  the  injury  results 
from  the  improper  or  the  careless  acts  of  anothef 
tenant,  in  the  use  of  parts  of  the  premises  that 
were  in  repair."  The  rule  may  be  said  to  be  that,  where 
the  building  is  occupied  by  several  tenants,  the  landlord, 
having  exercised  proper  care  in  the  construction  and  repair 


'  WMte  V.  Montgomery,  58  Ga. 
204.  In  O'Brien  v.  Capwell,  59 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  497,  an  action  for 
injury  by  the  breaking  down  of  a 
piazza,  the  court  said  that  the 
"law  is  well  settled  that  where 
there  is  no  fraud  or  false  represen- 
tation or  deceit,  and  no  express 
warranty  or  covenant  to  repair, 
there  is  no  implied  obUgation  or 
covenant  that  the  premises  are 
suitable  or  fit  for  occupation  or 
for  the  particular  use  which  the 
tenant  intends  to  make  of  them, 
or  that  they  axe  in  a  safe  condi- 
tion for  use,  or  that  they  wiQ  con- 
tinue so."  In  Bobbins  v.  Mount, 
4  Robt.  (N.  Y.)  553,  a  case  of  in- 
jury by  water,  the  court  said  if 
there  is  no  express  agreement, 
there  is  no  obHgation  on  the  jiart 
of  the  landlord  that  the  premises 
shall  continue  fit  for  the  purposes 
for  which  they  wei-e  demised,  or 
that  they  are  in  a  tenantable  con- 
dition, or  that  they  will  continue 
so.  Scott  V.  Simmons,  54  N.  H. 
436,  was  an  action  for  damages 
for  injuries  caused  by  the  negli- 
gence of  the  landlord  improperly 
constructing  a  drain,  and  suffer- 
ing it  to  remain  defective,  where- 
by the  tenant's  goods  were  dam- 
aged by  overflow  of  water  for 
which  cause  the  tenant  left  the 
premises.  The  court  held  that  the 
landlord  was  not  liable,  because 
he  was  liable  only  to  repair  the 
drain  under  an  express  covenant, 
the  obligation  to  repair  not  being 
implied.  In  Westlake  v.  De  Graw, 
35  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  669,  the  premises 
were  infected  with  sickening  and 
noxious  smells  arising  from  dead 
rats.  The  landlord  knew  of  the 
smells  but  did  not  disclose  it  to 
the  tenant.  .  The  smells  produced 
sickness.  The  landlord  was  in- 
formed and  sent  a  carpenter  to  re- 
move the  cause,  but  the  tenant 


abandoned  the  house  before  the 
carpenter  got  to  work.  The  court 
held  the  tenant  liable  for  the  rent. 
In  Collins  v.  Barrow,  1  M.  &  R. 
113,  it  was  held  that  the  tenants 
might  quit  if  the  premises  became 
unwholesome  for  want  of  drain- 
age. In  Sahsbury  v.  Marshall,  4 
O.  &  P.  75,  the  roof  leaked  and  the 
water-closet  and  cistern  were  foul. 
In  Coure  v.  Goodwin,  9  C.  &  P. 
378,  the  privy  walls  gave  way  and 
the  kitchen  was  overflowed  with 
filth.  In  Royce  v.  Guggenheim, 
106  Mass.  301  ;  Am.  Rep.  323, 
the  landlord  had  rendered  the 
premises  unfit  for  habitation  by 
the  erection  of  a  new  building, 
and  this  was  held  an  eviction.  In 
Crump  V.  MorreU,  12  PhUa.  349, 
the  tenant  being  compelled  to 
leave  by  the  dangerous  condition 
of  the  drains,,  fraudulently  con- 
cealed by  the  landlord,  was  held 
not  liable  for  the  rent. 

"  White  v.  Montgomery,  ante ; 
Bobbins  v.  Mount,  4  Bobt.  (N.  Y.) 
553.  In  Purcell  v.  English,  86  Ind. 
34,  an  action  was  brought  by  a 
tenant  of  an  apartment  house  to 
recover  for  injuries  resulting  from 
the  accumulation  of  ice  and  snow 
upon  a  common  stairway,  upon 
which  she  sUpped  and  fell,  and  be- 
ing precipitated  to  the  pavement, 
was  injured.  It  was  held  that 
there  could  be  no  recovery. 
Elliott,  J.,  in  a  very  carefully 
considered  opinion,  exhaustively 
reviews  the  authorities.  See  also 
Humphrey  v.  Wait,  23  U.  C.  C.  P. 
580  ;  Bobbins  v.  Jones,  15  C.  B. 
N.  S.  221 ;  Shindlebeek  v.  Moon, 
33  Ohio  St.  264  ;  Moore  v.  Goedel, 
84  N.  Y.  537;  Howard  V.  Doo- 
little,  3  Duer  (N.  Y.)  464 ;  Kaiser 
V.  Kirth,  46  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  161 ; 
Loupe  V.  Wood,  61  Cal.  586; 
Corey  v.  Mann,  14  How.  Pr,  (N, 
Y.)  168. 


848 


Repairs. 


[§  381. 


of  the  several  parts,  is  not  responsible  for  injuries  resulting 
to  any  of  the  tenants  from  improper  or  neghgent  use 
of  the  premises  or  any  of  its  appliances  by  other  tenants 
of  the  same  building/  or  from  the  acts  of  God,  or  from  a 
reasonable  and  lawful  use  of  the  premises,  or  causes  that 
could  not  reasonably  have  been  anticipated."    For  injuries 


require  a  reconstruction  of  the 
ways  on  a  different  plan,  if  the 
ways  as  they  existed  when  the 
premises  were  hired  were  not  alto- 
gether convenient  or  safe  hy  rea- 
son of  some  fault  in  the  original 
plan  which  was  apparent.  In  the 
case  at  bar,  there  was  no  duty  on 
the  part  of  the  defendant  to  the 
plaintifiE  to  remove  from  the  step 
the  ice  and  snow  which  naturally 
accumulated  thereon.  That  was 
the  tenant's  duty,  if  she  desired 
to  use  the  steps.  The  ice .  and 
snow  were  the  proximate  cause  of 
the  injury.  The  defendant  was 
under  no  obhgation  to  change  the 
original  constaruction  of  the  steps 
for  the  benefit  of  the  tenant. 

'  Carstairs  v.  Taylor,  L.  R. ,  6  Ex. 
217 ;  Loupe  v.  Wood,  ante.  In 
WUson  V.  Waddel,  35  L.  T.  N. 
S.  639,  the  parties  to  the  action 
were  lessees  under  the  same  land- 
lord, of  the  minerals  of  contigu- 
ous pieces  of  land.  The  soil,  which  , 
lay  over  the  minerals,  was  natu- 
rally impervious  to  water,  but  in 
working  his  mine  the  respondent 
caused  the  siuf  ace  water  to  flow 
through  a  number  of  cracks  hav- 
ing opened  during  the  progress  of 
his  mining  operations.  The  water 
flowed  through  the  respondent's 
mine,  and  thence  into  that  of  the 
appellants,  which  was  at  a  lower 
level.  The  latter  thereupon  claimed 
damages  for  the  loss  they  had 
sustained  by  reason  of  the  in- 
creased expense  cast  upon  them 
by  the  inflowing  of  the  water. 
The  House  of  Lords  decided  that 
this  was  a  case  of  damnum  absque 
injuria,  Lokd  Blackburn,  who 
delivered  the  opinion,  saying : 
"The  general  rule  of  land  is  that 
the  owner  of  one  piece  of  land 
has  a  right  to  use  it  in  the  natural 
course  of  user,  unless,  in  so  doing 
he  interferes  with  some  right  cre- 
ated either  by  law  or  contract,  and 
as  a  breach  of  the  law,  the  owner 
of  the  minerals  has  a  right  to  take 


V.  Fedden,  L.  E.,  7  Q.  B. 
661 ;  Bobbins  v.  Mount,  ante ; 
White  V.  Montgomery,  ante  ;  Wat- 
kins  V.  Goodall,  138  Mass.  538; 
Daupe  V.  Genin,  45  N.  Y.  119 ; 
MarshaU  v.  Cohen,  44  Ga.  489; 
Toole  V.  Beckett,  67  Me.  254; 
Powell  V.  Enghsh,  86  Ind.  34; 
Looney  v.  McLean,  28  Mass.  33. 
In  Wood  V.  Naumkeag,  Steam. 
Cotton  Co.,  134  Mass.  357,  the  steps 
leading  from  a  tenement  house, 
occupied  by  the  plaintifif,  who  was 
the  wife  of  a  tenant  at  will  of  the 
defendant,  became  shppery  from 
the  accumulation  of  ice  and  snow, 
and  plaintiff  shpped  thereon  in- 
juring herself.  These  steps  were 
used  in  common  by  the  plaintiff, 
and  other  occupants  and  tenants 
of  the  premises.  It  was  held  that 
the  defendant  was  not  Uable  for 
the  injury.  Field,  J. ,  saying  :  "If 
she  were  the  sole  tenant  of  the 
house,  including  the  steps,  the  de- 
fendant would  not  be  liable.  A 
tenant  who  hires  premises  takes 
them  as  they  are,  and  cannot 
complain  that  they  were  not  con- 
structed differently.  Button  v. 
Gerrish,  9  Cush.  (Mass.)  89 ;  Royce 
V.  Guggenheim,  106  Mass.  201, 202. 
There  may  be  cases  where  the 
landlord  is  liable  to  the  tenant  for 
injuries  received  from  secret  de- 
fects which  ate  known  to  the  land- 
lord, and  are  concealed  from  the 
tenant,  but  this  case  discloses  no 
such  defects  in  the  steps.  Minor 
V.  Sharon,  112  Mass.  477  ;  Looney 
V.  McLean,  129  id.  33.  When  the 
passage-ways  are  of  artificial  con- 
struction, as  for  example  the  halls 
and  stair-cases  of  a  house,  and  the 
owner  lets  part  of  the  premises 
with  the  right  in  the  tenants  to 
use  the  passage-ways  in  common 
with  others,  it  may  be  that  there 
is  an  obhgation  on  the  owner  to 
keep  the  ways  in  such  a  condition 
that  they  can  be  safely  used  by 
the  tenants,  but  this  obhgation 
has  never  been  extended  so  as  to 


CHAP.  XXXV.]         Landlord  Bound. 


M"    1:1    :■ 


849 


resulting  from  apparent  defects,  or  defects  know  to  him, 
or  that  would  have  been  know  if  he  had  exercised  ordinary 
care,  liability  exists  ;  but  not  when  the  results  are  purely 
accidental,  and  in  no  measure  attributable  to  the  negli- 
gence of  the  landlord.'    The  landlord  is  responsible  for 


away  the  whole  of  the  minerals 
in  his  land,  for  such  is  the  natural 
course  of  user  of  minerals ;  and  a 
servitude  to  prevent  such  user 
must  be  founded  on  something 
more  than  mere  neighboi-hood." 
A  similar  conclusion  was  reached 
in  the  case  of  Swett  v.  Cutts,  50  N. 
H.  439  ;  9  Am.  Eep.  276.  See  also 
MiUer  v.  Laubach,  47  Penn.  St. 
154 ;  Waffle  v.  N.  Y.  Central  Rail- 
road Co.,  58  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  413; 
Rawstrom  v.  Taylor,  11  Exch.  369. 
'  Carstairs  v.  Taylor,  ante  ;  White 
v.  Montgomery,  ante  ;  Eobbius  v. 
Mount,  ante.  Nor  is  the  tenant 
liable  for  an  injury  resulting  to 
other  tenants  which  is  not  attribu- 
table to  his  negligence.  In  Ross 
V.  Fedden,  L.  R.,  7  Q.  B.  661,  the 
plaiutiff  was  tenant  from  year  to 
year  of  the  ground  floor  of  a  build- 
ing where  he  carried  on  the  busi- 
ness of  an  iron-monger. '  The  de- 
fendants were  also  tenants  from 
year  to  year  of  the  second  floor  of 
the  same  building,  which  they  oc- 
cupied as  oflices.  Some  time  be- 
tween Saturday  night,  Nov.  26th, 
and  Monday  morning,  Nov.  28th, 
1876,  water  escaped  from  a  water- 
closet  in  the  defendant's  premises, 
found  its  way  down  throiigh  the 
first  floor  to  the  ground  floor,  and 
there  did  damage  to  the  plaintiff's 
premises  and  goods  to  the  extent 
of  £79  5s.  3d.  This  damage  the 
plaintiff  sought  to  recover  from 
the  defendants  in  this  action.  The 
plaintiffs  claim  to  recover  upon 
two  grounds.  First,  that  the  mis- 
chief arose  from  the  negligence  of 
the  defendants.  Upon  this  matter 
the  evidence  was  very  slight,  and 
there  was  no  inconsistency  in  it. 
The  closet  was  inside  the  defend- 
ant's private  office,  and  no  one  had 
access  to  it  but  the  two  partners 
in  the  defendant's  firm,  and  it  was 
for  their  exclusive  use.  One  of 
the  partners  .was  from  home  at  the 
time  of  the  occurrence  ;  the  other 
partner,  who  was  called  as  a  wit- 
ness, stated  that  the  closet  had 
previously  to  the  Saturday  been 


in  good  order  ;  that  he  beUeved  he 
had  used  it  on  the  Saturday  morn- 
ing and  found  nothing  amiss,  and 
no  one  could  have  used  it  after- 
wards ;  that  on  the  Saturday 
evening  at  about  6  or  6.30,  he 
washed  his  hands  at  the  wash- 
stand  in  the  same  room  with  the 
closet,  and  nothing  then  appeared 
to  be  the  matter  with  it.  He  then 
left  the  ofiice  and  no  one  entered 
it  again  until  Monday  morning. 
On  the  Monday  morning  when  the 
plaintiff  came  to  his  shop,  he  found 
the  damage  done.  Together  with 
a  plumber,  whom  he  had  sent  for, 
he  traced  the  escape  of  water  up- 
ward to  the  second  floor.  Tliey 
obtained  access  to  the  defendant's 
office  and  the  closet  inside,  and 
found  that  the  water  had  over- 
flowed the  pan.  On  examination 
it  appeared  that  the  cause  of  this 
was  that  the  valve  admitting  the 
supply  of  water  to  the  pan  had 
given  way  and  failed  to  close,  and 
the  overflow  pipe  had  become 
stuffed  with  paper  ;  the  valve,  th6 
defect  in  which  was  the  real  cause 
of  the  mischief,  was  under  the 
seat  of  the  closet,  and  could  only 
be  reached  or  seen  by  removing 
the  wood-work.  Upon  this  evi- 
dence the  court  held  that  the  de- 
fendants were  not  guilty  of  any 
neghgence.  Up  to  Saturday  even- 
ing there  was  no  rea;Son  to  suspect 
that  the  valve  had  -given  way,  or 
was  in  any  danger  of  giving  way, 
or  that  anything  was  wrong  with 
the  closet,  and  there  was  no 
reason  to  anticipate  any  danger 
therefrom.  But  it  was  in- 
sisted, on  behalf  of  the  plaint- 
iff, that  he  was  entitled  to  re- 
cover, even  in  the  absence  of  any 
negligence  on  the  part  of  the  de- 
fendants. The  court  say  :  "it  is 
argued  upon  the  authority  of 
Ry lands  v.  Fletcher,  Law  Rep.,  3 
H.  L.  330,  and  other  cases  similar 
in  principal.  In  that  case  it  was 
decided  that,  as  between  adjoining 
owners,  one  who  diverted  water 
from  its  natural  flow,  and  accumu- 


v;  '!  ii    '^  li 
850  Eepairs. 


[§  381. 


injuries  resulting  from  his  own  negligence,  but  not  for 


lated  it  on  his  own  land  for  his  own 
purposes,  is  bound  at  all  hazards, 
to  prevent  its  escape,  and  if  it  does 
escape.negligence  or  no  negligence, 
he  is  responsible  to  his  neighbor  for 
the  consequences.  It  is  contended 
that  the  same  rule  applies  to  this 
case.  On  the  other  hand,  the  case 
of  Carstairs  v.  Taylor,  Law  Eep. , 
6  Ex.  217,  has  been  cited.  In  that 
case  the  plaintiff  was  the  occupier 
of  the  ground  floor  of  a  ware- 
house, and  the  defendant  of  the 
upper  part.  The  water  from  the 
roof  was  collected  by  gutters  into 
a  box.  The  water  escaped  and 
injured  the  plaintiff's  goods  in  his 
warehouse  below  ;  and  it  was  held 
the  defendant  was  not  liable  for 
this  damage.  That  case  is  not,  I 
think,  at  all  a  direct  authority  for 
the  decision  of  the  present ;  it 
differs  in  two  important  particu- 
lars. The  apparatus  for  conducting 
the  water  was  there  as  much  for 
the  benefit  of  the  plaintiff  as  of  the 
defendant,  a  fact  upon  which  much 
stress  is  laid  in  the  judgment  of 
Braitwbll,  B.,  while  here  the 
water-closet  was  solely  for  the  de- 
fendant's benefit ;  and  further,  in 
that  case,  the  circumstance  that 
caused  the  damage  was  one  falling 
under  the  head  of  ws  major,  a  fact 
to  which  much  weight  is  given  by 
the  Lord  Chief  Baron  and  Mar 
TIN,  B.  This  cannot  be  said  in  the 
present  case.  I  think,  however, 
that  the  judgment  in  Carstairs  v. 
Taylor  leaves  it  very  doubtful  . 
whether  the  rule  of  law  laid  down 
in  Rylands  v.  Fletcher,  Law  Eep. , 
3  H.  L.  330,  in  the  case  of  adjacent 
owners,  applies  to  the  case  of  two 
persons  occupying  two  floors  of 
the  same  house.  But  assuming  the 
rule  to  apply,  is  the  present  case 
within  it?  As  between  the  occu- 
piers of  part  of  a -house — a  thing 
wholly  artificial — it  is  rather  a 
straining  of  language  to  speak  of 
any  one  state  of  things  as  more 
natural  than  ajiother.  But  I  think 
that  in  the  words  of  Martin,  B., 
in  the  case  already  refen-ed  to, 
"one  who  takes  the  floor  of  a  house 
must  be  held  to  take  the  premises 
as  they  are."  As  far  as  he  is  con- 
cerned, I  think  the  state  of  things 
then  existing  may  be  treated  as  the 
natural  state  of  things,  and  the 
flow  of  water  through  cisterns  and 


pipes  then  in  operation  as  equiva- 
lent to  the  natural  flow  of  water. 
I  think  he  takes  subject  to  the 
ordinary  risks  arising  from  the  use 
of  the  rest  of  the  house  as  it  stands ; 
and  that  one  who  merely  continues 
to  use  the  rest  of  the  house  as  it 
stands,  and  in  the  ordinary  man- 
ner, does  not  fall  withiu  the  rule 
laid  down  in  Rylands  v.  Fletcher, 
L.  E.,  1  Exchci.  368,  and  in  the 
absence  of  neghgence,  is  not  liable 
for  the  consequences ;  and  in  the 
present  case,  there  is  nothing  to 
show,  nor  has  it  been  suggested, 
that  it  has  been  in  any  way  altered 
since  the  plaintiff  became  tenant  of 
the  ground  floor,  or  that  it  has  been 
used  in  any  but  the  ordinary  man- 
ner. The  question  is  one  of  some 
difficulty,  but  my  opinion  is  that, 
under  the  circumstances  of  the 
case,  in  the  absence  of  negligence 
on  the  part  of  the  defendants,  they 
are  not  liable  for  the  damage 
which  the  plaintiff  has  sustained. 
Blackburn,  J. ,  said  :  "  I  think  it  is 
impossible  to  say  that  defendants, 
as  occupiers  of  the  upper  story  of 
a  house,  were  Kable  to  the  plaintiff 
imder  the  circumstances  found  in 
the  case.  The  water-closet  and 
the  supply-pipe  are  for  their  con- 
venience and  use,  but  I  cannot 
think  there  is  any  obhgation  on 
them  at  all  hazards  to  keep  the 
pipe  from  bursting  or  otherwise 
getting  out  of  order.  The  cause  of 
the  Overflow  was  the  valve  of  the 
supply-pipe  getting  out  of  order, 
andT  the  escape-pipe  choked  with 
paper,  and  the  judge  has  expressly 
found  that  there  was  no  neghgence, 
and  the  only  ground  taken  by  the 
plaintiff  is,  that  the  plaintiff  and 
defendants,  being  occupiers  under 
the  same  landlord,  the  defendants, 
being  the  occupiers  of  the  upper 
story,  contracted  an  obligation 
binding  them  in  favor  of  the 
plaintiff,  the  occupier  of  the  lower 
story,  to  keep  the  water  in  at  their 
peril.  I  do  not  agree  to  that ;  I  do 
not  think  the  maxim  '  Sio  utere  tuo 
ut  alienum  non  lq,edas, '  appUes. 
Negligence  is  negatived,  and  prob- 
ably, if  the  defendants  had  got 
notice  of  the  state  of  the  valve  and 
pipe  and  had  done  nothing,  there 
might  have  been  ground  for  the 
argument  that  they  were  liable  for 
the  consequences  ;    but  I  do  not 


CHAP.  XXXV.]         Landlord  Bound. 


851 


injuries  resulting  from  the  negligence  or    misconduct 

think  the  law  casts  on  the  de- 
fendants any  such  obligation  as 
the  plaintiff  contends  for.  The 
judg-jient  must,  therefore,  be 
aflarmed.  Mellor,  J.— I  am  of  the 
same  opinion.  I  was  prepared  to 
listen  to  any  authority  in  favor  of 
the  plaintiff,  but  non,e  had  been 
found.  In  the  absence  of  negli- 
gence, there  is  nothing  in  the  rela- 
tive position  of  the  parties  which 
would  make  the  defendants  liable. 
The  statement  in  the  case  rendered 
the  judge's  decision  doubtful,  but 
this  was  cleared  up  when  the 
judgment  was  read.  I  was  very 
glad  that  this  was  done.  I  am 
quite  satisfied  with  the  reasoning 
in  it.  Rylands  v.  Fletcher  does 
not  apply ;  and  Carstairs  v.  Tay- 
lor is  a  much  stronger  case  than 
the  present,  as  it  seems  to  me  in 
favor  of  the  defendant."  The  case 
of  Marshall  v.  Cohen,  44  Ga.  489, 
9  Am.  Rep.  170,  might  be  regarded 
as  in  conflict  with  the  doctrine  of 
this  case,  but  an  examination  of 
the  facts  of  the  case  shows  that 
the  defendant  was  clearly  charge- 
able with  negligence,  and  that  this 
was  the  ground  upon  which  the 
court  upheld  the  action.  It  ap- 
peared that  the  plaintiff  was  the 
occupant  of  the  ground  floor  of  a 
building  owned  by  the  defendant ; 
the  upper  portion  of  the  building 
was  occupied  by  other  tenants  ; 
there  was  a  water-closet  on  the 
upper  .floor  for  the  convenience 
and  use  of  the  tenants  of  that 
floor ;  the  water-closet  and  pipes 
were  not  in  a  defective  condition, 
and,  therefore,  were  not  a  nui- 
sance when  the  plaintiff  rented  the 
store.  But  it  did  appear  that  the 
closet  was  used  not  only  by  the 
tenants,  but  was  open  night  and 
day  for  the  use  of  outsiders,  and 
was  at  times  in  very  bad  condition, 
and  the  plumber  who  had  been 
called  by  her  on  one  or  two  occa- 
sions to  repair  the  closet,  advised 
her  to  close  it  up.  It  also  appeared 
that  previous  to  the  damage  sued 
for  there  had  been  a  leakage  and 
her  attention  was  called  to  it,  and 
she  promised  to  repair  it,  but  ne- 
glected so  to  do,  and  the  result  was 
that  the  water  overflowed  and  in- 
jured the  plaintiff's  goods.  LOCH- 
RAM,  C.  J.,  says  :  "  There  is  noth- 
ing clearer,  as  a  principle  of  law, 


than  that  a  party  is  liable  for  dam- 
ages done  by  himself,  his  servants 
or  agents,  in  maintaining  or  keep- 
ing up  a  private  nuisance.  The 
evidence  in  this  case  shows  that 
this  closet  was,  at  times,  in  very 
bad  order  and  condition ;  that  it 
was  kept  in  this  condition.  *  * 
*  *  And  it  appfears,  previous  to 
the  damage  sued  for,  there  was  a 
leakage  of  which  she  was  notified, 
and  she  promised  to  fla;  it."  Thus 
it  will  be  seen  that  in  this  case 
there  was  the  most  flagrant  neg- 
ligence on  the  part  of  the  defend- 
ant in  not  keeping  the  water-closet 
closed,  except  as  to  her  tenants, 
and  in  not  repairing  it  when  she 
was  notified  of  its  leaky  condition, 
and  particularly  when  she  had 
agreed  to  do  so.  Nothing  is  bet- 
ter settled  than  that  defective  wa- 
ter-closets, defective  water-pipes, 
or  the  negligent  maintenance  of 
anything  which  may  become  a 
nuisance  except  by  the  exercise  of 
proper  care,  becomes  a  nuisance 
when  negligently  or  carelessly 
maintained.  That  the  court  in 
this  case  put  the  defendant's  lia- 
biUty  squarely  upon  the  negligence 
of  the  defendant  is  apparent.  "  A 
general  principle  may  be  recog- 
nized," says  the  judge  farther  on 
in  his  opinion,  "  that  one  who  per- 
mits a  wrong  to  be  done  is  as  lia- 
ble as  he  who  does  it.  In  torts  aU 
are  regarded  as  principles.  This 
damage  was  the  result  of  a  nui- 
sance kept  by  the  landlord  upon 
the  premises ;  and  that  it  was  done 
by  his  own  tenants  does  not  change 
the  charge  or  remove  the  HabiUty. 
One  who  erects  anything  upon  his 
land  which,  by  ignition,  burns 
down  the  house  of  one  adjoining, 
is  Hable.  *  *  *  *  The  act  was 
produced  by  a  water-closet,  which, 
if  not  kept  clean  and  in  proper 
order,  was  per  se  a  private  nuL 
sance,  and  the  natural  and  ordinary 
consequence  of  which  was  to  pro- 
duce a  nuisance  in  the  inherent 
consequence  of  the  thing  itself. 
And  when  there  was  proof,  as  in 
this  case,  of  this  defect  being  known 
to  the  defendant  by  information 
and  by  actual  notice  of  a  previous 
leak,  we  think  the  reasons  of  this 
liability  appear."  Robbins  v. 
Mount,  4  Robt.  (N.  Y.)  553  ;  Tread- 
weU  V.  Davis,  39  Ga.  340  ;  BaU  v. 


852 


Eepairs. 


[§  381. 


of  his  tenants.'  In  such  cases  the  tenant  alone  is  respon- 
sible. Thus,  in  a  recent  English  case"  the  lessees  of  a 
colhery,  who  were  under  covenant  with  their  lessor  to 
erect  fences  either  by  stone  walls  or  posts  and  rails, 
,  erected  a  fence  of  posts  and  two  lines  of  wire  rope,  which 
had  become  unfit  for  coUiery  purposes.  The  fence  divided 
the  colliery  works  from  pasture  lands  in  the  occupation 
of  a  tenant  under  the  same  lessor..  The  wire  rope  in 
course  of  time  rusted,  decayed,  dropped  in  pieces,  and  fell 


Nye,  99  Mass.  583  ;  Whitehouse  v. 
Birmingham  Canal  Co.,  5  H.  &  N. 
928  ;  Blyth  v.  Birmingham  Water 
Works  Co.,  11  Exchq.  781  ;  Bag- 
nail  V.  E.  R.  Co.,  1  H.  &  C.  544 ; 
Harrison  v.  Great  Northern  E.  R. 
Co.,  Sid.  2.31  ;  Bell  v.  Twenty  Men, 
1  Q.  B.  766  ;  Bell  v.  Armstrong,  10 
Ind.  181  ;  Warren  v.  Kauffman,  3 
PhUa.  259 ;  KUlon  v.  Power,  51 
Penn.  St.  439  ;  Moore  v.  Goedel, 
7  Bosw.  (N.  Y.)  591 ;  34  N.  Y. 
537  ;  Ortmayer  v.  Johnson,  45  111. 
489  ;  Weston  v.  Incorp.  of  Tailors. 
Hay,  66.  In  Carstairs  v.  Taylor, 
previously  referred  to,  the  plaint- 
iff and  defendant  were  the  occu- 
pants of  the  same  building.  The 
plaintiff  of  the  lower  story  and  the 
defendant  of  the  upper  story.  P6r 
their  mutual  use  and  benefit  a 
tank  was  erected  in  the  upper 
<story,  connected  with  the  gutters 
and  the  roof,  so  that  the  rain  fall- 
ing upon  the  building  was  collect- 
ed and  gathered  in  the  tank,  and 
was  used  by  both  occupants.  A 
rat  having  eaten  a  hole  through 
the  tank,  the  water  escaped,  and 
flooded  the  plaintiff's  premises. 
The  court  held  that,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances of  this  case,  the  rule  in 
Eylands  v.  Fletcher  did  not  apply, 
for  the  water  was  collected  for  the 
use  of  both  parties,  and  the  injury 
resulted,  not  from  any  negUgence 
of  the  defendants,  but  irather  was 
attributable  to  vis  major.  In  Bob- 
bins V.  Mount,  4  Eobt.  (N.  Y.)  553, 
the  building  was  occupied  by  nu- 
merous tenants,  and  the  landlord 
provided  a  janitor  to  take  charge 
of  the  building,  who  was  paid  for 
his  services  by  the  tenants,  accord- 
ing to  the  space  that  each  occu- 
pied. A  faucet  w.as  left  open  in  a 
room  of  an  upper  tenant  one  night 
and  the  water  left  running  into  a 


urinal,  which  being  choked  up 
with  tobacco  overflowed  and  dam- 
aged the  tenants  below.  Upon 
the  trial  in  the  court  below  the 
judge  charged  the  jury,  that  if  the 
overflow  was  caused  by  the  negli- 
gence of  the  defendant,  or  if  the 
fixture  was  improperly  construct- 
ed, or  should  not  have  been  there 
at  all,  or  if  aU  the  safeguards  that 
could  possibly  have  been  placed 
there,  were  not  placed  there,  and 
the  fixture  was  unsafe,  the  defend- 
ants were  liable  m-espective  of  the 
question  of  negligence.  The  jury 
having  found  for  the  defendant, 
the  ruling  of  the  judge  was  fully 
sustained.  There  is  a  wide  dis- 
tinction between  acts  lawful  in 
themselves,  done  by  one  upon  his 
own  premises,  which  may  result 
in  injury  to  another  if  not  proper- 
ly done  or  guarded,  and  those 
which  in  the  nature  of  things 
must  so  result.  In  the  former  case 
a  party  could  be  made  liable  only 
for  actual  negUgence  in  the  per- 
formance of  the  act  or  mode  of 
maintaining  it,  Eockwood  v.  Wil- 
son, 11  Cush.  (Mass.)  23,  while  in 
the  latter  case  he  would  be  liable 
for  all  the  consequences  of  his  acts, 
whether  guilty  of  negligence  or 
not.  Bagnall  v.  London  N.  W.  R. 
E.  Co.,  7  H.  N.  423.  The  one  act 
becomes  a  nuisance  only  by  rea- 
son of  the  negligent  manner  in 
which  it  is  performed  or  maintain- 
ed, while  the  other  is  a  nuisance 
per  se.  CahiU  v.  Eastman,  18 
Minn.  334;  10  Am.  Eep.  184 ;  Phin- 
zey  V.  City  of  Augusta,  47  Ga. 
303  ;  Wood  on  Nuisances,  135-134. 

'  Murray  v.  Eichards,  1  Allen 
(Mass.)  414. 

2  Firth  V.  The  Bowhng  Iron  Co. 
recently  decided  in  the  Bradford 
County  Court,  England. 


CHAP.  XXXV.  J         Laitolord  Botind.  863 

upon  the  pasture.  The  tenant's  cattle,  in  grazing,  got 
pieces  of  the  wire  with  their  food  into  their  system,  and 
were  injured.  In  1867  two  heifers  died  from  eating  this 
wire.  With  the  lessor's  sanction,  complaint  was  made 
by  the  tenant  to  the  lessees,  and  compensation  asked  for 
but  no  notice  was  taken  by  the  lessees,  and  they  contin- 
ued to  use  the  wire  rope  as  before,  doing  such  repairs 
only  as  were  required  for  their  own  purposes.  In  1876  a 
cow  of  the  tenant,  which  was  pastured  in  the  same  field, 
became  ill,  and  was  ultimately  kiUed,  being  pronounced 
by  a  veterinary  surgeon  to  be  incurable.  In  the  carcass 
a  piece  of  wire  was  found  imbedded  in  the  under  fold  of 
the  pericardium,  which  the  cow  must  have  taken  up  with 
the  grass  when  feeding.  For  this  cow  compensation  was 
demanded,  and  refused,  and  thereupon  this  action  was 
brought.  The  court  held  that  the  action  could  not  be 
maintained,  on  the  ground  that  the  wire  fence  was  not  a 
proper  performance  of  the  covenants  in  the  lease,  there 
being  no  privity  of  contract  between  the  tenant  and  the 
lessor,  nor  upon  the  ground  of  negligence  merely,  there 
not  being  any  relation  between  the  parties  out  of  which 
any  duty  on  the  part  of  the  lessees  toward  the  tenant 
would  arise.  But  the  lessees  were  held  hable,  upon  the 
ground  that  they  knew  that  tJieir  mode  of  using  their 
property  was  productive  of  damage  to  the  lawful  rights  of 
the  tenant,  which  they  were  hound  to  respect.  The  prin- 
ciple upon  which  the  court  proceeded  is  supported  by  many 
cases.'  Nor,  in  the  absence  of  an  express  covenant  to 
repair,  is  the  landlord  in  any  case  responsible  to  one  tenant 
for  injuries  resulting  to  another  tenant  from  defects  in  a 
part  of  the  premises  not  embraced  in  the  lease  of  the 
tenant  injured,  if  such  tenant  expressly  assumed  all, 
the  risks,'  or  if  the  tenant  had  access  to  and  the  means  of 

•Greenland  v.  Chapin,  L.  R.,  5  126.     In  Fera  v.  Child.  115  Mass. 

Exch.  248.    See  also,  Grumott  v.  33,  the  lessee  stipulated  that  the 

Williams,  32  L.  J.  Rep.  (N.S.)  337;  lessor  should    not    be    liable    for 

Loseev.  Buchanan,  51  N.  Y.  478  ;  damagesoccasioned"  by  Are,  water 

Wilson  V.  City  of  New  Bedford,  or  otherwise,  or  by  the  uso  or  abuse 

108  Mass.  261  ;  Cahill  v.  Eastman,  of  the  Cochituate  water,  or  by  the 

18  Minn.  834  ;  Ryland  v.  Fletcher,  leakage  or  bursting  of  water-pipes, 

L.  R.,  3  H.  L.  830.  or  in  any  other  wa,y  or  manner," 

2  MoAlpine  v.    PoweU,  70  N.  Y.  and  it  was  held  that  this  included 

II.— 2 


854 


Eepairs. 


[§  381. 


I'emedying  the  defect ; '  and  especially  is  this  the  case 
where  the  injury  is  produced  by  a  defect  that  results  from 
his  own  act,  as,  for  damages  by  leakage  occasioned  by 
his  turning  off  the  water  in  pipes  in  the  building  to 
prevent  its  freezing."  Nor,  in  the  absence  of  a  covenant 
to  repair,  is  he  liable  for  injury  resulting  from  the  faulty 
construction  or  condition  of  -the  premises,  the  control 
over  which  is  in  the  hands  of  a  tenant,  either  to  the  tenant 
or  third  persons,"  unless  he  has  been  guilty  of  fraud  in 
having  misrepresented  the  condition  of  the  premises, 
or  has  concealed  certain  facts  relative  to  their  condition 
that  it  was  his  duty  to  inform  the  tenant  about,  and  it 
seems  that,  where  certain  defects  exist  that  are  likely  to 
injuriously  affect  the  health  of  the  tenant  or  his  family,  it 
is  the  landlord's  duty  to  disclose  the  facts,  and  failing  to 
do  so  J  he  is  liable  to  the  tenant  for  all  the  damages  result- 
ing to  the  tenant  which  are  the  immediate  and  proximate 
result  of  such  failure.*    Where  there  are  defects  in  the 

and  was  dangerous,  and  the  de- 
fendant was  bound  to  inform  the 
plaintiff  of  the  same,  so  that  pre- 
cautions might  be  taken,  and  to 
take  liimself  reasonable  precaution , 
against  the  exposure  of  the  plaintiff 
to  said  disease  ;  but  the  defendant 
carelessly  and  negligently  omitted 
to  inform  the  plaintiff,  or  to  take 
any  precautions  against  the  ex- 
posm-e  of  the  plaiitiff  to  the  said 
disease,  and  the  plaintiff,  using  the 
said  house,  was  made  sick  with  the 
said  disease.  The  evidence  tended 
to  support  the  allegations  of  the 
declaration.  The  court  instructed 
the  jury  as  follows  :  "  1st.  If  the 
owner  of  a  tenement  leases  the 
same,  to  be  occupied  by  the  lessee 
and  liis  family,  the  owner  at  the 
time  having  knowledge  that  the 
tenement  was  so  infected  by  the 
small-pox  as  to  be  unfit  for  occupa- 
tion, and  to  endanger  the  health 
and  lives  of  the  occupants  on  ac- 
count thereof,  the  lessee  having  no 
knowledge  of  said  fact,  and  the 
lessor  conceals  his  knowledge 
to  induce  the  lessee  to  laire 
and  occupy  the  same,  and  the 
lessee  and  his  family,  while  in 
the  occupation  of  the  said  tene- 
ment under  said  lease,  on  account 
of  the  said  infection  thereof,  are 


damages  resulting  from  a  bursting 
of  water-pipes  in  any  part  of  the 
building,  although  not  occupied  by 
the  tenant. 

'  Taylor  v.  Bailey,  74  HI.  178.  In 
the  absence  of  any  agreement  to  do 
so  a  tenant  of  part  of  a  building  is 
not  bound  to  make  general  repairs, 
and  if  the  landlord  fails  to  make 
them  and  the  building  falls  or 
otherwise  is  permitted  to  become 
ruinous,  and  the  tenant  is  injured 
thereby,  the  landlord  is  liable  to 
him  for  such  damages  as  he  sus- 
tains even  though  he  continued  the 
occupancy  knowing  the  premises 
to  be  unsafe.  Bald  v.  0'Brien,13 
Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  160. 

'  Taylor  v.  Bailey,  ante. 

3  Jaffe  V.  Harteau,  56  N.  Y.  398  ; 
Brewster  v.  Defremeny,  33  Cal. 
841  ;  Hazlett  v.  PoweU,  30  Penn. 
St.  298  :  Sherwood  v.  Scullan,  3 
Bos.  (N.  Y.)  137;  Joyce  v.  De- 
Ginervide,  3  Mo.  App.  596  ;  Douppe 
V.  Gennin,  45  N.  Y.  119. 

*  In  Minor  v.  Sharon,  113  Mass. 
477,  the  defendant  let  the  plaintiff 
a  tenement  to  reside  in  with  his 
family,  in  which,  as  the  plaintiff 
stated  in  his  declaration,  the  de- 
fendant knew  had  occured  cases  of 
the  small-pox,  and  that  the  same 
was  tainted  with  the  said  disease, 


CHAP.  XXXV.  j         Landlord  Bound. 


855 


premises  not  open  to  ordinary  observation,  of  the  existence 
of  which  the  landlord  knows,  or  ought  to  know,  which 
are  dangerous  to  the  person  of  the  tenant,  it  is  his  duty 
to  disclose  them  to  the  tenant,  and  if  he  fails  to  do  so, 
and  the  tenant  is  injured  thereby  the  landlord  is  respon- 
sible for  all  the  damages  that  ensue  to  the  tenant  there- 
from.    Thus  in  a  recent  Massachusetts'  case '  the  plaintiff, 


taken  sick,  the  lessee  is  entitled  to 
recover  the  damages  resulting  to 
him  from  said  sickness ;  but  if  the 
want  of  due  care  on  the  part  of  the 
jjlaintiffi  contributed  to  nis  taking 
the  disease,  he  cannot  recover. 
And  the  minor  children  are  entitled 
to  recover  for  the  damages  per- 
sonal to  themselves,  as  are  stated, 
if  the  father  exercised  due  care. 
Sd.  That  it  was  the  plaintifE's  duty 
to  take  all  such  precautions  as  a 
man  of  ordinary  care  and  prudence 
would  take  under  like  circum- 
stances. 'Sd.  No  specific  rule  can 
be  laid  down.  The  circumstances 
and  facts  known  to  the  plaintiff 
must  be  considered,  the  extent  of 
the  disease,  the  opportunities  and 
dangers  of  exposure.  4th.  If 
vaccination  was  a  proper  precau- 
tion, it  should  have  been  attended 
to  by  the  plaintiff,  within  a  reason- 
able time  after  he  had  knowledge 
of  danger  of  exposure.  He  should 
have  employed  a  proper  person,  or 
one  whom  he  had  i-easonable  cause 
to  beheve  was  quahfied  to  vaccinate 
his  family.  5th.  Whether  he  was 
in  fault  in  not  causing  his  family 
to  be  vaccinated,  or  in  not  procur- 
ing a  proper  person  to  vaccinate 
them,  is  for  the  jury.  If  they 
consider  that  a  proper  preventa- 
tive.the  jury  wiU  consider  whether, 
with  a  knowledge  of  the  existing 
state  of  facts,  the  plaintiff  un- 
reasonably delayed,  or  employed 
an  unsuitable  person.  If,  he  did, 
he  was  in  fault.  6th.  If  the  chil- 
dren caught  the  disease  in  conse- 
quence of  entering  rooms  not  leased 
to  the  father,  but  separate  and 
distinct  from  their  tenement,  the 
defendant  is  not  liable. "  The  jury 
f oiand  for  the  plaintiff  in  each  ac- 
tion ;  in  the  first  for  $325  ;  in  the 
second  for  $125  ;  and  in  the  third 
for,  $450;  and  the  verdict  was 
sustained  upon  appeal.  In  ]3assiiig 
.upon  the  question  Morton,  J., 
said  :  "  In  this  case  the  defendant 


knew  that  the  tenement  was  so  in- 
fected as  to  endanger  the  health 
and  life  of  any  person  who  might 
occupy  it.  It  was  a  plain  duty  of 
humanity  on  his  part  to  inform  the 
plaintiff  of  this  fact,  or  to  refrain 
from  leasing  it  until  he  had  used 
proper  m.eans  to  disinfect  it."  In 
Eaton  V.  Winne,  20  Mich.  156,  4 
Am.  Rep.  377,  the  defendant  oc- 
cupied a  certain  pasture  as  licensee 
under  the  plaintiff,  and  pastured  a 
flock  of  sheep  there  that  were  in- 
fected with  an  infectious  disease. 
Immediately  after  the  defendant 
took  his  sheep  away,  the  plaintiff 
turned  his  sheep  into  the  pasture, 
and  the  disease  was  communicated 
to  them.  The  plaintiff  was  igno- 
rant of  the  nature  of  the  disease  or 
its  mode  of  communication,  and 
was  falsely  informed  by  the  de- 
fendant that  there  was  no  danger. 
He  was  held  entitled  to  recover. 
See  Scott  v.  Simons,  54  N.  H.  426  ; 
Wilson  V.  Finch  Hatton,  2  L.  R., 
Exchq.  Div.  236. 

'  Cowen  V.  Sunderland,  (Mass.) 
5  N.  E.  Rep.  348.  In  this  case 
Devens.  J.,  said:  "  It  is  a  general 
rule,  well  established  by  the  decis- 
ions of  this  court,  that  the  lessee 
takes  an  estate  in  the  premises 
hired,  and  takes  the  risk  of  the 
quahty  of  the  premises,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  an  express  or  implied  war- 
ranty by  the  lessor,  or  of  deceit. 
If,  therefore,  he  is  injured  by  rea- 
son of  the  unsafe  condition  of  the 
premises  hired,  he  cannot  ordina- 
rily maintain  an  action  in  the  ab- 
sence of  such  warranty  or  of  mis- 
representation. The  rule  of  caveat 
emptor  applies,  and  it  is  for  the  les- 
see to  make  the  examination  nec- 
essary to  determine  whether  the 
premises  he  leases  are  safe  and 
adapted  to  the  purposes  for  which 
they  are  hired.  There  is  an  excep- 
tion to  this  general  rule,  arising 
from  the  duty  which  the  lessor 
owes  the  lessee.    This  duty  does 


856 


Eepairs. 


[§  381. 


a  tenant  of  the  defendant,  fell  into  a  cesspool  on  the 
demised  premises,  and  was  injured.     The  plaintiff  showed 


not  originate  directly  from  the 
contract ;  but  from  the  relation  of 
the  parties,  and  is  imposed  by  law. 
\\  here  there  are  concealed  defects, 
attended  with  danger  to  an  occu- 
pant, and  which  a  careful  exami- 
nation would  not  discover,  known 
to  the  lessor,  the  latter  is  bound  to 
reveal  them,  in  order  that  the  les- 
see may  guard  against  them. 
While  the  failure  to  reveal  such 
facts  may  not  be  actual  fraud  or 
misrepresentation,  it  is  such  negli- 
gence as  may  lay  the  foundation 
of  an  action  against  the  lessor,  if 
injury  occurs.  The  principle  that 
one  who  delivers  an  article  which 
he  knows  to  be  dangerous,  to  an- 
other, ignorant  of  its  qualities, 
without  notice  of  its  nature  or 
qualities,  is  liable  for  any  injury 
reasonably  likely  to  result  and 
which  does  result,  has  been  ap- 
plied to  the  letting  of  tenements. 
It  has  thus  been  held  that,  vyhere 
one  let  premises  infected  with  the 
small-pox,  and  injury  occured 
thereby,  he  was  liable  if,  know- 
ing this  danger,  he  omitted  to  in- 
form the  lessee ;  this  upon  the 
ground  of  his  negligent  failure  to 
perform  a  duty  which  he  owed  the 
lessee.  It  was  not  deemed  impor- 
tant whether  the  omission  to  give 
the  information  was  intentional  or 
otherwise.  Bowe  v.  Hunking,  135 
Mass.  380,  and  cases  cited ;  Tuttle 
v.  GUbert  Mfg.  Co.,  145  Mass.  169. 

Obviously  there  may  be  many 
concealed  defects  and  dangers 
about  a  house,  which  careful  ex- 
amination will  not  discover.  If 
these  are  known  to  the  lessor  it  is 
for  him  to  reveal  them.  Traps  or 
contrivances  may  exist,  by  means 
of  which  the  most  careful  occu- 
pant might  be  injured.  "Such 
traps  or  contrivances,"  says  Me. 
Justice  Field,  "are  not  merely  a 
want  of  repair ;  they  are  in  a  sense 
active  agencies  of  mischief,  which 
no  tenant  would  expect  to  find 
even  in  a  decayed  and  ruinous  ten- 
ement. "    Bowe  V.  Hunking,  supra. 

In  Reichenbacher  v.  Pahmeyer, 
8  Bradw.  (111.)  217,  the  defect  al- 
leged was  in  the  manner  of  hang- 
ing a  chandelier.  The  chandelier 
was  hung  unsafely,  and  the  lessor 
knew  it,  and  did  not  disclose  this 


fact  to  the  lessee.  It  was  not  ap- 
parent to  an  observer.  It  was  held 
that  the  lessor  was  liable  to  a  serv- 
ant of  the  lessee,  who  was  injured 
by  its  fall.  See  also  Scott  v. 
Simons,  54  N.  H.  426 ;  Godley  v. 
Hagerty,  20  Penn.  St.  897. 

In  Bowe  v.  Hunking,  supra,  it 
was  held  that  the  case  then  at  bar 
was  not  within  the  exception  to 
the  general  rule  by  which  a  lessor 
is  rendered  liable  for  negUgence  of 
this  character.  There  was  no  evi- 
dence that  the  defective  step,  by 
which  the  injury  in  that  case  oc- 
cui-red,  was  known  to  the  lessor  or 
her  agent  to  be  unsafe,  ."nil ,  further, 
this  defect  itself  was  ob  ious,  and 
whatever  danger  e..  jsted  was  read- 
ily seen  by  examination. 

In  the  case  at  bar,  as  the  plaint- 
iff presented  it,  there  was  evidence 
that  she  did  not  know  of  the  exist- 
ence or  location  of  the  cesspool; 
that  it  was  in  the  yai'd  she  had 
hired  and  was  entitled  to  use ;  that 
it  was  covered  with  from  four  to 
six  inches  of  dirt,  on  which  grass 
and  weeds  were  growing:  that  it 
presented  the  same  appearance  as 
the  rest  of  the  yard;  that  it  had 
never  been  pointed  out  to  her ;  and 
that  it  was  where  she  passed  over 
it  in  her  use  of  the  yard ;  that  the 
boards  which  covered  it,  and  on 
which  the  earth  rested,  were  rot- 
ten and  decayed ;  and  that,  in  step- 
ping upon  this  covering  of  the  cess- 
pool, she  was  thrown  into  it  and 
injured.  There  was  further  evi- 
dence that  this  cover  had  been  re- 
paired with  old  boards  some  time 
before,  by  the  defendant's  direc- 
tion, and  that  defendant  was  pres- 
ent when  this  was  done.  From 
the  description  of  witnesses  of 
these  repairs  to  the  covering  of  the 
cesspool,  the  jury  might  fairly 
have  inferred  that  it  was  left  in  an 
unsafe  state,  and  known  to  be  so. 

Upon  these  facts,  the  learned 
judge  erred  in  withdrawing  the 
case  from  the  jury.  It  should  have 
been  submitted,  with  proper  in- 
structions, to  determine  whether' 
the  defendant  knew  the  defective 
covering  of  the  cesspool  and  the 
danger  therefrom,  and  had  negli- 
gently omitted  to  inform  the 
plaintiff;  and  whether  the  plaint- 


CHAP.  XXXV.  J  Repairs.  857 

that  she  did  not  know  of  the  existence  or  location  of  the 
cesspool ;  that  it  was  in  the  yard  she  had  hired  and  was 
entitled  to  use  ;  that  it  was  covered  with  dirt  upon  which 
grass  and  weeds  were  growing,  and  presented  the  same 
appearance  as  the  rest  of  the  yard ;  that  it  had  never  been 
pointed  out  to  her ;  that  it  was  where  she  passed  over  it 
in  her  use  of  the  yard  ;  that  the  boards  which  covered  it 
and  on  which  the  earth  rested  were  rotten  and  decayed ; 
and  that,  in  stepping  upon  this  covering  of  the  cesspool, 
she  was  thrown  into  it  and  injured ;  and  there  was 
further  evidence  that  this  cover  had  been  repaired  with 
old  boards  some  time  before  by  the  defendant's  direction, 
and  that  the  defendant  was  present  when  this  was  done, 
it  was  held  that  the  questions  whether  the  defendant, 
knowing  the  defective  covering  of  the  cesspool,  and  the 
danger  therefrom,  had  negligently  omitted  to  inform  the 
plainti^,  and  whether  the  plaintiff  by  reason  of  want  of 
proper  examination  by  herself,  was  injured  thereby,  was 
a  question  for  the  jury.  But,  where  the  tenant  knows 
of  the  defect,-  and  the  landlord  agrees  to  repair  it  and 
make  the  premises  safe  so  far  as  that  defect  is 
concerned,  the  tenant  cannot  recover  for  injuries 
sustained  by  reason  of  such  defect.'  His  only 
remedy  in  such  a  case,  is  upon  the  contract.    Where 

iff  herself,  making  careful  exami-  reason  of  the  unsafe  condition  of 
nations,  had  been  injured  thereby,  the  premises  hired,  cannot  main- 
by  reason  of  a  want  of  proper  ex-  tain  an  action  against  the  lessor, 
amination.  in  the  absence  of  warranty  or  mis- 
'  In  Tuttle  V.  Gilbert  Mfg.  Co.,  representation.  In  cases  where 
(Mass.)  5  N.  E.  Kep.  168,  the  de-  lessors  have  been  held  liable  for 
fendant,  on  letting  a  farm  to  the  such  injuries  to  the  lessee,  the 
plaintiff,  agreed  to  repair  and  put  liability  is  founded  in  negligence, 
the  stable  floor  in  a  saie  condition.  Looney  v.  McLean,  139  Mass.  33  ; 
He  neglected  to  do  so,  and  the  Bowe  v.  Hunking,  135  Mass.  880, 
plaintiff  sustained  a  personal  ih-  and  cases  cited.  The  plaintiff  ad- 
fury  therefrom.  The  court  held  mits  the  general  rule,  but  claims 
that  he  could  not  recover  there-  that  this  case  is  taken  out  of  it  be- 
for.  Morton,  C.  J.,  said  :  "  It  is  cause,  at  the  time  of  the  letting, 
the  general  rule  that  there  is  no  the  defendant  agreed  to  repair  and 
warranty  implied,  in  the  letting  of  put  in  a  safe  condition  the  stable 
premises,  that  they  are  reasonably  floor,  the  unsafe  condition  of  which 
fit  for  use.  The  lessee  takes  an  es-  caused  his  injury.  The  contract  re- 
tate  in  the  premises  hired,  and  he  lied  on  is  a  loose  one  ;  it  fixed  no 
takes  the  risk  of  the  quality  of  the  time  within  which  the  repairs  were 
premises,  in  the  absence  of  an  ex-  to  be  made  ;  and  it  is  doubtful 
press  or  implied  warranty  by  the  whether  the  evidence  proved  any 
•lessor,  or  of  deceit.  A  lessee,  breach  of  contract  on  the  part  of 
therefore,   if   he    is   injured    by  the  defendant.    But  if  we  assvmie 


858 


Repairs. 


[§  381. 


an  apartment  house  is  divided  into  different  tene- 
ments and  let  to  different  tenants,  the  landlord  retaining 
control  of  the  halls,  stairways,  and  approaches  thereto, 
the  landlord  is  bound  to  use  reasonable  care  in  keeping 
the  same  in  a  safe  condition  for  the  tenant  and  for  injuries 
resulting  to  a  tenant  from  his  negligence  in  that  respect, 
he  is  liable.  Thus  in  a  recent  New  Jersey  case '  the  defend- 
ant's testator  was  the  owner  of  a  four  story  building  in 
Jersey  City,  divided  into  eight  tenements,  which  he  let 
to  as  many  families,  aU  of  whom  had  right  of  passage  to 
and  from  their  respective  tenements  by  means  of  the  com- 
mon halls  and  stairways.  The  plaintiffs  were  tenants  of 
foiir  rooms  on  the  second  floor.  The  evidence  shows 
that  the  plaintiff  Alice,  while  going  down  the  flight  of 


that  the  contract  waa  to  make  the 
repairs  within  a  reasonable  time, 
and  that  the  jury  would  be  justi- 
fied in  finding  that  the  defendant 
had  not  performed  it  within  a 
reasonable  time,  the  question  is 
whether,  for  such  a  breach,  the 
plaintifif  can  maintain  an  action  of 
tort  to  recover  for  personal  injuries 
sustained  by  reason  of  the  defect- 
ive condition  of  the  stable  floor. 
The  cases  are  numerous  and  con- 
fusing as  to  the  dividing  line  be- 
tween actions  of  contract  and  of 
tort,  and  there  are  many  cases 
where  a  man  may  have  his  elec- 
tion to  bring  either  action.  When 
the  cause  of  action  arises  merely 
from  a  breach  of  promise,  the  ac- 
tion is  in  contract.  The  action  of 
tort  has  for  its  foundation  the  neg- 
Ugenoe  of  the  defendant,  and  this 
means  more  than  a  mere  breach  of 
a  promise.  Otherwise  the  failure 
to  meet  a  note  or  any  other  prom- 
ise to  pay  money  would  sustain  a 
suit  in  tort  for  negligence,  and 
thus  the  promisor  be  made  liabfe 
for  all  the  consequential  damages 
arising  from  such  failure.  As  a 
general  rule  there. must  be  some 
active  negligence  or  misfeasance, 
to  support  tort.  There  must  be 
some  breach  of  duty  distinct  from 
breach  of  contract.  In  the  case 
at  bar,  the  utmost  shown  against 
the  defendant  is  that  there  was 
unreasonable  delay  on  its  part  in 
performing  an  executory  contract. 
As  we  have  seen,  it  is  not  liable  by 


reason  of  the  relation  of  lessor  and 
lessee  ;  but  its  liabiHty,  if  any, 
must  rest  solely  upon  a  breach  of 
this  contract.  We  do  not  see  how 
the  cases  would  differ  in  principle 
if  an  action  were  brought  against 
a  third  person  who  had  contracted 
to  repair  the  stable  floor,  and  had 
unreasonably  delayed  in  perform- 
ing his  contract.  We  are  not 
aware  of  any  authority  for  main- 
taining such  an  action.  If  the  de- 
fendant had  performed  the  work 
contemplated  by  its  contract,  un- 
skillfuUy  and  negligently,  it  would 
be  hable  to  an  action  of  tort,  be- 
cause in  such  case  there  would  be 
a  misfeasance,  which  is  a  sufficient 
foundation  for  an  action  of  tort. 
Such  was  the  case  of  Gill  v.  Mid- 
dleton,  105  Mass.  477.  The  case  of 
Ashley  v.  Root,  4  Allen  (Mass.)  504, 
does  not  conflict  with  our  view,  but 
recognizes  the  rule  that,  to  sustain 
an  action  of  tort,  there  must  be 
more  than  a  mere  breach  of  con- 
tract. The  plaintiff  now  argues 
that  he  had  the  right  to  go  to  the 
jury  upon  the  question  of  war- 
ranty and  deceit.  It  does  not  ap- 
pear that  this  claim  was  made  in 
the  superior  court ;  but  it  is  clear 
that  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence 
of  any  warranty  that  the  stable 
was  safe,  or  of  any  deceit  or  mis- 
representation on  the  part  of  the 
defendant  or  its  agent." 

'  GiUoon  V.  EeiUy,  10  Centl.  Eep. 
438. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  Eepairs.  859 

stairs  leading  from  her  apartment  to  the  street, 
caught  the  heel  of  her  boot  in  the  oilcloth  on  the 
stairs  and  fell  sustaining  the  injury  for  which  this 
suit  is  brought.  The  trial  judge  charged  the  jury  that, 
"The  point  was  whether  there  was  a  tear,  or  a  wear  or 
defect  in  the  oilcloth,  and  whether  that  threw  her  down  ; 
if  they  were  satified  of  defect  there,  then  they  should 
render  their  verdict  for  damages  :  there  was  liability  on 
the  part  of  the  landlord,  if  there  was  defect  in  that  partic- 
ular."   The  jury  found  for  the  plaintiffs. 

Said  Dixon,  J. :  "  The  testimony  does  not  disclose  any 
contract  by  the  landlord  for  the  repair  of  the  demised 
premises,  and  consequently  he  is  not  to  be  deemed  re- 
sponsible for  their  condition.'  But  we  think  that, 
under  the  evidence,  the  halls  and  stairways  should 
not  be  regarded  as  part  of  the  demised  premises 
within  the  scope  of  this  rule.  It  appears  to  have 
been  the  understanding  that  the  landlord  should  re- 
tain control  of  these  portions  of  the  building,  lighting  the 
halls  and  covering  the  floors  at  his  pleasure,  and  affording 
to  the  tenants,  and  those  having  lawful  occasion  to  visit 
their  apartments,  the  right  of  passage  to  and  fro.  With 
respect,  therefor,  to  the  halls  and  stairways,  the  landlord 
was  under  the  responsibility  of  a  general  owner  of  real 
estate  who  holds  out  invitations  or  inducements  to  other 
persons  to  use  his  property." 

The  obhgation  resting  upon  such  an  owner  is  that  rea- 
sonable care  and  skill  have  been  exercised  to  render  the 
premises  reasonably  fit  for  the  uses  which  he  has  invited 
others  to  make  of  them.'" 

It  is  plain  that  the  directions  given  to  the  jury  at  the 
trial  carried  the  responsibility  of  the  landlord  beyond 

'  Mullen  V.  Eainear,  36  N.  J.  L.  perior  Ct.  446,  as  the  wife  of  the 

530.  tenant  In  an  apartment  house  ap- 

^  Looney  v.  McLean,  139  Mass.SS.  proached  the  elevator,  the  door  was 

^Vanderbeckv.  Hendry,  85  N.  J.  opened  by  a  boy  who  had  performed 

S.  467,  471 ;  Francis,  v.  Cockrell,  L  the  same  service  on  other  occasions 

E.  5  Q.  B.  184,   501 ;  Headman  v.  but  was  not  shown  to  have  been 

Conway,  136  Mass.  374 ;  Looney  v.  hired  by  the  owner  of  the  house. 

McLean,  ubi  nupra  ;  Watkins  v.  She  stepped  in,  and  the  elevator  was 

Goodall,    138  Mass.  533;  Camp  v.  not  in  place,  and  she  fell  a  distance 

Wood,  76  N.   Y.    93  ;   Edwards  v.  of  six  feet  and  was  injured.    The 

N.  Y.  &  H.  E.  R.  Co.,  98  N.  Y.  345.  landlord  was  held  responsible  for 

In  Tansey  v.  Eoberts,  58  N.  Y.  Su-  the  injury. 


860 


Eepaies. 


[§  381. 


■what  the  law  will  warrant.  The  sole  conditions  of  his 
liability  were  declared  to  be  defect  in  the  oilcloth  and  the 
plaintiff's  being  thrown  down  by  reason  of  it.  Although 
the  testimony  was  conflicting  as  to  the  existence  of  any 
noticeable  defect,  the  attention  of  the  jury  was  not  called 
to  but  was  diverted.from  the  important  inquiries  whether 
the  defect  was  of  such  a  nature  as  to  render  the  stairs  not 
reasonably  fit  for  the  purpose  of  passage,  and  whether 
the  landlord  had  failed  to  exercise  reasonable  care  in  the 
matter.  The  case  also  presents  the  question  whether  the 
plaintiff  was  in  the  exercise  of  due  care,  for  she  testifies 
that  she  knew  of  the  defect  before  the  accident ;  yet  this 
subject  also  was  ignored  in  the  charge. 

The  landlord  is  not  liable  either  to  the  tenant  or  third 
persons  for  injuries  sustained  by  them,  by  reason  of 
defects  in  the  premises,  which  arose  during  the  term,  and 
even  though  he  was  bound  to  repair,  of  the  existence  of 
which  the  landlord  did  not  know,"  unless,  (in  the  case  of 


'  Thomas  v.  Kingsland,  13  Daly, 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  315  ;  Makin  v.  Wilkin- 
son, L.  E.  Exchq.  35.  In  Cole  v. 
McKey,  66  Wis.  500  ;  57  Am.  Eep. 
393,  the  defendant  for  himself  and 
other  owners,  leased  a  hall  to  a 
military  company,  who  assumed 
the  duty  of  repair  and  not  to  un- 
derlet without  consent  of  the  de- 
fendant ;  without  such  consent  the 
company  leased  it  for  a  skating 
rink.  The  plaintiff,  in  going  to  it, 
fell  into  a  hole  in  the  floor  of  the 
passageway  used  for  the  hall  and 
for  other  rooms  in  the  same  build- 
ing occupied  by  other  tenants,  and 
was  injured.  The  owners  of  the 
building  all  lived  in  another  town, 
and  none  of  them  knew  of  the  de- 
fect. It  was  held  that  the  defend- 
ant was  not  liable,  Cassoday  J., 
saying:  "The  rule  seems  to  be 
well  settled  that  in  the  absence  of 
any  secret  defect  or  deceit  or  war- 
ranty or  agreement  on  the  part  of 
the  landlord  to  repair,  the  tenant 
takes  the  leased  premises  in  the 
condition  they  happen  to  be  in  at 
the  time  of  the  leasing,  and  that 
in  such  case  the  landlord  is  not- 
Uable  to  the  tenant  for  an  injury 
caused  by  the  premises  being  out 
of  repair  during  the  term,  Hart  v. 
Wmdaor,    12    Mees.    «fc   W.    68  ; 


Keates  v.  Earl  of  Cadogan,  70 
Eng.  C.  L.  591  ;  Doupe  v.  Genin, 
45  N.  Y.  119  ;  S.  C.  6  Am.  Eep.  47  ; 
McAlpine  v.  Powell,  70  N.  Y.  126  ; 
36  Am.  Rep.  555  ;  Edwards  v.  N. 
Y.  &  H.  E.  Co.,  98  N.  Y.  345 ;  50 
Am.  Eep.  659;  Button  v.  Gerrish, 
9  Cush.  89  ;  55  Am.  Dec.  45  ;  Woods 
V.  Naumkeag  S.  C.  Co.,  134  Mass. 
357;  45  Am.  Eep.  344-,  Bowe  v. 
Hunkmg,  135  Mass.  380  ;  46  Am. 
Eep.  471;  Brewstel'-v.  DeFremery, 
33  Gal.  341  ;  Krueger  v.  Ferrant, 
39  Minn.  385 ;  S.  C.  43  Am.  Eep. 
333  ;  Humphrey  v.  Wait,  23  U.  C. 
C.  P.  580 ;  WoodonLandl.  &  Ten., 
§  382.  So  it  seems  that  the  right- 
ful sub-tenant,  servant,  employee, 
or  even  customer  of  the  lessee  is 
under  the  same  restriction,  be- 
cause he  enters  under  the  same 
title,  and  not  by  any  invitation  ex- 
press or  implied,  from  the  owner, 
arid  hence  assumes  the  same  risk. 
Joffe  V.  Harteau,  56  N.  Y.  398 ;  S. 
C.  15  Am.  Eep.  438 ;  Eyan  v.  Wil- 
son, 87  N.  Y.  471 ;  S.  C.  41  Am. 
Eep.  384.  In  the  case  before  us 
there  is  no  claim  of  any  secret  de- 
fect, deceit,  warranty  or  agree- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  defendant 
to  repair.  On  the  contrary,  it  was 
expressly  agreed  upon  the  part  of 
the  tenant  to  "  deliver  up  the  said 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


Eepairs. 


861 


third  persons)  the  defect  amounted  to  a  nuisance  and 


premises,  together  with  the  appur- 
tenances thereunto  belonging,  * 
*  *  peaceably  and  quietly  at 
the  expiration  of  said  term  (of  two 
years'  time),  in  as  good  condition 
and  repau"  as  the  same "  wer.e  at 
the  time  of  making  the  lease. 
Undoubtedly  the  lease  gave  to  the 
lessee,  and  thos^  rightfully  using 
any  i^art  of  the  leased  premises 
under  them,  the  right  of  passage 
through  and  up  the  hallways  and 
stairways  mentioned,  as  there  was 
no  other  means  of  access.  Pom- 
fret  V.  Eicroft,  1  Saund,  321  ; 
Doyle  V.  Lord,  64  N.  Y.  433 ;  21 
Am.  Eep.  639 ;  Eoyce  v.  Guggen- 
heim, 106  Mass.  201  ;  Am.  Rep. 
323.  But  it  is  claimed  that  not- 
withstanding such  right  of  pas- 
sage, yet  that  as  the  defendant  had 
other  tenants  in  the  same  building, 
having  a  like  right  of  passage, 
such  hallways  and  stairways  must 
be  deemed  to  have  remained  in  the 
possession  and  control  of  the  de- 
fendant, and  hence  that  he  wa;S 
responsible  for  injury  by  reason 
of  any  want  of  repair  therein.  It 
has  been  held  that  where  the  land- 
lord rented  only  a  portion  of  the 
premises,  and  retained  the  posses- 
sion, occupancy  and  control  of  the 
balance,  he  was  liable  to  one  in- 
jured, while  rightfully  passing  over 
the  portion  in  his  possession,  by 
reason  of  a  defect  thereia.  Camp 
V.  Wood,  76  N.  Y.  92  ;  33  Am.  Eep. 
383 ;  Edwards  v.  N.  Y.  &  H.  E. 
Co.,  95  N.  Y.  355;  50  Am.  Eep. 
659.  This  rule  has  been  extended 
to  a  passageway  over  staircases  and ' 
entries  used  by  the  lessee  "  in  com- 
mon with  the  landlord  and  the 
other  tenants"  in  the  same  build- 
ing. Looney  v.  McLean,  139 
Mass.  35  ;  37  Am.  Rep.  395.  In 
commenting  upon  that  case,  the 
same  court  said  :  "It  may  be  that 
there  is  an  obligation  on  the  owner 
to  keep  the  ways  (stairways  and 
passages)  in  such  a  condition  that 
they  can  be  safely  used  by  the  ten- 
ants ;  but  this  obhgation  has  never 
been  extended  so  as  to  require  a 
construction  of  the  ways  on  a  dif- 
ferent plan,  if  the  ways  as  they 
existed  when  the  premises  were 
hired,  were  not  altogether  conven- 
ient or  safe  by  reason  of  some  de- 
fault in  the  original  plan  which 


was  apparent ;  "  and  so  it  was  ac- 
cordingly held  that  a  landlord  let- 
ting several  tenements  in  the  same 
building,  with  a  common  exterior 
flight  of  entrance  steps,  without  a 
railing,  was  not  liable  to  a  tenant 
injured  by  falling  on  ice  accumu- 
lated on  the  steps,  although  ihey 
were  so  made  and  of  such  mate- 
rial as  to  collect  ice.  Woods  v. 
Naumkeag  S.  C.  Co.,  sv^ra.  In 
the  BtUl  later  case  of  Eowe  v. 
Hunking,  supra,  the  same  court 
held  that  a  landlord  was  "  not  lia- 
ble to  his  tenant  for  a  personal  in- 
jury by  reason  of  a  defect  in  a 
stafrway  in  the  tenement  caused 
by  a  previous  tenant :  there  hav- 
ing been  an  opportunity  to  exam- 
ine the  premises  at  the  time  of 
hiring,  and  no  warranty  of  fitness, 
and  no  knowledge  on  the  land- 
lord's part  of  any  unsafeness." 
The  defect  in  the  staircase  there 
complained  of  was  that  "the  tread 
of  the  second  stair  had  been  sawed, 
about  four  inches  from  each  end, 
across  to  within  about  an  inch  of 
the  back  side  of  it,  and  lengthwise 
cut  out  about  an  inch  from  and 
parallel  to  the  back  side  of  the 
tread,  and  was  at  the  time  of  the 
accident  unsupported."  Looney  y. 
McLean,  supra,  is  quite  similar  in 
its  facts  to  the  Scotch  case  cited, 
of  M'Martin  v.  Hannay,  10  Sess. 
Cas.  (3d  sec),  411,  in  which  Lord 
Benhome  made  this  distinction  : 
"The  landlord  undertook  to  be 
answerable  for  the  outside  stair. 
He  actually  kept  a  man  in  his  em- 
ployment for  the  purpose  of  look- 
ing after  it  and  other  similar  stairs 
in  various  tenements.  This  re- 
lieves my  mind  of  considerable 
doubt,  for  often  the  landlord  is  not 
near  the  place  where  the  property  is 
situated,  and  knows  nothing  about 
the  dangerous  condition  into  which 
it  may  have  got.  In  such  cases  there 
may  be  a  considerable  room  for 
arguing  that  the  tenant  may  have 
incurred  a  certain  responsibiUty." 
In  the  recent  case  of  Ivay  v. 
Hedges,  9  Q.  B.  Div.  80.  the  defend- 
ant let  out  his  house,  in  apart- 
ments, to  several  tenants,  with  the 
privilege  of  using  the  roof,  which 
was  flat,  having  an  iron  rail  at  the 
outer  edge,  for  drying  their  linen. 
The  plaintiff,  one  of  the  tenants, 


862 


Repairs. 


[§  381. 


existed  when  the  premises  were  let.*    It  is  the  duty  of 


went  upon  the  roof  to  remove 
some  linen,  when  his  foot  slipped, 
and  the  rail  being  out  of  repair,  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  landlord,  he 
fell  and  was  injured.  The  nonsuit 
of  the  plaintiflE  was  sustained  on 
the  ground  "  that  there  was  no 
duty  on  the  landlord  to  protect 
such  a  place;  and  that  if  the 
lodgers  chose  to  use  the  roof  for 
the  purposes  stated,  they  must 
take  it  cum  oneie."  In  Hum- 
phrey V.  Wait,  32  U.  C.  C.  P.  580, 
the  defendant  leased  to  the  plaint- 
iff a  room  in  his  house.  The  only 
mode  of  access  to  it  and  the  other 
rooms  on  the  sanae  story  was  by  a 
certain  passage,  in  which  there  was 
an  uncovered  stove  pipe  hole,  into 
which  the  plaintiff  while  rightfully 
passing,  slipped  and  was  injured; 
and  it  was  held  that,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  an  express  contract,  the 
defendant  was  under  no  legal  obli- 
gation to  keep  the  premises  in  re- 
pair and  hence  he  was  not  liable. 
It  is  there  said  by  the  chief  justice 
on  the  part  of  the  court:  "If  a 
man  rent  the  upper  story  of  a 
house,  with  the  stair  case,  the  only 
means  of  approach,  in  a  ruinous 
and  unsafe  state,  I  see  no  implied 
obligation  on  the  landlord  to  up- 
hold it,  or  to  answer  in  damages 
for  an  injury  resulting  from  its 
insecure  state.  It  would  be  a 
singular  state  of  the  law  if  the 
landlard  would  not  be  answerable 


if  he  demised  the  stairway  with 
the  upper  story,  and  would  be 
answerable  if  he  only  gave  a  right 
to  use  it  as  an  approach  to  the  part 
of  the  house  actually  demised." 
Tliis  language  has  received  the  ex- 
press sanction  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Indiana.  Purcell  v.  Eng- 
lish. 86  Ind.  34;  S.  C.  45  Am. 
Rep.  255.  In  that  case  it  was  held 
that  "where  a  stairway  connected 
with  apartments  hired  in  a  tene- 
ment house  occupied  by  several 
tenants,  is  rendered  unsafe  by 
temporary  causes,  such  as  the  ac- 
cumulation of  snow  and  ice,  the 
landlord  is  not  liable  to  the  tenant 
who  uses  such  a  stairway  with 
full  knowledge  of  its  dangerous 
condition,  unless  there  is  a  con- 
tract on  the  part  of  the  landlord  to 
keep  the  premises  in  repair  and  fit 
for  safe  use."  In  that  case  there 
is  a  discriminating  and  well  writ- 
ten opinion  by  Elliott,  J.,  throw- 
ing doubts  upon  the  soundness  of 
Looney  v.  McLean,  supra,  and 
claiming  that  it  stands  alone.  It 
is  there  said  that  "the  duty  of  the 
tenant  to  keep  in  safe  condition, 
for  his  own  use,  the  demised  prem- 
ises, extends  to  all  the  appurte- 
nances connected  therewith,  and 
this  includes  steps,  stairways  and 
other  approaches.  Whatever  passes 
to  the  tenant  under  the  lease  is  for 
the  term  designated,  under  his 
control   and   in    his   possession," 


'In  Godley  v.  Haggerty,  20 
Penn.  St.  387,  afBrmed  in  Carson 
V.  Godley,  26  Penn.  St.  Ill,  it  was 
held  that  when  the  owner  of  real 
estate  erected  thereon  a  row  of 
buildings  with  the  intention  of 
renting  them  to  the  government 
as  bonded  warehouses,  and  with 
the  knowledge  that  they  would  be 
obliged  as  such  to  sustain  very 
great  weights,  he  was  hable  in 
damages  for  any  injury  to  a  per- 
son employed  in  one  of  the  stores 
occasioned  by  its  fall,  after  having 
been  so  rented,  though  the  imme- 
diate cause  of  the  accident  was 
the  storage  of  heavy  merchandise 
in  an  upper  story,  it  appearing 
that  the  building  had  been  con- 
structed on  a  defective  plan  and 
of  insufficient  strength.  See  Wal- 
den  V.  Finch,  70  Penn.  St.  460, 
Nelson  v.  Liverpool  Brewery  Co., 


L.  R.,  2  C.  P.  Div.  311.  In 
Swords  V.  Edgar,  59  N.  Y.  28 ;  17 
Am  Rep.  295,  it  was  held  that  the 
lessors  of  a  pier,  which  was  in  pos- 
session of  their  lessee  from  whom 
they  were  receiving  rent  for  it, 
were  liable  for  an  injury  received 
by  a  longshoreman  engaged  in  dis- 
charging a  cargo  thereon,  the  cause 
of  the  injury  being  a  danger  or  de- 
fect which  existed  at  the  date  of 
the  demise.  The  pier,  though  pri- 
vate property,  was  kept  for  use  by 
all  vessels  which  might  come  to  it 
for  the -purpose  of  loading  and  un- 
loading, and  the  court  held  that 
the  longshoreman,  being  in  the 
employ  of  such  a  vessel,  was  to  be 
regarded  as  there  by  invitation, 
and  therefore  as  entitled  to  the 
protection  which  would  result  from 
having  the  pier  in  an  ordinary 
state   of    security  and    strength. 


CHAP.   XXXV.] 


Repairs. 


863 


the  tenant  if  the  landlord  has  covenanted  to  repair,  and 

citing  Pomfret  v.  Ricroft,  sttpm. 
See  also,  Howard  v.  Doolittle,  3 
Duer,  (N.  Y.)  464 ;  Corey  v.  Mann, 
14  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  163:  Kaiser 
V.  Hirth,  46  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  161 ; 
Loupe  V.  Wood,  51  Cal.  586  ; 
Ki-ueger  v.  Farrant,  supra ;  Piatt 
V.  Farney,  16  Bradw.  (111.)  31.6. 
It  is  unnecessary  here  to  deter- 
mine the  apparent  conflict  between 
the  Massachusetts  mentioned  and 
other  cases  cited ;  since  it  is  pretty 
clear  from  the  authorities,  that  in 
the  absence  of  any  secret  defect,  de- 
ceit, warranty  or  agreement  on  the 
part  of  the  landlord  to  repair,  he 
cannot  be  be  liable  to  the  tenant,  or 
anyone  rightfully  occupying  under 
him,  for  an  injury  caused  by  the 
premises  getting  out  of  repair  dur- 
ing the  term,  unless  it  may  be  by 
reason  of  his  own  wrongful  act  or 
failure  to  perform  a  known  duty. 
Thus  in  Carstairs  v.  Taylor,  L*  E. 
6  Exchq.  223,  where  the  landlord 
rented  the  lower  part  of  the  house, 
and  retained  possession  of  the 
upper  part,  it  was  said  on  the  part 
of  the  court :  "  The  defendant  can 
be  liable  only  if  he  was  guilty  of 
negligence."  The  defendant  here 
testified  that  he  did  not  know  of 
the  defect  in  the  entry  way  untU 
after  the  injury  ;  and  the  circum- 
stance precludes  any  presumption 
of  such  knowledge.  It  would  be 
unwarranted  to  find,  upon  such 


facts,  that  he  was  guilty  of  negli' 
gence.  But  the  case  is  very  much 
stronger  for  the  defendant  than 
any  of  the  cases  cited.  Wansor 
was  not  occupying  the  hall  as  a 
skating  rink  by  any  rightful  au- 
thority from  the  defendant  or  any 
of  the  owners  of  the  building.  On 
the  contrary  the  letting  to  Wansor 
by  the  Guards  was  expressly  pro- 
hibited by  the  written  lease.  The 
occupancy  by  Wansor,  and  those 
under  him  or  upon  his  invitation, 
for  such  a  purpose,  was  wrongful, 
as  against  the  defendant  and  the 
other  owners.  The  plaintiff,  at 
the  time  of  the  injury,  was  so  oc- 
cupying. This  being  so,  neither 
the  defendant,  nor  any  of  such 
owners,  under  any  of  the  authori- 
ties, owed  her  the  duty  of  security 
in  passage  while  she  was  in  the 
act  of  invading  their  rights.  To 
constitute  actionable  neghgence, 
the  defendant  must  be  guilty  of 
some  wrongful  act  or  breach  of 
positive  duty  to  the  plaintiff.  This 
is  elementary,  and  has  often  been 
recognized  by  this  court.  Cahill  v. 
Dayton,  57  Wis.  600  ;  46  Am. 
Rep.  46 ;  Griswold  v.  C.  &  N.  R. 
Co.,  64  Wis.  652 ;  Purcell  v.  Eng- 
lish, supra ;  Ryan  v.  Wilson,  supra. 
There  is  no  claim  of  any  such 
wrongful  act.  It  is  very  clear 
that  the  defendant  owed  to  the 
plaintiff  no  such  duty." 


The  court  also  held  that  though 
the  lease  contained  a  covenant 
binding  the  lessee  to  keep  the  pier 
in  good  order  and  repair,  the  les- 
sors were  not  exonerated  thereby, 
dissenting  from  Pretty  v.  Bick- 
more,  supra.  In  Edwards  v.  New 
York  &  Harlem  R.  Co.,  98  N.  Y. 
245;  S.  C,  50  Am.  Rep.  659,  the 
plaintiff  was  injured  by  the  falling 
of  a  gallery  in  a  buildmg  let  to  be 
used  for  public  exhibitions  :  and 
it  was  held  that  the  lessors  were 
not  liable,  there  being  no  evi- 
dence that  they  either  knew  or 
had  reason  to  know  that  the 
gallery  would  be  used  in  such  a 
way  as  to  endanger  its  security. 
The  court  said  ;  "  If  one  builds  a 
house  for  pubUc  amusements  or  en- 
tertainments, and  lets  it  for  those 
purposes,  knowing  that  it  is  so 
imperfectly  or  carelessly  built  that 
it  is  liable  to  go  to  pieces  in  the  or- 


dinary use  for  which  it  was  design- 
ed,  he  is  liable  to  the  persons  in- 
jured through  his  carelessness.' 
The  jugment  in  this  case  was  that 
of  a  divided  court,  and  seems  oppos- 
ed to  Francis  v.  Cockerell,  L.  R.  5  B- 
501 ;  Camp  v.  Wood,  76  N.  Y.  92 ; 
Campbell  v.  Portland  Sugar  Co  , 
62  Me.  552  ;  Waggoner  v.  Jermaine, 
3  Den  (N.  Y.)  356  ;  Nolton  v.  Wes- 
tern R.R.  Co., 15  N.Y.  444 ;  Wendell 
V.  Boxter,  13 Grey  (Mass.) 494 ;  Ryan 
V.  Wilson,  87  N.  Y.  471  ;  Mullen 
V.  St  John,  57  N.  Y.  567  ;  Grate  v. 
Chester,  &c.,  Ry.  3  Exchq.  251. 
that  the  lessors  ought  to  be  held  to 
respond  to  damages,  was  drawn  up 
by  RuaER,  C.  J.,  and  concurred  in 
by  Danfobth  and  Finch,  JJ.  See 
also  Camp  v.  Wood,  76  N.  Y.  92 ; 
32  Am.  Rep.  383. 

In  Albert  V.  State,  66  Md.  325; 
59  Am.  Rep.  159.  It  was  an  ac- 
tion brought  by  or  for  a  minor  for 


864: 


Eepairs. 


[§  381. 


defects  arise  during  the  term,  to  notify  the  landlord 
thereof,"  and,  if  the  landlord  does  not  repair,  to  do  so 
himself  and  seek  his  remedy  against  the  landlord  for  the 
expense,  if  it  is  in  excess  of  the  rent.'  But,  where  the 
landlord  knew  of  the  defect  when  the  premises  were  let, 
or  by  the  use  of  reasonable  diligence  might  have  known, 
and  the  premises  are  let  for  a  use  which  the  landlord 
knows  will  call  numerous  people  thereto,  it  is  held  in 
quite  a  respectable  class  of  cases  that  the  landlord  is  liable 
to  strangers  who  are  lawfully  upon  the  premises,  and 

damages  sustained  by  him  by  the 
death  of  his  parents,  who  were 
drowned  by  reason  of  the  defect- 
iveness of  wharf  in  the  occupation 
of  the  defendant's  tenant.  The  in- 
struction given  on  trial  to  the  jury 
was  that  "if  the  jury  found  that 
the  defendant  was  the  owner  of  the 
wharf  and  that  he  rented  it  out  to 
a  tenant,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
renting  the  wharf  was  unsafe,  and 
the  defendant  knew,  or  by  the  ex- 
ercise of  reasonable  dUigence  could 
have  know  of  its  unsafe  condition, 
and  the  accident  happened  in  con- 
sequence of  such  condition,  the  de- 
fendant was  liable.  See  also,  Calder 
V.  Smalley,  66  Iowa,  219 ;  55  Am. 
Eep.  370.  In  Leonard  v.  Storer,  115 
Mass.  88;  15  Am.  Eep.  76,  the  plaint- 
iff was  injured  while  passing  along 
a  public  street  in  Boston,  by  the 
falling  of  snow  and  ice  upon  her 
from  a  house  belonging  to  the  de- 
fendant, but  leased  by  him  nearly 
twelve  years  before  for  the  term 
of  fifteen  years  to  a  tenant  who 
by  the  terms  of  the  lease  was  "to 
make  all  needful  and  proper  re- 
pairs, both  external  and  iatemal." 
The  plaintiff  sought  to  charge  the 
defendant  because  the  roof  was  so 
constructed  that  the  snow  and  ice 
in  collecting  upon  it,  would  natu- 
rally slide  into  the  sti-eet.  The 
court  held  that  it  did  not  appear 
that  the  tenant  "might  not  have 
cleaned  the  roof  by  the  exercise  of 
due  care  or  that  he  could  not  by 
proper  precautions  have  prevented 
the  accident,"  nor  that  "any  neg- 
lect of  duty  or  vsrrongful  act  on 
the  part  of  the  defendant  was  the 
cause  of  the  injury,"  and  affirmed 
the  judgment  for  the  defendant. 
The  ground  of  decision  is  not  very 
clearly  set    forth,  but    it    would 


seem  that  the  defendant  was  dis- 
charged because  the  injury  was 
attributable  to  the  negligence  of 
the  tenant  instead  of  to  any  de- 
fect in  the  structure  of  the  house, 
or  if  there  was  any  defect  because 
it  was  for  the  tenant  alone  under 
the  lease  to  remedy  it.  And  that 
the  defendant  could  be  charged 
only  on  the  ground  that  the 
house  when  let  was  a  public  nui- 
sance. In  Mellen  v.  Morrill,  126 
Mass.  545,  the  defendant  was  the 
owner  of  a  dwelling-house  which 
he  let  by  parol  to  a  tenant  who 
occupied  it  for  a  dwelling-house 
and  market.  The  walk  from  the 
street  to  the  door  led  along  an  em- 
bankment and  was  unsafe  for 
want  of  a  railing.  The  plaintiff, 
in  going  to  the  house  along  the 
walk  in  the  night-time  for  the 
purpose  of  settling  an  accoimt 
with  the  tenant,  fell  down  the 
embankment  and  was  injured". 
The  court  held  that  the  defendant 
was  not  liable,  but  that  it  was  the 
duty  of  the  tenant,  if  he  used  the 
premises  so  as  impliedly  to  invite 
people  to  visit  them  in  the  night, 
"  to  make  them  safe  by  a  railing 
or  by  a  light  or  by  other  warning." 
It  did  not  appear  that  the  defend- 
ant let  the  premises  to  be  used  as 
a  market,  and  it  seems  that  they 
might  have  been  safely  used  if 
the  tenant  had  simply  set  out  a 
light  or  other  warning.  Rich  v.  Bas- 
terfield,  4C.  B.  784 ;  Irvine  v.  Wood, 
51  N.  Y,  334 ;  10  Am.  Eep.  603. 

'  Thomas  v.  Kingsland,  ante. 

« O'Connor  v.  Gourard,  N.  Y. 
DaUy  Eeg.  Apr.  17th,  1886  ;  Brad- 
ley V.  DeGourconria,  67  How.  Pr 
(N.  Y.)  76  ;  Vann  v.  Eouse,  94  N.  Y. 
401 ;  Butler  v.  Kidder.  87  N.  Y.  98. 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


Eepairs. 


865 


injured  by  reason  of  such  defects'  and  the  ground  of 
liability  is  that,  as  in  such  cases  the  use  to  which  the 
property  is  elevated,  being  of  a  public,  or  to  say  the  least 
a  qiiasi  public  character,  defects  endangering  the  safety 
of  people  lawfully  going  there,  is  a  nuisance  for  the 
injurious  consequences  of  which  both  the  owner  and 
occupier  are  clearly  responsible.  But,  where  the  defect 
arises  during  the  term,  the  landlord  being  under  no 
obUgation  to  repair,  only  the  tenant  can  be  held  liable, 
because  even  though  a  nuisance,  the  landlord  has  neither 
created  or  upheld  it.    The  landlord  cannot  be  held  Uable 


'  In  Albert  v.  State,  66  Md.  325  ; 
59  Am.  Rep.  159,  the  owner  of  a 
wharf  who  let  it,  knowing,  or 
where  by  the  use  of  reasonable  dil- 
igence he  might  have  known,  of 
its  defective  condition,  was  held 
liable  to  a  third  person  who  was 
injured  by  its  defective  condition 
while  rightfully  upon  it.  The  tri- 
al judge  instructed  the  jury,  that, 
if  they  found  that  the  defendant 
was  the  owner  of  the  wharf,  and 
that  he  rented  it  out  to  a  tenant, 
and  that  at  the  time  of  the  rent- 
ing the  wharf  was  unsafe,  and  the 
defendant  knew  or  by  the  exercise 
of  reasonable  diligence  could  liave 
known  of  its  unsafe  condition, 
and  that  the  accident  happened  in 
consequence  of  such  unsafe  condi- 
tion, the  plaintiflf  was  entitled  to 
recover.  Stone,  J.,  said:  "Of 
the  correctness  of  the  rule  so  laid 
down,  provided  the  jury  found 
the  facts,  we  think  there  can  be 
no  reasonable  doubt.  The  law  is 
very  tersely  laid  down  as  far  back 
as  me  case"  of  Eoswell  v.  Prior,  13 
Mod.  639,  where  the  court  say : 
"This  action  is  well  brought 
against  the  erector,  for  before  nis 
assignment  over  he  was  liable 
for  all  consequential  damages, 
and  it  shall  not  be  in  his  power  to 
discharge  himself  by  granting  it 
over."  There  are  many  cases  to 
the  same  effect,  but  it  will  be  suf- 
ficient for  us  to  cite  the  case  of 
Owings  V.  Jones,  9  Md.  108,  where 
the  court  adopt  this  rule  laid  down 
in  56  E.  C.  L.  R.  784:,  "Where 
the  owner  leases  premises  which 
are  a  nuisance,  or  must  in  the  nat- 
ure of  things  become  so  by  their 
user,    and    receives    rent,    then 


whether  in  or  out  of  possession  he 
is  liable."  A  wharf  furnishing 
the  only  mode  of  ingress  and 
egress  to  a  summer  resort,  where 
crowds  were  invited  to  come,  if 
in  an  unsafe  and  dangerous  condi- 
tion, is  certainly  a  nuisance  of  the 
worst  character.  It  will  not  do 
for  the  owner,  knowing  its  condi- 
tion, or  having  by  the  exercise  of 
any  reasonable  care  the  means  of 
knowing  it,  to  rent  it. out  and  re- 
ceive rent  for  it,  but  escape  all  lia- 
bility when  the  crash  comes.  He 
who  sohcits  and  invites  the  public 
to  his  resorts,  must  have  them  in 
a  reasonably  safe  condition,  and 
not  in  a  condition  to  risk  the  lives 
and  limbs  of  his  visitors.  This 
question  has  been  much  discussed 
in  the  courts  of  New  York.  Swords 
V.  Edgar,  59  N.  Y.  28;  S.  0.-17 
Am.  Rep.  295,  was  a  case  very 
much  like  the  present;  There  the 
court  decided  that  if  the  owner  of 
a  pier  had  leased  it,  and  at  the 
time  of  the  demise,  and  delivery 
of  possession  to  the  lessee,  it  was 
in  an  unsafe  and  defective  condi- 
tion, and  afterward,  while  in  the 
possession  of  the  lessee,  an  injury 
happens  to  one  lawfully  on  the 
pier,  the  lessor  is  liable.  This  de- 
cision has  not  been  overruled  in 
that  State.  The  case  of  Edwards 
V.  N.  Y.  &  H.  R.  R.  Co.,  98  N.  Y. 
245;  S.  C.  50  Am.  Rep.  659,  is 
very  different  from  Swords  v.  Ed- 
gar, and  in  commenting  upon  the 
latter  case  the  court  says;  "It  is 
one  where  liability  was  imposed 
upon  the  lessor  of  a  public  dock, 
upon  the  ground  that  he  had  suf- 
fered a  nuisance  in  his  dock  be- 
fore the  demise,  and  he  w^as  held 


Repairs. 


[§  381. 


for  injuries  arising  from  defects  arising  during  the  term, 
especially  where  the  thing  complained  of  was  not  defective 
originally.  In  such  case  the  fault  is  with  the  tenant 
safely,  whose  duty  it  is,  during  the  term  to  keep  the 
premises  in  proper  repair.'  In  an  Ohio  case '  it  appeared 
that  upon  certain  premises  leased  by  the  defendant  to  a 
tenant,  there  was  a  water  pipe  and  gutter  which,  although 
not  defective  in  its  original  construction,  became  stopped 
up  so  that  the  water  flowed  upon  the  door-steps  of  the 
leased  house,  forming  ice,  upon  which  a  third  person  fell 
and  was  injured.  It  was  held  that,  in  the  absence  of  any 
contract  on  the  part  of  the  lessor  to  the  contrary,  it  was  the 
duty  of  the  tenant  to  repair  the  pipe,  or  remove  the  ice,  and 


liable  on  that  ground,  and  the 
ground  of  nuisance  is  the  only  one 
upon  which  that  decision  can 
stand.  There  are  similar  cases  in 
New  England  and  England.  A 
dock  is  regarded  as  a  species  of 
public  highway,  and  the  owner 
who  suffers  a  nuisance  to  be  cre- 
ated and  continued  upon  his  dock 
remains  liable  upon  the  ground 
of  nuisance."  The  case  in  98  N. 
Y.  was  this :  The  defendant  rented 
a  hall  for  the  purpose  of  giving  in 
it  a  pedestrian  exhibition.  A  gal- 
lery broke  down  during  the  ex- 
hibition and  injured  the  plaintiff. 
The  court  held  that  in  the  absence 
of  evidence  tending  to  show  that 
the  defendant  knew,  or  had  rea- 
son to  supj)ose,  that  there  was 
some  defect  in  the  gallery,  or  that 
it  was  of  insufficient  strength  to 
hold  the  number  of  people  who 
could  be  contained  therein,  or 
that  it  would  be  used  in  such  a 
way  as  to  endanger  its  security, 
the  plaintifiE  could  not  recover. 
The  gallery  had  been  divided  into 
boxes,  which  were  filled  with 
chairs  and  tables,  and  had  been 
used  for  festivals,  etc.  But  the 
lessee  had  removed  the  chairs  and 
tables  and  a  tiirbulent  crowd  had 
filled  the  gallery,  and  in  stamping 
and  beating  time  to  the  music, 
they  broke  it  down.  There  was 
no  evidence  whether  that  the  les- 
sor knew,  or  could  have  known, 
that  it  was  to  be  so  used  and  he 
was  held  not  liable.  We  cannot 
jierceive  any  inconsistency  in  this 
case  with  Swords  v.  Edgar;  we 


have  referred  to  them  at  some 
length  because  they  were  pressed 
in  the  argument.  But  in  any 
event  we  think  the  case  of  Owings 
V.  Jones,  9  Md.  108,  a  controlling 
authority  based  as  we  thing  it  is 
upon  sound  reason,  and  we  think 
it  may  be  held  as  well  settled  in 
this  State,  that  where  the  owner 
of  a  wharf  leases  or  rents  it  out, 
and  at  the  time  of  such  renting 
the  wharf  was  in  an  unsafe  condi- 
tion for  the  use  that  the  lessor 
knew  it  was  to  be  put,  and  that 
the  owner  knew,  or  by  the  exer- 
cise of  reasonable  diligence  could 
have  known,  of  its  condition  and 
that  one  who  was  lawfully  on  the 
wharf  was  injured  in  consequence 
of  its  condition,  that  the  owner  is 
liable."  Where  the  nuisance  ex- 
isted when  the  premises  were  let, 
both  the  landlord  and  the  tenant 
are  liable  therefor.  Regina  v. 
Olser,  7  C.  P.  (Out.)  324;  McCal- 
1am  V.  Hutchinson,  7  id.  508. 

'  Lowell  V.  Spaulding,  4  Cush. 
(Mass.)  277. 

"  Shindelbeck  v.  Moon,  32  Ohio 
St.  264  ;  30  Am.  Rep.  584.  In  this 
case  Wright,  J. ,  says  :  ' '  When  the 
landlord  has  leased  premises,  he 
parts  with  control  of  them  ;  with 
possession  that  control  passes  to 
the  tenant,  and  if  defect  arises,  or 
want  of  repair,  or  the  premises  are 
allowed  to  get  into  such  a  condi- 
tion as  that  they  become  dangerous 
during  the  demise,  it  is  the  duty 
of  the  tenant  to  take  such  steps  as 
wiU  prevent  injury.  The  liability 
arising  from  the  control  of  prem-. 


CHAP.  XXXV.  J 


Repairs. 


867 


that  for  the  consequences  of  any  failure  to  do  so,  he,  and 
not  the  landlord,  was  responsible.  In  a  Massachusetts' 
case,'  an  action  was  brought  against  the  landlord  by  a 
third  person,  for  an  injury  sustained  by  the  latter  by  fall- 
ing down  an  unfenced  embankment  while  passing  along 


iaes,  is  illustrated  in  that  large 
class  of  cases  where  contractors 
build  houses.  If  the  premises  are 
completely  given  up  to  the  con- 
tractor, he  will  be  responsible  to 
one  injured  during  the  progress  of 
the  work.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  owner  retains  supervision,  and 
the  building  goes  on  under  his  di- 
rection, as  he  is  in  control  of  the 
j)remises,  his  responsibility  con- 
tinues; the  contractor  or  builder 
then  stands,  to  him,  in  the  relation 
of  servant.  And  there  are  many 
nice  cases  as  to  whether  the  party 
is  an  independent  contractor  or 
servant  merely.  It  is  however, 
not  necessary  to  enter  into  this 
discussion.  The  principle  of  con- 
trol and  its  accompanying  liability 
is  sufficiently  illustrated  in  City  of 
Cincinnati  v.  Stone,  5  Ohio  St.  38. 
The  city  contracted  with  B  to 
grade  a  street,  and  in  doing  this  he 
blocked  the  water  so  that  it  flowed 
over  Stone's  ground,  doing  dam- 
age. The  city  was  held  liable  on 
the  ground  that  by  the  contract 
she  reserved  the  right  to  direct  the 
manner  of  doing  the  work.  The 
syllabus  says  when  the  employer 
retains  control  and  direction  of  the 
work,  and  injury  happens,  he  wUl 
be  responsible.  Clark  v.  Fry,  8 
Ohio  St.  358  ;  Gwathmey  v.  L.  M. 
E.  R.  Co.,  13 id.  93.  The  principle 
suggested  is  recognized  in  Bur- 
dick  V.  Cheadle,  36  Ohio  St.  393  ; 
30  Am.  Rep.  768.  In  that  case  the 
person  injured  was  in  the  store, 
upon  the  invitation  of  the  tenant, 
or  as  a  customer,  and  was  not  a 
stranger,  maintaining  his  rights  as 
one  of  the  public.  It  is  held 
that  if  one  invites  another  into 
danger  and  hurt,  the  sufferer  must 
seek  his  remedy  against  the  party 
inviting  him.  That  he  cannot 
maintain  an  action  against  another 
must  be  apparent  from  the  fact 
that  if  he  had  not  accepted  the  in- 
vitation he  would  not  have  been 
injured.  In  Burdick  v.  Cheadle, 
the  court,  in  discussing  the  max- 


im, "  sic  utere,"  etc.,  observes: 
"  The  principle  ordinarily  apphes 
only  to  persons  in  possession  and 
having  control  of  the  property, 
either  as  owners  or  tenants."  The 
rule,  therefore,  deducible  from  the 
authorities,  and  which  is  applica- 
ble to  the  case  in  hand,  is  this :  A 
landlord  who  is  out  of  possession 
of  the  premises  by  virtue  of  a  de- 
mise, and  who  has  no  control  over 
them,  who  would  not  have  the 
right  to  enter  therein,  even  to  make 
repairs,  without  his  tenant's  con- 
sent, is  not  liable  for  accidents  oc- 
casioned by  the  fact  that  the  prop- 
erty is  temporarily  out  of  repair. 
If  the  defect  is  inherent  in  the 
original  construction,  and  this  oc- 
casions the  injury,  then  the  land- 
lord or  lessor  is  responsible ;  but 
when  the  defect  arises  after  the 
lease,  then  the  tenant  is  responsi- 
ble. Examining  the  amended  pe- 
tition, therefore,  we  find  this  al- 
leged :  Moon  was  the  owner  and 
Brooks  the  lessee  and  possessed  of 
the  premises,  using  and  keeping 
them  as  a  post-office.  It  is  then 
averred  that  the  water-pipe  or  gut- 
ter became  filled  and  obstructed, 
and  the  water  f eU  from  the  roof 
upon  the  steps  leading  from  the 
post-office  to  the  sidewalk.  This 
froze,  and  the  plaintifiE  slipped  on 
the  steps  and  fell.  The  cause  of 
the  injury  is  the  stopping  up  of 
the  pipe.  It  is  not  alleged  that 
there  was  a  fault  in  its  original 
construction,  but  it  would  appear 
to  be  one  of  those  obstructions 
that  may  occur  at  any  moment. 
It  is  not  averred  that  this  obstruc- 
tion existed  before  the  demise  was 
made,  and  such  an  averment  is 
necessary  before  the  landlord  can 
beheld.  If  it  occurred  after  the 
demise  it  is  the  duty  of  the  tenant 
or  occupier  to  see  that  such  ob- 
struction was  removed." 

'  Mellen  v.  MorriU,  136  Mass.  545 ; 
30  Am.  Rep.  695 ;  Helmig  v.  Jordon, 
53  Ind.  31 :  Burdick  v.  Cheadle,  36 
Ohio  St.  393. 


868 


Eepairs. 


[§  381. 


a  walk  leading  from  the  street  to  the  building,  and  the 
court  held  that  there  could  be  no  recovery  although  the 
premises  were  in  that  condition  when  they  were  let. 
Said  Morton,  ' '  the  occupier  of  a  building  who  neghgently 
permits  the  building  or  the  access  to  it  to  be  in  an  unsafe 
condition,  is  liable  for  an  injury  occasioned  thereby,  to  a 
person  whom  he  by  an  invitation  express  or  implied 
induces  to  enter  upon  it.  He  is  liable  because  it  is  negli- 
gence in  him  to  invite  a  person  to  enter  upon  a  danger- 
ous place  without  proper  warning."     But  the  defendant 


■  Sweeney  v.  Old  Colony  R.  R. 
Ck).,  10  AUen  (Mass.)  368;  Carleton 
V.  Franconia  Iron  &  Steel  Co.,  99 
Mass.  316.  In  Cowen  v.  Saunder- 
land,  (Mass.)  Nov.  27th,  1887,  in  an 
action  by  a  tenant  against  her 
landlord  for  damages  resulting 
from  falling  into  a  cesspool  in  the 
yard,  covered  by  rotten  planks, 
which  were  concealed  by  earth  on 
which  gi-ass  and  weeds  were  grow- 
ing, there  was  evidence  that  the 
same  had  never  been  pointed  out 
to  her  by  the  defendant,  and  that 
she  was  ignorant  of  its  position 
and  dangerous  character,  and  that 
defendant  had  directed  the  cover 
to  be  repaired  with  old  boards  some 
time  previous,  and  was  present 
when  such  repairs  were  made.  It 
was  held  that  it  should  have  been 
left  to  the  jury  to  say  whether  de- 
fendant knew  of  the  defective 
covering,  and  the  danger  there- 
from, and  had  neglected  to  inform 
plaintiff  of  it ;  and  also  whether 
plaintiff  had  been  injured  in  conse- 
quence of  her  failure  to  make  a 
proper  examination  of  the  premises. 
It  is  a  general  rule,  well  established 
by  the  decisions  of  this  court,  that 
the  lessee  takes  an  estate  in  the 
premises  hired,  and  takes  the  risk 
of  the  quality  of  the  premises,  in 
the  absence  of  an  express  or  impHed 
warranty  by  the  lessor  or  of  deceit. 
If ,  therefore,  he  is  injured  by  reason 
of  the  unsafe  condition  of  the 
premises  hired , he  cannot  ordinarily 
maintain  an  action  in  the  absence 
of  such  warranty  or  of  misrepre- 
sentation. The  rule  of  caveat 
emptor  applies,  and  it  is  for  the 
lessee  to  make  the  examination 
necessary  to  determine  whether 
the  premises  he  leases  are  safe  and 
adapted  to  the  purposes  for  which 


they  are  hired.  There  is  an  ex- 
ception to  this  general  rule,  arising 
from  the  duty  which  the  lessor 
owes  the  lessee.  This  duty  does 
not  originate  directly  from  the 
contract,  but  from  the  relation  of 
the  parties,  and  is  imposed  by  law. 
Where  there  are  concealed  defects 
attended  with  danger  to  an  oc- 
cupant, and  which  a  careful  ex- 
amination would  not  discover, 
known  to  the  lessor,  the  latter  is 
bound  to  reveal  them,  in  order  that 
the  lessee  may  guard  against  them. 
While  the  failure  to  reveal  such 
facts  may  not  be  actual  fraud  or 
misrepresentation,  it  is  such  negli- 
gence as  may  lay  the  foundation 
of  an  action  against  the  lessor,  if 
injury  occurs.  The  principle  that 
one  who  delivers  an  article,  which 
he  knows  to  be  dangerous,  to  an- 
other, ignorant  of  its  qualities, 
without  notice  of  its  nature  or 
qualities,  is  Uable  for  any  injury 
reasonably  likely  to  result,  and 
which  does  result,  has  been  applied 
to  the  letting  of  tenements.  It  has 
thus  been  held  that  where  one  let 
premises  infected  with  the  small- 
pox, and  injury  occurred  thereby, 
he  was  liable,  if  knowing  this 
danger,  he  omitted  to  inform  the 
lessee  ;  this  upon  the  ground  of  his 
negligent  f aihire  to  perform  a  duty 
which  he  owed  the  lessee.  It  was 
not  deemed  important  whether  the 
omission  to  give  the  information 
was  intentional  or  otherwise. 
Bowe  V.  Hunking,  135  Mass.  380, 
and  cases  cited  ;  Tuttle  v.  Manu- 
facturing Co.  145  id.  169.  Ob- 
viously there  may  be  many  con- 
cealed defects  and  dangers  about  a 
house,  which  careful  examination 
will  not  discover.  If  these  are 
known  to  the  lessor,  it  is  for  him  to 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EePAIRS.  869 

was  not  the  occupier  of  the  land,  and  did  not  expressly 
or  impliedly  invite  the  plaintiff  to  enter  upon  it.  He  had 
leased  it  to  a  tenant  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  he 
retained  any  control  over  the  walk,  or  any  right  to  direct 
the  purpose  for  which  the  premises  should  be  used.'' 

The  landlord  cannot  be  held  liable  for  an  injury  result- 
ing to  an  employee  of  the  tenant  or  to  third  persons  by 
any  defects  in  the  premises  arising  either  from  the  act  of 
the  tenant,  or  during  the  term.'  But  when  the  prem- 
ises, at  the  time  when  they  are  leased  are  in  so  defective 
a  condition  as  to  be  per  se  a  nuisance,  especially  when 
they  are  leased  for  a  quasi  public  use,  the  landlord  is 
responsible  for  injuries  resulting  either  to  the  tenant  or 
third  persons  lawfully  upon    the  premises  therefrom. 

But,  where  there  are  no  secret  or  latent  defects  in  the 
premises  at  the  time  of  the  letting  of  which  the  landlord 
knew,  or  by  the  exercise  of  reasonable  care  might  have 
known,  there  is  no  implied  warranty  on  the  part  of  the 
landlord,  that  they  are  fit  for  the  purposes  for  which  they 
were  let,  or  that  they  are  in  good  repair  or  that  they 
shall  remain  so  for  any  time,'  nor  can  he,  ir\  the  absence 
of  the  existence  of  any  duty  to  keep  the  premises  in  suit 
able  repair,  be  held  chargeable  with  negligence,  because 
of  their  disrepair. 

From  the  mere  fact  of  ownership,  there  is  no  presump- 
tion that  the  landlord  knows  the  pecuUar  condition  of  a 

reveal  them.  Traps  or  contrivances  was  injured  by  its  fall.  See  also 
may  exist  by  means  of  which  the  Scott  v.  Simons,  54  N.  H.  126  ; 
most  careful  occupant  might  be  Godley  v.  Hagerty,  30  Penn.  St. 
injured.  "Such  traps  or  con-  897.  In  Bowe  v.  Hunking,  m6i 
trivances,"  says  Mr.  Justice  supra,  it  was  held  that  the  case 
Field,  "are  not  merely  a  want  o^  then  at  bar  was  not  within  the 
repair  ;  they  are  in  a  sense  active  exception  of  the  general  rule  by 
agencies  of  mischief,  which  no  which  a  lessor  is  rendered  liable 
tenant  would  expect  to  find,  even  for  negligence  of  this  character. 
in  a  decayed  and  ruinous  tene-  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  de- 
ment. "  Bowe  V.  Hunking,  ubi  fective  step  by  which  the  injury  in 
supra.  In  Eeichenbacher  v.  thatcaseoccurredwasknowntothe 
Pahmeyer,  8  Bradw.  (111.)  217,  the  lessor  or  heragentto  be  unsafe,  and 
defect  alleged  was  in  the  manner  further,  this  defect  itself  was  ob- 
of  hanging  a  chandelier.  The  vious,  and  whatever  danger  existed 
chandeBer  was  hung  unsafely,  and  was  readily  seen  by  examination, 
the  lessor  knew  it,  and  did  not  'Eyan  v.  Wilson,  87  N.  Y.  471. 
disclose  this  fact  to  the  lessee.  It  =  Swords  v.  Edgar,  59  N.  Y.  28; 
was  not  apparent  to  an  observer.  17  Am.  Eep.  395 ;  Coke  v.  Gutkese, 
It  was  held  that  the  lessor  was  80  Ky.  498. 

liable  to  a  servant  of  the  lessee  -whQ  'PurceU  v.  fJnglish,  86  Ind.  34. 
TT        2 


SrO  EePAIES.  [§  381. 

house  rented  by  him.  But  where  a  lessee  has  lived  for 
six  months  next  door  to  the  tenement  leased,  and  knew 
that  the  house  had  been  vacant  for  six  months,  it  will  be 
presumed  to  have  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  condition  of 
the  house,  and  the  fact  that  he  reaUy  did  not  know  that 
it  was  out  of  repair,  will  not  enable  him  to  set  up  as  a 
counter  claim  to  an  action  for  the  rent,  damages  which 
he  claims  to  have  sustained  by  reason  of  the  unhealthy 
condition  of  the  house.'  Indeed  a  tenant  can  never,  in 
the  absence  of  an  agreement  by  the  landlord  to  repair, 
recover  for  injuries  resulting  from  defects  of  which 
he  knew  or  might,  by  proper  dihgence,  have  known  as 
well  as  the  landlord,  at  the  time  of  leasing  or  which  arose 
after  the  term  commenced."  But  there  is  a  strong  tend- 
ency on  the  part  of  the  courts  to  hold  that  the  tenant  is 
absolved  from  the  lease,  if  there  are  latent  defects  in  the 
premises,  or  causes  not  readily  discoverable  upon  examina- 
tion, rendering  the  premises  unfit  for  occupancy,  and  of 
which  the  landlord  knew  and  did  not  inform  the  tenant." 
But  it  should  be  stated  that  the  last  proposition  is  not  well 
established,  and  is  contrary  to  the  weight  of  authority,  and 
even  the  same  court  that  has  given  expression  to  that 
doctrine  has  since  held  otherwise;*  and  it  is  doubtful 
whether  it  would  be  expedient  to  open  the  door  to  such 
defences,  except  in  the  class  of  cases  where  the  life  or 
health  of  the  tenant  is  involved.  In  a  lease  there  is  no 
imphed  covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessor  to  repair ;  nor 
of  warranty  of  suitableness  or  safety ;  and  this  applies  to 
the  case  of  distinct  tenements  under  a  common  roof,  and 
the  want  of  repair  of  the  roof,  although  the  landlord 
has  control  of  the  upper  story  and  the  roof. 

Thus  in  the  case  last  cited  the  plaintiff  leased  and 
occupied  the  lower  story  of  defendant's  building,  in  the 
city  of  MinneapoHs.  Separate  rooms  in  the  second  story 
were  occupied  by  other  tenants.     It  does  not  appear  that 

1  Jackson  v.  OdeU,  9  Daly  (N.  Y.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  481  ;  Staples  v.  An- 
C.  P.)  371.  derson,   3  Robt.   (N.  Y.   Superior 

2  Bold  V.  O'Brien,  N.  Y.   DaUy      Ct.)  337. 

Register,  Oct.   31,  1883;  Krueger  ^  Meeks   v.   Bowerman,   1  Daly 

V.  Ferrant,  20  Minn.  385.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  100. 

'  Wilson  V.  Finch  Hatton,  ante ;  « Krueger  v.   Ferrant,   39  Minn. 

Eakin  v.  Brown,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  385 ;  43  Am.  Rep.  333 
C.  P.)  36  ;  Wallace  v.  Lent,  1  Daly 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  Repairs.    .  871 

any  of  the  tenants  had  control  of  the  roof,  or  were 
charged  with  the  duty  of  repairing  it,  or  that  there  was 
any  covenant  or  agreement  to  repair  by  either  party  to 
any  of  the  leases  under  which  the  several  tenements  in 
the  building  were  occupied.  The  roof  having  become 
defective  and  out  of  repair,  water  had  at  divers  times 
during  rain  storms  leaked  through  into  plaintiff's  store, 
and  caused  some  damage.  The  defendant  had  due  notice 
of  this,  as  well  as  of  the  condition  of  the  roof,  but  he  had 
neglected  to  make  any  repairs.  At  the  time  complained 
of,  as  the  result  of  a  severe  storm,  a  large  quantity  of 
water  leaking  through  the  roof  passed  through  the  ceil- 
ing of  the  plaintiff's  store,  greatly  damaging  his  stock  of 
goods,  consisting  of  guns,  ammunition,  etc.  The  plaintiff 
alleged  in  his  complaint  a  promise  and  undertaking  by  the 
defendant,  in  the  contract  of  lease,  to  keep  the  roof  in 
repair,  but  the  issue  as  to  any  express  agreement  so  to 
do  was  excluded  from  the  jury  by  the  court  for  insuffi- 
ciency of  proof.  But  independently  of  any  express  con- 
tract or  agreement  to  repair,  the  court  instructed  the 
jury  that  the  landlord  was  bound  to  so  care  for  the  roof, 
which  was  under  his  own  charge,  that  his  tenant  should  not 
be  injured  by  his  neglect.  In  other  words,  the  defend- 
ant was  bound  to  take  such  care  in  respect  to  this  roof, 
and  the  keeping  of  it  in  repair,  as  to  protect  the  store 
below  from  any  danger  of  being  drenched  by  water,  as  a 
prudent  man  of  ordinary  intelligence  would  do  if  the 
property  were  all  his  own.  The  court  held  that  this  was 
erroneous  and  reversed  the  judgment. 

Vandeebuegh,  J.  said  :  "  Where  several  apartments  are 
leased,  as  in  this  instance,  by  the  owner  of  the  premises 
to  different  tenants  under  a  common  roof,  doubtless,  in 
the  absence  of  a  stipulation  to  the  contraiy,  those  parts 
of  the  premises,  including  the  roof,  not  expressly  included 
in  the  leases,  will  be  deemed  to  remain  in  the  possession 
and  control  of  the  landlord.'  And  tenements  under  a 
common  roof  may  be  as  essentially  distinct  when  one  is 

'  Stockwell  V.   Hunter,  11  Met. 
(Mass.)  448. 


872  Eepairs.  [§  381. 

under  the  other,  as  when  one  is  by  the  side  of  the  other.' 
The  court  rightly  instructed  the  jury  in  this  case  that  the 
roof  of  the  demised  premises  was  ' '  in  the  charge  of  the 
landlord."  But  the  rule  appears  to  be  well  established 
that  there  is  no  implied  covenant  on  the  part  of  the 
landlord  to  make  repairs,  or  that  the  premises  are  or 
will  prove  to  be  suitable  for  the  tenant's  use  or  business.' 
There  seems  to  be  no  sound  reason  why  this  rule  should 
not  extend  in  the  like  manner  to  portions  of  the  premises 
not  expressly  demised  to  the  tenant,  but  which  are 
necessary  for  his  use  or  protection ;  as  in  this  case  the 
common  roof.'  In  all  the  States  where  the  subject  is  not 
regulated  by  statute,  the  rule  is,  invariably,  that  the 
landlord  in  the  absence  of  a  contract  on  his  part  to  keep 
the  premises  in  repair,  is  not  bound  to  do  so,  and  is  not 
responsible  either  to  the  tenant  or  third  persons  for 
injuries  resulting  from  their  disrepair.  But,  where  a 
building  is  divided  into  numerous  tenements,  and  let  to 
different  tenants,  all  having  the  same  avenues  of  ingress 
and  egress,  and  in  which  the  landlord  employs  a  janitor 
to  look  after  the  tenements  and  to  discharge  certain  duties 
to  the  tenants,  a  question  is  presented  more  difficult  of 
solution  than  arises  in  the  case  of  an  ordinary  tenement, 
occupied  and  controlled  by  a  single  tenant. 

In  such  cases,  the  tenant  has  no  control  over  the  halls 
and  stairs,  and  to  hold  that  the  landlord  is  absolved  from 
all  responsibility  respecting  them,  because  he  has  let  the 
tenements  to  which  they  lead,  is  absurd.  The  courts  hold 
that  the  landlord  is  responsible  for  the  condition  of 
elevators  used  in  many  of  this  class  of  tenements  and  for 
the  manner  in  which  they  are  operated ;  *  and  undoubtedly, 
in  the  case  of  apartment  houses,  in  which  the  land- 
lord keeps  a  janitor  to  look  after  the  condition  of  the 
tenements,  and  to  attend  to  the  wants  of  tenants,  and 
in  which  it  is  universally  the  custom  for  the  landlord  to 

'Proprietors,  etc.,  t.    Lowell,  1  (N.  Y.)  464 ;  Wilkinson  v.  Clauson 

Met.  (Mass.)  538 ;  Cheeseborough  v.  29  Minn.  91.                                      ' 

Green,  10  Conn.  318.  'Pomfret  v.   Eicroft,   1  Saimd. 

■•'  Foster  v.  Peyser,  9  Cush.  (Mass.)  331. 

342;  Witty  v.  Matthews,  53  N .  Y.  ■*  Tanney  v.  Roberts,  53  N.   Y. 

513;  Howard  v.  Doolittle,  3  Duer,  Superior  Ct.  446. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  Repairs.  873 

make  repairs,  the  courts  would  hold  that  the  employment 
of  the  janitor  by  the  landlord,  and  the  general  supervision 
thus  retained  by  him  over  the  building,  through  the 
janitor,  coupled  with  the  usage  respecting  repairs,  before 
referred  to,  would  render  the  landlord  responsible  for 
the  condition  of  the  avenues  of  ingress  and  egress  to  and 
from  the  building,  as  well  as  for  any  other  part  of  the 
building  over  which,  through  the  janitor,  the  landlord 
has  supervision  and  control.  In  a  Massachusetts  case,' 
where  a  landlord  was  sued  for  injuries  received  by  a 
tenant  through  the  defective  condition  of  a  stairway 
leading  to  the  roof  of  a  building  used  in  common  by  the 
tenants  of  a  building  occupied  as  tenements  by  several 
famihes,  it  was  held  that  the  landlord  was  responsible. 
In  this  case,  however,  the  court  does  not  seem  to  have 
given  the  question  much  consideration,  or  if  it  did,  the 
opinion  fails  to  disclose  any  good  ground  for  the  doctrine 
advanced  therein.  But,  while,  as  a  general  rule,  the 
landlord  is,  in  the  absence  of  any  agreement  to  do  so, 
under  no  obUgation  to  keep  the  premises  in  repair,  and 
therefore  is  not  responsible  for  injuries  resulting  from 
their  defective  condition,  yet,  it  is  believed  that  in  the 
case  of  apartment  houses,  let  and  managed  as  stated 
supra,  the  landlord  is  responsible  for  the  defective  con- 
dition of  any  of  the  approaches  to  the  premises,  over  which, 
through  his  janitor  or  other  agents,  he  retains  general 
control.  <■ 

But  this  rule  must  be  restricted  to  that  class  of  tene- 
ments, and  has  no  application  to  buildings  in  which  no 
janitor  is  employed,  and  over  the  halls  and  approaches 
to  which  the  landlord  retains  no  control,  although 
they  are  occupied  by  several  tenants."    In  an  Indiana 

^  Looney  v.  Mc  Lean,  129  Mass.  door  about  two  feet  from  the  rail. 

33 ;  37  Am.  Rep.  395.  The  rail  was  out  of  repau:,  and  the 

^  Htunphrey  v.  Wait,  23  U.  C-  C.  plaintiff,  a  tenant,  gomg  upon  the 

P.  680.    See  Way  v.  Hodges,  9  Q.  roof  to  remove  Unen  hung  there  to 

B.  Div.  80,  in  which  the  defendant  dry,  slipped,  and  the  raiUng  giving 

was  the  owner  of  an  apartment  way,  he  was  precipitated  to  the 

house  let  to  tenants,  each  of  whom  street  below  and  seriously  injured, 

had  the  privilege  of  using  the  roof  The  court  held  that  the  landlord 

for  drying  linen.    The  roof  had  an  was  not  liable,  there  being  no  im- 

iron  rail  around  the  edge,  and  the  plied  covenant  to  keep  the  rail  in 

access  to  the  roof  vs^as  through  a  repair.    Lord  Coleridge  said:  "I 


874 


Repairs. 


[§  381. 


case '  this  rule  was  adopted.  In  that  case  the  plaintiff 
leased  rooms  in  the  upper  story  of  the  defendant's  building. 
The  approach  to  these  rooms  was  by  a  stairway  common 
to  all  the  tenants.  The  railing  of  the  stairway  was  out 
of  repair,  rotten  and  loose,  and  in  going  down  the  stairs 
the  plaintiff  slipped  upon  the  ice  and  snow  which  had 
accumulated  upon  them,  and  grasping  the  hand  rail,  it 
gave  way,  and  the  plaintiff  was  precipitated  upon  the 
pavement  and  injured.  The  court  held  that  the  landlord 
was  not  responsible  for  the  injury.  The  same  doctrine 
was  held  in  a  Massachusetts  case'  where  the  defect 
consisted  in  the  accumulation  of  ice  and  snow  upon  the 
common  approach  to  the  tenement.  In  a  Minnesota 
case '  where  the  building  was  occupied  by  several  tenants, 


let  you  certain  rooms,  and  if  you 
like  to  dry  your  linen  on  the  leads 
you  may  do  so, — ^the  tenant  takes 
the  premises  as  he  finds  them." 
In  Henkel  v.  Murr,  30  Hun  (N.  Y.) 
28,  it  was  held  that  to  render  the 
owner  of  a  building,  the  rooms  in 
which  are  rented  to  different  ten- 
ants, liable  for  the  injuries  sus- 
tained by  a  person  who,  while 
"visiting  one  of  the  tenants,  caught 
her  heel  in  a  hole  in  the  oil-cloth 
laid  upon  the  stairs  in  the  hall,  it 
must  be  shown  not  only  that  the 
fall  was  occasioned  by  the  danger- 
ous condition  in  which  the  oil-cloth 
was  left,  but  also  that  the  landlord 
neglected,  after  having  had  knowl- 
edge or  notice  of  its  dangerous  con- 
dition, to  repau-  the  same,  or  that 
he  omitted  to  use  reasonable  means 
and  precautions  to  ascertain  its 
condition  and  make  the  requisite 
repairs.  Also  that  evidence  that 
some  time  after  the  accident  the 
landlord  had  put  new  oil-cloth 
upon  the  stairs  was  inadmissible. 
The  court  said :  "  But  the  question 
is  not  one  of  contract.  The  habil- 
ity  rests  wholly  upon  actual  negli- 
gence, in  which  the  duty  or  obliga- 
tion of  the  landlord  is  only  an  ele- 
ment ;  a  most  important  one,  it  is 
true,  but  by  no  means  exclusive 
and  controlling.  In  addition  to 
that  element  it  must  appear  that 
with  some  notice  of  the  condition 
of  things,  or  under  some  circum- 
stances equivalent  to  notice,  such 
as  an  unreasonable  omission  to  as- 
certain the  condition,  he  had  failed 


to  make  the  necessary  repairs  or 
changes  caUedior  by  the  condition 
or  exigency.  It  was  not  enough, 
.  therefore,  to  find  that  a  hole  had 
come  in  the  oil-cloth  in  which  the 
plaintifE's  heel  caught  so  as  to 
cause  the  fall  which  injured  her, 
for  in  the  nature  of  things  all  that 
might  occur  without  just  ground 
to  charge  the  landlord  with  negli- 
gence. *  *  *  Against  the  ajp- 
peUant's  objection  and  exception  it 
was  shown  that  some  months  after 
the  accident  to  plaintiff  the  def  endr 
ant  had  put  new  oil-cloth  upon  the 
stair-case.  It  has  been  frequently 
held  that  such  evidence  is  not  ad- 
missible to  show  knowledge  of 
dangerous  condition  at  the  time  of 
the  injury.  The  cases  are  very  de- 
cisive on  that  subject.  Dougan  v. 
Champlain  Transportation  Co.,  56 
N.  Y.  ],  8;  Baird  v.  Daly,  68  id. 
547 ;  Salters  v.  Delaware  and  Hud- 
son Canal  Co.,  3  Hun.  338 ;  Mor- 
rell  V.  Peck,  24  id .  37. "  Hudson  v. 
Chicago  and  Northwestern  R.  Co., 
59  Iowa,  581 ;  44  Am.  Rep.  692. 

'  PurceU  V.  EngUsh,  86  Ind.  34 ; 
44  Am.  Rep.  255. 

'  Woods  V.  Naumkeag  Steam 
Cotton  Co.,  ante. 

3  Krueger  v.  Ferrant,  29  Minn. 
385  ;  43  Am.  Rep.  223.  In  this  case 
Vanderburgh,  J.,  said  :  "  Where 
several  apartments  are  leased,  as 
in  this  instance,  by  the  owner  of 
the  premises  to  dififerent  tenants 
under  a  common  roof,  doubtless 
in  the  absence  of  a  stipulation  to 
the  contrary,  those  parts  of  the 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


Eepairs. 


875 


it  was  held  that  the  landlord  was  not  responsible  to  a 
tenant  for  an  injury  to  his  goods  by  water  falling  upon 
them  through  the  leaky  and  defective  condition  of  the 
roof,  over  which  the  tenant  had  no  control;  although 

the  landlord  knew  of  the  defect,  and  neglected  to  repair 
it. 

prevent  its  becoming  a  nuisance 
The  tenant  is  the  party  most  in- 
terested in  understanding  the  risks 
which  he  will  assume  in  exposing 
his  goods  to  injury  from  the  ele- 
ments. It  is  incumbent  on  him  to 
exercise  proper  care  and  precau- 
tion in  the  selection  and  leasing  of 
tenements  to  be  occupied  by  him. 
It  is  his  right,  and  ordinarily  his 
duty,  to  insist  that  he  be  permitted 
to  inspect  those  portions  of  the 
premises  which  may  be  important 
to  him,  and  to  require  the  proper 
stipulations  in  the  contract  for  his 
protection.  Carstairs  v.  Taylor, 
L.  R..  6  Exch.  817  ;  Ceates  v.  Earl 
of  Cadogan,  10  C.  B.  591,  601. 
Since  then  defendant  is  not  liable 
to  plaintiff  upon  contract,  express 
or  implied ;  his  liability,  if  any, 
must  arise  from  the  fact  of  ms 
ownership  and  control  of  the  up- 
per story  of  the  building.  This 
brings  us  to  the  consideration  of 
the  ground  upon  which  the  court, 
at  the  trial,  substantially  placed 
the  defendant's  liability  in  this 
case,  and  that  is  the  application 
to  the  owner  or  occupant  of  the 
upper  story  of  the  maxim  sic  utere 
tuo  ut  alienum  non  loedas.  In  the 
application  of  Ihis  principle  it  is 
deemed  immaterial  whether  the 
relation  of  the  occupant  of  the 
lower  story  to  the  owner  of  the 
upper  story  and  roof  be  that  of  ten- 
ant or  distinct  owner.  2  Wait's 
Actions  and  Def.  745.  This  max- 
im restrains  a  man  from  using  his 
own  property  to  the  prejudice  of 
his  neighbor,  but  it  is  not  usually 
applicable  to  a  mere  omission  to 
act,  but  rather  to  some  affirmative 
act  or  course  of  conduct  which 
amounts  to  or  results  in  an  invasion 
of  another's  rights.  Exceptional 
cases  need  not  be  discussed  here. 
Pomfretv.  Eicroft  (note,)  supra; 
Broom  Leg.  Max.  366.  In  Cheese- 
borough  v.  Green,  supra,  the  court, 
while  admitting  that  an  action  on 
the  case  might  lie  against  any  one 


premises,  including  the  roof,  not 
expressly  included  in  the  leases, 
will  be  deemed  to  remain  in  the 
possession  and  control  of  the  land- 
lord. StockweU  V.  Hunter,  11  Met. 
(Mass.)  448.  And  tenements  under 
a  common  roof  may  be  as  essen- 
tially distinct,  when  one  is  under 
the  other,  as  when  one  is  by  the 
side  of  the  other.  Proprietors,  &c. 
V.  Lowell,  1  Met.  (Mass.)  536  ; 
Cheeseborough  v.  Green,  10  Conn. 
318.  The  court  rightly  instructed 
the  jury  that  the  roof  of  the  de- 
mised premises  was  "  in  the  charge 
of  the  landlord."  The  rule  appears 
to  be  well  established  that  there  is 
no  implied  covenant  on  the  part 
of  the  landlord  to  make  repairs,  or 
that  the  premises  axe,  or  will  prove 
to  be  suitable  for  the  tenant's  use. 
Foster  v.  Peyser,  9  Cush.  (Mass.) 
242  ;  Witty  v.  Matthews,  52  N.  Y. 
512  ;  Howard  v.  DooUttle,  3  Duer, 
(N.  T.)  464  ;  Wilkinson  v.  Clausen, 
29  Minn.  9i.  There  seems  to  be 
no  sound  reason  why  this  rule 
should  not  extend  in  like  manner 
to  portions  of  the  premises  not  ex- 
pressly demised  to  the  tenant,  but 
which  are  necessary  for  his  use 
or  protection  ;  as  in  this  case  the 
common  roof,  Pomfret  v.  Kisnap, 
1  Saund.  321 ;  Chauntler  v.  Robin- 
son, 4  Exch.  163  ;  Doupe  v.  Genin, 
45  N.  "S.  119;  6  Am.  Rep.  47; 
Brewster  v.  De  Fremery,  33  Cal. 
341 ;  Walker  v.  Gilbert,  2  Robt. 
(N.  Y.)  214.  The  authorities  gen- 
erally agree  that  the  parcel  tenant 
or  owner  may,  in  such  case,  have 
an  easement  of  ingress  and  egress 
over  the  common  passage-ways, 
and  of  shelter  in  the  roof.  But 
this  does  not  throw  upon  the  land- 
lord the  burden  of  actively  under- 
taking to  keep  the  building  or  any 
part  of  it  in  repair,  unless  he  has 
agreed  to  do  so,  or  unless  it  is  in 
danger  of  becoming  a  nuisance. 
In  Chauntler  v.  Robinson,  supra, 
the  court  decide  that  the  only  ob- 
hgation  oast  upon  the  owner  is  to 


876 


Repaies. 


[§  382. 


Sec.  382.  Where  there  are  several  lessors.— Where  a 
lease  is  made  by  several  joint  owners  of  premises,  but  in 
various  proportions,  and  the  lessee  covenants  to  pay  each 
of  them  separately  his  proportion  of  the  rent,  a  covenant 
to  repair,  though  expressed  to  be  made  with  them  jointly 
and  severally,  is  nevertheless  a  joint  covenant,  because 
their  interests  are  necessarily  joint,  and  an  action  for  its 
breach  must  be  brought  in  the  names  of  aU.' 


Sec.  383.  When  landlord  has  repaired.— When  the  land- 
lord, who  holds  under  a  lease,  is  forced  to  repair  himself, 
in  the  middle  of  his  tenant's  term,  in  order  to  sava  a  for- 


who  should  suffer  his  huilding  to 
become  dangerous  through  decay, 
deny  that  the  maxim  could  be  car- 
ried further  in  its  application,  so 
as  to  render  the  owner  of  the  up- 
per story  liable  to  the  owner  of  the 
lower  for  want  of  proper  repairs 
to  the  roof.  See  also  Pierce  v. 
Dyer,  109  Mass.  374  ;  13  Am.  Eep. 
716  ;  Colebeck  v.  Girdlers'  Co.,  1 
Q.  B.  Div.  (1875),  234.  Walker  v. 
Gilbert,  2  Eobt.  (N.  Y.)  314,  and 
Doupe  V.  Genua,  45  N.  Y.  119 ;  6 
Am.  Eep.  47,  are  cases  similar  to 
the  one  at  bar.  In  the  latter  case 
(page  124)  the  court  very  clearly 
states  and  distinguishes  the  rule 
of  liability  applicable  to  this  case : 
"  A  man  has  no  right  to  so  con- 
struct his  building  or  allow  it  to 
be  in  such  a  condition  as  to  cause 
the  water  which  falls  upon  it  to 
flow  upon  his  neighbor's  premises. 
He  is  bound  to  protect  ms  neigh- 
bor against  injury  caused  by  his 
own  structures."  But  in  the  ab- 
sence of  contra,ct,  he  is  not  bound 
to  replace  or  repair  structures 
which  have  fallen  into  decay, 
merely  for  the  purpose  of  proteot- 
irg  his  neighbor's  property,  simply 
because  such  structures  previously 
afforded  such  protection.  The  case 
of  Toole  V.  Beckett,  67  Me.  544 ; 
24  Am.  Rep.  54,  maintains  a  con- 
trary doctrine.  The  court  rests  its 
opinion  upon  the  authority  of  Kir- 
by  V.  Boylston  Market  Ass'n,  14 
Gray  (Mass.)  349;  Gray  v.  Boston 
Gas-hght  Co.,  14 Mass.  149  ;  19  Am. 
Eep.  324  ;  Norcross  v.  Thorn,  51  Me. 
503  ;  and  Priest  v.  Nichols,  116 
Mass.  401.  With  due  respect,  we 
think  these  cases  are  readily  dis- 


tinguishable, and  cannot  be  in- 
voked to  support  the  conclusion 
arrived  at  by  the  court  in  Toole  v. 
Beckett.  In  Kirby  v.  Boylston 
Market  Ass'n  the  defendant's  struc- 
ture caused  snow  and  ice  to  accum- 
ulate upon  the  sidewalk  so  as  to 
render  it  unsafe  for  travel.  In 
Gray  v.  Boston  Gas-light  Co. ,  the 
defendant's  chimney  fell  into  the 
street  and  injured  the  property  of 
a  stranger.  Norcross  v.  Thom. 
was  also  an  action  on  the  case  for 
maintaining  a  nuisance.  In  Priest 
v.  Nichols,  the  goods  of  a  tenant 
were  damaged  by  water  escaping 
from  a  waste-pipe  to  an  engine 
used  by  the  defendant  in  an  upper 
story.  It  is  very  clear  that  this 
was  not  a  case  of  mere  omission  to 
repair,  and  that  the  landlord,  hav- 
ing imdertaken  to  use  machinery 
in  the  building,  would  be  bound 
to  exercise  due  care  in  its  manage- 
ment to  prevent  injury  to  others. 
It  is  suggested  in  several  cases 
that  the  tenant  of  the  lower  story 
may  himself  enter  and  make  re- 
pairs. Pomfret  v.  Eicroft  and 
Colebeck  v.  Girdlers'  Co.,  supra. 
And  in  Clieeseborough  v.  Green 
the  court  thought  he  might  have  a 
remedy  in  chancery.  If  the  de- 
fendant's liability  rests  solely  upon 
his  neglect  to  repair  the  roof,  we 
are  satisfied  that  in  the  absence  of 
any  express  agreement  on  his  part 
to  rnake  repairs,  the  plaintiff's 
claim  in  this  action  cannot  be  sus- 
tained upon  either  ground  as  have 
considered,  without  a  departure 
from  established  principles." 

>  Calvert   v.   Bradley,   16  How. 
(Y.  S.)  580. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]       Assignee  op  Lease.  877 

feiture  of  his  own  estate  to  his  landlord,  it  seems  that  the 
damage  he  will  be  entitled  to  recover  will  depend  upon 
the  covenant  on  which  he  sues.  If  there  is  a  covenant 
to  repair  after  notice,  and  he  has  given  notice  to  his 
sublessee,  and  the  time  has  expired,  and  he  has  then 
entered  himself  and  repaired,  the  measure  of  damages 
will  be  the  cost  of  such  repairs,  so  far  as  they  are  fit  and 
necessary.  And  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  plaintiff  to 
prove  that  the  defendant  assented  to  the  repairs  being 
done  by  him,  because,  if  there  is  no  assent,  the  plaintiffs 
would  be  trespassers  and  liable  to  an  action  for  the  entry. 
In  such  a  case  it  would  not  operate  in  mitigation  of 
damages,  that  the  plaintiff  had,  before  the  commence- 
ment of  the  action,  assigned  the  premises  to  a  third  party, 
who  puUed  them  down  and  entirely  rebuUt  them.  The 
injury  was  done  when  his  breach  of  covenant  compelled 
the  plaintiff  to  lay  out  money.'  But  if  he  sues  upon  the 
general  covenant  to  repair,  after  giving  notice  under  the 
special  covenant,  but  before  the  time  fixed  by  the  notice 
has  expired,  it  has  been  held  that  he  can  recover  only 
nominal  damages  ;  because  he  cannot  recover  under  the 
special  covenant,  and  under  the  genei'al  covenant  he 
cannot  show  that  there  has  been  any  damage  done  to  the 
reversion."  Probably  in  this  case  it  was  thought  that  the 
notice  calling  upon  the  defendant  to  repair  within  two 
months,  under  the  special  covenant,  operated  as  an  elec- 
tion to  proceed  under  that  covenant,  and  estopped  the 
plaintiff  from  demanding  substantial  damages  until  the 
expiration  of  the  time  fixed  by  himself.  Bat  it  is  not 
beKeved  that  the  existence  of  a  special  covenant  to  repair 
after  notice  would  prevent  the  landlord  from  recovering 
full  damages  in  a  suit  upon  the  general  covenant  to 
repair,  if  he  chose  to  rely  exclusively  upon  it. 

Sec.  384.  Damagesagainstassigneeof  lease.— The  assignee 
of  a  lease  is,  of  course,  liable  only  for  a  bi'each  of  cove- 
nant committed   during  his  own  holding.     But  where 

1  Colley  V.  Streeton,  2  B.  &  C.  =  Williams  v.  Williams,  L.  R.,  9 
273.  C.  P.  659. 


878  Repairs.  [§  385, 

the  lease  has  passed  through  several  hands,  and  the 
premises  are  out  of  repair  when  the  action  is  brought, 
and  are  proved  to  have  been  so  when  they  were  held  by 
the  defendant,  it  will  be  for  him  to  show  how  much  of 
the  injury  arose  subsequent  to  his  occupation.  And  in 
default  of  evidence  by  him,  the  jury  may  assess  the 
damage  at  the  whole  amount  to  which  he  would  have 
been  liable  had  all  the  dilapidations  take  place  in  his  own 
time.'  Of  course  strict  proof  must  always  be  given  of 
the  amount  of  disrepair.  Accordingly,  where  the  jury 
were  instructed  that  this  action  was  not  like  one  for 
goods  sold  and  delivered,  and  that  the  plaintiff  might 
rest  upon  general  evidence  in  support  of  his  particulars 
of  demand,  without  proving  every  item,  especially  as 
they  had  viewed  the  premises  with  the  particulars  of 
demand  in  their  hands,  and  would  therefore  be  able  to 
judge  if  the  plaintiff  had  made  out  his  case, — a  new  trial 
was  granted.' 

Sec.  385.  When  action  is  brought  at  the  end  of  the  term. — 
Where  the  action  is  brought  upon  the  covenant  to  repair 
at  the  end  of  the  term,  the  damages  are  such  a  sum  as 
will  put  the  premises  into  the  state  of  repair  in  which 
the  tenant  was  bound  to  leave  them ;  where,  besides  the 
covenant  to  repair,  there  is  also  a  covenant  to  insure 
against  fire  for  a  specific  sum,  the  defendant's  liability, 
in  case  of  the  premises  being  burnt  down,  is  not  limited 
to  this  sum.  The  condition  is  intended  only  as  an  addi- 
tional security  to  the  landlord.'  The  defendant,  however, 
is  not  liable  to  pay  for  improved  modes  of  doing  the 
work,  by  means  of  which  the  parts  repaired  are  more 
durable  than  they  were  on  their  former  principles  of  con- 
struction.* 

Sec.  386.  Subsequent  erections.— When  the  covenant  is 
only  to  repair  the  demised  premises,  the  defendant  is  not 
bound  to  repair  any  building  afterward  erected,  even 
though  he  was  wrong  in  erecting  them,  and  no  damages 

'  Shaw  T.  Kay,  1  Ex.  413  ;  Smith  =Digby  v.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  276. 
V.  Peat,  9  Ex.  161.  ■•  Seward  v.  Leggatt,  7  C.  &  P. 

=  Smith  V.  Douglas,  16  C.  B.  31.        613. 


CHAP.xxxvl  '  Claim  FOR  Damages.  879 

can  be  recovered  in  respect  of  the  disrepair  into  which 
they  may  have  fallen.'  It  is  no  answer  to  a  claim  for 
not  repairing,  that  the  plaintiff's  interest  in  the  premises 
has  ceased.  The  plaintiff  may  he  liable  over  to  his 
superior  landlord  ;  but  independently  of  this  the  objection 
cannot  be  set  up  by  a  party  who  is  himself  in  fault." 

Sec.  387.  Damages  must  arise  from  the  defendant's  neglect. 
— Of  course  no  claim  can  be  maintained  for  any  damages 
which  do  not  flow  immediately  from  the  defendant's 
neglect.  For  instance,  the  plaintiff  held  land  under 
several  covenants,  one  of  which  was  a  covenant  to  repair, 
with  a  right  of  entry  by  the  landlord  on  breach  of  the 
covenants,  and  made^a  -sublease  to  the  defendant,  with  a 
covenant  to  repair,  which  was  broken  by  the  defendant. 
The  head  landlord  ejected  the  plaintiff  for  breach  of  all 
the  covenants,  including  that  violated  by  the  defendant. 
It  was  held  that  the  plaintiff  could  not  recover  from  the 
defendant  the  value  of  the  term  so  forfeited,  since  there 
were  other  breaches  besides  those  in  the  defendant's  lease, 
and  it  did  not  appear  on  which  of  them  the  ejectment  had 
turned.  And  Maule,  J.,  and  Bosanquet,  J.,  doubted 
whether,  in  any  case,  the  subtenant  could  be  liable  in 
such  an  action  for  all  the  consequences  to  his  landlord  of 
a  breach  of  covenant  contained  in  a  lease  to  which  he  was 
not  himself  a  party.' 

Sec.  388.  Meaning  of  a  covenant  to  repair.— What  amount 
of  repair  is  necessary.— Evidence  of  previous  disrepair.- In 
estimating  the  amount  of  damages,  it  is,  of  course,  impor- 
tant to  know  what  state  of  repair  tlie  tenant  was  bound 

'  Worcester  School  Trustees  v.  dilapidations,  although  at  the  ex- 
Rowlands,  9  C.  &  P.  734.  Every  piration  of  the  term  the  premises 
such  covenant  must  be  construed  were  pulled  down  under  a  ver- 
according  to  its  particular  words  ;  bal  arrangement  for  that  purpose 
Cornish  v.  Cleife,  3  H.  &  C.  446 ;  made  previously  with  a  proposed 
and  sometimes  a  distinction  may  new  lessee.  But  in  this  case  the 
exist  between  a  liabihty  to  repair  court  laid  stress  on  the  fact  that 
newly  erected  houses  and  a  liabil-  the  agreement  with  the  proposed 
ity  to  repair  newly  erected  addi-  new  lessee  was  verbal  only,  and 
tions  to  existing  houses.     B. ,  id.  therefore    not    binding  on    either 

'  Clow  V.  Brogden,  8  M.  &  G.  party.    Bawlings  v.  Morgan,  18  C. 

39  ;  and  see  Davies  v.  Underwood,  B.  (N.  S.)  776. 
ante.    In  another  case,  a  lessor  re-         '  Clow  v.  Brogden,  ante  ;  2  Sco. 

covered  substantial   damages  for  N.  R.  303,  314,  S.  C. 


880  EbPAIES.  r§  388. 

to  put  the  premises  into.  Where  the  covenant  is,  "to 
put  the  premises  into  repair,"  this  clearly  means  to  put 
them  into  a  better  state  of  repair  than  the  tenant  found 
them  in.'  It  has  also  been  decided,  however,  that  a  cov- 
enant to  "keep"  in  repair  involves  a  covenant  to  put  in 
repair.  For  they  cannot  be  kept  in  good  repair  without 
being  put  into  it."  But  the  amount  of  repair,  of  course, 
depends  on  the  age  and  class  of  the  house,  and  must  dif- 
fer, as  that  may  be  a  palace  or  a  cottage.  No  one  is  bound 
to  give  his  landlord  a  new  house  instead  of  an  old  one.' 
A  house  in  one  locality  may  be  repaired  with  materials 
inferior  to  those  requisite  for  repairing  a  house  in  another.* 
And,  accordingly,  where  a  lessee  took  premises,  which 
at  the  time  were  old  and  out  of  repair,  under  a  cove- 
nant to  repair,  and  they  were  destroyed  by  fire,  and  it 
appeared  that  the  cost  of  re-instating  them  would  amount 
to  1635Z.,  but*they  would  then  be  more  valuable  by  600Z. 
than  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  fire ;  it  was  decided 
that  defendant  was  liable  to  pay  only  1035Z.,  that  being 
the  amount  which  the  plaintiff  had  really  lost.'  This  is 
all  quite  clear,  but  a  more  difficult  question  arises  as  to 
how  far  evidence  of  actual  disrepair,  as  distinguished 
from  mere  inferiority,  may  be  admitted.  The  rule  is, 
that  evidence  may  be  given  as  to  the  age  and  class  of  the 
premises,  with  their  general  condition  as  to  repair ;  but  the 
defendant  cannot  prove  in  detail  that  a  certain  part  is  out 
of  order.' 

"  Belcher  v.  Mcintosh,  8  C.  &  P.  session.      The    evidence   was   re- 

730.  fused,    and     a    new     trial     was 

^  Payne  -v.  Heine,  16  M.  &  W.  granted  upon  that  ground.    Loed 

541  ;  Easton  v.  Pratt,  2  H.  &  C.  Denman  said:   "It  is  very  mate- 

676.  rial,  with  a  view  both  to  the  event 

^  Per  Aldeeson,  B.,  Belcher  v.  of  the  suit  and  the  amount  of  dam- 

Mclntosh,  8  C.  &  P.  723.  ages,  to  show  what  the  previous 

^  Per  Paeke,  B.,  Payne  V.  Haine,  state  of  the  premises  was."    And 

16  M.  &  W.  545.  in  Payne  v.  Haine,  Aldbrson,  B., 

'  Yates  V.  Dunster,  11  Ex.  15.  says  :  "The  marginal  note  of  Bur- 

'  Stanley  v.  Twogood,  3  B.  &  C.  dett  v.  Withers  may  be  incorrect ; 

4 ;    Muntz  v.   Goring,  4  id.   451 ;  but  the  judgment  is  quite  right, 

Payne  v.  Haine,  16  M.  &  W.  545.  and  shows  that  a  lessee  who  has 

Burdett  v.  Withers,  7  Ad.  &  El.  contracted  to  keep  demised  prem- 

136,  seems  to  go  beyond  this  rule,  ises  in  good  repair,  is  entitled  to 

In  that  case  the  defendant's  counsel  prove  what  their  general  state  of 

sought  to  examine  the  witnesses  as  repair  was  at  the  time  of  the  de- 

to  the  condition  of  the  premises  mise,  so  as  to  measure  the  amount 

when  the  plaintiff  went  into  pos-  of  damages  for  want  of  repairs  by 


CHAP.  XXXV.  J     Condition  Precedent. 


881 


Sec.  389.  Where  there  is  a  conditional  precedent.— The 
landlord's  claim  to  recover  for  breach  of  a  covenant  to 
repair  may  depend  on  the  performance  of  some  condition 
precedent,  such  as  putting  the  premises  in  repair  himself.' 
Such  a  condition,  when  applied  to  a  single  house  and 
premiseSjis  indivisible,  and  where  the  landlord  has  repaired 
only  a  part,  he  cannot  recover  for  non-repair  by  the 
tenant,  even  of  the  very  part  which  he  has  put  into  repair. 
But  if  the  covenant  applied  to  two  separate  dwelling- 
houses,  of  which  one  might  be  completely  enjoyed  though 
the  other  was  not  in  a  condition  for  proper  occupation, 
the  covenants  would  be  divisible,  and  the  performance  of 


reference  to  that  state."  This  rec- 
onciles that  case  with  the  others 
mentioned  before.  The  question, 
therefore,  for  the  future  will  prob- 
ably be,  not  so  much  as  to  the  ad- 
missibility of  such  evidence,  as  the 
purpose  to  which  it  may  be  ap- 
pUed.  Since  Payne  v,  Haine,  a 
tenant  cannot  justify  keeping 
premises  iu  bad  repair,  because 
they  happened  to  be  in  that  state 
when  he  took  them.  But  evidence 
of  this  nature,  like  evidence  of  age, 
wUl  be  admissible  to  show  how  far 
they  were  capable  of  being  re- 
paired at  all,  and  what  amount  of 
repair  could  have  been  contem- 
plated by  the  covenant.  In  other 
words,  a  house  is  like  a  ship,  which 
varies  in  class  according  to  its 
original  construction,  and  which 
descends  in  class  by  age  and  wear 
and  tear  and  general  deteriora- 
tion. A  tenant  is  not  allowed  to 
say,  "  I  found  the  house  out  of  re- 
pair and  therefore  I  left  it  out  of 
repair,  or  put  it  into  imperfect  re- 
pair." But  he  is  allowed  to  show 
that  either  by  original  construc- 
tion, or  by  lapse  of  time,  the  house 
was  one  of  class  C,  and  not  one  of 
class  A  ;  and  that  he  had  done  to 
it  such  repairs  of  an  accessory 
character,  such  as  fittings  and  the 
Uke,  as  were  suitable  to  class  C, 
and  such  repairs  of  a  substantial 
and  structural  character  as  were 
sufficient  to  keep  it  in  that  class  as 
far  as  possible.  To  do  anything 
more  would  be  to  raise  the  house 
to  a  different  class.  See  Harris  v. 
Jones,  1  M.  &  Eob.  173,  and  Gut- 


teridge  v.  Maynard,  id.  334,  336, 
where  Tindal,  C.  J. ,  says :  ' '  "Where 
a  very  old  building  is  demised,  and 
the  lessee  enters  into  a  covenant  to 
repair,  it  is  not  meant  that  the  old 
building  is  to  be  ^festored  in  a  re- 
newed form  at  the  end  of  the  term, 
or  of  greater  value  than  it  was  at 
the  commencemefnt  of  the  term. 
What  the  natural  operation  of  time 
flowing  on  effects,  and  all  that  the 
elements  bring  about  in  diminish- 
ing the  value,  constitute  a  loss, 
which,  so  far  as  results  from  time 
and  nature,  falls  on  the  landlord." 
The  doctrine  of  Payne  v.  Haine, 
ante,  is  peculiarly  difficult  of  ap- 
phcation  in  the  case  of  assignees  of 
a  term,  where  the  original  lease 
contained  covenants  to  repair. 
Each  assignee  is  only  liable  for 
breach  of  covenant  committed  dur- 
ing his  own  holding.  But  if  he  is 
JDOund,  not  only  to  keep  the  prem- 
ises in  as  good  repair  as  he  got 
them,  but  to  put  them  iato  better, 
where  there  is  actual  disrepair,  he 
wiU  in  effect  be  liable  for  all  the 
breaches  of  his  predecessors.  In 
the  case  of  Smith  v.  Peat,  9  Exchq. 
161,  it  is  said  he  might  be  called  to 
prove  the  state  of  the  premises  at 
the  time  of  the  assignment  to  him. 
But  it  is  clear  that  that  dictum 
must  be  taken  with  some  Umita- 
tion. 

'  Neale  v.  Ratclifif,  15  Q.  B.  916 ; 
Coward  v.  Gregory,  L.  R. ,  2  C.  P. 
153  ;  36  L.  J.  C.  P.  1.  See,  as  to 
the  tenant's  right  to  timber,  Bris- 
tol (Dean  and  Chapter)  v.  Jones,  1 
E.  &  E.  484  ;  58  L.  S.  Q.  B.  201. 


882  EePAIRS.  [§  390. 

one  part  would,  it  seems,  entitle  to  an  action  for  the  non- 
performance of  the  corresponding  part  of  the  covenant.' 
Where  one  count  of  a  declaration  stated  an  agreement 
by  plaintiff  and  defendant  to  take  certain  premises 
subject  to  a  covenant  to  repair,  and  alleged  non-repair ; 
the  second  count  stated,  that  in  consideration  that 
defendant  was  tenant  to  plaintiff  of  a  certain  other  mes- 
suage, he  promised  to  use  it  in  a  tenant-like  manner, 
laying  as  a  breach  that  he  had  made  holes  in  the  walls, 
&c. ;  one  demise  only  as  to  one  h6use  was  proved  ;  it  was 
held  that  damages  could  not  be  recovered  on  both  counts, 
as  they  must  be  taken  to  refer  to  different  messuages." 

Sec.  390.  Action  against  the  lessor.— Covenants  to  repair 
on  the  part  of  the  lessor  present  no  distinction  as  to  the 
amount  of  damages  that  may  be  recovered.  In  an  action 
by  the  "tenant  on  such  a  covenant,  it  was  held  that  he 
could  not  recover,  as  special  damage,  rent,  taxes,  and 
other  sums  laid  out  upon  a  house  into  which  the  plaintiff 
was  forced  to  move  while  his  own  was  uninhabitable. 
Because,  although  the  defendant  covenanted  to  repair, 
he  did  not  covenant  to  find  him  another  house  while  the 
repairs  were  going  on,  any  more  than  he  would  have 
been  bound  to  do  so  if  the  premises  had  been  consumed 
by  fire.'    But  an  allowance  might  be  made    for   the 

'  Neale  v.  Ratcliff,  15  Q.  B.  916.  contract  for  the  lease  of  land  for  a 
'  Holford  V.  Dunnett,  7  M.  &  W.  term  of  years,  it  was  agreed  that 
348.  A  lessor  of  land  for  a  speci-  the  lessor  should  clear  out  a  ditch 
fled  annual  ground  rent  cove-  on  the  land,  and  that  the  lessee 
nanted  in  the  lease  to  build  upon  should  clear  a  portion  of  the  land, 
it  within  a  stated  time  and  to  let  erect  certain  fences,  pay  the  taxes, 
the  building  to  the  lessee  of  the  &c.  To  an  action  by  the  lessor 
land  at  a  certain  rent.  The  lease  upon  the  lease,  alleging  a  failure 
further  provided  that  if  the  lessor  on  the  part  of  the  lessee  to  dis- 
"  shall  decline  toeiectsaid  build-  charge  his  covenant,  the  defend- 
ing "  within  the  specified  time,  "  it  ant,  for  a  defence,  set  up  that  the 
is  agreed  that"  the  lessee  "may  plaintiff  had  failed  for  15  months 
go  forward  and  erect  the  same."  to  clear  out  the  ditch,  as  he  agreed. 
Held  in  an  action  by  the  lessee  for  for  wlaich  cause  the  defendant  had 
a  breach  of  the  covenant,  that  the  abandoned  the  land  and  the  lease, 
latter  stipulation  was  not  a  full  de-  Held,  that  the  answer  was  no  bar 
fence,  and  that  it  could  not  be  re-  to  the  suit,  no  damages  being  al- 
lied on  in  reduction  of  damages  if  leged  to  have  resulted  from  the 
the  jury  should  find  that  the  lessor  failure  of  the  plaintiff  to  perform  his 
had  thrown  obstacles  in  the  way  covenant.  The  agreement  of  the  les- 
of  the  reasonable  performance  of  sor  was  not  a  condition  precedent, 
the  le;s2e's  stipulated  rights.  Ed-  Handschy  v.  Sutton,28Ind.  159. 
wards  v.  Gale,  53  Me.  360.     In  a         «  Green  v.  Eales,  2  Q.  B.  225. 


CHAP,  xxs V.J  Repaies..  883 

additional  time  during  which  he  was  oUiged  to  be  in 
another  house,  on  account  of  defendant's  delay  in  com- 
mencing repairs.  Where  the  defendant  covenants  to 
repair  part  of  the  premises  only,  injury  done  to  the  other 
parts  by  the  non-repair  of  the  former  may  be  recovered, 
if  it  resulted  from  neglect  on  the  plaintiff's  part.'  It  was 
ruled  in  one  case,  that  if  the  premises  became  more  out 
of  repair  after  the  commencement  of  the  action  the  jury 
might  consider  this  in  assessing  damages. "  This  of  course 
applies  only  where  the  defendant  is  still  liable. 

Sec.  391.  Effect  of  entire  destruction  of  the  estate.— But 
the  rule  is  otherwise  if  the  estate  is  entirely  destroyed  ; 
as,  if  the  land  is  entirely  gained  upon  by  the  sea,  or  is 
swallowed  up  by  an  earthquake,  or  other  casualty.  Thus, 
if  a  person  leases  the  upper  story  of  a  building,  or  a  cellar, 
for  a  term,  and  it  is  blown  down,  or  destroyed  by  fire, 
his  entire  estate  ceases,  and  there  is  nothing  from  which 
the  rent  can  issue,  as  he  has  no  interest  in  the  land  upon 
which  the  building  stood,  and,  as  his  entire  estate  in  the 
premises  is  destroyed,  he  is,  from  that  time,  relieved 
from  all  liability  for  rent,  because  all  his  interest  as  lessee 
is  gone."  But  so  long  as  the  estate  remains,  and  there  is 
anything  left  out  of  which  the  rent  can  issue,  his  liability 
therefor  remains,  although  he  is  deprived  of  its  beneficial 
enjoyment,  either  by  public  enemies,*  the  act  of  the 
government, °  or  the  agency  of  the  elements."    Thus,  if 

'  Green  v.  Eales,  3  Q.  B.  335.  taken  away  from  the  tenant,  the 
*  Shortbridge  v.  Lampleigh,  3  rent  ought  to  be  abated  or  appor- 
Ld.  Eaym.  803.  tioned,  because  the  title  to  the  rent 
2  In  Womack  v.  McQuarry,  38  is  founded  upon  the  presumption 
Ind.  103,  it  was  held  that  when  a  that  the  tenant  enjoyed  the  thing 
lease,, or  contract  for  a  lease,  re-  during  the  contract."  Baker  v. 
lates  to  a  part  of  a  building,  as  an  Holtzapffell,  4  Taunt.  45  ;  Stock- 
upper  story,  or  a  cellar,  its  destruc-  well  V.  Hunter,  11  Met.  (Mass.) 
tion  by  fire,  or  any  cause,  relieves  448 ;  McMillan  v.  Solomon,  43  Ala. 
the  tenant  from  liability  for  the  356 ;  Buerger  v.  Boyd,  25  Ark. 
rent,  because  there  is  nothing  left  441  :  Austin  v.  Field,  7  Abb.  Pr. 
waon  which  the  demise  can  operate.  N.  S.  (N.  Y.)  39. 


See,  also,  to  the  same  effect.  Graves  ^  Paradine  v.  Jones,  Alleyn,  27  ; 

■V.  Berdan,  36  N.  Y.  498  ;   Winton  Wagner  v.   White,  4  Har.   &  J. 

V.  Cornish,  5  Ohio,  303  ;  Freeland  (Md.)  564  ;  Coy  v.  Downie,  14  Fla. 

V.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  701  ;  Kerr  v.  Mer-  544. 

chants'  Exchange  Ins.  Co. ,  3  Edw.  *  Harrison  v.  North,  1  Ch.  Cas.  84. 

Ch.  (N.  Y.)  815.    In  7th  Bacon's  «  Carter  v.  Cumins,  cited  1  Ch. 

Abr.  p.  63,  it  is  said  :    "  If  the  use  Cas.  84;   Trapnall  v.  Merrick,   31 

of  the  thing  be  entirely  lost,  or  Ark.  503.    Thus,  where  the  cellar 


884  Eepairs.  [§  392. 

land  is  completely  covered  with  water  by  an  inundation, 
and  permanently  remains  so  covered,  yet,  as  the  estate 
still  exists,  the  tenant  must  pay  the  rent,  although  he  is 
deprived  of  all  beneficial  use  thereof,  by  reason  of  the 
presence  of  the  water  upon  it.' 

Sec.  392.  Furnished  houses  or  apartments.— A  different 
rule  prevails  as  to  a  lease  of  a  furnished  house ;  and  as  to 
those,  it  is  held,  that  there  is  an  impUed  condition  or 
obUgation  that  the  house  is  in  a  fit  state  to  be  inhabited." 
In  the  case  last  referred  to,  the  defendant  rented  of  the 
plaintiff  a  furnished  house  for  five  or  gix  weeks  at  a 
weekly  rent  of  eight  guineas,  the  option  as  to  whether 
the  lease  should  endure  for  five  or  six  weeks  being  with 
the  defendant.  The  rent  was  to  commence  on  the  15th 
of  September,  and  on  the  22d,  the  defendant,  having  pre- 
viously given  the  plaintiff  notice  of  his  intention  to  do  so, 
moved  out  and  delivered  up  the  keys,  and  moved  to 
another  residence.  In  an  action  to  recover  the  rent  for 
the  whole  term,  the  defence  was,  that  the  house  was  so 
infested  with  vermin  as  to  be  unfit  for  occupancy.  Lokd 
Abestgeb,  0.  B.,  instructed  the,  jury  that,  "in  point  of 
law,  every  house  must  be  taken  to  be  let  upon  the  implied 
condition  that  there  was  nothing  about  it  so  noxious  as 
to  render  it  uninhabitable,  and  that  if  they  believed  that , 
the  defendant  left  the  plaintiff's  house  on  account  of  the 
nuisance  occasioned  by  these  vermin  being  so  intolerable 
as  to  render  it  impossible  that  he  could  live  in  it  with  any 
reasonable  comfort,  they  ought  to  find  a  verdict  for  the 
defendant."  Upon  a  rule  for  a  new  trial  this  ruling  was 
sustained,  so  far  as  it  applied  to  a  lease  of  furnished 
houses.     The  doctrine  of  this  case  was  predicated  upon 

and  lower  story  of  a  building  was  see  is  for  a  part  of  the  term  de- 
rendered  untenantable  by  reason  prived  of  their  use  by  an  accidental 
of  water  filling  the  lower  story,  injury,  or  even  by  the  entry  of  the 
and  depositing  mud,  &c.,  therein,  landlord  to  make  necessary  repairs, 
it  was  held  that  the  tenant  was  not  does  not  reheve  the  tenant  from 
entitled  to  any  abatement  from  the  liability    for   the    rent.     Peck    v. 
rent  for  the  full  term.     Neidelt  v.  Ledwidge,   25  111.  109 ;  Pindar  v. 
Wales,  16  Mo.  214.     So,  where  the  Aiasl&y,  1  T.  R.  313. 
building  is  destroyed  by  fire,  and  •  1  EoUe's  Abr.  236  (C). 
there  is  no  covenant  on  the  land-  '  Smith  v.   Marrable,    11  M.   & 
lord's   part  to   rebuild,  White  v.  W.  5. 
Molyneaux,  2  Ga.  134,  or  the  les- 


CHAP.  XXXV.  J 


Repaies. 


885 


the  authority  of  some  nisi  privs  cases/  which  have  been 
strictly  overruled  ; '  and  the  doctrine  of  Smith  v.  Marrable 
was  greatly  shaken  by  the  cases  last  cited,  and  held  unten- 
able, except,  perhaps,  as  applied  to  the  lease  of  a  furnished 
house,  and  sustainable  only  in  that  respect,  upon  the 
ground  that  the  contract  is  of  a  mixed  nature,  being  for 
a  house  and  sufficient  and  comfortable  furniture. '    When 


'  Edwards  v.  Etherington,  Ey. 
&  M.  26B  ;  Cullins  t.  Barrow,  1  M. 
&  Eob.  113 ;  Salisbury  v.  Marshall, 
4  C.  &  P.  65.  In  the  case  of  White 
V.  Montgomery,  decided  by  the 
Supreme  Court  of  Georgia,  April 
10th,  1877,  the  doctrine  of  this 
case  was  followed,  in  its  most  ex- 
tended sense,  but  was  predicated 
upon  the  provisions  of  the  statute. 
In  that  case,  the  court  say  :  "It 
is  the  duty  of  the  landlord,  when 
he  rents  a  tenement  to  a  tenant  at 
full  price,  to  make  it  suitable  for 
the  purpose  for  which  it  is  rented, 
unless  the  tenant  knows  as  much 
about  its  condition  as  he  does ;  and 
he  must,  upon  notice  of  any  de- 
fect, keep  it  by  repairs  in  such 
condition  as  to  be  suitable  for  such 
use.  The  tenant  is  not  the  agent 
of  the  landlord,  in  the  sense  that 
the  latter  is  responsible  for  the 
damages  which  result  to  third  per- 
sons from  the  illegal  or  neghgent 
use  of  the  rented  premises  by  the 
latter ;  the  landlord  is  responsible 
for  any  damage  which  may  flow 
from  the  defective  structure  of  the 
tenement  or  from  his  failure  to 
ke^  it  in  proper  repair ;  but  if  it 
be  properly  constructed  and  kept 
by  the  landlord  in  proper  repair, 
the  tenant  alone  is  responsible  for 
his  bad  or  negligent  use  of  a  thing 
good  in  itself  and  kept  good  by  the 
landlord,  but  made  bad  and  work- 
ing damage  by  the  tenant's'  im- 
proper or  negligent  use  of  it. 
Therefore,  if  a  landlord  rent  dif- 
ferent tenements  in  the  same  build- 
ing to  different  tenants,  and  the 
store-room  rented  to  one  tenant 
is  under  rooms  used  as  a  hotel 
rented  to  another,  and  immedi- 
ately over  the  store-room  there  is 
a  water-closet  properly  construct- 
ed, and  kept  in  proper  repair  by 
the  landlord,  but  so  improperly  or 
negligently  used  by  the  occupants 
of  the  hotel  as  to  cause  damage  to 
II.— 4 


the  goods  in  the  store  below,  the 
tenant  of  the  hotel  is  responsible 
for  the  damage  to  his  co-tenant  of 
the  store-room,  and  the  landlord 
is  not."  See,  also,  Scott  v.  Sim- 
ons, 54  N.  ■  H.  426,  where  it  was 
held  that  a  landlord  is  liable  for 
injuries  resulting  to  his  tenant  if 
the  house  is  negligently  construct- 
ed, or  he  carelessly  permits  it  to 
remain  in  a  state  of  disrepair. 
■  ^  Hart  V.  Windsor,  12  M.  &  W. 
68 ;  Sutton  V.  Temple,  12  id.  52. 

'Opinion  of  Parke,  B.,  in  Sut- 
ton V.  Temple,  12  M.  &  W.  65 ; 
also  in  Hart  v.  "Windsor,  12  id.  87. 
In  the  former  case,  he  says :  "As 
to  the  case  of  Smith  v.  Marrable, 
it  is  suflBciently  distinguished  from 
the  present  case,  on  the  ground  on 
which  the  Lord  Chief  Baron  has 
put  it,  that  there,  the  contract  was 
of  a  mixed  nature,  being  a  bargain 
for  a  house  and  furniture,  which 
was  necessarily  to  Le  such  as  was 
fit  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was 
to  be  used.  It  resembles  the  case 
of  a  ready  furnished  room  in  a, 
hotel,  which  is  hired  on  the  un- 
derstanding that  it  shall  be  rea- 
sonably fit  for  immediate  habitar 
tion.  In  such  case,  the  bargain  is 
not  so  much  for  the  house  as  the 
furniture,  and  it  is  well  understood 
that  the  house  is  to  be  supplied 
with  fit  and  proper  furniture,  and 
that  if  it  be  defective,  the  landlord 
is  bound  to  replace  it."  The  doc- 
trine is  re-aflflrmed  in  the  case  of 
Wilson  et  al.  v.  Finch  Hatton,  L. 
E.,  3  Exch.  D.  336,  in  which  the 
defendant  agreed  to  rent  the  plaint- 
iff's furnished  house  for  three 
months,  from  the  7th  of  May,  but 
having  at  the  beginning  of  the  in- 
tended tenancy  discovered  that 
the  house  was,  owing  to  defective 
drainage,  unfit  for  habitation,  re- 
fused to  occupy.  The  plaintiffs 
repaired  the  drainSf  and  on  the 
26th  of  Hay  tendered  the  house  in 


886 


Eepairs. 


[§  392. 


the  landlord  is  under  obligation  to  repair,  whether  this 
obUgation  arises  by  express  contract  or  operation  of  law, 
unless  he  does  so  before  the  term  commences — when  the 
term  is  to  commence  infiduro,  and  there  is  a  reasonable 
time  for  him  to  repair — it  is  held  by  a  late  English  case 
that  the  tenant  is  absolved  from  his  contract ; '  but  if  he 
has  entered  into  possession,  he  must  give  the  landlord 
notice  to  repair,  and  unless  he  does  so  within  a  reasonable 
time,  must  make  the  repairs  himself,  or  cause  them  to  be 
made,  and  deduct  the  expense  from  the  rent ;  or  he  may 
bring  an  action  against  him  to  recover  the  amount,  if  the 
rent  is  not  sufficient  to  cover  the  expense ; '  and  according 
to  the  doctrine  of  some  Enghsh  cases,  he  is  not  liable  for 
rent  until  the  repairs  are  made,"  provided  the  jury  find 
that  the  contract  to  pay  rent  is  not  absolute,  but  condi- 
tional upon  the  repairs  being  made."  But  the  tenant  can- 
not, upon  that  ground,  abandon  possession  and  absolve 
himself  from  Uability  for  rent  for  the  balance  of  the 
term,  but  must  make    the    repairs  himself    within    a 


a  wholesome  condition  to  tlie  de- 
fendant, who  refused  to  occupy  or 
to  pay  the  rent.  The  plaintiffs 
having  sued  for  the  rent  and  for 
use  and  occupation,  the  court  held 
that,  in  an  agreement  of  this  kind, 
there  is  an  impUed  condition  that 
the  house  shall  be  fit  for  occupa- 
tion at  the  time  at  which  the  ten- 
ancy is  to  begin,  and  if  the  con- 
dition is  not  fulfilled,  the  lessee  is 
entitled  thereupon  to  rescind  the 
contract ;  and  that  the  state  of  the 
house  in  question,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  intended  tenancy,  entitled 
defendant  to  rescind  ;  and  that 
he  was  not  liable  for  the  rent  or 
for  use  and  occupation.  In  the 
case  of  Button  v.  Gerrish,  11  Cush. 
(Mass.)  89,  Shaw,  J.,  says  that  in 
the  case  of  furnished  rooms  in  a 
lodging-house,  let  for  a  particular 
season,  a  warranty  may  be  im- 
phed  that  they  are  suitably  fitted 
for  such  use.  See,  also,  Campbell 
V.  Wenlock,  4  F.  &  F.  716.  In 
TuUy  V.  HowUng,  L.  E.,  3  Q.  B. 
D.  183,  the  same  principle  was  ap- 
plied to  a  contract  for  the  charter 
of  a  ship.  See,  however,  Francis 
V.  Cockerm,  E.  E.,  5  Q.  B.  501; 
Jones  V.  Just,  L.  E.,  3  Q.  B.  197  ; 


Keates  v.  Earl  Cadogan,  10  C.  B. 
591 ;  Surplice  v.  Famsworth,  8 
Scott  (N.  E.)  307  ;  Heard  v.  Cam- 
plin,  15  L.  T.  (O.  S.)  437  ;  Searle  v. 
Laverick,  L.  E.,  9  Q.  B.  133  ;  Hart 
V.  Windsor,  13  M.  &  W.  68 ;  West- 
lake  V.  DeGraw,  25  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
669 ;  Foster  v.  Peyser,  11  Cush. 
(Mass.)  343  ;  McGIashan  v.  TaU- 
madge,  37  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  313 ;  Mur- 
ray V.  Mace,  Ir.  Rep.,  8  C.  L.  396., 

'  Wilson  T.  Finch  Hatton,  L.  E., 
3  Exchq.  Div.  343. 

« In  Green  v.  Eales,  3  Q.  B.  335, 
it  was  held  that  where  the  land- 
lord, upon  request,  refuses  to  re- 
pair, the  tenant  may  go  on  at  ohce 
and  repair.  It  was  also  held  that 
he  could  recover  of  the  landlord  no 
more  than  the  expense  of  repairs, 
and  could  not  recover  in  addition 
thereto  the  expense  of  fitting  up 
quarters  elsewhere,  or  the  rent  of 
other  premises,  while  the  premises 
were  being  repaired. 

2  Mechlen  v.  Wallace,  7  Ad.  &  El. 
54,  n. ;  Vaughn  v.  Hancock,  3  C. 
B.  766. 

■•  LoBX)  Kbnyon,  C.  J. ,  in  Mechlen 
v.  Wallace,  ante.  In  Wood  v. 
Clarke,  7  Q.  B.  311. 


CHAP.  xxxv.J  Eepaies.  887 

reasonable  time,  or  bring  an  action  against  the  landlord 
for  damages  resulting  from  the  breach  of  his  contract. 
But  if  the  payment  of  rent  is  conditional  upon  the  land- 
lord making  repairs,  even  though  the  tenant  has  entered, 
there  is  no  present  demise  created,  but  only  a  conditional 
one,  that  becomes  operative  when  the  condition  precedent 
is  performed. '  The  question  as  to  whether  the  instrument 
under  which  the  tenant  enters  is  to  be  treated  as  a  lease, 
or  merely  as  an  agreement  for  one,  depends  upon  the 
intention  of  the  parties,  to  be  gathered  from  the  whole 
instrument,"  and  is  a  question  for  the  jury.' 

Sec.  393.  TTo  implied  covenants  to  repair  by  tenant. — No 
covenant  or  promise  as  to  repairs,  upon  the  part  of  the 
tenant,  can  be  implied  where  there  is  any  express  stipu- 
lation on  the  subject,*  but  an  express  covenant  or  promise 
may  sometimes  be  insufficient  to  exclude  the  custom  of 
the  country  to  use  the  premises  in  a  tenant-like  manner. 
Where  buildings  and  land  are  leased  without  any  express 
stipulation  as  to  repairs,  cultivation,  &c.,  a  covenant  or 
promise  on  the  part  of  the  lessee  is  implied  by  law,  that 
he  will  use  the  premises  in  a  tenant-like  and  proper 
manner, ""  and  that  he  will  manage  and  cultivate  the  lands 
in  a  good  and  husband-like  manner  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  country;  but  not  that  he  wiU  spend  a  certain 
quantity  of  manure  thereon,  or  keep  the  buildings  in 
repair ;  or  any  other  special  stipulation  not  arising  out  of 
the  bare  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant.'  In  declaring 
on  such  implied  covenants  the  particulars  of  the  alleged 
custom  should  not  be  stated,  but  only  any  breaches  of  it ; ' 
or  the  breaches  may  be  alleged  in  general  terms ;  as,  that 

'  Gore  V.  Lloyd,  12  M.  &  W.  463  ;  '  Morrison  v.  Chadwick,  7  C.  B. 

Wood  V.  Clarke,  ante.  366  ;    6  D.   &    L.   567  ;   White  v. 

«  Bacon    v.   Bowdoin,    23  Pick.  Nicholson,  4  M.  &  G.  95. 

(Mass.),  401 ;  Jackson  v.  Delacroix,  «  Brown  v.  Crump,  6 Taunt.  300  ; 

2  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  433 ;    Curhng  v.  Granger  v.    ColUns,  6  M.    &   W. 

Mills,  7  Scott,  N.  R.  709.  461. 

*  Mechlen  v.  Wallace,  7  Ad.   &  ■■  Angerstein  v.  Handson,  1  C.  M. 

El.  54.  &  R.  789  ;  Leigh  v.  Hewitt,  4  East, 

"  Merrill  v.  Frame,  4  Taunt.  339  ;  154 ;    Powley  v.  Walker,  5  T.  R. 

Line  v.  Stephenson,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  373  ;  Harris  v.  Mantle,  3  T.  R,  307  ; 

678 ;  5  id.  183  ;    Messent  v.  Reyn-  Martin  v  Gilham,  7  Ad,  &  El.  540. 
olds,    3   C.    B. .  194 ;   Standen   v. 
Chrismas,  10  B.  B.  135. 


888  EepaIES.  [§  394. 

the  defendant  did  not  cultivate  aqpording  to  the  custom 
of  the  country,  without  specifying  the  particular 
instances.'  If  the  breach  assigned  is,  "that  the  defend- 
ant has  not  used  the  demised  premises,  or  any  part 
thereof,  in  a  good  and  husband  like  manner,  but  on  the 
contrary  thereof  has  committed  waste,"  the  plaintiff 
cannot  give  evidence  of  the  defendant's  using  the  farm 
in  an  unhusband-Kke  manner,  if  it  does  not  amount  to 
waste."  On  a  declaration  alleging  that  the  defendant, 
being  tenant  to  the  plaintiff,  cut  down  and  destroyed 
trees  on  the  premises,  and  otherwise  used  the  premises  in 
so  untenantable  and  improper  a  manner  that  they  thereby 
became,  and  were  and  are,  dilapidated  and  in  bad  and 
untenantable  condition,  the  plaintiff  cannot  recover  for 
permissive  waste.' 

Sec.  394.  Proof  of  custom.— A  strict  legal  custom  from 
time  immemorial  need  not  be  proved,  but  only  the  pre- 
vailing course  of  good  husbandry  and  management  in  the 
neighborhood,  and  a  breach  or  breaches  thereof.*  The 
onus  of  proving  any  custom  lies  upon  the  party  claiming 
under  it.'  The  witnesses  to  prove  it  must  speak  to  facts, 
and  not  to  mere  matter  of  opinion."  A  custom  at  one 
place  wiU  not  extend  to  another  place  some  miles  distant, 
unless  shown  by  evidence  to  extend  to  that  place  also ; ' 
nor  will  a  custom  confined  to  any  particular  estate,  how- 
ever large,  be  sufficient. " 

Sec.  395.  To  what  tenancies  applicable.— Where  a  custom 
of  the  country  is  proved  to  exist,  it  wiU  be  considered 
apphcable  to  all  tenancies  in  whatever  way  created, 
whether  orally,  or  by  writing,  or  even  by  deed,  unless 

>  Martyn  v.  Clue,  18  Q.  B.  662 ;  *  Leigh  v.  Hewitt,  4  East,  J54  ; 

Earl  of  Falmouth  v.  Thom9,s,  1  Cr.  Dalby  v.  Hirst,  1  Brod.  &  B.  224 ; 

&  M.  89.  Senior  v.  Armytage,  Holt,  N.  P. 

2  Harris  v.  Maatle,  3  T.  R.  307.  C.  197. 

The  words   "but  on  the  contrary  '  Caldecott  v.  Smythies,  7  C.  & 

thereof "    always  may   and   gen-  P.  808. 

erally  should  be  avoided.     Edge  v.  "  Henderson  v.  Chamock,  Peake, 

Pemberton,  12  M.  &  W.  187 ;  1  D.  4. 

&  L.    467  ;  Carpenter  v.  Parker,  3  '  Brown  v.  Wilkinson,  Co.  Lit. 

C.  B.  N.  S.  207.  270  b,  note  (228). 

3  Martin  v,  Gilham,  7  Ad.  &  El.  «  Wormersley  v.  Dally,  26  L.  J. 
540.  Ex.  219. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EEPAIRS.  889 

expressly  or  impliedly  excluded  by  the  terms  actually 
agreed  on.'  But  if  the  lease  or  agreement  contains  terms 
or  stipulations  which  are  inconsistent  with  the  custom  of 
the  country,  such  custom  will  be  excluded  upon  the 
principle  expressum  facit  cessare  taciturn.''  If,  however, 
the  custom  and  stipulations  of  the  lease  or  agreement  are 
not  wholly  inconsistent  with  each  other,  both  of  them 
may  sometimes  prevail. '  Whether  the  custom,  as  proved, 
are  or  are  not  excluded  by  the  terms  of  the  contract,  is  a 
question  of  law  for  the  court.* 

Sec.  396.  Covenants  to  repair.— When  implied.— Some- 
times a  covenant  as  to  repairs,  cultivation,  &c.,  maybe 
imphed  from  words  used  in  other  covenants  in  the  lease, 
or  from  the  recitals.  But  such  covenants  are  implied  and 
found  as  matter  of  fact,  and  are  not  covenants  implied  by 
law  from  the  mere  relation  of  the  parties  as  landlord  and 
tenant.  In  declaring  on  a  covenant  of  this  nature,  it  is 
proper  to  plead  it  the  same  as  if  the  deed  actually  con- 
tained an  express  covenant  to  that  effect,"  and  the  same 
rule  prevails  where  the  contract  is  not  under  seal,  and  some 
promise  is  to  be  implied  in  addition  to  the  express  stipula- 
tions." In  such  cases,  if  the  plaintiff  omits  to  state  the 
implied  covenant  or  stipulation  he  cannot  allege  any 
breach  of  it,  or  the  declaration  wiU  be  bad  in  arrest  of 
judgment.'  It  would  be  improper  to  declare  upon  the 
express  contract,  and  upon  the  implied  covenant  or 
promise,  in  two  counts,  as  though  they  were  two  distinct 
contracts;  the  plaintiff  could  not  recover  under  both 
counts,  there  being  only  one  contract." 

'  Cole  Ejec.  249.  -^  Hall  v .   Betty,  4  M.  &  G.  410 

'■  Webbv.  Hummer,  3  B.  &  Aid.  Woolley  v.   Eedilieu,  5  M.   &  G. 

746  ;    Roberts  v.  Barker,  1   Cr.  &  316  ;  WUliams  v.  Taylor,  5  Q.  B. 

M.  808  ;  Clarke  v.  Eoystone,  13  M.  175  ;  Courteney  v.  Taylor,  6  M.  & 

&  W.  753.  G.  851 ;  WUls  v.  Murray,  4  Exch. 

8  Hutton  V.  "Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  843  ;  Rashleigh  v.  The  South  East- 

466;  Holding  v.   Pigott,  7  Bing.  emR.  Co.,  IOC.  B.  313. 

465  ;   Sutton  v.  Temple,  13  M.  &  '  Callander  v.  Oelrichs,  5  Bing. 

W.  63 ;  Faviell  v.  Gaskoin,  7  Exch.  N.  C.  58 ;  Messent  v.  Reynolds,  3 

273  ;  Muncey  v.  Dennis,  1  H.  &  N.  C.  B.  194 ;  Mosley  v.  Attenborough, 

316  ;  White  t.  Nicholson,  4  M.  &  3  Exch.  500  (1st  count) ;  Eldertonv. 

G.  95;  Martyn  V.  Clue,  18  Q.  B.  Emmens,6C.B.  160  ;5D.  &L.  489. 

661,  683.  ■■  Dunn  v.  Sayles,  5  Q.  B.  685. 

*  Parker  v.  Ibbitson,  4  C.  B.  N.  "  Holford  v.  Dunnett,  7  M.  &  "W. 

S.  846.  348  ;  Deere  v.  Ivey,  4  Q.  B.  379. 


890  Eepairs.  ,  [§S9T. 

Where  a  person  is  let  into  possession  under  a  mere 
agreement  for  a  future  lease  (not  amounting  to  an -actual 
demise),  he  becomes  a  mere  tenant  at  wUl :  but  when  he 
pays,  or  expressly  agrees  to  pay,  any  part  of  the  annual 
rent  therein  mentioned,  his  tenancy  at  will  changes  into 
a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  upon  -the  terms  of  the  intend- 
ed lease,  so  far  as  they  are  applicable  to  and  not  incon- 
sistent with  a  yearly  tenancy.'  So  where  a  person  is  let 
into  possession  under  a  twd  lease,  as  a  lease  for  more  than 
three  years  not  made  by  deed,  and  pays,  or  expressly 
agrees  to  pay,  any  part  of  the  annual  rent  therein  expressed 
to  be  reserved,  he  becomes  a  tenant  from  year  to  year? 
upon  the  terms  of  such  lease,  so  far  as  they  are  applicable 
to  and  not  inconsistent  with  a  yearly  tenancy.'  So  where 
a  tenant  holds  over  after  the  expiration  of  his  lease,  he 
becomes  a  tenant  on  sufferance ;  hut  when  he  pays,  or 
expressly  agrees  to  pay,  any  subsequent  rent,  at  the  previ- 
ous rate,  a  new  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  thereby  created, 
upon  the  same  terms  and  conditions  as  those  contained 
in  the  expired  lease,  so  far  as  the  same  are  applicable  to 
and  not  inconsistent  with  a  yearly  tenancy.'  But  it 
may  be  otherwise  where  the  parties  to  the  express  and 
implied  leases  are  different.  Where  a  remainder-man 
accepts  rent  under  a  lease  granted  by  the  previous  tenant' 
for  life,  which  became  void  on  the  death  of  such  tenant 
for  life,  or  at  the  end  of  the  then  current  year  of  the 
tenancy,  a  new  imphed  tenancy  from  year  to  year  on  the 
old  ter-ms  is  thereby  created.  So  where  a  mortgagee 
compels  a  subsequent  tenant  of  the  mortgagor  to  attorn 
to  him,  a  new  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  thereby  created 
between  them  upon  the  terms  of  the  previous  lease,  so  far 
as  they  are  applicable  to  a  yearly  tenancy. 

Sec.  397.  How  to  declare  on  a  new  implfed  tenancy.— The 
proper  mode  of  declaring  for  the  breach  of  any  such 
implied  stipulation  is  to  allege,  that  the  defendant  became, 
and  was  tenant  from  year  to  year,  to  the  plaintiff,  of  the 

'  Tempest  v.  Eawling.  13  East.  18.  *  Johnson  v.  The  Churchwardens 

-  Arden  v  Sulhvan,  14  Q.  B.  832  ;  of  St.  Peter,  Hereford,  4  Ad.  &  El 

Davenish  v,  Moffatt,  15  Q.  B.  357.  530,  556 :  Oakley  v.  Monck,  3  H  & 

2  Digby  V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  375.  C.  706. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  Repairs.  891 

property  (describing  it  concisely)  upon  the  terms  {amongst 
others)  that  [&c.j,  stating  only  the  particular  stipulations 
broken,  and  alleging  a  breach  or  breaches  thereof."  It  is 
not  necessary  to  state  the  whole  of  the  agreement,  if  the 
part  omitted  does  not  quahfy  that  which  is  stated."  But 
any  part  which  qualifies  that  which  is  stated  must  not  be 
omitted.'  An  agreement  by  the  tenant  to  leave  a  farm 
as  he  found  it  has  been  held  to  be  an  agreement  to  leave 
it  in  tenantable  repair,  if  he  found  it  so,  and  will  maintain 
a  declaration  so  laid.* 

Sec.  398.  Implied  liability  of  tenant  at  will,  or  from  year 
to  year,  as  to  repairs.— In  the  absence  of  any  express  or 
implied  stipulation  on  the  subject,  a  tenant  at  wiU,  or  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year,  is  not  liable  to  general  repairs  ; 
nor  for  permisswe  waste ;  nor  to  make  good  mere  wear 
and  tear  of  the  premises  ;  but  only  to  keep  them  wind 
and  water  tight. ''  He  is  bound  to  commit  no  waste,  and  to 
make  fair  tenantable  repairs,  such  as  putting  in  windows 
or  doors  that  have  been  broken  by  him,  so  as  to  prevent 
waste  and  decay  of  the  premises  ;  but  he  is  not  bound  to 
do  substantial  and  lasting  repairs,  such  as  a  new  roofing, 
&c.'  A  tenant  from  year  to  year  of  farming  premises  is 
bound  by  law  only  to  reasonable  and  tenantable  repairs, 
so  as  to  prevent  waste  or  decay  of  the  premises  ;  and,  in 
the  absence  of  any  express  stipulation,  is  not  bound  to 
substantial  and  lasting  repairs,'  for  the  law  only  implies 
a  contract  to  use  the  farm  in  a  husbandlike  manner, 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  if  there  is  any, 
and  does  not  raise  an  implied  agreement  on  his  part  to 

* 

1  Bidlen  &  L,  PL  173  ;  Tempest  *  Winn  v.  White,  2  W.  Blac.  840. 

V.  Rawling,  13  East,  18 ;  Eichard-  '  Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  C.  &  P. 

son  V.   Giflfotd,   1  Ad.  &  El.  52 ;  327 ;  Torrig,no  v.   Young,  C  C.  & 

Burdett,  Bart.  v.  Withers,  7  Ad.  P.  8 ;  Auworth  v.  Johnson,  5  C. 

&  El.  136  ;   Dietrichsen  V.  Giubilei,  &  P.   239  ;    Horsefall  v.   Mather, 

14  M.  &  W.  845 ;    Massey  v.  Good-  Holt,   N.   P.   C.   7  ;    Countess    of 

all,  17  Q.  B.  810 ;  Bickford  v.  Par-  Shrewsbury's  Case,  5  Co.  E.  13  a; 

son,  5  C.  B.  930 ;  White  v.  Nichol-  Cro.    Eliz.    777,   784 ;    Gibson    v. 

son,  4  M.   &  G.  95;  Johnson    v.  Wells,   1   B.   &   P.   New  E.   290; 

The  Churchwardens  of  St.  Peter,  Martin  v.  Gilham,  7  Ad.  &  El.  540  ; 

Hereford,  4  Ad.  &  El.  520.  Hartnett  v.  Maitland,  16  M.  &  W. 

"  Tempest  v.  Rawling,  13  East,  257. 

18.  "  Ferguson  v. ,  2  Esp.  590. 

'  Horsefall  v.  Testar,   7  Taunt.  '  Ferguson  v. ,  2  Esp.  590. 

385. 


892  Eepairs.  [§399. 

do  any  particular  acts,  or  to  repair  generally."  He  is  not 
liable  for  permissive,  but  only  for  commissive  waste,  and 
as  the  non-repair  of  buildings  is  of  the  former  class,  he 
'is  not  liable  therefor/  Liability  for  permissive  waste  at- 
taches to  tenants  for  lives  or  for  years,'  but  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year,  being  practically  only  a  tenant  at  will,  is 
not  liable  therefor  unless  there  is  an  express  stipulation 
that  he  shall  be." 

Sec.  399.  Remedies  of  landlord  for  non-repair.— By- 
entry  or  ejectment.— As  already  stated,  the  landlord  may 
proceed  against  the  tenant  at  law  for  damages  for  not 
repairing  according  to  his  covenant,'  but  unless  there  is  an 
express  provision  in  the  lease  to  that  effect  he  cannot  re- 
enter or  bring  ejectment  because  of  a  breach,  of  such  cov- 
enant, but  is  confined  to  an  action  for  damages.*  But 
when  there  is  such  a  provision,  either  the  lessor,  his 
representatives  or  assignee  may  re-enter  or  bring  eject- 
ment-if  the  covenant  is  broken  in  any  respect;'  and 
unless*  there  is  a  provision  that  notice  shall  be  given,  he 
may  re-enter  or  bring  ejectment  without  previous  notice 
to  the  tenant  to  repair."    If,  however,  the  lease  contains 

'  Gibson  v.  Wells,  3  B.  &  P.  291 ;  action  of  waste  has  generally  given 

Horsefall  v.  Mather,  Holt,  7.  way  to  an  action  on  the  case  in  the 

^  YeUowley  v.  Gower,  11  Exchq.  nature  of  waste,  and  at  the  common 

394;  Hartnett  v.  Maitland,  16  M.  law   was  confined  to  tenants  by 

&  W.  257  ;  White  v.  Wager,  4  H.  dower  and  curtesy  or  guardian ; 

&  J.  (Md.)  37-3 ;  Sackett  v.  Sack-  but  by  the  statutes  previously  re- 

ett,  8  Pick.  (Mass.)  309 ;  Heme  v.  ferred  to  (see  note  3,  ante),  the  ac- 

Benbaw,  4  Taunt.  764;  Jones  v.  tion  was  extended  to  tenants  for 

HUl,  7  id.  393 ;  Greene  v.  Cole,  3  hfe,  for  years,  and  pur  autre  vie, 

Wms.  Saund.  252.    The  statutes  of  3    Inst.    301,    or    their  assignees. 

Marlbridge  and    Gloucester  have  Saunders  v.   Norwood,   Cro.   Eliz. 

no     application     to     permissive'  683.    See  Waste,  post. 

waste.    The  words  of  the  former  "  See  ante,  p. 

statute  are    ''cpxi  facit  vastum,"  ^  Cole  on  Ejectment,  403,  433; 

and  the  latter  introduces  no  new  Fox  v.   Briscos,   15  Cal.   228.     A 

action  for  this  species  of  wrong,  stipulation  to  quit  on  demand,  if 

It  will  be  observed  that  all  the  any  of  the  covenants  are  broken, 

cases  go  upon  the  distinction  be-  operates  to  give   the   landlord  a 

tween  permissive  and  commissive  right   to   re-enter   for   a   breach, 

waste.    Martin  v.  Gilham,  7  Ad.  Simons  v.  Marshall,  8  Iowa,  502. 

&  El.  540 ;  Torriano  v.  Young,  6  '  Baylis  v.  Le  Gros,  4  C.  B.   N. 

.  C.  &  P.  8.                            .  S.  537 ;  Hills  v.  Morris,  11  L.   J. 

^  See  cases  cited  in  the  last  note.  Exchq.  313  ;  Bennett  v.  Herrihg, 

'  Smith's  Landlord  and  Tenant,  3  C.  B.  N.  S.  370. 


391 ;  Gibson  v.  Wells,  1  N.  R.  290 
Heme  v.  Benbaw,  4  Taunt.  764 
Martin  v.  Gilham,  ante.     The  old 


See  cases  in  last  note,  especially 
Baylis  v.  Le  Gros. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  Repairs.  893 

a  provision  for  re-entry  in  case  of  a  failure  to  repair 
within  a  certain  time  after  notice  from  the  landlord  to  do 
so,  re-entry  cannot  be  made  or  ejectment  brought  until 
notice  has  been  given  and  the  time  specified  in  the  lease 
has  expired,'  unless  the  covenant  as  to  repairs  and 
the  stipulation  as  to  re-entry  are  independent.  As,  if 
there  is  a  general  covenant  to  repair,  and  a  covenant  to 
repair  specific  defects  upon  notice  of  a  certain  duration 
from  the  landlord,  and  a  provision  for  re-entry  upqn  a 
breach  of  any  covenant  in  the  lease,  it  was  held  that  the 
covenants  were  distinct,  and  that  the  landlord  might 
re-enter  for  a  breach  of  the  covenant  to  repair,  without 
previous  notice,"  or  bring  ejectment."  But,  under  such 
a  lease,  if  the  landlord  gives  the  tenant  notice  to  repair 
within  a  certain  time,  he  is  treated  as  waiving  the  for- 
feiture during  such  period,  and  can  neither  re-enter  nor 
bring  ejectment  until  the  period  named  in  the  notice 
has  elapsed  ; '  but  a  notice  to  repair  forthwith  does  not 
have  that  effect."  When  notice  in  required  to  be  given 
it  must  be  given  to  the  lessee  himself,  and  a  notice  served 
upon  his  undertenant  does  not  suffice."  Where  there  is 
a  covenant  to  keep  in  repair,  non-repair  is  a  continuing 
breach.'  Acceptance  of  rent  becoming  due  after  a  notice 
to  repair  is  given,  does  not  operate  as  a  waiver  of  the 
forfeiture ;  °  nor  does  the  acceptance  of  rent,  after  eject- 
ment brought  for  non-repair,  operate  as  a  waiver  of  such 
breach  so  as  to  defeat  the  action.'    Courts  of  equity  will 

'  Rankin  v.  Brindley,  4  B.  &  Ad.  346.      If    a    tenant    after  action 

84.  brought  for  a  breach  of  the  cov- 

*  Baylis  v.  Le  Gros,  ante.  enant  to  repair,   goes   on  and  re- 
'  Goatley  v.  Paine,  3  Camp.  520.  pairs,  the  landlord  is  nevertheless 

*  Morecroft  v.  Meux,  4  B.  &  C.  entitled  to  recover  nominal  dam- 
406  ;  Pitman  v.  Sutton,  9  C.  &  P.  ages  at  least,  and  if  the  repairs  are 
706  ;  Eutzen  v.  Lewis,  5  Ad.  &  El.  not  properly  made,  substantial 
877.  damages.     Moroney  v.  Ferguson, 

'  Goatley  v.  Paine,  ailte.  8  Ir.  C.  L.  551.    Nor  is  the  plaintiff 

*  Sweetman  v.  Cush,  Cro.  Jac.  8  ;  confined  to  nominal  damages,  even 
Cole  on  Ejectment,  433.  though  before  the  end  of  the  term 

'  Bennett  v.  Herring,  3  C.  B.  N.  S.  the  lessor  has  agreed  with  a  third 

370  ;  Block  v.  Ebner,  54  Ind.  544  ;  person  to  grant  him  a  lease  of  the 

Hemmings  v.  Durnf  ord,  3  C.  &  J.  premises  under  the  terms  of  which 

967 ;  Baker  v.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  498.  the  buildings  are  to  be  torn  down. 

» Rankin  v.  Brindley,  4  B.  &  Ad.  Rawlings  v.  Morgan,  18  C.  B.  N. 

84.  S.  776. 

9  Jones  V.    Carter,  15   M.  &  W. 
735  ;  Morecroft  v.  Meux,  1  C.  &  P. 


894 


Repairs, 


[§  400. 


not  specifically  enforce  a  contract  to  repair/  but  they  will 
enforce  a  covenant  to  build,  unless  the  building  is  to  be 
erected  under  the  direction  of  some  person  other  than  the 
parties.' 

Sec.  400.  Damages  recoverable.— A  covenant  by  the  lessor 
to  repair  the  external  parts  of  a  demised  house  comprises 
the  partition  wall  between  it  and  an  adjoining  house ; 
and  where  the  adjoining  house  was  pulled  down  by  other 
persons,  whereby  the  wall  was  damaged,  and  the  lessor 
did  nothing  to  prevent  its  sinking,  and  suffered  it  to  con- 
tinue in  a  ruinous  state,  and  refused  to  repair  it,  he  was 
held  liable  for  the  expenses  the  lessee  was  put  to  in  rebuild- 
ing the  wall,  and  for  glass  broken  by  the  sinking  of  it, 
but  not  for  rent  and  the  expenses  of  the  lessee  for  other 
premises  rented  by  him  while  the  repairs  were  going  on.° 


1  Beck  V.  AUison,  56  N.  Y.  367  ; 
E.  R.  Co.  V.  Watson,  36  Ind.  50 ; 
Paxton  V.  Newton,  3  Sm.  &  Giff. 
437  ;  HUl  v.  Barclay,  16  Ves.  405  ; 
London  v.  Nash,  1  id.  18  ;  Lucas  v. 
Commerford,  3  Bro.  C.  C.  166 ; 
Martin  v.  Holley,  61  Mo.  196  ;  Ran- 
dall V.  Latham,  36  Conn.  48. 

?  Jarman's  Precedents,  407 ; 
Columbia  Water  Co.  v.  Columbia, 
5  S.  C.  235  ;  Nokes  v.  Gibbon,  3 
Drew,  681  ;  Franklyn  v.  Tuton,  5 
Mod.  469  ;  Mosley  v.  Virgin,  3  Ves. 
184. 

=  Green  v.  Eales,  3  Q.  B.  235. 
Where  a  covenant  in  a  lease  was 
broken  by  the  lessor  through  his 
failure  to  repair  a  certain  wall 
bounding  the  leased  premises,  it 
was  held  that  the  measure  of  dam- 
ages was  what  it  would  cost  to  re- 
build the  wall  and  any  loss  that 
might  be  sustained  as  the  direct 
and  immediate  consequence  of 
the  insufficiency  of  the  wall  and 
the  breach  of  the  covenant.  But 
remote,  contingent,  or  speculative 
damages,  or  such  as  might  have 
been  avoided  by  the  lessee  if  he 
had  made  the  repairs  himself  and 
charged  their  cost  to  the  lessor, 
were  not  allowable.  Fisher  v. 
Goebel,  40  Mo.  475.  When  the 
tenant  covenants  to  keep  the 
premises  in  repair,  an  action  may 
be  for  its  breach  at  any  time  during 
the  term,  Luxmore  v.  Robson,  1 
B.  &  Aid.    584,  but  there  can  be 


only  one  recovery  for  the  same 
breach.  Coward  v.  Gregory,  L. 
R.,  3  C.  P.  153.  The  rule  formerly 
was,  that  the  recovery  must  be 
limited  to  the  cost  of  repairs. 
Vivian  v.  Champion,  2  Ld.  Rayd. 
1135.  But  latterly,  it  is  generally 
held  that  the  recovery  may  be 
measured  by  the  extent  of  the 
injury  to  the  reversion.  Worces- 
ter School  Trustees  v.  Rowlands,  9 
C.  &  P.  734  ;  Smith  v.  Peat,  9  Ex. 
161 ;  Mills  V.  East  London  Union, 
L.  R.,  8  C.  P.  79;  Williams  v. 
Williams,  L.  R.,  9  C.  P.  659; 
Marriott  v.  Cotton,  3  C.  &  R.  553, 
seems  opposed  to  this  rule  accord- 
ing to  the  report  of  the  case  at  nisi 
prius.  In  that  case  the  action  was 
for  a  breach  of  a  contract  to  re- 
pair. The  defendant  set  up  in  de- 
fence, a  plea  that  the  premises 
were  in  good  repair  until  they 
were  accidentally  destroyed  by  Are. 
A  verdict  was  given  for  the  de- 
fendant upon  this  plea.  Damages 
were  to  be  assessed  contingently, 
in  case  the  plea  should  be  held 
bad,  and  Rolfe,  B.,  directed 
nominal  damages.  He  said  that 
otherwise,  as  the  action  was 
brought  during  the  tenancy,  the 

Elaintiff  might  put  the  money  into 
is  pocket,  and  then  bring  another 
action  for  non-repair,  in  which, 
on  the  principle  contended  for  by 
the  plaintiff,  he  woiild  be  entitled 
again  to  recover  substantial  dam- 


CHAP.  XXXV.]    Damages  Eeooveeable. 


895 


But  he  is  not  liable  for  damages  resulting  from  the  inter- 
ruption of  the  tenant's  business  while  the  repairs  are 
being  made.'    The  rule  is,  that  for  a  breach  of  this  cove- 


age.  But  it  appears  that  in  a 
subsequent  stage  of  the  case  this 
ruling  was  reversed,  and  that  sub- 
stantial damages  wer«  entered  up. 
In  Bell  V.  Hayden,  9  Ir.  C.  L.  Rep. 
301,  where  substantial  damages 
w^ere  recovered  pending  the  term, 
O'Brien,  J.,  stated  that  he  had 
procured  from  the  oflSces  of  the 
Queen's  Bench  in  England,  copies 
of  the  orders  made  in  Marriott  v. 
Cotton,  and  that  the  case  went  to 
the  court  above,  and  the  verdict 
for  nominal  damages  was  set  aside, 
and  a  verdict  entered  for  substantial 
damages.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
has  been  said  that  the  rule  laid 
down  in  Doe  v.  Rowlands,  ante, 
that  the  injury  to  the  marketable 
value  of  the  reversion  is  the  meas- 
ure of  damages,  is  not  of  universal 
application.  In  a  case  which  was 
much  considered,  in  Ireland,  the 
lease  contained  a  covenant  to  keep 
in  repair  by  the  lessee,  had,  at  the 
time  of  action  brought,  more  than 
eight  hundred  years  to  run.  It 
was  argued  that '  the  lessor  was 
entitled  only  to  nominal  damages, 
the  measure  of  damages  being  not 
the  amount  which  would  restore 
the  premises  to  their  pristine 
condition  at  the  date  of  the  lease, 
but  the  amount  of  injury  done  to 
the  reversion,  and  that  one  shilling 
laid  out  at  interest  would,  at  the 
end  of  eight  hundred  years,  far 
exceed  the  sum  which  the  plaintiffs 
could  then  claim.  Mazeeee  and 
Brady,  C.  ,  after  expressing  doubts 
both  of  Marriott  v.  Cotton  and  Doe 
V.  Rowlands,  and  remarking  on 
the  difficulty  of  saying  whs^t  upon 
the  authorities  should  be  the 
measure  of  damages,  refused  to 
say  that  nominal  damages  only 
could  be  recovered,  and  left  it 
generally  to  the  master  to  ascertain 
the  amount  of  damage  sustained 
by  the  plaintiff  in  consequence  of 
the  dilapidations.  McNamara  v. 
Vincent,  3  Ir.  Ch.  481.  And 
shortly  afterward  in  England, 
where  a  lessee  sued  his  sublessee 
for  breach  of  a  covenant  to  keep 
in  repair,  he  was  held  entitled  to 
recover  substantial  damages,  al- 
though he  had  no  reversion,  the 


lessor  having  ejected  both  lessee 
and  sublessee  for  non-payment  of 
rent.  Bramwell,  B.,  said  that 
the  criterion  of  damage  proposed, 
namely,  the  diminution  in  value  of 
the  reversion,  was  a  very  good  test, 
but  not  the  only  test  of  the  dam- 
ages to  be  recovered  ;  and  Watson, 
B.,  said  "the  damages  recovered 
are  usually  such  as  are  sufficient  to 
put  the  premises  into  repair.  As 
a  matter  of  fact  it  is  never  proved 
in  evidence  to  what  extent  the 
reversion  is  damaged."  Davis  v. 
Underwood,  2  H.  &  N.  570.  It  is 
to  be  observed  upon  this  latter  case, 
as  Pollock,  C?  B.,  pointed  out, 
that  although  the  plaintiff  had 
been  ejected  by  his  lessor  for  non- 
payment of  rent,  he  still  continued 
liable  upon  his  own  covenant  to 
repair.  The  damages  to  which  his 
lessor  would  have  been  entitled, 
would  have  been  the  amount 
necessary  to  put  the  premises  in 
repair ;  for  this  amount  would 
exactly  measure  the  injury  to  his 
reversion.  Obviously,  therefore, 
he  was  entitled  to  receive  exactly 
the  same  amount  from  his  sub- 
lessee. As  Watson,  B.,  put  it 
"  the  true  foundation  of  the  action 
is,  not  that  the  reversion  is,  but 
that  it  may  be  damnified  by  the 
conduct  of  the  lessee."  The  plaint- 
iff was  entitled  to  ?ay  to  his  sub- 
lessee. "My  reversion  was  sub- 
stantially injured  by  your  failure 
to  repair.  The  fact  that  I  have 
subsequently  lost  the  reversion  has 
neither  lessened  the  injury  done 
to  me,  nor  affected  your  obligation 
to  pay  for  that  injury."  In  the 
Irish  case,  too,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  length  of  the  term  was  no 
reason  why  the  reversion  might 
not  fall  in  at  once  ;  e.  g.,  from  non- 
payment of  rent,  or  other  cause  of 
forfeiture.  If  so,  the  argument 
for  the  defendant  fell  to  the  ground. 
'  Ward  V.  Kelsey,  43  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  582.  The  landlord,  if  he  has 
covenanted  to  repair,  is  liable  to 
an  adjoining  owner  for  damages 
•  sustained  by  him  by  reason  of  the 
falling  of  the  buildings  or  any  of 
them,  upon  the  buildings  of  such 
adjacent    owner,,  and   upon   the 


896  REPAHfe.  [§  400. 

nant  the  tenant  shall  recover  his  actual  loss.  If  he  leased 
the  premises  for  a  particular  purpose,  the  rental  value  of 
the  building  for  such  purpose  during  the  period  that  he 
was  deprived  of  its  use,  or  of  any  part  thei-eof,  is  the 
measure  of  recovery.  Thus,  in  a  New  York  case,'  the 
defendant  leased  to  the  plaintiff  a  building  and  premises 
known  as  the  Prescott  House,  in  New  York  city,  and  five 
stories  of  a  new  building  to  be  erected  on  adjoining  lots 
in  the  rear  of  the  hotel,  for  a  term  of  years.  The  defend- 
ant covenanted  to  tear  down  the  buildings  on  the  prem- 
ises upon  which  the  new  building  was  to  be  erected,  and 
immediately  erect  a  new  building  five  stories  high,  as 
stipulated  in  the  lease,  and  have  the  new  building  com 
pleted  and  ready  for  occupation  on  or  before  the  1st  day 
of  the  ensuing  September.  The  defendant  failed  to  com- 
plete the  new  building  within  the  time  specified.  The 
defendant  also  covenanted  to  make  certain  repairs  in  the 
old  hotel  building  which  the  plaintiff  occupied  while  the 
new  building  was  being  erected.  After  the  execution  of 
the  new  lease  the  plaintiff  stored  his  furniture  in  the  new 
building.  The  defendant  removed  a  balustrade  in  making 
repairs  upon  the  hotel,  and  in  doing  so  made  openings  in 
the  roof  covering,  and  during  a  storm  in  October  the 
water  penetrated  through  and  rendered  the  upper  rooms 
unfit  for  occupation.  The  plaintiff  several  times  notified 
the  defendant  to  repair  the  defects,  but  he  did  not  do  it, 
and  after  waiting  about  six  weeks  he  made  them  himself, 
and  then  brought  an  action  to  recover  the  cost  of  the 
repairs,  and  his  damages  for  the  non-fulfilment  of  the 
contract  to  repair,  as  well  as  of  the  contract  for  the  com- 
pletion of  the  building.  The  damages  claimed  by  the 
plaintiff  upon  the  last  named '  ground,  was  the  value  of 
the  use  of  the  rooms  in  the  old  and  new  building  during 
the  time  he  was  deprived  of  their  use  in  consequence  of 
the  alleged  breaches.  The  lower  court  held  that  this  was 
the  true  rule  of  damages,  and  instructed  the  jury  that,  as 

same  principle  he  is  liable  to  a  if   lie    had   himself   been  in  the 

third  person  for  injuries  sustained  actual  possession  of  the  premises.  \ 

by  him  by  reason  of  the  defective  Benson  v.  Saurez,  43  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 

condition   of    the    premises, "  for  408. 
which  he  wolud  have  been  Uable  ■  Hexter  v.  Knox,  63  N.  Y.  581. 


CHAP,  xxxv.]    Damages  Eecoveeablb. 


897 


to  such  rooms  as  the  plaintiff  had  furniture  for,  he  was 
entitled  to  damages  upon  the  basis  of  their  value  as 
furnished  rooms.  As  to  the  defendant's  failure  to  make 
repairs,  the  court  instructed  the  jury  that  the  plaintiff 
was  entitled  to  recover  the  loss  he  sustained  by  being 
deprived  of  the  use»t)f  the  rooms  until  they  were  repaired, 
and  that  while  he  had  the  right,  after  notice,  and  wait- 
ing a  reasonable  time  to  enable  the  defendant  to  repair 
them,  to  repair  them  himself  and  charge  the  expense 
thereof  to  the  defendant,  he  was  bound  to  do  so,  but 
could  proceed  against  the  defendant  for  his  damages  by 
reason  of  the  non -repairs.  The  ruhng  was  sustained  by 
the  Court  of  Appeals. 

The  rule  of  damages  maybe  said  to  be,  that  theplaintif 
is  entitled  to  recover  such  a  sum  as  will  place  him  in  as 
good  a  position  as  he  would  have  been  if  the  defendant 
had  performed  his  covenant,^  and  this  rule  is  equally 


'  Smead  v.  Foord,  1  El.  &  El. 
602 ;  Alder  t.  Keightley,  15  M.  & 
"W.  117 ;  Dunlop  v.  Higgins,  1  H. 
L.  Cas.  381 ;  Eobinson  v.  Hannan, 
1  Exchq.  855  ;  Simons  v.  Patchett, 
7  E.  &  B.  568 ;  Fletcher  v.  Tayleur, 
17  C.  B.  21 ;  Bramley  v.  Chester- 
ton, 3  C.  B.  N.  S.  592 ;  Mack  v. 
Patchin,  43  N.  Y.  167  ;  Locke  v. 
Furze,  19  C.  B.  N.  S.  96  ;  Williams 
V.  BurreU,  1  M.  G.  &  S.  402 ; 
Myers  v.  Bums,  35  N.  Y.  273. 
And  the  old  rule  that  has  latterly 
been  much  questioned,  and  at 
least  partially  overruled,  both  in 
this  country  and  England,  that  in 
case  the  landlord  wrongfully  evicts 
the  tenant,  or  he  is  evicted  by  su- 
perior title  as  the  rent  ceases  and  the 
lessee  is  discharged  from  its  pay- 
ment, he  can  merely  recover  nom- 
inal damages  and  such  mesne 
profits  as  he  is  hable  to  pay  the 
true  owner ;  and  the  costs  he 
has  been  compelled  to  pay  in  de- 
fending the  title,  KeUey  v.  Dutch 
Church,  &c.,  3  HiU  (N.  Y.)  105  ; 
Baldwin  v.  Mann,  3  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
399,  has  been  essentially  modified 
and  relaxed,  because  it  was  found 
to  be  harsh  and  unjust  in  most 
instances.  Chatterton  v.  Fox,  5 
Duer  (N.  Y.  Supr.  Ct.)  64  ;  Driggs 
V.  Dwight,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  72 ; 
Duane  v.  Euesler,  1  Hilt.  (K.  Y. 
C.  P.)  420;   Williams  y.  BurreU, 


ante ;  Locke  v.  Furze,  ante ;  Myers 
V.  Burns,  ante  ;  Mack  v.  Patchin, 
ante.  In  an  action  by  the  lessee 
against  the  lessor  of  certain  rooms 
used  as  a  photographic  studio,  for 
a  breach  of  a  covenant  in  the  lease 
to  keep  the  rooms  heated  during 
certain  months  of  the  year,  the 
plaintiff,  after  testifying  that  he 
had  been  in  business  as  a  photog- 
rapher for  many  years,  that  he 
had  hired  and  also  examined  other 
rooms  with  a  view  to  hiring  them 
for  his  business,  that  he  knew  the 
proper  rental  value  of  such  rooms, 
and  that  the  temperature  of  the 
rooms  was  an  important  element 
of  their  rental  value,  was  allowed 
against  the  defendant's  objection 
to  answer  this  question  :  "  Now 
considering  that  properly  heated, 
these  premises  were  worth"  the 
sum  reserved  in  the  lease,  "what 
would  they  be  worth  as  they  have 
been  heated  according  to  your 
testimony  ?  "  The  judge  instructed 
the  jury  that  the  general  measure 
of  damages  was  the  difference  in 
value  of  the  leased  premises,  heat- 
ed as  stipulated  in  the  lease,  and 
the  value  heated  as  they  were  in 
fact  heated  ;  and  that  this  defer- 
ence could  not  exceed  the  reason- 
able cost  of  supplying  heat  which 
the  defendant  had  agreed  and 
failed  to   furnish.     It   was  held 


898  Eepaies.  [§  400. 

applicable  whether  the  action  is  brought  by  the  landlord 
or  the  tenant.  If  any  special  or  particular  damages,  in 
addition  to  the  damage  which  naturally  and  ordinarily 
results  from  the  breach,  are  claimed,  the  plaintiff  must 
specially  allege  and  prove  them  and  show  their  connection 
with  the  covenant,'  and  they  must  not  be  too  remote,  nor 
speculative."  In  the  case  of  an  action  1^  the  tenant,  he 
is,  as  we  have  seen,  entitled  to  recover  the  rental  value 
of  the  premises  for  the  purposes  for  which  they  were 
rented  to  or  used  by  him,  and  if  he  makes  the  repairs 
himself,  the  necessary  expense  of  all  reasonable  repairs.' 
In  the  case  of  an  action  by  the  landlord,  brought  against 
the  tenant  before  the  term  is  ended,'  when  the  landlord 
has  not  himself  made  the  repairs,  he  is  entitled  to  recover 
the  injury  to  his  reversion  by  reason  of  the  tenant's 
neglect  to  repair,  and  is  not  necessarily  restricted  to  a 
recovery  of  nominal  damages  merely.'  The  loss  which 
he  would  sustain  by  reason  of  the  dilapidations  if  he 
went  into  the  market  to  sell  the  reversion  is  the  true  cri- 
terion, °  and  not,  as  held  by  Lord  Holt,"  such  a  sum  as 
would  be  required  to  repair  the  same."  But  if  the  land- 
lord goes  on  and  makes  the  repairs  he  is  entitled  to  recover 
the  reasonable  and  necessary  expenses  thereof  in  addition 

that  the  defendant  had  no  ground  2    H.     &    M.    570.       In    Macna- 

of  exception  to  the  admission  of  mara  v.  Vincent,  2  Ir.  Ch.  481,  the 

the  evidence  objected  to,  McCor-  master  was  required  to  ascertain 

mick  V.  Stowell,  138  Mass.  431.  what  damages  the    plaintiff  sus- 

1  Hadden  v.  Sott,  15  C.  B.  411 ;  tained  by  reason  of  the  dilapida- 

EandaU  v.  Eoper,  E.  B.  &  B.  84.  tions,  and  the  court  refused  to  di- 

^  Smead  v.  Foord,  ante ;  Hadley  rect  a  verdict  for  nominal  dam- 

V.   Boxendale,   ante ;    Fletcher  v.  ages,  although  the  lease  had  more 

Tayleur,  ante.  than  800  years  to  run. 

^  Hexter  v.  Knox,  ante.  «  Maetin,  B.,  in  Smith  v.  Peat, 

■»  Luxmore    v.   Eobson,   1   B.   &  9  Bxchq.  161. 

Aid.  684.  ■"  Vivian    v.    Champion,    3    Ld. 

5  Smith  V.  Peat,  9  Exchq.   161 ;  Eayd.  1125  ;  S.  C.  1  Salk.  141.   See 

CoUey  V.  Streeton,  2  B.  &  C.  273 ;  sustaining  the  rule  in  this  case, 

Turner  v.  Lamb,  14  M.  &  W.  412.  Nixon  v.  Denham,  1  Ir.  L.  R.  100 ; 

Practically,  the  injury  to  the  re-  S.  C.  1  Jebb.  &  S.  416  ;  Penley  v. 

version  is  never  shown  in  evidence,  Watts,  7  M.  &  W.  601. 

and  the  damages  actually  recov-  ^  Turner  v.  Lamb,  ante  ;    Smith 

ered  are  such  as  would  be  suf-  v.  Peat,  ante  ;    Bell  v.  Hayden,  9 

ficient    to    put   the    premises   in  Ir.  O.  L.  301 ;  Mills  v.  E.  L.  Union, 

the   state    of    repair    into   which  L.   E.,   9  C.  P.  659;  Williams  v. 

the  tenant  was  bound  to  put  them,  Williams,    L.    R. ,    9    C.   P.   659 ; 

and  such  other  special  damages  as  Worcester,    &c.,    v.   Rowlands,   9 

the  plaintiff  alleges  and  proves  to  C.  &  P.  734. 

have  arisen  from  a  breach  of  the  '  In    WiUiams  v.   Williams,  L. 

covenant.     Davies  v.  Underwood,  R.,  9  C.  P.  659,  plaintiffs  were  as- 


CHAP,  xxxv.j    Damages  Recoverable. 


899 


to  any  other  damages  which  he  may  sustain  by  reason 
of  the  tenant's  default,  and  this  includes  the  loss  of  the 


signees  of  a  lease  of  the  premises 
in  question  ;  that  lease  contained 
a  general  covenant  to  repair,  and 
also  a  covenant  to  repair  after 
three  calendar  months'  notice. 
The  plaintiffs  demised  the  prem- 
ises to  the  defendant  on  similar 
covenants  to  those  contained  in 
the  original  lease,  except  that  the 
notice  stipulated  for  was  a  two, 
and  not  a  three  months'  notice. 
In  September,  1872,  a'  notice  to  re- 
pair the  premises  was  left  by  the 
superior  landlord  on  the  premises, 
caUing  on  the  plaintiffs  to  repair. 
Tliis  notice  was  left  with  the  de- 
fendant, but  he,  being  no  party  to 
the  original  lease,  took  no  notice 
of  the  requisition.  Notice  was 
given  to  the  plaintiffs  on  17th  Jan- 
uary, 1873.  The  plaintiffs,  there- 
upon, called  on  the  defendant  to 
repair  in  very  general  terms,  and 
on  20th  March,  1873,  the  defend- 
ant received  a  formal  notice  from 
the  plaintiff's  attorney,  requiring 
him  to  repair  the  premises  "  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  terms  of  his 
lease."  The  plaintiffs,  being 
pressed  by  their  superior  landlord, 
in  order  to  avoid  a  forfeiture, 
themselves  did  the  necessary  re- 
pairs, which  were  finished  shortly 
before  the  present  action  was 
brought,  which  was  to  recover  the 
amount  so  expended.  At  the  trial 
it  was  held  that  the  plaintiffs 
could  not  recover  upon  the 
breaches  which  charged  an  omis- 
sion to  repair  the  premises,  not  be- 
ing out  of  repair  at  the  time  of 
bringing  the  action,  and  that  the 
first  notice  served  by  the  plaintiffs 
in  January  was  not  sufficient. 
On  the  plaintiffs  appealing  to  the 
full  court,  they  strongly  relied  on 
CoUey  V.  Streeton,  2  B.  &  0.  278, 
to  sustain  the  proposition  that, 
where  the  superior  landlord  gives 
a  notice  to  repair  to  his  lessee,  and 
the  latter  gives  notice  to  his  sub- 
lessee, and  upon  his  default  goes 
in  and  does  the  necessary  repair, 
the  lessee  can  recover  against  his 
sublessee.  That  case,  however, 
went  upon  the  ground  that  the 
sublessee  had  proper  notice  to  re- 
pair, before  the  commencement  of 
the  action.  It  was  admitted  by 
LOBD  CoiiEEiDGE,  in  the  present 


case,  tliat,  had  there  been  a  breach 
of  the  specific  covenant  to  repair 
within  two  months  after  notice, 
the  measure  of  damages  which  the 
plaintiffs  would  have  been  entitled 
to  recover  would  have  been  the  ex- 
penses which  they  had  incurred  in 
putting  the  premises  in  repair. 
That  view  of  the,  case  is  fully  in 
accordance  with  the  opinion  of 
Justice  Bayley,  expressed  in  his 
judgment  in  Colley  v.  Streeton, 
that  '"the  measure  of  damages 
was  properly  the  loss  which  the 
plaintiffs  sustained  by  reason  of 
the  default  of  the  defendants. 
That  was  the  sum  reasonably  ex- 
pended by  them  in  doing  such  re- 
pairs as  were  necessary,  for  the 
purpose  of  avoiding  a  forfeiture  of 
the  lease."  On  this  point  of  the 
case,  however,  it  was  held  that 
the  two  months'  notice,  which 
was  requisite  to  be  given,  had  not 
been  duly  given  by  the  plaintiffs, 
and  in  consequence  the  plaintiffs 
could  not  rely  on  a  breach  of  this 
covenant.  The  plaintiffs,  how- 
ever, fell  back  upon  the  breach  of 
the  general  covenant  to  repair^ 
and  upon  that  point  also  the  court 
decided  against  them,  holding 
that  no  substantial  damages  can 
be  recovered  under  the  general 
covenant  where  no  damage  has 
been  done  to  the  reversion,  and 
the  reversioner  has  not  been  in- 
jured by  anything  done,  or  omit- 
ted to  be  done  by  the  defendant. 
Justice  Brett  observed  :  "  The 
lessors  would,  also,  have  an  im- 
plied right  to  sue  for  damages, 
but  they  had  no  right  to  go  upon 
the  premises  and  do  the  repairs 
themselves.  It  is  admitted  that 
the  premises  were  out  of  repair; 
but,  instead  of  avaihng  themselves 
of  the  right  of  forfeiture,  the 
plaintiffs  do  the  necessary  repairs 
themselves,  in  order  to  save  a  for- 
feiture as  between  themselves  and 
a  superior  landlord ;  and  they 
claim  to  be  entitled  to  recover  the 
expenses  thus  incurred  as  dam- 
ages under  the  third  breach 
(which  was  founded  upon  the  gen- 
eral contract).  That  they  cannot 
do."  The  court  subsequently  in- 
timated that,  had  the  point  been 
taken  at  the  trial,  the  plaintiffs 


900 


Repairs. 


[§  400. 


rent  of  the  premises  during  the  period  necessary  to  make 
the  repairs.'  In  estimating  the  damages  the  tenant  may 
show  the  age  and  condition  of  the  buUdings  at  the  time 
when  the  covenant  was  entered  into,  and  the  damages 
are  to  be  measured  with  reference  thereto,  and "  this  is 


would  have  been  entitled  to  nom- 
inal damages  under  the  third 
breach.  The  court  treated  the 
case  of  Davis  v.  Underwood,  2  H. 
&  N.  570,  where  substantial  dam- 
ages were  recovered,  as  merely 
deciding  that  where  the  mesne 
landlord  had  determined  his  lease 
by  his  own  act,  this  did  not  pre- 
vent his  recovering  substantial 
damages  for  the  defendant's 
breach  of  covenant  (in  not  repair- 
ing) while  he  remained  owner  of 
the  reversion.  Upon  the  whole, 
we  think  that  the  decision  of  the 
common  pleas  in  the  present  case, 
although  no  doubt  it  at  first  bears 
rather  a  harsh  aspect,  will  be 
found  consistent  with  the  princi- 
ples of  justice,  as  well  as  law. 
The  plaintiffs  had,  in  the  present 
case,  a  right  to  re-enter  on  the 
premises  and  forfeit  the  interest 
of  the  subtenant,  which  right  they 
neglected  to  avail  themselves  of. 
Having  chosen  not  to  make  use  of 
this  right,  they  had  no  legal  claim 
to  create  a  new  remedy  for  them- 
selves ;  and  having  elected  them- 
selves to  perform  the  defendant's 
duty,  they  could  not  then  demand 
satisfaction,  when  they  had  neg-. 
lected  the  proper  laeans  of  setting 
themselves  right  wbicli  were  of- 
fered them  by  the  law.  In  the 
case  of  Merony  v.  Ferguson,  8  W. 
R.  551,  in  the  Queen's  Bench,  in 
Ireland,  a  somewhat  similar  ques- 
tion arose.  The  action  there  was 
brought  on  a  covenant  to  repair  in 
a  lease ;  the  evidence  went  to 
show  that  the  premises  had  fallen 
into  disrepair,  but  that  after  the 
action  was  brought  considerable 
sums  of  money  were  spent  by  the 
defendant  in  repairing  them.  The 
action  was  brought  before  the  end 
of  the  term  for  which  the  prem- 
ises were  leased.  The  jury  found 
for  the  defendant.  JUSTICE  Bak- 
EY,  who  tried  the  case,  certified 
that,  in  his  opinion,  the  verdict 
■was  against  the  weight  of  evi- 
dence, but  that,  "  according  to  the 
rule  laid  down  by  the  oases  as  to 


the  measure  of  damages  when  the 
action  is  brought  before  the  end 
of  the  term,  a  verdict  for  the 
plaintiff  could  only  have  been  for 
nominal  damages."  On  the  new 
trial  motion  the  defendant  relied 
on  a  series  of  authorities,  among 
others,  Watts  v.  Judd,  5  M.  &  Gr. 
598,  and  Young  v.  Harris,  2  C.  & 
J.  14,  to  show  a  new  trial  will  not 
be  granted  on  the  ground  that 
the  verdict' was  against  the  weight 
of  evidence,  if  merely  nominal 
damages  can  be  obtained.  The 
plaintiffs  relied  on  Macnamara  v. 
Vincent,  2  Ir.  Ch.  R.  504,  to  show 
that  they  were  entitled  to  substan- 
tial damages.  The  court,  how- 
ever, acquiesced  in  the  view  set 
out  in  the  report  of  Justice  Bab- 
EY,  that  nominal  damages  only 
could  have  been  recovered,  but 
held  that  this  action  differed  in  its 
nature  from  a  new  action  for  the 
recovery  of  a  sum  of  money,  and 
granted  a  new  trial.  Although 
this  decision  seems  to  differ  from 
Young  V.  Harris,  and  that  class  of 
cases,  it  appears  to  be  in  accord- 
ance with  the  English  authorities 
on  the  subject  of  the  measure  of 
damages  in  cases  of  this  nature. 

'  Woods  V.  Pope,  1  Bing.  N.  C. 
467  ;  S.  C.  6  C.  &  P.  783. 

i'Burdett  v.  Withers,  7  Ad.  & 
El.  136  ;  Mantz  v.  Goring,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  451 ;  Stanley  v.  Twogood,  3 
id.  4.  If  the  premises  become  inore 
out  of  repair  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  action,  it  has  been 
held  in  one  case  that  the  jury 
might  consider  that  fact  in  esti- 
mating the  damages.  Mayne  "on 
Damages,  89,  238  ;  Shortbridge  v. 
Lampleigh,  3  Ld.  Rayd.  803.  A 
former  recovery  does  not  go  in  bar 
of  the  action,  but  may  be  shown 
in  mitigation.  Coward  v.  Gregory, 
L.  R.,  2  C.  P.  153.  A  covenant  to 
keep  in  repair  is  continuous,  and 
separate  actions  may  be  brought 
thereon,  but  a  covenant  to  put  in 
repair  admits  of  but  one  breach 
and  one  action.  Coward  v.  Greg- 
ory, ante.    So,  too,  when  an  action 


CHAP    XXXV.]  EePAIES.  901 

the  rule  even  though  the  covenant  is  "to  keep  the  prem- 
ises in  good  repair"  the  rule  being  that  the  tenant  is 
merely  to  keep  them  in  good  repair  with  reference  to 
their  state  and  condition  when  leased  to  him^  although 
under  such  a  covenant  the  tenant  cannot  defeat  his  lia- 
bility by  showing  that  the  premises  are  in  an  as  equally 
good  condition  as  when  they  'were  let  to  him,  because 
the  words  "fo  keep  in  good  repair"  presupposes  their 
being  put  into  good  repair  with  reference  to  the  subject- 
matter." 

In  an  action  for  breach,  of  a  covenant  in  an  underlease 
to  repair,  whereby  the  plaintiff's  term  in  the  premises 
was  forfeited,  the  plaintiff  cannot  recover  the  value  of 
his  term  if  the  superior  landlord  has  brought  his  eject- 
ment for  the  non-repair,  as  well  as  for  breach  of  other 
covenants  not  contained  in  the  underlease,  if  it  is  not 
proved  that  the  forfeiture  was  caused  by  the  acts  of  the 
defendant :  hut  he  may  recover  the  amount  of  dilapidation 
at  the  time  of  ejectment,  though  his  own  term  is  deter- 
mined. '  He  may  recover  substantial  damages  for  non-per- 
formance of  the  covenant  to  repair,  contained  in  the 
underlease,  notwithstanding  both  he  and  the  defendant 
have  been  ejected  by  the  superior  landlord  for  non-pay- 
ment by  himself  of  the  rent  reserved  in  the  original  lease.' 
In  covenant  on  an  underlease  for  not  repairing,  in  which 
the  covenants  differed  from  those  in  the  original  lease, 
and  to  which  there  was  no  covenant  to  indemnify  the 
lessee  against  breach  of  covenants  in  the  original  lease, 
the  lessee  cannot  recover  the  costs  of  an  action  brought 
against  him  by  the  original  lessor  for  the  mere  dilapi- 
dations, which  he  might  have  paid  for  before  that  action 

is  brought  against  a  tenant  for  not  jury  found  the  expense  of  a  new 

rebuildiug  premises  destroyed  by  building  would  be  £1635,  but  that 

fire,  the  jury  are  at  liberty  to  and  the  new  building  would  be  worth 

must  deduct  from  the  whole  ex-  £600  more  than  the  one  destroyed, 

pense  of  a  new  building  the  differ-  The  court  held  that  the  plaintiff 

ence  between  the  value  of  the  new  could  recover  only  £10B5, 

building  and  a  building  in  the  con-  '  Eolfe,  B.,  Payne  v.  Haine,  19 

dition  of  the  one  destroyed.    Thus,  M.  &  W.  541. 

in  Yates  v.  Dunster,  11  Exchq.  15,  ''  Clow  v.  Brogden,  3  M.  &  G.  39. 

the  defendant   covenanted  to  re-  ^  Davis  v.  Underwood,  3  H.  & 

pair.    The  building    was  burned.  N.  570. 
inanactionfornot  rebuilding,  the 
XL— 5 


902  Eepaxes.  [§  400. 

was  commenced ; '  or  which  he  might  have  afterwards 
paid  into  court.  A  covenant  to  repair  contained  in  an 
underlease,  though  in  the  same  language  as  the  covenant 
in  the  original  lease,  yet  may  be  different  in  effect,  owing 
to  the  underlease  having  been  granted  subsequently  to 
the  original  lease,  and  when  the  premises  had  become  in 
a  different  condition."  If  a  lessee  assign  over,  subject  to 
the  performance  by  the  assignee  of  the  covenants  in  the 
lease  from  the  day  of  assignment,  and  one  of  the  cove- 
nants is  a  general  one  to  repair  and  keep  in  repair,  on 
which  the  lessor  afterwards  recovers  against  the  lessee, 
the  latter  can  recover  over  against  his  assignee  for  those 
dilapidations  only  which  have  taken  place  after  the  assign- 
ment.' A  tenant  who  has  recovered  damages  of  the 
landlord  for  not  repairing,  &c.,  is  liable  for  the  rent 
accruing  during  the  period  of  non-repair.* 

A  contract  by  a  subtenant  to  make  repairs  is  not  a 
mere  contract  of  indemnity,  but,  if  he  fails  to  perform 
in  that  respect  he  is  liable  to  his  lessor  therefor,  whether 
the  lessor  has  paid  the  original  landlord  or  not ; '  but  in 
such  a  case  there  is  no  liability  on  the  part  of  the  sub- 
tenant to  the  landlord ;  nor,  where  one  of  several  tenants 
of  a  building  has  covenanted  to  repair,  can  a  co-tenant 
maintain  an  action  against  him  for  damages  resulting 
from  his  failure  to  repair,  especially  if  the  injury  resulted 
from  an  inherent  defect  in  the  building  or  any  of  its 
fixtures.' 

>  Penley  v.  Watts,  7  M.  &.  W.  ment  for  the  whole  value  of  the 

601 ;  Logan  v.  Hall,  4  C.  B.  598.  use  and  occupation  of  such  prem- 

"  Walker  v.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W.  ises,  no  deduction  being  made  for 

249;  Smith,  L.  &  T.  275  (2d  ed.).  the  rent.      It  was  held  that  the 

3  Hawkins  v.  Sherman,  3  C.   &  lessor  was  thereafter  entitled  to  re- 

P.  459.  cover  the  amount  of  rent  agreed 

*  Knox  V.  Hexter,  70  N.  Y.  461,  to  be  paid  for  such  premises  dur- 

decided  by  Court  of  Appeals,  N.  ing  such  period.     Opinion  by  An- 

Y. ,  Dec.  1877.     In  that  case  the  dkews,  J.     See  report  of  the  case 

defendant,  a  lessee  of   premises,  of  Hexter  v.   Knox  at  a  former 

brought  action   against   plaintiff,  term,  63  N.  Y.  561. 

the  lessor,  for  damages  in  being  '  Smith  v.  Coe,  1  Sweeney  (N.  Y. 

deprived  of  the  use  and  occupa-  Superior  Ct.)  332. 

tion  of  such  premises  during  a  cer-  «  Martin  v.  Washburn,  33  La.  An. 

tain  period,  and  recovered  judg-  427. 


CHAP.  xxxvi.J      Pakticulae  Trade.  903 


CHAPTEE  XXXVT. 

jnSCELLANBOUS  COVENANTS. 

Sec.  401.  Against  particular  trade. 

Sec.  402.  "Waiver- of  forfeiture. 

Sec.  403.  Covenants  to  work  mines. 

Sec.  404.  Other  covenants. 

Sec.  405.  Contracts  to  deal  with  particular  persons. 

Sec.  406.  Contracts  in  restraint  of  trade  within  a  given  distance. 

Sec.  407.  How  the  distance  is  to  be  computed. 

Sec.  408.  Covenants  to  redeliver  fixtures,  etc. 

Sec.  409.  Covenants  to  give  up  part  of  land. 

Sec.  410.  Obligation  of  tenant  of  farm  as  to  cultivation  of  land. 

Sec.  411.  As  to  expenditure  of  produce  on  premises. 

Sec.  412.  Express  covenants  as  to  mode  of  cultivation. 

Sec.  401.  Against  particular  trade.— Covenants  restrict- 
ing the  lessee  to  a  certain  use  of  premises,  and  prohibit- 
ing the  carrying  on  of  particular  trades  upon  the  premises 
are  regarded  as  reasonable,  but  are  not  what  are  techni- 
cally termed  usual  covenants.'    A  subtenant  is  presumed 

'Chinsley  v.  Langley,  1  RoUe's  whatsoever,"  the  court  held  that 
Abr.  457 ;  Casser  v.  CoUjmge,  3  the  stipulation  respecting  the 
My.  &  K.  288 ;  Propent  v.  Parker,  school  could  not  be  extended  to 
3  id.  280 ;  Parker  v.  Whyte,  1  H.  prohibit  the  exercise  of  other 
&  M.  167 ;  Gaskell  v.  Spry,  1  B.  &  trades.  Van  v.  Corf e,  3  My.  &  K. 
Aid.  619 ;  Mitchell  v.  Reynolds,  6  269.  So,  where  the  particulars  of 
Ad.  &  El.  438 ;  Leather  Cloth  Co.  sale  of  certaia  leasehold  premises 
V.  Lorsout,  L.  R.,  9  Eq.  345.  In  an  stated  that  under  the  original  lease 
English  case  an  agreement  for  a  no  offensive  trade  was  to  be  car- 
lease  stipulated  that  the  lease  ried  on,  and  that  the  premises 
should  contain  the  usual  cove-  could  not  be  let  to  a  cofifee-house- 
nants  between  landlord  and  tenant,  keeper  or  working  hatter ;  and  the 
and  that  the  house  should  not  be  original  lease  prohibited  the  busi- 
converted  into  a  school,  the  in-  ness,  among  many  others,  of  a 
tended  lessor  being  himself  but  a  brewer,  baker,  sugar-baker,  vint- 
lessee,  and  his  lease  containing  a  ner,  victualler,  butcher,  tripe- 
covenant  not  to  carry  on  the  trade  seller,  poulterer,  flsh-monger, 
of  a  slaughterman,  butcher,  tal-  cheese-monger,  fruiterer,  herb- 
low-chan(fler,  soap-boiler,  &c.,  seller,  coffee-house-keeper,  work- 
"br   any    other    offensive    trade  ing  hattet    and   the  use  of  the 


904 


Miscellaneous  Covenaot's. 


[§  401. 


to  know  the  terms  of  the  lease  under  which  his  lessor 
holds,  and  is  bound  by  any  lawful  restriction  imposed  by 
the  original  lease  as  to  the  use  of  the  premises.'  But 
w^here  the  lessor  knows  that  the  person  contracting  with 
him  for  a  lease  intends  to  use  the  premises  for  a  purpose 
that  is  prohibited  in  the  conveyance  to  him,  and  he  omits 
to  inform  the  intended  lessee  that  the  exercise  of 
certain  trades,  or  the  use  of  the  premises  for  certain 
purposes,  are  so  prohibited;,  the  intended  lessee  is  not 
bound  to  take  a  lease  subject  to  such  restrictions,  as  the 
conduct  of  the  lessor  is  treated  as  equivEiHent  to  a  repre- 


premises  for  the  sale  of  coals,  po- 
tatoes, or  any  provisions,  it  was 
held,  that  the  misdescription  of 
the  property  proposed  to  be  sold 
was  so  material  and  substantial  as 
to  entitle  a  purchsiser  to  rescind 
his  contract.  Flight  v.  Barton,  3 
My.  &  K.  383 ;  Casser  v.  CoUynge, 
ante.  Thus,  in  a  recent  English 
case,  A  sold  an  estate  to  B,  who 
covenanted  that  no  building  to  be 
erected  thereon  should  be  used  as 
a  beer-shop.  B  erected  a  building 
thereon,  and  sold  the  estate  to  C, 
who  sold  to  D,  who  let  the  premis- 
es to  E,  as  tenant  from  year  to 
year,  without  express  notice  of  the 
covenant;  it  did  not  appear 
whether  the  deeds  to  C  and  I)  dis- 
closed the  covenant.  Held,  that 
the  rule,  that  a  purchaser,  who 
does  not  inquire  into  his  vendor's 
title,  is  affected  with  notice  of 
what  appears  on  it,  applies  to  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year,  and  that 
E  shoidd  be  enjoined  from  using 
the  premises  as  a  beer-shop.  Wil- 
son V.  Hart,  L.  E.,  1  Ch.  463.  But 
it  was  intimated  in  this  case  that 
the  covenant  could  not  have  been 
enforced  against  E,  if  D  had  told 
him  that  there  was  no  restriction. 
In  the  absence  of  any  restriction* 
the  lessees  have,  by  implication, 
the  right  to  put  the  premises  to 
such  use  and  employment  as  they 
please,  not  materially  different 
from  that  in  which  they  are  usual- 
ly employed,  to  which  they  are 
adapted,  and  for  which  tbey  were 
constructed;  they  have  also  the 
common  law  right  to  assign  or 
transfer  their  interest  to  a  third 
person,  to  put  him  in  possession  of 


the  property,  and  to  clothe  him. 
with  all  their  rights  and  privileges 
under  the  contract,  and  this  right 
can  be  restrained  only  by  express 
stipulation.  Thus,  when  a  house 
is  leased  which  was  built  for  a  ho- 
tel, and  the  lease  contains  no  stip- 
ulation as  to  the  employments 
which  shall  be  carried  on  in  it, 
the  lessee  may  use  it  as  a  seminary 
for  young  ladies,  or  he  may  under- 
let it  to  another  to  be  used  for 
that  purpose.  Nave  v.  Berry,  33 
Ala.  383.  Where  a  lessee  cove- 
nanted to  make  no  alterations  in 
the  premises  without  the  consent 
of  the  lessor,  and  he  did  make 
alterations  therein  without  such 
consent,  but  they  were  decided  to 
be  improvements,  rendering  the 
premises  more  valuable  to  the  les- 
sor, the  court  held  that  the  plaint- 
iff was  not  entitled  to  judgment, 
and  that  the  defendant  should  put 
the  premises  in  the  same  condi- 
tion they  were  before  the  altera- 
tions. Eagle  V.  Owen,  8  Duer  (N. 
Y.)  15.  If  the  landlord,  in  consid- 
eration that  a  person  will  take  a 
lease  of  certain  premises,  of  him, 
agrees  that  he  wiU  not  let  adjoin- 
ing j)remises,  owned  by  him,  for 
certain  purposes,  he  is  hable  to 
such  person  for  damages  if  he  vi- 
olates such  agreement,  and  such 
damages  may  be  recouped  against 
the  rent.  Chicago  Legal  News 
Co.  V.  Brown,  5  lU.  App.  350. 

'  Casser  v.  CoUynge,  ante.  In 
other  words,  he  is  bound  to  know ; 
and  if  he  takes  a  lease  or  assign- 
ment without  inquiry,  he  is  bound 
by  the  restriction.  Wilson  v.  Hart, 
ante. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]         Paeticulae  Trade. 

sentation  that  there  is  no  restriction  upon  the  exercise 
of  that  particular  trade  upon  the  premises."  Such  cove- 
nants run  with  the  land,"  and  are  binding  upon  an  assignee 
of  the  lease.'  But,  while  as  between  the  lessor  and  an 
assignee  of  a  lease  containing  a  restrictive  clause  of  this 
character,  and  also  for  re-entry  upon  its  breach,  the  land- 
lord may  re-enter  if  the  assignee  commits  breach,'  or  may 
enjoy  the  use  of  the  premises  for  a  prohibited  purpose  ;" 
yet  the  lessee  can  have  no  remedy,  either  at  law  or  equity, 
against  his  subtenant,  unless  each  subtenant  Tcnew  that 
the  particular  business  was  prohibited  in  the  original 
lease."  But,  if  either  a  lessee,  or  an  assignee,  or  sub- 
tenant obtains  a  lease  of  premises  by  falsely  and  fraudu- 
lently representing  that  he  intends  to  use  them  for  a 
lawful  business  or  purpose,  and,  having  obtained  posses- 
sion, he  uses  them  for  an  unlawful  purpose — as,  if  he 
leases  a  dweUing-house,  representing  that  he  wants  it  for 
a  private  residence,  and  he  converts  it  into  a  brothel — in 
the  absence  of  any  restrictive  clause  in  the  lease,  the 
landlord  cannot  re-enter  or  maintain  ejectment  against 
him,  because  such  misrepresentation  and  subsequent 
iUegal  use  of  the  premises  are  not  sufficient,  at  law,  to 
avoid  the  lease.'  Therefor,  if  the  lessor  desires  to  prevent 
certains  uses  of  the  premises  he  should  insert  a  clause  in 
the  lease  defining  the  purposes  for  which  the  premises 

■  Flight  r.  Barton,  3  My.  &  K.  new  lease,  that  such  omission  was 
283  ;  Wilson  v.  Hart,  ante.    But  a  no  defence.    Ryder  v,  Jenny,   3 
person  who  has  contracted  to  take  Robt.  (N.  Y.)  56. 
a  lease,  or  a  renewal  of  a  lease,  '  Bush  v.  Keeling,  ante  :  Gas- 
cannot  shield  himself  from   Ua-  kell  v.  Spry,  ante;   Caughtoa  v. 
bility  for  refusing  to  accept  one,  Pattison,  10  East,  130 ;  Wilkinson 
upon  the  ground  that  the  agree-  v.  Rogers,  2  De  G.  J.  &  S.  62  ;  De- 
ment was  for  a  lease  with  certain  Forest  v.  Bryne,  1  Hilt.  (I*.  Y.  C. 
covenante,   some   of  which    were  P.)  43 ;  Browner  v.   Lambert,  23 
omitted  from  the  lease  tendered.  Barb.  ([N.  Y.)  153. 
if  the  covenants   so  admitted  are  '  Wilson  v.  Hart,  ante  ;  Jay  v. 
stich  as  are  implied  from  the  de-  Richardson,  30  Beav.  563. 
mise  itself.  Thus,  a  lease  contained  ■»  Wilkinson  t.  Rogers,  ante, 
a  covenant  for  its  renewal,  at  the  'Jay  v.  Richardson,  ante ;  Park- 
expiration  of  the  term  thereof,  for  man  v.  Aroaidi,  34  Ala.  393.    How- 
another  specified  term,  and  a  fur-  ard  v   Ellis,  4  Sandf .  (N.*Y  )  469  ; 
ther   covenant   for   quiet   enjoy-  Dodge  v.  Lambert,  4  Bos.  (N.  Y.) 
ment.    The  new   lease   tendered  570 ;  Steward  v,  Winters,  4  vSandf. 
contained   neither  of   such  cove-  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  587. 
nants.    It  was  held,  in  an  action  *  Wilson  v.  Hart,  ante, 
against  the  lessee  to  recover  dam-  'Feret  v.  Hill,  15  C.  B.  207. 
ages  for  his  refusal  to  execute  the 


906  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  401. 

shall  be  used;  and  care  should  be  taken  to  use  language 
clearly  expressing  his  wishes  in  that  respect.  If  the  cove- 
nant merely  provides  that  the  premises  shall  not  be  used  for 
the  exercise  of  any  "  offensive  tvadie  or  business,"  it  would 
prohibit  its  use  only  for  the  exercise  of  such  trades  or 
business  as  in  law  or  in  fact  amount  to  a  nuisance.  But 
all  such  uses,  coming  under  the  head  of  "trades  or  busi- 
ness," as  amount  to  a  nuisance  would  be  embraced  in  the 
covenant ;  but  not  such  as  arise  from  the  use  of  the 
premises  for  any  other  purpose.  Therefore,  if  the  lessor 
desires  to  prohibit  certain  kinds  of  business,  they  should 
be  particularly  specified,  as  the  question  as  to  whether  a 
nuisance  exists  or  not  is  one  of  fact,  and  depends  upon 
the  results  produced  thereby.'  So,  too,  the  covenant 
should  be  fortified  by  a  proviso  for  re-entry  in  case  of 
breach,  otherwise  the  lessor  cannot  eject  the  tenant ;  but 
is  limited  to  damages  for  the  breach  of  the  covenant,"  or 
a  bin  in  equity  for  an  injunction.  Such  covenants  will 
not  be  extended  to  prohibit  the  exercise  of  any  other  trade, 
or  the  use  of  the  premises  for  any  other  purpose  than  that 
named  or  clearly  embraced  in  the  conveyance  ;  °  and  if 
the  covenant  provides  that  "no  trades  or  businesses" 
(specifying  them),  "or  any  other  offensive  trade,^'  shall 
be  exercised  upon  the  premises,  omitting  the  words  "  or 
business,"  the  word  trade  will  not  be  construed  as  hav- 
ing the  same  meaning  as  the  word  "  business  "  in  the 
former  clause,  but  wiU  treat  it  as  applicable  only  to  a  deal- 
ing by  buying  and  selUng ;  "for,"  said  Lord  Denman, 
"although  every  trade  is  a  business,  every  business  is  not 
a  trade."*    Where  the  lease  prohibited   the  exercise  of 

•Wetherellv.  Bird,  6C.  &P.  195;  pijpe  maker,  tobacco-pipe  burner, 

reversed  in  part,  2  Ad.  &  El.  161 ;  soap  maker,  sugar  baker,  fellmon- 

James  v.  Thorne,  1  B.  &  C.  715.  ger,  dyer,  distiller,  victualler,  vint- 

=  Woodf all's  L.  &T.  {9th.  ed.)557.  ner,  tavern  keeper  or  coflEee-house 

'Van  V.   Corfe,  ante ;   Flight  v.  keeper,  tanner,   common  brewer. 

Booth,  1  Bing.  N.  C.  370.  or  any  offensive  trade,  without  U- 

■»  Wetherell  v.  Bird,  2  Ad.  &  El.  cense."    The  defendant,  who  took 

161.    In  this  case  a  lease  was  made  the  lease  as  assignee,  used  the  prem- 

of  a  house,  containing  a  covenant  ises  as  a  private  lunatic  asylum.    At 

with  a  clause  of  forfeiture,  that  the  Nisi  Prius,<o  C.  &  P.   195,  Loed 

lessee  would  not  "use  or  exercise  Denman  ruled  that,  usingtheprem- 

the  trades  or  businesses  of  a  butch-  ises  for  a  private  lunatic  asylum 

er,  baker,  slaughter-man,  neither  came  within  the  meaning  of  the 

of  taUow,  tallow  chandler,  tobacco-  covenant,     notwithstanding     the 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]    "Waiver  of  Forfeiture. 


907 


"any  trade  or  business  "  upon  the  premises,  it  was  held 
that  keeping  a  school  upon  the  premises  constituted  a 
breach.'  A  covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessee  that  he 
will  reside  upon  the  premises  during  the  term  is  reason- 
able," but  it  is  not  a  usual  covenant  ;  but  as  it  relates  to 
the  estate  it  runs  with  the  land,"  and  even  though  the 
lessee  is  divested  of  his  possession  by  execution  or  other 
legal  process,  a  breach  results  therefrom,  and,  if  there  is 
a  provision  therefor,  the  landlord  may  re-enter.' 

A  covenant  to  use  a  building  only  "as  a  private  resi- 
dence "  is  broken  by  devoting  any  part  of  it  to  any  business 
purpose,  as  holding  public  auction  therein ; '  or  a  cove- 


word  "business"'  was  omitted  af- 
ter the  words  "or  any  ofiEensive 
trade."  But,  as  has  been  stated, 
upon  appeal,  this  ruling  was  re- 
versed, and  the  doctrine  established 
that  a  covenant  prohibiting  the  use 
of  the  premises  for  the  purpose  of 
carrying  on  any  trade,  does  not 
prevent  the  lessee  from  carrying 
on  there  any  bixsiness  which  is  not 
a  trade.  In  other  words,  the  word 
' '  trade  "  in  such  covenants  is  appli- 
cable only  to  a  business  conducted 
by  buying  and  selling.  But  the 
word  "business"  has  a  more  ex- 
tended significance,  and  embraces 
any  occupation  for  profit,  as  the 
keeping  of  a  school.  Kemp  v.  So- 
ber, 1  Sim.  N.  S.  517 ;  Bish  v.  Keel- 
ing, ante  ;  Wickenden  v.  Webster, 
ante. 

'In  Bush  v.  KeeUng,  1  M.  &  S. 
95,  the  lease  contained  a  covenant 
upon  the  part  of  the  lessee  not  "to 
convert  the  premises  into  or  per- 
mit them  to  be  used  as  a  shop,  nor 
to  have  any  mark  or  show  of  trade 
or  business  therein,  nor  to  use  or 
exercise,  or  suffer  to  be  used  or  ex- 
ercised, any  trade  or  business  there- 
on," was  held  to  be  broken  by  car- 
rying on  the  business  of  a  school- 
master thereon,  although  there 
was  no  board  or  sign  or  other  mark 
or  show  of  trade  or  business  what- 
ever, the  court  placing  its  decision 
upon  the  ground  that  this  business 
was  likely  to  be  productive  of  as 
much  annoyance  to  the  neighbor- 
hood as  any  other,  and  that  the 
exhibition  of  the  boys  might  be 
said  somewhat  to  resemble  a  show 
of  business.    It  is  no  defence  to  an 


action  to  restrain  the  lessees  from 
using  the  premises  in  a  way  which 
they  covenanted  not  to  do,  that  the 
use  is  not  a  public  or  private  nui- 
sance ;  nor  that  it  will  not  deterio- 
rate the  premises  in  value  ;  nor  that 
the  lessees  have  expended  large 
sums  with  a  view  to  such  prohibited 
use,  which  they  will  lose  if  not 
permitted  to  violate  their  covenant. 
Dodge  V.  Lambert,  2  Bosw.  (N.  Y.) 
570  ;  Howard  v.  Ellis,  4  Sandf .  (N. 
Y.)  369;  Steward  v.  Winters,  4 
Sandf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  587. 

'Ponsonby  v.  Adams,  3  Bro.  P. 
C.  431. 

»Tatum  V.  Chaplin,  3  H.  Bl.  133. 

*Duke  of  Norfolk  v.  Hawke,  3 
East,  481. 

^SeweU  V.  Taylor,  7  C.  B.  N.  S. 
160.  A  covenant  of  this  character 
is  broken  by  putting  up  a  blind  in 
a  window  with  "  A  B,  Dress-mak- 
er," or  "A  B,  Coal  Oflice,"  or  adver- 
tising any  business,  in  any  wise 
calculated  to  make  the  premises  a 
place  of  resort  for  people  who  would 
not  otherwise  come  there.  Wil- 
kinson V.  Jlogers,  ante.  So  by 
keeping  a  day  school  and  dancing 
academy  on  the  premises,  although 
the  neighbors  make  no  complaints. 
Wilkinson  v.  Webster,  6  E.  &  B. 
887  ;  Johnston  v.  Hall,  3  Kay  &  J. 
414.  And  if  it  provides  that  "the 
premises  shall  not  be  let  to  a  butch- 
er, nor  shall  the  said  A  (lessee)  ex- 
ercise the  trade  of  a  butcher  there- 
on," the  covenant  is  broken  if  the 
premises  are  let  to  a  butcher  who 
uses  them  only  as,  a  private  resi- 
dence. Thus  a  lease  was  made 
with   a  covenant  that  the   lessee 


908  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§401- 

nant  that  the  premises  shall  not, be  used  for  the  exercise 
of  the  trade  of  a  butcher  is  broken  by  selling  raw  meat 
upon  the  premises,  although  the  animals  are  slaughtered 
elsewhere.'  A  covenant  not  to  sell  any  articles  at  retail 
upon  the  premises  is  not  broken  by  selUng  at  wholesale  ; " 
nor  is  a  covenant  not  to  use  the  premises  for  the  sale  of 
certain  articles  in  a  way  specified,  broken  by  selling  them 
in  a  way  not  specified.  Thus,  a  lease  contained  a  cove- 
nant that  the  lessor  should  not  "use  the  premises  as  a 
public  house  for  the  sale  of  beer,  &c.,"  and  it  was  held 
that  the  covenant  was  not  broken  by  his  taking  out  a 
license  for,  and  using  the  premises  for  the  sale  of,  beer, 
not  to  he  drunk  upon  the  premises;'  and  where  the  lease 
contained  a  covenant  that  the  lessee  would  not  use  the 
premises  to  "carry  on  the  trade  or  calling  of  hotel,  or 
tavern  keeper,  publican  or  beershop  keeper,  or  seller  by 
retail  of  wine,  beer,  spirits,  or  spirituous  liquors, "  it  was 
held  that  the  covenant  was  not  broken  by  selling  wine 
and  spirits  by  retail,  in  bottles,  not  to  be  consumed  upon 
the  premises ; '  and,  generally,  it  may  be  said  to  be  well 
established  that  such  covenants  will  be  construed  strictly, 
and  will  not  be  extended  by  implication  to  prevent  a 
beneficial  use  of  the  property  that  is  not  expressly  pro- 
hibited.   Illustrative  of  this  rule,  we  wiU  take  the  case  of 

should  "not  lease  the  shop,  yard,  M.  189,  it  was  held  that  a  cove- 
or  other  thing  belonging  to  the  nant  not  to  carry  on  the  business  of 
house  to  one  who  sells  coals,  nor  a  pork  butcher  upon  the  premises 
shall  the  lessee  himself  sell  coals  was  broken  by  exposing  the  car- 
there,"  and  the  lessee  afterwards  casses  of  dead  pigs  therein  for 
let  the  house  to  one  who  was  en-  sale,  although  they  were  cut  up 
gaged  in  the  business  of  selling  and  the  contracts  for  the  sale  were 
coals,  and  it  was  held  a  breach.  made  elsewhere. 
Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Condition  (O).  ^  In  Simon  v.  Farren,  1  Bing.  N. 
Using  a  house  as  a  boarding-house  C.  136,  the  lease  contained  a  cove- 
is  breach  of  this  covenant,  although  nant  that  the  lessee  should  not 
the  landlord  has  consented  that  carry  on  upon  the  premises  the 
the  rooms  may  be  let  to  scholars  business  of  "a  common  brewer  or 
of  a  girls'  school  as  sleeping  rooms.  retailer  df  beer ;"  and  it  was  held 
Gannett  v.  Albree,  103  Slass.  373.  that  carrying  on  the  business  of  a 
And  where  a  covenant  provided  retail  brtewer  was  not  a  breach, 
that  the  lessee  should  erect  a  build-  See,  also*  Pease  v.  Coates,  L.  R.,  3 
ing  to  be  used  strictly  as  a  private  Eq.  688  ;  London,  &c.  Railway  Co. 
dwelling,  it  was  held  to  be  broken  v.  Garnett,  L.  R.,  9  Eq.  26,  where 
by  using  the  building  as  a  pubUc  a  similar  doctrine  was  held, 
house.  Bray  v.  Fogarty,  4  Ir.  Eq.  '  Pease  v.  Coates,  ante ;  Railway 
."544.  Co.  V.  Garnett,  ante. 

>  GaskeU  v.  Spry,  1  B.  &  Aid.  «  JoneS  v.  Bone,  L.  R.,  9  Eq.  674. 
617.    In  Davis  v.  Elsam,  Moo.  & 


CHAP,  xxxvi.]    Waiver  op  Forfeiture.  909 

a  covenant  prohibiting  the  use  of  pi'emises  for  "any 
offensive  trade  or  business."  Such  a  covenant  might  be 
construed  as  covering  any  trade  or  business  offensive  to 
the  lessor,  or  to  the  neighborhood,  but,  unqualified,  it 
would  not  receive  either  construction.  Even  though  such 
a  tenant  is  qualified  by  the  use  of  the  words  "  any  trade 
or  business  offensive  to  the  neighborhood"  or  "other 
tenants  "  of  the  lessor,  it  would  only  cover  such  uses  of  the 
property  as  are  "reasonably"  offensive.  That  is,  such 
uses  of  the  property  as,  in  view  of  the  location  and  char- 
acter of  the  neighborhood,  afford  a  recoverable  ground  of 
complaint.  The  fact  that  the  neighbors  did  not  want  to 
have  the  building  used  for  the  purpose  to  which  the 
tenant  devoted  it,  and  that  such  use  was  offensive  to 
some  of  them,  would  not  operate  as  a  breach,  unless,  in 
view  of  all  the  circumstances,  the  nature  of  the  use,  and 
the  character,  such  use  is  reasonably  offensive  ;  that  is, 
such  as  would  be  offensive  to  reasonable  people,  possessed 
of  reasonable  rather  than  fastidious  tastes  and  notions. 
Thus,  where  the  lessee  covenanted  not  to  carry  on  "any 
noisome  or  offensive  trade,"  it  was  held  that  this  did 
not  preclude  the  defendant  from  carrying  on  a  "  danger- 
ous" trade,'  even  though  it  largely  increased  the  expense 
of  insurance  upon  adjacent  property,  or  rendered  it 
uninsurable ;  as,  using  the  premises  as  a  place  of  deposit 
for  lucifer  matches."  So,  where  the  lessee  covenanted 
not  to  do  any  act  upon  the  premises  "which  may  lead  to 
the  damage,  annoyance,  or  disturbance  of  the  lessor,  or 

'  Hickman   v.    Isaacs,   4  L.  T.  they  now  are,"  they  then  being 

N.   S.   285.      Where  a  lease  con-  occupied  for  the  manufacture  of 

tained  a  covenant  that  the  prem-  travelling    bags,    was    held    not 

ises  should   "  be  used  as  cabinet  broken  by  using  the  premises  for 

ware-rooms,"  it  was  held  that  it  the  manufacttire  of  caps, 

will  not  be  inferred  that  their  use  ^  Hickman  v.  Isaacs,  ante.     But 

for  any  other  purpose  is  prohibit-  where  a  tenant  covenants  not  to 

ed.    Breyman  v.  Noyes.  6  Wis.  1.  use  the  premises  for  any  purpose 

But  a  contrary  rule  is  estabhshed  that  shall  make  the  risk  from  Are 

by  Deforest  v.  Bryne,  1  E.  D.  S.  above    ordinary  or  common,  the 

(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  45  ;  and  such  a  clause  lease  is  violated  by  any  use  of  the 

is  held  to  amount  to  a  restriction,  premises  that,  in"  the  estimate  of 

But  in  Shumway  v.  Collins,  6  Gray  insurers,  makes  the  risk  extraord- 

(Mass.),  a  iTile  similar  to  that  in  the  inary,  as  by  putting  in  a  caloric 

Wisconsin  case   was   established,  engine.    Harmony  Lodge  v.  White, 

and  a  provision  in  the  lease  "  to  be  3  Gin.  (Ohio)  6, 
occupied  for  the    same    purposes 


910  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  401. 

any  of  his  tenants,  or  any  part  of  the  neighborhood, 
*  *  *  or  any  other  trade  or  business  that  may  be,  or 
grow,  or  lead  to  be  offensive,  or  any  annoyance  or  dis- 
turbance to  any  of  (the  lessor's)  tenants,"  and  certain  trades 
were  enumerated,  but  not  that,  of  a  hcensed  victualler,  it 
was  held  that  the  opening  of  a  public  house  upon  the  prem- 
ises did  not  operate  as  a  breach  of  the  covenant.'  A  cov- 
enant not  to  convert  a  dwelling  into  a  shop  does  not  pro- 
hibit the  sale  of  goods  therein,  but  merely  prevents  a 
structural  change  of  the  building  from  a  dwelling-house 
to  a  shop.' 

A  covenant  upon  the  tenant's  part  to  use  a  building 
for  a  certain  purpose,  and  to  use  his  best  endeavors  to 
improve  it  for  that  purpose,  is  not  broken  by  merely 
permitting  it  to  remain  unused  for  such  purpose  for  a 
part  of  the  term.  In  such  cases  the  question  is,  whether 
the  tenant  under  all  the  circumstances  has  made  such 
efforts  to  improve  the  property  as  the  covenant 
contemplated,  and  is  essentially  a  question  for  the  jmy, 
rather  than  a  question  of  law,  unless  it  is  clearly  appar- 
ent from  the  language  of  the  covenant  that  a  partial  non- 
user  is  not  operative  as  a  breach.  Thus,  in  an  English 
case  °  the  defendant  took  a  lease  of  an  opera  house,  • 
with  such  a  covenant.  At  the  end  of  the  first  season  the 
house  was  closed  and  was  not  used  at  all  the  following 
year  ;  the  court  held  that  the  covenant  was  not  broken.* 

'  Jones  V.  Thome,  1  B.  &  C.  715.  get  the  house  open  again,     Lind&r 

See    also    Mechler    v.    Foundling  v.   Pryor,  8  C.   &  P.  518.    As  to 

Hospital.  1  V.  &  B.  188.  best  endeavors,  see  also  Simpson 

'  Wilkinson  t.  Rogers,  ante.  v.  Clayton,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  758.    But 

'  Croft  V.  Lumley,  6  H.  L.  Cas.  where  a  lease  contained  a  cove- 

673.  nant  by  the  lessee  to  use  and  keep 

^  But  to  excuse  a  failure  to  use  open  the  demised  premises  during 
the  premises  during  the  entire  the  term  as  an  inn,  provided  the 
term  under  such  a  covenant  there  proper  licenses  could  be  obtained, 
must  be  good  grounds  for  not  do-  and  to  use  his  best  endeavors  to 
ing  so.  Thus,  a  covenant  by  the  procure  the  licenses  to  be  renewed 
lessee  of  a  public-house  to  use  his  from  time  to  time,  and  not  to  do, 
best  and  utmost  endeavors  to  keep  or  cause  or  permit  to  be  done,  any 
it  open  as  a  public  licensed  victual-  act  whereby  they  might  become 
ling-house,  is  broken  by  the  license  forfeited  or  be  refused ;  and  an  in- 
being  taken  away  on  account  of  junction,  ex  parte,  was  obtained 
irregularities  permitted  by  the  oc-  against  the  defendant,  who  was  an 
cupiers,  and  his  neglect  to  apply  assignee  of  the  premises,  and  had 
for  a  rehearing  of  the  case,  or  to  .threatened  to  do  certain  acts  incon- 
do  some  act  with  a  view  to  obtain  sistent  with  the  first  branch  of  the 
the  continuance  of  the  license,  and  covenant,    restraining   bim    from 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]     WaIVEE  OF  rORFEITUEE.  911 

Where  premises  are  leased  to  a  person,  either  for  a  term 
of  years,  or  for  hfe,  upon  condition  that  he  shall  occupy 
them  himself,  the  covenant  is  not  broken  if  he  permits 
other  persons  to  occupy  the  premises  with  him.  In  a 
Connecticut  case '  a  lease  for  life  was  made  to  a  feme  sole 
with  a  condition,  "but  only  for  herself  to  occupy. as  a 
resident,"  and  also  providing  that  upon  any  violation  of 
the  covenants  or  conditions  of  the  lease  the  lease  should 
bo  void.  The  lessee  subsequently  married,  and  with 
her  husband  occupied  the  house.  The  court  held  that 
the  lease  was  not  thereby  invalidated.  Such  a  covenant 
is  broken  by  the  tenant  abandoning  the  premises  person- 
ally, whether  voluntarily  or  under  compulsion  of  legal 
process."  But  it  has  been  held  in  California  that  such  a 
covenant  is  not  broken  where  the  tenant  occupies  by  an 
agent.' 

Sec.  402.  Waiver  of  forfeiture.— If  a  lessee  exercises  a 
trade  upon  the  premises,  by  which  his  lease  is  forfeited, 
the  landlord  does  not,  by  merely  lying  by  and  witnessing 
the  act  for  several  years,  waive  the  forfeiture,  some  posi- 
tive act  of  waiver  being  necessary  ;  but  if  he  permits  the 
tenant  to  expend  money  in  improvements  to  adapt  them 
to  that  trade,  it  would  be  evidence  for  the  jury  of  his 
consent  to  their  being  so  used.*     If  rent  be  received  for 

discontmuing,  during  the  term,  to  or  be  refused,  the  injunction  was 

us^  and  keep  open  the  preihises  as  dissolved.    Hooper  v.  Brodrick,  11 

an  inn,  or  to  renew  the  hcenses  Sim.  47.     Where  a  tenant  is  pre- 

from  time  to  time,  provided  they  vented  from  using  premises  in  a 

could  be  obtained,  and  from  doing  way  that  he  has  covenanted  to  use 

or  causing  or  permitting  to  be  done  them  by  operation   of   law,  per- 

any  act  whereby  the  hcenses  might  formance  is  excused.    Anglesea  v. 

become   forfeited  or  be  refused ;  Rugley,  6  Q.  B.  107 ;  Grantley  v. 

the  court,  on  the  hearing,  refused  Butler,  6  id.  115,  n.  b. 

to  continue  the  injunction,  as  it  '  Schroeder  v.  King,  38  Conn.  78. 

was  in  effect  the  same  as  ordering  "  Tatum  v.  Chaplin,  3  H.  Bl.  133 ; 

him  to  carry  on  the  business  of  an  Doe  v.  Clarke,  3  East.  481 ;  Doe  v. 

inn-keeper,  though  it  might  have  Carter,  8  T.  E.  57. 

restrained  him  from  doing,  or  cans-  *  Clark  v.  Clark,  49  Cal.  586. 

ing  or  permitting  to  be  done,  any  act  *  Where  the  lessee  covenanted  to 

which  would  put  it  out  of  his  pow-  use  the  premises  only  to  keep  a 

er,  or  the  power  of  any  other  per-  lager  beer  saloon,  and  after  the 

son,  to  carry  on  that  business  on  term  began  commenced  fitting  up 

the  premises.     As  it  was  not  shown  a  restaurant  thereon,  at  considera- 

that  the  defendant  had  threatened  ble  expense  and  without  objection 

or  intended  to  do,  or  to  cause  or  from  the  lessor's  agent,  who  knew 

permittobedone,  any  act  whereby  the  facts;  it    was  held,  that  by 

the  Hcenses  might  become  forfeited  such  omission  to  object,  the  lessor 


912  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  403. 

twenty  years,  with  full  knowledge  of  the  breach  of 
covenant,  and  without  any  objection,  a  license  under  seal 
may  be  presumed  and  found  by  the  jury."  Where  there 
is  a  covenant  against  carrying  on  a  particular  trade  with- 
out written  license,  the  mere  fact  of  the  lessor's  suffer- 
ing the  tenant  to  carry  on  one  trade  on  the  premises  will 
not  afterwards  authorize  his  carrying  on  another  with- 
out a  written  license."  It  seems  that  a  covenant  not  to 
carry  on  or  suffer  upon  the  demised  premises  during  the 
term  any  specified  trades  or  businesses,  or  any  trade  or 
business  whatever,  is  a  covenant  of  a  continuing  nature, 
and  broken  from  day  to  day  so  long  as  any  prohibited 
trade  or  business  is  carried  on. ' 

Sec.  403.  Covenants  to  "work  mines.— A  lease  of  a  mine 
contained  a  proviso  that  it  should  be  void  to  all  intents 
and  purposes  if  the  tenant  ceased  working  at  any  time 
for  two  years  :  held,  that  a  fraudulent  working  for  a  short 
time  would  not  prevent  a  forfeiture.*  An  agreement  to 
work  a  mine  as  long  as  it  is  "fairly  workable,"  does  not 
oblige  the  tenant  to  work  it  at  a  dead  loss.'  But  where 
lessees  of  mines  entered  into  an  absolute  unqualified 
covenant  to  get  2000  tons  of  rock  salt  in  each  year  d<iiring 
the  continuance  Of  the  term,  or  pay  for  the  deficiency,  it 

must  be  treated  as  having  waived  the  mine  is  discontinued.    Hodg- 

the  breach.  Malley  v.  Thallheimer,  son  v.  Moulson,  18  C.  B.  N.  S.  333. 

44  Conn.  41  ;  Sheppard  v.  Allen,  3  A  lease  of  a  quarry  having  sev- 

Taunt.   78  ;  Boscawen  v.   Bliss,  4  eral  faces  contained  a  stipulation 

Taunt.  735  ;  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B.  that  the  "quarry  shall  be  worked 

&  Aid.  401.    A  covenant  in  a  min-  as  the  face  is  now  opened."    It 

ing  lease  that  the    lessee   would  was  held  not  to  amount  to  a  breach 

have  piUars  of  soUd  stone  of  suf-  because  the  lessee  worked  one  face 

ficient  strength  to  support  the  roof  to  a  greater  extent  than  the  oth- 

of  the  mine  is  broken  if  such  pil-  ers,    provided    he   preserved   the 

lars  are  not  sufficient  to  prevent  general  shape  of  the  quarry  and 

the    subsidence    of    the   surface,  left  the  faces   in   good   working 

when  the  demise  is  of  all  the  min-  order.    Keeler  v.  Green,  21  N.  J. 

ing  material  under   the   surface,  Eq.  27. 

and  is  to  be  determined  when  such  '  Gibson  v.Doeg,  H.  &  N.  615  ; 

material  is  exhausted,    and   con-  Bridges  v.  Longman,  24  Beav.  27. 

templates  the  removal  of  such  ma-  '  Mechler  v.   Foundling   Hospi- 

terial,  and  such  covenant  is  found  tal,  1  V.  &  B.  188, 

among  other  covenants  by  which  ^  Ambler  v.  Woodbridge,  9  B.  & 

the  lessee  is  to  fill  up  the  pits  and  C.  376 ;  Cole  Ejec.  433  ;  Bray  v. 

shafts  so  as  to  make  the  surface  Fogarty,  1  Ir.  Eq.  544. 

good  arable  land,  and  remove  the  ^  Doe  d.  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B. 

engines  and  machinery  and  pay  &  A.  401  ;  Gow.  230. 

compensation  for  damage  done  to  =  Jones  v.  Shears,  7  C.  &  P.  346. 
the  surface  after  the  working  of 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]       Other  Covenants.  913 

was  held,  that  they  were  liable,  whether  the  salt  could  be 
got  easily  or  with  difficulty,  and  that  whether  it  existed 
at  all  was  immaterial.  And  where  such  lessees  cove- 
nanted with  all  reasonable  diligence  to  sink  the  shafts 
down  to  the  salt,  it  was  held,  that  they  were  bound  to  do 
so,  although  it  might  be  an  unreasonable  application  of 
time  and  labor.  So  where  they  covenanted  to  work  it 
during  the  cjontinuance  of  the  term  in  a  proper  and 
workmanhke  manner,  it  was  held,  that  they  must  be 
taken  to  have  covenanted  to  work  the  mine  in  some  way, 
in  as  prudent  and  proper  a  manner  as  they  could  under 
the  circumstances,  and  therefore  had  no  right  to  abandon 
the  works  altogether,  notwithstanding  the  mine  was 
drowned  by  an  influx  of  brine,  which  rendered  it  impos- 
sible to  work  the  mine  at  a  profit. '  A  lessee  of  iron  mines 
covenanted  to  work  them,  unless  prevented  by  accident 
or  want  of  materials,  or  unless  the  ironstone  should  be 
insufiacient  in  quantity  or  quality,  or  would  not  by  itself, 
or  with  a  proper  mixture  or  process,  make  good  common 
pig-iron :  held,  that  the  mixture  intended  was  not  neces- 
sarily of  ingredients  procurable  on  the  demised  premises.' 
Where  there  was  a  demise  of  all  mines  which  then  had 
been,  or  thereafter  during  the  demise  should  be  discovered 
or  opened  under  certain  lands,  and  there  was  a  covenant 
by  the  lessee  that  he  would  work  the  said  mines  in  a 
proper  and  workmanlike  manner,  no  action  lies  on  the 
covenant  if  the  mines  have  never  been  worked  either 
before  or  since  the  demise.' 

Sec.  404.  other  covenants.— The  lessee  often  covenants 
not  to  do  certain  specified  acts  upon  the  premises — as  not 
to  plough  up  a  certain  piece  of  land,  or  not  to  cut  down 
any  trees  upon  the  lands,  or  not  to  dig  ground  or  clay,* 

'  Jervis  v.  Tomkinson,  1   H.  &.  Shrewsbury  t.  Gould,  3  B.  &  Aid. 

N.  195.  487,  where  a  covenant  by  a  lessee 

'  Foley  V.  Addenbrook,  13  M.  &  of  limestone,  at  all  seasons  of  bum- 

W.  174.  ing  lime,  to  supply  the  lessor  with 

'  ^  Quarrington  v.   Arthur,  10  M.  lime  at  a  stipulated  price,  imported 

&  W.  335.  a  covenant  that  he  would  also  burn 

*  Aldridge  v.  Howard,  4  M.  &  G.  lime  at  such  seasons.  In  the  case 
931 ;  WeWb  v.  Plummer,  3  B.  &  of  Flint  v.  Brandon,  1  N.  R.  78, 
AJd.  746  ;  Dawson  v.  Baldwin,  the  lessee  covenanted  not  to  dig- 
Hay.    &    Jo.    34.      See    Earl   of  gravel,  brick-earth,  &c.,  out  of  any 


914 


Miscellaneous  Covenants. 


[§  404. 


or  open  quarries  or  mines  upon  the  land — and  any  cove- 


part  of  the  demised  premises  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  lessor,  or 
paying  him  10s.  per  load,  except 
what  should  be  dug  out  of  two 
acres,  part  of  the  premises  de- 
mised. By  a  memorandum  in- 
dorsed on  the  lease  before  execu- 
tion, it  was  agreed,  that  it  should 
be  lawfvd  for  the  lessor  to  let  to 
any  person,  for  the  purpose  of 
making  bricks  or  tiles  only,  any 
part  of  the  demised  premises,  he 
(the  lessor)  allowing  to  the  lessee 
3Z.  for  every  acre  which  he  should 
so  let ;  and  it  was  further  agreed, 
that  it  should  be  lawful  for  the 
lessee  to  break  up  and  dig  for 
gravel  any  part  of  the  demised 
land,  he  covenanting  to  pay  to  the 
lessor  20Z.  for  every  acre  he  should 
break  up  and  dig,  and  to  make 
good  the  same,  at  or  before  the 
expiration  of  the  lease.  It  was 
argued  that  the  lessee  might  dig 
for  gravel  in  the  two  excepted  acres 
without  the  lessor's  consent,  or  any 
obhgation  to  make  the  ground 
good ;  but  it  was  held,  that  the 
memorandum  was  a  new  agree- 
ment, and  embraced  the  ground 
excepted  by  the  lease,  and  bound 
the  lessee  to  make  good  any  part 
of  the  two  acres  which  he  should 
breakup.  Where  a  lease  contained 
a  provision  that  in  case  the  tenant 
should  observe  and  perform  the 
covenants  in  the  lease  (one  being 
for  the  payment  of  rent),  and 
should  peaceably  quit  on  notice, 
he  should  be  entitled  to  a  way- 
going crop  to  be  taken  from  certain 
specified  parts  of  the  lands  demised ; 
and  that  the  crop  should  be  left  for 
the  landlord  or  his  incoming  ten- 
ant at  a  valuation  ;  it  was  decided, 
that  this  clause  did  not  give  the 
tenant  the  right  of  possession  as 
against  the  landlord  after  the 
determination  of  the  tenancy ;  but 
that  the  tenant  at  most  could  only 
go  on  the  land  for  the  purposes  of 
a  way-going  crop.  Strickland  v. 
Maxwell,  2  Cr.  &  M.  539.  A  cov- 
enant by  a  lessee  to  grind  all  his 
com  and  grains  that  he  should 
spend  in  domestic  use  at  the 'mill 
of  his  lessor's  minor,  is  not  confined 
to  such  com  as  shaU  grow  upon 
the  demised  premises.  Hamley  v. 
Hendon,  12  Mod.  327.  Where  a 
party  agreed  for  a  lease  of  two 
farms,  with  a  condition,  that  in 


the  lease  to  be  granted  should  be 
contained  "covenants,  clauses, and 
agreements,  for  sowing  and 
managing  thereof,  and  for  dis- 
posing of  the  dung  and  straw,  and 
quittmg  and  yielding  up  the 
premises,  agreeably  to  the  manner 
in  which  the  same  had  been,  and 
should  be,  respectively  sown, 
managed,  and  quitted,  by  the  then 
present  tenants  thereof;"  it  was 
determined,  that  the  intended 
lessee  was  not  bound  by  the  cove- 
nants contaiaed  in  a  former  lease ; 
the  terms  being,  not  that  he  should 
hold  as  those  tenants  held,  but  that 
he  should  manage  the  estate  ac- 
cording to  the  mode,  and  quit  it  in 
the  condition,  in  which  they  should 
have  managed  and  quitted  it 
respectively  ;  that  is,  as  the  land- 
lord himself  should  have  permitted 
them  to  manage  and  quit.  Lieben- 
rood  v.  Vines,  1  Meriv.  15.  Com- 
mon husbandry  covenants  in  a 
lease  are  not  the  subject  of  equit- 
able jurisdiction  in  the  way  of  spe- 
cific performance.  Eayner  v. 
Stone,  2  Eden,  128.  If  a  lessee  of  a 
coal  mine  covenants  to  pay  to  the 
lessor  a  certain  proportion  of  the 
value  of  9  cwt.  of  coals  to  be  raised, 
unless  prevented  by  unavoidable 
accident  from  workiog  the  pit,  he 
is  not  excused,  at  law,  by  the 
circumstances  of  the  mine  becom- 
ing flooded,  though  the  cost  of 
raising  the  coal  would  be  greater 
than  its  value  when  raised.  Un- 
avoidable accident  means  an  acci- 
dent physically  unavoidable.  Mor- 
ris V.  Smith,  3  Doug.~  279.  In  the 
case  of  Quarrington  v.  Arthur,  10  M. 
&  W.  335,  the  defendant  took  a  de- 
mise of  all  mines  and  beds  of  coal, 
ironstone,  &o.,  which  then  had 
been,  or  thereafter  during  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  same  demise  should 
be,  discovered  or  opened  under  the 
lands  belonging  to  Dyffwyn  House, 
ar  the  yearly  rent  of  201. ,  to  be  paid 
whether  any  coals,  &c. ,  should  be 
worked  or  not ;  the  lessee  paying 
also  the  yearly  sum  of  21.  for  every 
acre  of  surface  taken  or  used  by 
him,  together  with  the  sum  of  7d. 
for  every  ton  of  coal  or  ironstone 
raised  ;  and  he  covenanted,  at  all 
times  during  the  said  demise  to 
work  the  said  mines  in  a  proper 
and  workmanlike  manner.  Upon 
this     covenant     an     action    was 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]     Paeticular  Persons.  915 

nant  of  this  kind  that  does  not  defeat  the  purpose  for 
which  the  premises  were  leased,  as  expressed  in  the  lease 
itselfj  is  valid  and  binding  upon  the  lessee. 

Sec.  405.  Contracts  to  deal  with  particular  persons.— Cove- 
nants or  undertakings  entered  into  by  the  lessee  to  deal 
with  the  lessor  alone  in  the  way  of  trade,  or  indeed  any 
other  mode  of  binding  a  party  to  purchase  articles  of 
particular  individuals,  are  not  favored  by  the  courts, 
although  it  has  never  been  directly  decided  that  they  are 
illegal  and  nugatory.  The  question  upon  the  validity  of 
such  contracts  has  generally  arisen  with  respect  to  leases 
granted  by  brewers  to  publicans  ;  and  in  many  cases  the 
courts  have  strongly  censured  that  course  of  proceeding, 
not  only  as  being  extremely  injurious  to  the  public 
interest  and  welfare,  but  having  an  evident  tendency  to 
prejudice  the  health  of  the  subject. '  Attempts  were  made 
to  get  over  the  difficulty  by  framing  the  contract  in  the 
alternative,  either  that  the  pubhcan  should  take  all  his 
beer  of  the  brewer,  or  pay  an  advanced  rent ;  but  it  was 

brought,  alleging  as  a  breach  that  or  would  not,  by  itself,  or  with  a 
the  defendant  did  not  work  the  proper  mixture  and  process  in  the 
mines  in  a  proper  and  workman-  smelting  and  manufacturing  there- 
like manner,  but  permitted  them  of,  make  good  common  pig-iron; 
to  lie  ungotton  and  uncleared.  It  it  was  held,  that  it  was  not  neoes- 
was  held,  that,  in  order  to  show  the  sary  that  the  proper  mixture  men- 
defendant  to  have  been  griilty  of  a  tioned  should  be  found  upon  the 
breach,  it  was  necessary  that  the  demised  premises  ;  but  that  it  was 
mines,  the  not  working  of  which  to  be  procured  by  the  lessee  as 
was  the  ground  of  the  alleged  some  of  the  articles  used  in  his 
breach,  should  have  been  dis-  trade  as  a  manufacturer  of  iron, 
covered  or  opened,  the  subject-  Foley  v.  Addenbrook,  13  M.  &  W. 
matter  of  the  demise  being,  not  175.  Where  the  lessees  of  a  coal 
the  mines  under  the  lands  speci-  mine  covenanted  to  get,  by  a 
fled  in  the  deed,  but  only  such  of  certain  time,  the  whole  of  the 
the  mines  as  had  been  or  should  be  demised  mines,  beds,  and  veins  of 
discovered  or  opened;  and,  as  it  coal,  lying  under  certain  messuages 
appeared  by  the  pleadings  that  the  and  closes  of  land,  not  deeper  than 
mines  had  not  been  worked  at  all,  or  below  the  level  of  the  bottom  of 
judgment  was  given  for  the  de-  the  mine,  called  the  Arley  mine, 
fendant.  And  where  a  lessee  of  under  a  certain  point  at  the  surface; 
an  ironstone  mine  covenanted  at  in  an  action  for  breach  of  the 
aU.  times  during  the  term  effectually  covenant,  itwasheld,  thatevidence 
to  work  the  mine  without  inter-  was  admissible  to  show  the  sense 
mission  or  loss  of  time,  save  only  in  which  the  term  level  was  used 
for  such  time  as  there  should  be  among  coal-miners.  Clayton  v. 
absolute  necessity  for  stopping  or  Gregson,  5  Ad.  &  El.  303;  Smith 
discontinuing  the  furnaces  for  re-  v.  Wilson,  3  B.  &  Ad.  728. 
pairs,  or  in  case  the  ironstone  to  be  '  Thornton  v.  Sherratt,  8  Taunt, 
got  and  raised  should  be  insufBcieht  529  ;  Woodf  aU's  L.  &  T.  562-3. 
in  quantity  to  supply  the  furnaces. 


916  MisceUjAneous  Covenants.  [§  405. 

held,  that  even  this  could  not  be  enforced,  unless  it  was 
proved  that  good  beer  was  supplied :  and  the  quality 
cannot  be  shown  to  be  good  by  evidence  that  the  brewer 
served  good  beer  to  his  other  customers  at  the  same 
period  of  time.'  In  another  case,  where  a  lease  contained 
such  a  proviso,  a  plea  in  bar  to  an  avowry  for  such 
advanced  rent,  stating  the  beer  dehvered  by  the  plaintiff 
to  be  bad,  nauseous  and  unwholesome,  was  considered 
to  be  a  good  defence  on  the  merits.'  Where,  in  the  con- 
ditions of  his  sale  of  a  public-house,,  it  was  described  as 
a  free  pubhc-house,  and  the  lease  contained  a  clause  of 
this  nature,  it  was  held,  that  the  purchaser  was  not 
bound  to  complete  his  purchase,  and  might  recover  back 
his  deposit,  notwithstanding  the  lease  was  read  over  by 
the  auctioneer  at  the  time  of  sale.'  Lord  Kenyon,  in  a 
former  case,  doubted  whether  a  covenant  contained  in 
the  assignment  of  a  lease,  requiring  the  assignee  and  his 
assigns  to  buy  the  beer  of  the  assignor,  would  bind  a 
subsequent  assignee : '  and  in  a  late  case,  where  the  les- 
see of  a  public-house  covenanted  for  himself  and  his 
assigns,  with  his  lessors  (brewers),  to  take  all  his  beer  of 
them,  or  f/ie«V  SMCcessors  in  their  said  trade,  and  the  les- 
sors sold  their  trade,  and  the  public-house,  with  other 
premises,  to  third  persons,  who  removed  their  business  to 
a  short  distance  :  it  was  held,  that  the  trade  of  the  lessors 
was  determined,  and  that  their  assignee  could  not  take 
advantage  of  the  covenant  on  the  assignee  of  the  lessee 
purchasing  beer  from  another  brewer.' 

Where  there  was  a  lease  of  hme-works,  with  a  stipula- 
tion that  the  lessor  should  furnish,  and  the  lessee  take, 
coals  from  particular  collieries ;  it  was  held,  that  the  les- 
see could  not,  on  failure  by  the  lessor  to  raise  the  full 
quantity  of  coals,  restort  to  other  collieries  for  the  whole 
of  his  supply,  but  only  for  the  deficiency." 

Sec.  406.  Contracts  in  restraint  of  trade  -within  a  given 
distance.— -A  covenant  to  restrain  a  person  from  exercising 

'  Holcombe  v.  Hewson,  3  Camp,  '  Jones  v.  Edney,  3  Camp.  285. 

391.  ,  "  Hartley  v.  PehaU,  Peake,  131. 

=  Cooper   V.    Twibill,    3    Camp.  »  Calvert  v.  Reid,  10  B.  &  C.  849. 

286,  M.  Wight  T.  Dickson,  1  Dow.  141. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]      Restraint  of  Trade. 


917 


a  trade  is  not  illegal  if  it  is  not  to  the  general  prejudice 
of  the  public,  and  the  consideration  is  reasonable ;'  there 


'  "While  a  contract  restricting 
one  from  exercising  a  particular 
trade  in  the  country  is  void,  and 
generally  when  the  restriction  ap- 
Vilies  to  the  whole  State,  yet  in- 
stances may  arise  when  the  latter 
class  of  restrictions  would  be  held 
vaUd.  In  a  recent  case,  .deter- 
mined in  the  Supreme  t  ourt  of  the 
United  States,  Oregon  Steam  Nav. 
Co.  V.  Winsor,  20  Wall,  (U.  S.)  64, 
this  doctrine  was  announced,  and 
the  court,  after  a  very  *ble  and 
exhaustive  review  of  the  cases  and 
of  the  principles  upon  which  the 
doctrine  holding  such  contracts 
void  is  predicated,  held  that  a  con- 
tract by  which  the  defendant  con- 
tracted not  to  run  a  steamer,  which 
he  had  purchased  of  the  plaintiff, 
upon  ■  any  waters  of  CEilifornia, 
was  valid,  and  an  action  for  a 
breach  of  the  contract  was  upheld, 
the  court  saying  :  "  There  should 
be  no  invariable  rule  that  a  con- 
tract restriction  must  be  Umited 
by  the  State  line.  This  country  is 
substantially  one  country,  espec- 
ially in  all  matters  of  trade  and 
business ;  and  cases  may  arise  in 
which  it  would  involve  too  narrow 
a  view  to  condemn  as  invalid  a  con- 
tract not  to  carry  on  a  particular 
trade  within  a  particular  State." 
But  this  is  an  exception  rather 
than  a  rule,  and  depends  entirely 
upon  the  charsicter  of  the  business 
and  the  effect  of  the  restriction 
upon  the  restricted  party  and  the 
pubhc.  Price  v.  Green,  16  M.  & 
W.  346  ;  Maier  v.  Homan,  4  Daly 
(N.  Y.  0.  P.)  168  ;  Callahan  v.  Don- 
nelly, 45  Cal.  153  ;  as  to  nature  of 
business,  St.  Joseph  R.  E.  Co.  v. 
Ryan,  ll  Kan.  602  ;  as  to  general 
doctrine,  see  Gale  v.  Kalamazoo, 
33  Mich.  344  ;  Hubbard  v.  MUler, 
27  id.  15 ;  More  v.  Bonet,  40  Cal. 
351 ;  Jeiikins  v.  Temple,  39  Ga. 
655  ;  Gillis  v.  Hall,  2  Brewst.  (Penn.) 
343 ;  Treat  v.  Shoninger  Melodeon 
Co.,  35  Conn.  543  ;  Crawford  v. 
Wick,  18  Ohio  St.  190;  Perkins  v. 
Clay,  54  N.  H.  518  ;  Dwight  v. 
Hamilton,  118  Mass.  175  ;  Fox  v. 
Scard,  33  Beavan,  337  ;  Hoyt  v. 
Holly,  39  Conn.  336  ;  Gilman  v. 
Dwight,  18  Gray  (Mass.)  356  ;  .An- 
gler v.  Webber,  14  Allen  (Mass.) 
211 ;  Atkyns  v.  Kinner,  4  Exchq. 

II.~6 


776 ;  Howard  v.  Woodard,  10  Jur. 
1133 ;  Verges  v.  Forshee,  9  La. 
Ann.  294  ;  Duffy  v.  Shockev,  11 
Ind.  70  ;  McClurg's  Appeal,  58 
Penn.  St.  284  ;  Pyke  v.  Thomas,  4 
Bibb  (Ky.)486  ;  Butler  v.  Burleson, 
16  Vt.  176 ;  Heichen  v.  Hamilton, 
8  Iowa,  596  ;  Wood's  Law  of  Mas- 
ter and  Servant,  359-61.  Thus,  it 
is  held  not  unreasonable  to  restrict 
one  from  carrying  on  a  trade 
within  the  city  of  London,  with 
its  four  millions  of  inhabitants, 
Price  V.  Green,  ante  ;  Mallan  v. 
May,  11  M.  &  W.  653,  and  includ- 
ing one  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
from  it,  was  not  unreasonable ; 
Bunn  V.  Guy,  4  East,  190 :  so, 
within  twenty  miles,  Hayward  v. 
Young,  3  Chitty,  407,  but  includ- 
ing a  district  within  two  hundred 
miles,  was  held  void.  Horner  v. 
Graves,  7  Bing.  735.  A  district  of 
thirteen  miles  was  held  vahd. 
Davis  V.  Mason,  5  T.  E.  118.  So 
five  miles,  in  the  case  of  a  milk- 
man.    Proctor  V.  Sargent,  3  Man. 

6  Gr.  30.  In  one  case  the  whole 
Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  was 
held  valid.  Whittaker  v.  Howe, 
3  Beavan,  383.  •  In  this  country, 
generally,  it  is  held  that  a  restraint 
extending  to  the  whole  State  is 
void.  Dunlop  v.  Gregory,  10  N: 
Y.  241 ;  Taylor  v.  Blanchard,  13 
AUen  (Mass.)  370  ;  Nobles  v.  Bates, 

7  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  307  ;  Chappel  v. 
Brockway,  31  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  157 ; 
More  V.  Bonet,  40  Cal.  251.  But 
that  this  is  not  the  invariable  rule, 
see  Steam  Nav.  Co.  v.  Winsor, 
ante,  and  in  one  case  a  restraint 
covering  all  the  territory  west  of 
Albany.  Lawrence  v.  Kidder,  10 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  641.  But  a  contract 
not  to  run  boats  on  a  certain  Une 
of  travel  is  held  good ;  Steam 
Navigation  Co.  v.  Wright,  6  Cal. 
358  ;  so,  an  agreement  not  to  set 
up  a  trade  within  sixty  miles  of  a 
town,  Whitney  v.  Slayton,  40  Me. 
324,  within  twelve  miles,  Mc- 
Clurg's Appeal,  51  Penn.  St. ;  But- 
ter V.  Burleson,  16  Vt.  176,  within 
the  county,  Holbrook  v.  Waters,  9 
How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  335  ;  Lange  v. 
Werk,  3  Ohio  St.  519,  within  the 
city,  Thomas  v.  Miles,  3  Ohio  St. 
374,  within  thirty  miles,  Bowser  v. 
Bliss,  7  Blackf.  (Ind.)  344j  within 


918 


Miscellaneous  Covenants. 


[§  406. 


is,  therefore,  no  objection  to  a  covenant  by  which  a  party 
binds  himself  not  to  exercise  a  particular  trade  within  a 
specified  distance  of  premises  which  he  has  transferred 
to  another,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  the  same 
trade.'  But  a  covenant  by  the  lessor,  that  he  will  not, 
during  the  continuance  of  the  demise,  carry  on  a  certain 
business  in  a  certain  town,  or  elsewhere,  or  in  any  manner 


the  town,  Olark  v.  Crosby,  37  Vt. 
188.  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  no 
precise  rule  as  to  the  extent  of  the 
district  covered  by  a  restriction 
can  be  given  to  determine  the  va- 
lidity of  such  a  contract.  In  all 
cases  the  restraint  must  be  partial, 
must  be  predicated  upon  a  good 
consideration,  and  must  be  rea- 
sonable, and  not  oppressive  ;  Hol- 
brook  V.  Waters,  9  How.  Pr.  (N. 
Y.)  335  ;  and  in  determining  the 
question  of  reasonableness,  the  nat- 
ure of  the  business  is  an  impor- 
tant element,  and,  taken  in  con- 
nection with  the  relative  situation 
of  the  parties  at  the  time  when  the 
contract  was  entered  into,  and  the 
consideration  upon  which  it  is 
predicated,  and  the  interests  of  the 
pubUo,  in  controlling.  Mallan  v. 
May,  11  M.  &  W.  653 ;  Bunn  v. 
Guy,  4  East,  190  ;  Homorv.  Graves, 
7  Bing.  735 ;  Steam  Navigation 
Co.  V.  Wright,  6  Cal.  358.  The 
consideration  of  such  an  agree- 
ment is  suflScient,  however  small, 
if  it  is  a  legal  consideration,  and 
the  courts  will  not  consider  its  ade- 
quacy, Hitchcock  V.  Coker,  6  Ad. 

6  El.  438,  nor  will  it  generally  con- 
sider the  consideration  in  deter- 
mining the  question  of  reasonable- 
ness; Archer  v.  Marsh,  6  Ad.  & 
El.  959  ;  but  in  the  absence  of 
fraud  the  parties  alone  are  the 
judges  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the 
consideration,  and  having  agreed 
upon,  are  bound  by  it.  Duffy  v. 
Shockey,  11  Ind.  70 ;  Guerand  v. 
Bandelet,  83  Md.  561.  Contracts 
in  total  restraint  of  trade  are  void. 
Alger  V.  Thatcher,  19  Kck.  (Mass.) 
51.  So,  those  that  are  unreason- 
able as  to  territory.  Nobles  v.  Bates, 

7  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  307,  or  that  unrea- 
sonably tend  to  limit  or  restrain  the 
operation  of  trades,  Kellogg  v. 
Larkin,  3  Chand.  (Wis.)  133.  See 
bearing  upon  the  legaUty  of  such 
contracts,  Laubenheimer  v.  Mann. 
17  Wis.   343  ;  Gihnan  v.  Dwight 


13  Gray  (Mass.)  356  ;  Pierce  v. 
Woodward,  6  Pick.  (Mass.)  206; 
People  V.  Brockway,  21  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  157  ;  Warfleld  v.  Booth,  33 
Md.  63»;  CaUfomia  Steam  Navi- 
gation Co.  V.  Wright,  6  Dal.  358  ; 
Dean  v.  Emerson,  103  Mass.  480; 
Webb  V.  Noah,  1  Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
604 ;  Morse  v.  Morse,  103  Mass. 
703  ;  Maine  v.  Homan,  4  Daly  (N. 
Y.  C.  P.)  108  ;  Guerand  v.  Dande- 
let,  33  Md.  561 ;  Pyke  v.  Thomas, 
4  Bibb.  (Ky.)  486;  Crawford  v. 
Wick,  18  Ohio  St.  190  ;  BiUings  v. 
Ames,  33  Mo.  265 ;  Jenkins  v. 
Temple,  89  Ga.  655  ;  Beard  v.  Den- 
nis, 6  Ind.  200 ;  GiUis  v.  Hall,  2 
Brewst.  (Penn.)  342 ;  Dixon  v.  U. 
S.,  1  Brock.  (U.  S.)  177  ;  Treat  v. 
Shoninger  Melodeon  Co.,  35  Conn. 
543  ;  Grasselli  v.  Lawdon,  11  Ohio 
St.  349;  Callahan  v.  Donnelly, 
43  Cal.  153  ;  Taylor  v.  Blanchard, 
13  Allen  (Mass.)  370  ;  R.  R.  Co.  v. 
Ryan,  11  Kan.  603  ;  Hubbard  v. 
Miller,  37  Mich.  15 ;  Goodman  v. 
Henderson,  58  Ga.  567  ;  Curtis  v. 
Gokey,  68  N.  Y.  300  ;  Arnott  v. 
Pittston  Coal  Co.,  98  id.  658  ;  Craft 
V.  McConoughy,  79  111.  846 ;  EUis  v. 
Jones,  56  Ga.  504;  Chesman  v. 
Nainby,  3  Stra.  739;  Davis  v. 
Mason,  5  T.  R.  118  ;  Bunn  v.  Guy. 
4  East,  190  ;  Hayward  v.  Young, 
2  Chit.  107 ;  Morris  v.  Coleman,  18 
Ves.  438  ;  Homer  v.  Ashford,  3 
Bing.  332;  Crisdee  v.  Boulton,  3 
C.  &  P.  210 ;  Hitchcock  v.  Coker, 
6  Ad.  &  El.  438  ;  Archer  v.  Marsh, 
6  Ad.  &  El.  959  ;  Proctor  v.  Sar- 
gent, 2  M.  &  G.  30 ;  Mallan  v.  May, 
U  M.  &  W.  653  ;  Avery  v.  Lang- 
ford,  1  Kay,  663;  Mumford  v. 
Gething,  77  C.  B.  N.  S.  805. 

'  Mitchell  V.  Reynolds,  1  P.  Wms. 
181 ;  1  Smith,  L.  C.  289  (4th  ed.) ; 
Bunn  V.  Guy,  4  East,  190  ;  Rannie 
V.  Irving,  7  M.  &  G.  969  ;  Pember- 
ton  V.  Vaughan,  10  Q.  B.  87  ;  Elves 
V.  Crofts,  10  C.  B.  341 ;  Bryson  v. 
Whitehead,  1  Sim.  &  S.  74. 


CHAP.' XXXVI.]  Distance.  919 

be  concerned  in  the  business  is  void.'  A  bond  not  to 
follow  or  be  employed  in  the  business  of  a  coal  merchant 
for  nine  months  (without  any  limit  as  to  space  or 
distance),  is  void."  A  covenant  or  promise  in  restraint  of 
trade  may  sometimes  be  divisible  and  good  in  part,  and 
bad  as  to  the  residue  :  in  such  cases  the  breaches  should 
be  confined  to  the  good  part."  The  court  will  not  inquire 
into  the  adequacy  of  the  consideration  for  the  restriction, 
when  it  appears  to  possess  some  hona  fide  legal  value ; 
but  if  it  is  merely  colorable,  the  restraint  will  be  void.' 
A  mere  technical  or  nominal  consideration  is  insufficient.' 
The  contract  being  under  seal  will  not  dispense  with  the 
necessity  for  a  sufficient  legal  consideration  to  support  a 
stipulation  in  restraint  of  trade.' 

Sec.  407.  How  the  distance  is  to  be  computed.— Where 
the  assignor  of  a  lease  of  a  public-house  in  London  cove- 
nanted that  he  would  not  keep  a  public-house  within  the 
distance  of  half  a  mile  from  the  premises  assigned,  it 
was  held  that  the  half-mile,  as  mentioned  in  the  cove- 
nant, imported  half  a  mile  measured  by  the  nearest  way 
of  access  between  the  premises  assigned  and  any  public- 
house  afterwards  kept  by  the  assignor.'  But  it  appears 
to  be  now  settled  that  the  distance  is  to  he  measured  in  a 
straight  line  upon  a  horizontal  plane,  i.  e.,  as  the  crow 
flies. 

Sec.  408.  Covenants  to  redeliver  fixtures,  &c.— Where 
fixtures,  furniture,  or  other  goods  and  chattels,  are  leased 
together  with  houses,  it  is  usual  to  attach  a  schedule  of 
them  to  the  lease,  and  to  insert  a  covenant  by  the  lessee- 

'  Hinde  v,  Gray,  1  M.  &  G.  195  ;  '  Young  v.  Timmins,  1  C.  &  J 

and  see  Homer  v.  Graves,  7  Bing.  331. 

735  ;  which  appears  to  have  been  «  Prugnall  v.  Gosse,  Alleyn,  67 ; 

overruled  in  error,  6  Ad.  &  El.  966.  The  Tailors  of  Exeter  v.  Clarke,  2 

'  Ward  V.  Byrne,  5  M.  &  W.  548,  Show.  350 ;  Claygate  v.  Batchelor, 

561 ;    Hunlocke   v.    Blacklowe,    3  Owen,  143  ;  Year  Bk.,  3  H.  5,  fo. 

Wms.  Saund.  156.  5  ;  Mitchel  v.  Reynolds,  1  P.  Wms. 

8  Green  v.   Price,   13  M.  &  W.  181 ;  1  Smith,   L.  C.  289-304  (4th 

695  ;  16  id.  346  ;  Nicholls  v.  Stret-  ed.) ;   Button  v.  Parker,  7  Dowl. 

ton,  10  Q.  B.  346,  354.  739. 

"  Hitchcock  V.  Coker,  6  Ad.   &  '  Leigh  v.  Hind,  9  B.  &  C.  744  ; 

El.   438-447  ;   Archer  v.  Marsh,  6  Woods  v.  Dennett,  2  Stark.  89. 
Ad.    &    El.    959  ;    Pilkington   v. 
Scott,  15  M.  &  W.  657. 


920  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  ^09. 

to  redeliver  them  in  the  same  condition  at  the  end  of  the 
term.'  The  object  in  doing  this  is  to  give  the  lessor  a 
remedy  on  the  covenant  (with  clearer  evidence)  for  any 
damage  sustained  by  their  being  removed  or  injured 
during  the  term.  Where  a  lessee  of  a  coal  mine  had 
covenanted  at  the  end  of  the  term  to  yield  up  the  works 
and  mines  and  all  ways  and  roads  in  good  repair,  order 
and  condition,  so  that  the  works  might  be  continued  and 
carried  on  by  the  lessor :  held,  that  sucli  covenant  did  not 
include  wooden  sleepers,  or  iron  train  plates  fastened  to 
such  wooden  sleepers,  used  for  the  purpose  of  a  railway 
or  tramway  from  and  to  the  mines." 

Sec.  409.  Covenants  to  give  up  part  of  land.— Sometimes 
the  lessor  reserves  the  power  of  taking  such  portions  of 
the  land  demised  as  he  may  want  for  building  or  other 
purposes,  upon  giving  a  specified  notice  to  the  lessee,  and 
making  a  proportionable  abatement  out  of  the  rent. 
Such  provisos  may  be  perfectly  reasonable  and  just,  and 
have  often  been  recognized  by  the  courts  both  of  law  and 
equity.  Such  a  power  has  been  extended  to  the  whole  of 
the  land  demised. '  Where  the  proviso  was,  that  the  lessor 
might  from  time  to  time  have  any  part  of  the  land  leased, 
it  was  held,  he  might  require  possession  of  the  whole  :  * 
and  it  was  held  in  the  case  last  cited  that  as  the  proviso 
had  gave  the  lessor  power  to  take  possession  it  did  not 
operate  by  way  of  covenant  merely.  But,  in  another 
case, °  where  there  was  no  such  power,  it  was  held  to 
operate  only  as  a  covenant.  Frequently  a  lease  contains 
a  covenant  that  in  case  the  lessor  shall  sell  the  premises, 
the  lessee  shall,  upon  a  certain  specified  notice,  quit  and 
give  up  possession  to  the  lessor,  and  sometimes  it  is  pro- 

'  Duignan  v.  Walker,  1  Johns,  the  reasonable  use  and  wear  there- 

446  ;  Reg  v.  SaflEron  Walden,  9  Q.  of  will  permit,   damages  by  the 

B.  76  ;  Stokes  v.  GrisseU,  14  C.  B.  elements  excepted ;   it  was  held, 

678  ;  Lake  v.  Butler,  5  E.  &  B.  92  ;  that  the  lessee  was  not  protected 

Jewel  V.  Stead,  6  E.  &  B.  350.  from  liability  for  waste,  although 

'  Duke  of  Beaufort  v.  Bates,  10  it  was  the  result  of  accident,  with- 

"W.  R.  200.     In  Parrott  v.  Barney,  out  the  fault  of  the  tenant. 

2  Abb.  (XJ.  S.)  197,  under  a  cove-  ^  Wilson  v.  Abeel,  2  M.  &  S.  541. 

nant  that,  at  the  end  of  the  term,  ■*  Gardner  v.  Kenward,  12  Q.  B. 

the  lessee  would  deliver  up  the  244. 

premises  ia  as  good  condition  as  '  Wilson  v.  Phillips,  2  Bing.  13. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  Cultivation.  921 

vided  that  the  lessor  shall  pay  the  lessee  such  reasonable 
damages  as  he  shall  sustain  thereby,  or  a  reasonable  sum, 
or  a  certain  specified  sum,  and  such  provisions  are  re- 
garded as  reasonable  and  valid.  But,  where  the  lease 
contains  such  a  provision  the  right  does  not  exist,  unless 
the  lessor  actually  sells  the  premises,'  and  the  sale  must  be 
honafide,  and  not  a  mere  sham  for  the  purpose  of  getting 
rid  of  the  tenant ;  nor  can  it  be  operative  unless  the  speci- 
fied notice  is  given,  unless  the  lessee  waives  such  notice. 
If  the  lease  is  made  determinable  by  either  party,  at  their 
option,  the  lessee  may  quit  at  any  time,  and  the  lessor  may 
put  an  end  to  the  lease  by  a  mere  demand  of  possession  ; 
but  if  any  particular  mode  of  putting  an  end  to  the  term 
is  named  in  the  lease,  that  mode  must  be  strictly 
conformed  to ;  and  if  notice  of  a  particular  duration  is 
required  to  be  given,  a  less  notice  will  not  suffice.  If  it 
is  provided  that  the  lease  may  be  determined  at  the  end  of 
any  two,  three,  four,  or  any  other  number  of  months,  it 
is  incumbent  upon  the  party  to  give  reasonable  notice  of 
his  intention."  If  there  is  a  provision  that  the  lessor  may 
put  an  end  to  the  lease  by  paying  the  lessee  for  his 
improvements,  or  the  loss  he  sustains  by  being  required 
to  quit  before  the  time  is  ended,  payment  may  or  may 
not  be  a  condition  precedent  to  the  exercise  of  the  rights 
according  to  the  language  of  the  covenant. 

Sec.  410.  Obligation  of  tenant  of  farm  as  to  cultivation 
of  land.— Every  tenant,  independent  of  any  express  cove- 
nant, is  bound  to  cultivate  his  farm  in  a  husbandlike 

'  Doe  V.  Kenward,  13  Q.  B.  244.  obtain  a  deed  of  a  part  of  the  prop- 
Where  a  lease  provides  that  the  erty  leased,  the  lease  should  be- 
lessor  shall  not  take  possession  un-  come  void,  or  the  lessee  should 
til  he  has  given  30  days'  notice  to  have  a  right  to  a  lease  of  the  resi- 
the  lessee,  and  paid  the  value  of  due  on  the  same  conditions, — Held, 
improvements  made  by  the  latter,  that  if  the  lessee  entered  and  oc- 
and  that  such  value  shall  be  ascer-  cupied  without  such  deed  being 
tained  by  two  appraisers  appointed  obtained,  he  would  be  taken  to 
by  the  lessor  and  lessee  respect-  have  elected  not  to  avoid  the  lease, 
ively,  the  lessor  is  entitled  to  the  but  to  hold  the  residue  according 
possession  if  he  gives  said  notice,  to  its  terms.  Hall  v.  Spaulding, 
and  tenders  the  full  value  of  the  43  N.  H.  359. 

improvements,  although  the  lessee  '  Goodright  v.  Richardson,  3  T. 

neglects  to  appoint  an  appraiser.  E.  463  ;  Cadby  v.  Martinez,  11  Ad. 

Connor    v.    Jones,    28    Cal.     59.  &    El.   720;    Roe   v.   Hurstsmon- 

Where  it  was  provided  in  a  lease  ceaux,  7  B.  &  C.  555. 
that,  if  the  lessor  should  fail  to 


922  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  410. 

manner  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  and  to 
consume  the  produce  upon  it.  This  is  an  engagement 
which  arises  out  of  the  letting,  and  which  the  tenant 
cannot  dispense  with  unless  by  special  agreement.' 
What  is  to  be  considered  as  a  good  and  husbandlike  mode 
of  cultivation  must  vary  exceedingly,  according  to  soil, 
climate  and  situation;  therefore,  the  "custom  of  the 
country,"  with  reference  to  good  husbandry,  must  be 
applied  to  the  improved  habits  of  husbandry  in  the 
neighborhood  under  circumstances  of  a  like  nature.  Evi- 
dence that  an  estate  had  been  managed  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  country  would  always  be  a  medium  of 
proof  that  it  had  been  treated  in  a  good  and  husbandlike 
manner."  In  an  action  against  a  tenant  for  treating  the 
farm  contrary  to  good  husbandry  and  the  custom  of  the 
country,  it  is  not  incumbent  on  the  landlord  to  prove  a 
definite  known  custom  or  course  of  husbandry;  it  is 
sufficient  to  show  what  is  the  prevalent  course  of  good 
management.;  and  by  proving  that  the  estate  was  not  so 
managed,  the  landlord  will  prove  that  it  was  treated 
contrary  to  good  husbandry  and  the  custom  of  the 
country.'  The  fact  that  a  tenant  has  half  his  farm  under 
tillage  at  the  same  time,  while  no  other  farmer  in  the 
neighborhood  tills  his  more  than  a  third,  is  clear  proof  of 
mismanagement,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  the  country 
in  good  husbandry.*    Out  of  the  bare  relation  of  landlord 

'  Per  GiBBS,  C.  J.,  in  Brown  v.  with  the  law  or  the  express  terms 

Crump,  1  Marsh.  567  ;  Powley  v.  of  the  contract.      Cox  v.  Heisley, 

Walker,  5  T.   R.   373 ;   Onslow  v.  20  Penn.   St.   345 ;  VanDorens  v. 

,   16   Ves.    178;     HaUifax    v.  Everitt,  5  N.  J.  L.  460.      And  it  is 

Chambers,  3  M.  &  W.  662  ;  Beale  not  binding  except  so  far  as  it  is 

V.  Sanders,  8  Bing.  N.  S.  850.     If  universally  obhgatory.    Newson  v. 

the  lease  under  which  the  tenant  Smythes,   3  H.  &  N.  840 ;  1  F.  &. 

entered,  expressly  or  by  necessary  F.  477.     But  it  is  not  necessary  that 

implication,  excludes  the  custom,  it  should  have  been  iramemorially 

it  will  be  binding  upon  a  tenant  established.     It  is  sufficient  if  it  is 

holding  over.    Hutton  v.  Warren,  an  established  usage  in  reference 

1  M.  &  W.  466  ;  Wilkins  v.  Wood,  to  such  farms.      Dalby  v.  Hirst,  1 

17  L.  J.  Q.  B.  319 ;  Wigglesworth  B.  &  B.   234  ;  Leigh  v.  Hewitt,  4 

V.  DaUison,  1  Doug.  201 ;  Clark  v.  East,  154. 

Eoystone,  13  M.  &  W.  753 ;  Senior  '  Per  Lord  Ellenboeough,   C. 

V.  Armytage,  Holt,  197.      But  in  J.,  in  Leigh  v.  Hewitt,    4    East,, 

order  to  amount  to  a  custom  so  as  159. 

to  be  regarded  as  entering    into  *  Leigh  v.  Hewitt,  4  East,  161 ; 

and  forming  part  of  the  contract,  Dalby  v.  Hirst,  1  B.  &  B.  234. 

it  must   be   uniform,    notorious,  *  Leigh  v.  Hewitt,  4East,  154. 
reasonable,  and  not  conflict  either 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  Produce.  923 

and  tenant,  no  obligation  arises  to  make  a  certain  quantity 
of  fallow,  and  to  spread  a  certain  quantity  of  manure 
every  year  thereon.'  * 

Sec.  411.  As  to  expenditure  of  produce  on  premises.— The 
tenant  must  not  carry  manure  or  compost  off  the  prem- 
ises," or  remove  anything  except  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  country.'  It  has  been  said  that  the  tenant  may 
carry  hay  and  straw  off  the  premises,  if  the  practice  is 
not  contrary  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  or  prohibited 
by  the  lease  or  agreement  under  which  he  holds.*  The 
custom  of  the  country  relating  to  cultivation  will  be 
excluded  by  an  express  covenant  or  agreement  incon- 
sistent with  it." 

Sec^  412.  Express  covenants  as  to  mode  of  cultivation.— 
Of  course  it  is  competent  for  the  parties  to  provide  for 
a  special  and  particular  mode  of  cultivation,  and  this  is 
often  done,  and  is  advisable  in  all  agricultural  leases. 
They  are  generally  formed  in  accordance  with  the  custom 
of  the  country,  and  in  any  event  are  so  much  dependent 
upon  the  language  of  the  agreement  as  to  /-ender  it  impos- 
sible to  furnish  any  definite  rules  to  control  a  given  case. 
They  are  generally  incorporated  in  a  lease  for  the  benefit 
of  the  landlord,  but  may  be  insertec^  for  the  protection  of 
the  tenant  in  departing  from  the  usual  course  of  hus- 
bandry. If  a  particular  sum  is  agreed  upon  to  be  paid  in 
case  of  breach  that  is  the  measure  of  recovery ;  as  if  the 
covenant  provides  that  certain  parts  of  the  land  shaU  not 
be  ploughed,  and,  if  done,  that  a  certain  additional  rent 
shall  be  paid,  the  additional  rent  is  not  a  penalty  but  a 
liquidated  satisfaction  for  the  breach,  and  a  court  of  equity 
win  not  restrain  an  action  for  its  breach,'  but  will  rather 
aid  the  action  by  compelling  a  discovery.'    A  covenant 

'  Brown  v.  Crump,  1  Marsh.  567  ;  '  Hutton  v.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W. 

Granger  v.  Collins,  6  M.  &  W.  461.  466  ;  Webb  v.  Hummer,  3  B.  & 

2  Powley  V.  Walker,  5  T.  E.  373 ;  Aid.  746  ;  Roberts  v.  Barker,  1  Cr. 

Gouffh V.Howard,  PeakeAdd.  Cas.  &  M.  808  ;   Clarke  v.  Eoystone,  13 

197.  M.  &W.  75ii. 

"  Onslow  V. ,  16  Ves.  173.  «  Jones  v.  Green,  3  Y.  &  J.  298 ; 

*  Gough  V.  Howard,  Peake  Add.  Bolfe  v.  Peterson,  2  Bro.  P.  C.  486. 

Cas.  197.   But  see  Brown  V.  Crump,  '  Richards  v.  Cole,  Metf.  Plead- 

1  Marsh,  at  p.  569.  ings,  196. 


924 


Miscellaneous  Covenants. 


[§  412. 


to  cultivate,  on  a  certain  system,  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  country,  is  held  to  mean  that  he  -will  so  cultivate 
only  so  far  as  is  universally  obligatory  by  the  custom  of 
the  country.'  A  jury  may  find  that  the  tenant  has  done 
aU  he  was  bound  to  do  by  the  custom." 

Under  an  agreement  to  manage  and  quit  premises 
agreeably  to  the  manner  in  which  the  same  have  been 
managed  and  quitted  by  the  former  tenants,  a  tenant, 
without  notice,  is  not  bound  by  the  terms  upon  which  the 
former  tenants  held.  The  only  rule  by  which,  according 
to  the  agreement,  he  is  to  be  guided,  is  the  condition  of 
the  estate  and  the  mode  in.  Which  it  was  managed  at  the 
time  of  his  taking  possession.'  A  covenant  to  manage 
pasture  in  a  husbandhke  manner  is  equivalent  to  a  cove- 
nant not  to  convert  it  into  arable  land.*  A  covenant  to 
permit  the  landlord  in  the  last  year  of  the  term  to  sow 


■  Fleming  v.  Snook,  5  Beav.  250. 
In  McBride  v.  Daniels,  93  Penn. 
St.  332,  M.  let  to  D.  a  farm  for  the 
term  of  two  years  ;  D.  agreed  "to 
take  all  proper  care  of  said  prem- 
ises, the  same  as  a  careful  and  pru- 
dent farmer  should  of  his  own 
property,  and  retmsn  the  same  at 
the  end  of  said  lease  in  as  good 
condition  as  the  same  is  received, 
except  natural  wear  and  unavoid- 
able accidents."  Also,  "  to  leave 
as  many  acres  seeded  down  as 
there  now  are."  A  clause  in  the 
lease  also  gave  M.  the  privilege  of 
buying  the  hay  and  fodder  on  the 
premises,  at  the  end  of  the  term, 
at  a  discount  of  twenty-five  per 
cent,  below  the  market  price.  D. , 
at  the  end  of  his  term,  brought 
suit  to  recover  the  price  of  the  hay 
and  fodder  thus  taken,  and  M., 
under  a  plea  of  set-off,  offered  to 
prove  that  D.  suffered  Canada 
thistles  to  grow  and  go  to  seed  on 
the  land ;  that  he  pastured  the 
meadow  in  sheep  to  such  an  ex- 
tent as  to  destroy  it ;  and  that  he 
did  not  leave  as  many  acres  in 
grass  as  there  were  when  he  took 
possession,  with  a  view  to  showing 
a  want  of  good  husbandry,  and 
damage  on  the  farm.  It  was  held 
that  under  the  pleadings,  this  evi- 
dence was  admissible.  In  a  Mary- 
land case,  in  1859,  A  took  a  lease 
of  a  cottage,  for  a  bathing-place, 


on  the  grounds  of  a  large  hotel  at 
a  watering-place,  where  were  other 
buildings.  The  lease  contained  a 
covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessee 
to  keep  the  cottage  in  perfect  re- 
pair and  tenantable  condition, 
otherwise  his  rights  were  to  be 
forfeited.  During  the  war  the 
premises  were  occupied  by  troops, 
and  left  in  bad  condition,  and 
after  the  war  were  not  again  put 
in  repair  by  the  lessee,  whereupon 
the  lessor  entered  and  tore  down 
the  cottage.  In  trespass  qu.  cl.  fr. 
by  the  lessee  against  the  lessor,  it 
was  held  that  he  could  not  re- 
cover. Moyer  v.  Mitchell,  53  Md. 
171.  The  right  of  a  lessee,  whose 
lease  is  subordinate  to  a  mortgage, 
to  claim  on  the  foreclosure  for  im- 
provements, is  not  that  of  a 
"third  possessor"  proper.  In 
such  case,  a  fair  price  is  the 
measure  of  the  lessor's  liability 
to  the  lessee  for  improvements  put 
on  the  leased  premises  by  the  les- 
see, which  the  lessor  elects  to  keep. 
Penn  v.  Citizens'  Bank,  33  La.  An. 
195. 

^  Newson  v.  Smythies,  1  F.  &  F. 
477,  479  ;  Rankin  v.  Lay,  3  De  G. 
F.  &  J.  65. 

*  Liebenrood  v.  Vines,  1  Mer.  15. 
See  Hood  v.  KendaU,  17  C.  B.  360. 

^Drury  v.  Molins,  6  Ves.  338. 
See  HiUs  v.  Rowland,  4  De  G.  M. 
&  G.  430. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]    Mode  of  Cultivation.  925 

clover  among  the  tenant's  barley  binds  the  landlord  to 
use  due  diligence  to  ascertain  for  himself  when  the  ten- 
ant sows  his  barley."  A  covenant  at  the  end  of  the  lease 
to  leave  certain  parts  of  the  land  ploughed  for  a  certain 
crop  for  the  incoming  tenant,  means  such  land  as  would, 
in  the  natural  course  of  good  husbandly,  be  ploughed 
and  left  for  the  purpose  of  being  planted  with  such  crops." 
Under  a  covenant  to  pay  additional  rent  for  pasture  land 
which  the  lessee  should  ear,  plough,  break  up,  dig,  use  or 
convert  to  tillage,  or  for  brick  earth,  or  for  any  other 
purpose  whatsoever,  the  question  whether  the  use  of  the 
land  as  a  race-course  and  ground  for  training  horses  is  a 
breach  of  the  covenant  is  one  of  fact  for  a  jury.'  Laying 
down  the  land  to  premanent  grass  again  will  not  protect 
the  lessee,  who  has  once  ploughed  it  up,  from  future 
accruing  additional  rent.*  Under  a  covenant  not  to 
remove  from  the  farm,  during  the  last  year  of  the  term, 
any  of  the  hay,  &c. ,  which  shall  grow  on  the  farm,  the 
lessee  is  prohibited  from  removing  hay,  &c.,  which  ison  the 
farm  in  the  last  year  of  the  term,  at  whatever  time  during 
the  term  it  may  have  grown.'  An  agreement  that  the  ten- 
ant shall  not  sell  any  straw  or  manure  grown  or  produced 
on  the  farm  without  the  license  of  the  landlord,  under 
certain  penalties,  recoverable  as  additional  rent,  extends 
to  straw  sold  by  the  tenant  after  detei-mination  of 
the  tenancy.'  Under  an  agreement  that  the  tenant  shall 
consume  the  hay  on  the  premises,  or  for  every  load  of  hay 
removed  shall  bring  two  loads  of  manure,  the  bringing  on 
of  the  manure  is  not  a  condition  precedent  to  the  carry- 
ing off  the  hay  as  between  the  landlord  and  tenant ;  but 
after  the  tenant  has  quitted  possession  of  the  premises, 
the  succeeding  tenant  may  refuse  to  permit  the  hay  to 
be  removed  until* the  manure  is  brought  on.' 

Under  an  agreement  that  tenant  shall  be  paid  "a  fair 
price"  for  straw  left  on  the  premises  at  the  end  of  his 

'  Hughes  V.  Biohman.  Cowp.  125.  « (j^le  v.  Bates,  3  H.  &  C.  84. 

« Hunter  v.  MiUer.  9  L.  T.  N.  S.  « Massey  t.  GoodaU,  17  Q.  B.  310. 

159.  '  Smith  v.  Chance,  3  B.  &  Aid. 

3  Aldridge  v.  Howard,  4  M.  &  753 ;     Lowndes    v.    Fountain,    1 

Gr.  921.  Exchq.  487. 

■'Birch  V.  Stephenson,  3  Taunt. 
469. 


926  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  412. 

tenancy,  not  containing  any  stipulation  as  to  payment 
for  manure,  the  tenant  is  to  be  paid  for  the  straw  at  a 
fodder  price  only,  i.  e.,  one-half  the  market  price.'  So 
under  an  agreement,  a  tenant  to  pay  an  additional  rent 
for  every  ton  of  hay,  &c.,  sold  off  or  removed  from  the 
premises,  hay  of  very  bad  quality  and  unfit  to  be  eaten 
by  cattle  is  within  the  meaning  of  the  agreement."  But 
under  a  covenant  that  the  lessee  shall  not  sell  or  carry 
away  from  the  demised  premises  any  hay,  straw,  or 
manure  grown  or  produced  thereon  w^ithout  the  consent 
of  the  lessor,  under  the  increased  rent  of  £10  for  every 
ton  so  sold  or  carried  away,  but  that  the  lessee  will  con- 
sume the  hay  and  straw  by  his  cattle,  it  has  been  held 
that  the  lessee  is  entitled  to  sell  the  hay  and  straw  on 
payment  of  the  increased  rent." 

A  condition  not  to  sell  or  convey  away  any  dung,  &c., 
from  a  farm,  extends  to  manure  made  on  the  farm  by 
cows  sold  by  the  tenant  and  provided  with  provender  by 
the  buyer.* 

Under  a  covenant  to  manure  land  with  two  sets  of 
muck  within  the  space  of  six  of  the  last  years  of  the  term, 
the  last  set  of  muck  to  be  laid  upon  the  premises  within 
three  years  of  the  expiration  of  the  term,  the  tenant  may 
lay  on  both  sets  of  muck  within  the  last  three  years  of 
the  term."  Where  a  lease  contained  a  covenant  by  the 
tenant  to  leave  the  manure  on  the  farm  and  sell  it  to  the 
incoming  tenant  at  a  valuation,  it  was  held  that  the 
effect  of  the  covenant  was  to  give  the  tenant  a  right  of 
onstand  for  his  manure  upon  the  farm,  and  that  he  had 
such  a  continuing  possession  of  it  and  property  in  it,  in 
the  mean  time,  as  to  enable  him  to  maintain  an  action  of 
trespass  if  the  incoming  tenant  takes  it  before  the  valua- 
tion has  been  made.° 

Where  a  tenant  covenanted  to  leave  fodder,  &c.,  on 
the  determination  of  his  lease,  and  he  became  bankrupt, 

'  Clarke  v.   Westrope,  18  C.  B.  =  Leigh  v.  Lillie,  6  H.  &  N.  165. 

765.     As   to   the    meaning    of    a  "  Hindle  v.  Pollitt,   6  M.  &  W. 

"  fair  valuation,"  see  Cumberland  529. 

V.  Bowes,  15  C.  B.  348.  *  Pownall  v.  Moores,  5  B.  &  Aid. 

»  Fielden  v.  Tattersall,  7  L.  T.  N.  416. 

S.  718.  "  Beaty  v.  Gibbons,  16  East,  116. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]    Mode  op  Cultivation.  927 

and  his  assignees  refused  to  take  the  lease,  they  were 
held  not  entitled  to  take  the  fodder.'  A  farm  lease  con- 
tained a  covenant  by  the  lessee  that  "he  should  not  nor 
would,  during  the  last  year  of  the  term  thereby  granted, 
sell  or  remove  from  the  said  farm  and  lands  any  of  the 
hay,  straw  and  fodder  which  should  arise  and  grow  on 
the  said  farm  and  lands:"  held,  that  the  ptohibition 
was  not  restricted  to  hay,  straw  and  fodder  which  arose 
and  grew  on  the  farm  in  the  last  year  of  the  term,  but 
extended  to  that  which  had  arisen  and  grown  at  any 
time  during  the  term.' 

The  remedies  given  by  the  law  for  the  breach  of  con- 
tracts relative  to  the  course  of  husbandry  are  :  An  action 
of  covenant,  where  the  contract  is  under  seal ;  an  action 
of  assumpsit,  where  it  is  in  writing  not  under  seal,  or 
verbal;  and  an  action  of  ejectment,  where  the  breach  of 
contract  works  a  forfeiture  of  the  estate.  A  court  of 
equity  will  not  decree  the  specific  performance  of  cove- 
nants to  cultivate  in  a  particular  manner,  but  will  leave 
the  landlord  to  his  remedy  at  law."  It  may,  however, 
restrain  tenants  from  committing  waste,  spoil  or  destruc- 
tion during  the  term.* 

A  court  of  equity  will  not  interfere  to  enforce  a  con- 
tract for  the  cultivation  of  land  in  a  particular  way,  nor 
will  it  undertake  to  determine  what  is  a  proper  course  of 
husbandry."  But,  while  it  will  not  enforce  such  con- 
tracts by  decreeing  a  specific  performance,  yet  it  will 
interfere  by  injunction  to  prevent  a  tenant  from  doing 
acts  in  violation  of  the  express  stipulations  of  the  lease, 
and  even  where  there  is  no  express  covenant  it  will  en- 
join the  tenant  from  doing  acts  in  violation  of  the  im- 
plied covenant  to  cultivate  the  land  in  a  husbandlike 
manner.  Thus,  in  an  Enghsh  case,"  a  tenant  was  re- 
strained from  sowing  mustard  seeds,  saffron  and  other 
deleterious  crops  upon  the  land,  upon  the  ground  that  it 
would  be  injurious  to  the  land,  and  in  violation  of  the 

'  Ex  parte  Nixon,  1  Rose,  445  ;  '  Dunn  v.  Bryan,  7  Ir.  Eq.  143 

^ajjparte  Whittington,  Buck,  87.  Raynor  v.    Stone,    3  Eden,   128; 

2  Gale  V.  Bates,  3  H.  &  C.  84.  Soden  v.  Smith's  L.  &  T.  248. 

3  Rayner  v.  Stone,  2  Eden,  128.  »  Pratt  v.  Brett,  3  Madd.  63. 
*  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Waste  (N). 


928  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  [§  412. 

implied  covenant  to  cultivate  the  land  in  a  husbandlike 
manner.  In  another  English  case,  where  there  was  no 
express  covenant  as  to  the  mode  of  cultivation,  the 
tenant  was  enjoined  from  ploughing  up  pasture,  upon  the 
ground  that  such  act  was  in  violation  of  the  implied 
covenants  of  the  lease  ; '  so  a  tenant  will,  in  the  absence 
of  a  covenant  expressly  permitting  it,  be  enjoined  from 
carrying  away  the  manure  or  the  hay  and  straw  raised 
upon  the  farm,  except  so  far  as  the  same  accords  with 
the  custom  of  the  country  ; "  and  where  a  tenant  cove- 
nants to  leave  a  certain  quantity  of  hay  or  certain  stock 
upon  the  premises  at  the  end  of  his  term,  equity  will 
enjoin  him  from  selhng  the  same,  or  a  bill  in  the  nature 
of  a  quia  timet  may  be  brought,  although  the  landlord 
has  a  full  remedy  at  law,  upon  the  covenant.'  When  in 
a  mining  lease  for  a  term,  the  lessee  covenants  to  pay  a 
certain  sum  per  ton  for  all  the  ore  mined,  or  so  much  per 
load  or  foot  for  the  stone,  slate,  or  marble  quarried,  and 
the  lease  is  silent  as  to  the  time  each  year,  the  mine  or 
quarry  shall  be  worked,  or  as  to  the  quantity  of  ore  which 
shall  be  dug,  or  of  stone  which  shall  be  quarried,  the  lease 
is  not  invaUdated  because  the  lessee  neglects  to  work  the 
mine  or  quarry  continuously.  This  principle  was  illus- 
trated in  a  Massachusetts  case.*  In  that  case  a  lease 
under  seal  of  a  tract  of  land  for  the  term  of  ten  years  by 
A  to  B  and  afterwards  assigned  to  C  contained  the  follow- 
ing provisions.  "  The  party  of  the  first  part  in  consider- 
ation of  grading  and  opening  the  yard,  &c.,  shall  furnish 
clay,  sand  and  water  the  first  year  commencing  "  on  a  day 
named  "free  of  expense  to  the  party  of  the  second  ;  for 
nine  successive  years  following,  the  party  of  the  first  part 
shall  furnish  to  party  of  the  second  part  same  materials 
at  the  rate  of  twenty  five  cents  per  thousand  brick  as 
they  may  count  out  of  the  kiln."  It  also  provided  that 
if  the  clay  on  the  premises  should  be  exhausted  before 
the  lease  expired  the  lessee  might  use  adjoining  land  to 

1  Drury  v.  Molins,  6  Yes.  173.  v.  Buckingham,  3  Bro.  P.  O.  581. 

«  Onslow  V. ,  16  Ves.  173.  *  SmUey    v.     McLanathan,    138 

^  Smith   V.   Niles,   20    Vt.    315 ;  Mass.  363. 
Briggs  V.  Oaks,  26  id.  138  ;  Ward 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]    Mode  of  Cultivation.  95^9 

procure  clay ;  and  that  the  lessee  should  "pay  the  said 
rent  in  semi-annual  payments ."  A  new  agreement  under 
seal,  changing  some  of  the  terms  of  the  lease,  was  made 
before  the  assignment,  by  which  the  lessor  agreed  with 
the  assignee  "  that,  if  he  shaU  take  an  assignment  of  the 
lease  aforesaid  and  proceed  to  manufacture  bricks  upon 
the  premises  covered  thereby  then  I  will  receive  as  rent " 
a  certain  sum  "for  each  thousand  bricks  manufactured  ; " 
and  that  "if  clay  pipe  is  manufactured  upon  the  said 
premises,  or  if  any  other  articles  are  manufactured  from 
clay  thereon  "  the  rent  shall  be  determined  in  a  certain 
manner.  The  lessee  never  manufactured  any  brick.  It 
was  held  in  an  action  upon  the  covenants  of  the  lease,  to 
recover  while  the  defendant  was  in  possession  after  the 
first  year,  that  no  rent  had  become  due  thereunder ;  and 
that  there  was  no  implied  covenant  of  the  lease  that  the 
lessee  should  proceed  and  manufacture  brick  under  it. 
But  when  the  lessee  covenants  to  work  the  mine  a  certain 
number  of  months  each  year,  or  to  mine  a  certain 
quantity  of  ore  each  year,  he  is  bound  to  perform,  and 
upon  failure  to  do  so  is  liable  to  the  lessor  for  the  damages 
sustained  by  him  by  reason  of  his  non-performance. 
When  the  tenant  covenants  to  pay  the  lessor  for  all  gas 
consumed  on  the  premises,  the  sum  due  therefor  is  treated 
as  rent  in  arrears,  and  may  be  distrained  for.'  The 
landlord  is  not  bound  to  treat  an  unliquidated  claim  of 
the  tenant  for  damages,  as  a  payment  on  account  of  rent, 
and  is  only  required  to  credit  the  tenant  with  such  sums 
as  the  parties  have  agreed  to  treat  as  payments  on 
account  of  rent." 

'  Gilmore  T.  Ontario  Iron  Co.,  86         'Spencer    v.    Clinefeller,     101 
N.  Y.  455'. .  Penn.  St.  319. 

'  Femwood  Masonic  Hall  Ass'n 
V.  Jones,  103  Penn.  St.  307. 


930  Eenewals.  L§  4:13 


CHAPTEE  XXXVIL 

EENEWALS. 

Sec.  413.  To  renew. 

Sec.  414.  To  pay  taxes. 

Sec.  415.  Against  incumbrances. 

Sec.  416.  Miscellaneous  covenants. 

Sec.  413.  To  renew.— A  covenant  for  a  renewal  of  the 
lease  on  the  landlord's  part  is  often  inserted  in  a  lease, 
and  when  it  is,  it  is  binding  upon  the  landlord  and  its 
grantees  or  assignees,  as  such  covenants  relate  to  the  land 
and  pass  with  it ; '  and,  if  the  lessee  performs  all  the 
conditions  precedent  to  his  right  to  have  the  lease  renewed, 
a  court  of  equity  wiU  compel  a  specific  performance  of 
the  covenant  by  the  lessor ; "  but  in  order  to  be  binding 
upon  the  lessor  it  must  be  contained  in  the  lease,  or  must 
be  predicated  upon  a  subsequent  valid  and  sufficient  con- 

'  Piggott  V.  Masgn,  1  Paige  Ch.  conditiona  precedent  must  be  per- 
(N.  Y.)  412  ;  Earl  of  Shelburn  v.  formed  in  order  to  entitle  the  ten- 
Biddulph,  6  Bro.  P.  C.  363.  But  a  ant  to  a  renewal.  If  notice  of  the 
covenant  for  a  perpetual  lease  lessee's  desire  to  have  a  renewal  is 
made  by  one  who  does  not  own  required,  the  provision  relating 
the  fee  is  not  binding  upon  the  thereto  must  be  substantially  corn- 
owner  of  the  fee.  Postlewaite  v.  pUed  with.  House  v.  Burr,  24 
Lewthwaite,  2  J.  &  H.  237  ;  Breton  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  525.  And  the  fact 
V.  Tuohey,  8  Ir.  Ch.  190.  that  the  tenant  holds  over  for  a 

2  Furmval  v.  Crew,  3  Atk.  88 ;  long  time,  as  in  our  case  for  a 
Rutgers  v.  Hunter,  6  John.  Ch.  year,  will  not  warrant  a  presump- 
(N.  Y.)  215  ;  Bees  v.  Lord  Dacre,  tion  that  such  notice  was  given, 
cited  9  Ves.  332 ;  Pritchard  v.  Bradford  v.  Patten,  108  Mass.  153; 
Oney,  1  Jac.  &  W.  396.  If  a  cove-  And  if  no  time  within  which  no- 
nant  to  renew  cannot  be  fully  per-  tice  shall  be  given  is  specified  it 
formed  by  the  lessor,  by  reason  of  must  be  given  before  the  term  ex- 
some  statute,  or  otherwise  by  oper-  pires  ;  Renaud  v.  Daskam,  34 
ation  of  law,  a  court  of  equity  Conn.  512  ;  and  in  the  case  last 
will  decree  performance  of  so  cited,  where  the  lease  expired 
much  of  it  as  remains  lawful,  or  March  31st,  and  the  tenant  did 
as  the  lessor  has  power  to  perform,  not  give  notice  of  his  desire  until 
Bettesworth  v.  The  Dean,  &c.,  of  the  succeeding  April  2d,  it  was 
St.  Paul's,  3  Bro.  P.  C.  389.    All  held  too  late. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  To  Renew.  931 

sideration.  A  subsequent  mere  naked  agreement  to 
;renew  has  no  binding  force.'  Where  a  lessor  agrees  with 
a  lessee,  that  at  the  expiration  of  the  lease  then  subsisting, 
"he  shall  have  the  refusal  of  the  premises  for  another 
year,"  the  lessee  has  the  election  to  rent,  or  not,  the 
premises  on  the  same  terms  and  conditions,  and  on  pay- 
ment of  the  same  rent,  and  the  lessor  is  bound  to  renew 
the  lease  upon  the  same  terms,  if  the  lessee  so  elects. 
While  this  provision  for  renewal  is  not  itself  a  renewal 
so  as  to  vest  an  estate,  yet  it  gives  an  equity  which  may 
be  set  upon  as  a  defense  in  a  summary  proceeding  in 
ejectment.' .  In  construing  a  covenant  in  a  lease  for  the 
purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  it  is  a  covenant  for  per- 
petual renewal  or  not,  the  same  rule  of  construction 
applies  as  in  construing  any  other  contract,  and  the  rule 
is  that  the  intention  of  the  parties  to  the  contract  is  to  be 
ascertained  from  the  language  used.  Where  the  language 
used  is  obscure,  the  presumption  is  against  a  covenant 
for  perpetual  renewal ;  but  where  the  language  is  clear 
this  presumption  has  no  apphcation.  When  once  one  is 
satisfied,  according  to  the  canons  of  interpretation,  as  to 
the  meaning  of  a  document,  which  the  law  does  not 
require  to  be  in  any  special  form  of  words,  the  thing  is 
done.  When  once  the  bargain  is  ascertained  there  is  no 
rule,  either  at  law  or  in  equity,  that  the  parties  are  to  be 
punished  because  they  have  not  expressed  themselves 
more  fitly.  The  object  of  rules  of  construction  is  to 
enable  the  courts  to  understand  contracts.'  A  lease  con- 
tained a  covenant  that  the  lessee  should  be  entitled  "on 
giving  six  months'  notice  "  before  the  expiration  of  the 
term,  to  have  a  further  lease  from  the  expiration  of  the 

'In    Robertson   v.   St.  John,    2  *    Tracy  v.  Albany  Ex.  Co.,  Seld. 

Bro.  C.  C.  140,  the  lessor  by  letter  473  ;  Eenoud  v.  Durham,  33  Conn, 

promised     to    renew     the    lease  513.     McAdoo  v.  Galium, 

in     consideration    of     money  al-  'What  was  said  by  Sir  Edward 

ready  laid  out  by  the    tenant  up-  Sugden  in  Sheppard  v.  Doolan,    3 

on  the  premises,  and  it  was  held  Drew.  &  War.   1,  is  borne  out  by 

that  no  valid  agreement  to  renew  the  observations  of  Wood,  V.  C, 

existed,   and   that  the  agreement  in  Hare  v.  Burges,    4  K.  &  J.  45. 

was  not  rendered    valid  by    the  See  also  Exparte  Clarke,  Irish  E. 

fact    that  the    tenant,    upon  the  6  Eq.  51 ;  Brown  v.  Tighe,  3  CI.  & 

strength    of    it,     laid  out   more  Fin.  416. 
money  in  fitting  up  the  premises. 


932  Eenewals.  [§  413. 

original  term  "upon  the  lessee  paying  the  rent  and 
performing  and  observing  the  covenants  of  this  present 
lease."  The  lessee  gave  notice  at  the  time  stated.  At 
the  date  of  the  notice  and  at  the  date  of  its  expiration 
there  was  an  existing  breach  of  a  covenant  to  paint. 
During  currency  of  the  notice  the  lessor  accepted  rent. 
It  was  held,  that  the  performance  of  the  lessee's  cove- 
nants was  a  condition  precedent  to  his  being  entitled  to  a 
new  lease,  and  that  the  lessee  could  not  therefore  enforce 
the  gi'anting  of  it.  The  court  dechned  to  decide  whether 
he  would  have  been  so  entitled  if  the  breach  had  been 
remedied  before  the  expiration  of  the  notice.  It  was 
held,  also,  that  the  landlord  had  not  by  accepting  rent 
waived  his  right  to  take  this  advantage  of  the  breach.' 
A  valid  covenant  to  renew  perpetually  will  be  enforced." 
The  question,  what  quantity  of  interest  is  contracted  for 
can  be  solved  only  by  the  construction  given  to  the  agree- 
ment for  renewal,  and  it  is  immaterial  whether  it  is 
contained  in  an  instrument  under  seal,  or  not  under  seal ; 
and  equally  so,  whether  the  construction  is  arrived  at 

1  Simpson  v.  Titterell,  Cro.  Eliz.  gott  v.  Mason,  1  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 

643 ;    Anonymous,    4    Leon,    50 ;  413 ;    Carr  v.   Ellison,   36  Wend. 

Hays  V.  Bickerstaffe,  3  Mod.  34;  (N.   Y.)  178;  4  Jarm.  Prec.   474; 

Boone  V.  Eyre,  IH.  Bl.  273;  »Duke  Eutgers  v.   Hunter,   6  John.  Ch. 

of  St.   Albans  v.   Shore,  id.  370 ;  (N.   Y.).    Prima    facie  it  is  pre- 

Porter  v.  Sheppard,  6  Term  R.  665  ;  sumed  that  the  landlord  did  not 

Davis  V.  Thomas,  1  Buss.  &  My.  intend  to  covenant  for  the  crea- 

506 ;  Davfson  v.  Dyer,  5  B.  &  Ad.  tion  of  a  perpetuity,   and  if  the ' 

584 ;  Gray  v.  Friar,  4  H.  L.  Cas.  language  used  is  such  as  clearly 

565  ;  Stavers  v.   Curling,  3  Bing.  indicates    such    an  intention   the 

N.  C.  355 ;  Job  v.  Bannister,  3  K.  court  will    carry    it    into    eflfect. 

&  J.  874 ;  38  L.  T.  Rep.  342  ;  Finch  Farnivall  v.   Crewe,   3    Atk.   83  ; 

V.  Underwood,  34  L.  T.  Rep.  (N.  Hare  v.  Burges,   4  Kay  &  J.  45 ; 

S.)776.     Bastin  v.  Bidwell,  44  L.  Bridges  v.  Hitchcock,  1  Bro.  P.  C. 

T.  Rep.  (N.  S.)  742.  532  ;  Smyth  v.  Naugle,  7  CI.  &  F. 

"  Blackmore  v.  Boardman,  38  405.  It  was  held  in  one  case, 
Mo.  430.  But  see  Morrison  v.  Cooke  v.  Booth,  Cowp.  8;  9,  that 
Rossingnole,  5  Cal.  64,  where  it  the  parties  may,  by  their  own  acts 
was  held  that  a  covenant  to  renew  of  successive  renewals,  establish  a 
indefinitely,  at  the  option  of  the  custom  that  amounts  to  a  cove- 
lessee,  is  in  effect  the  creation  of  a  nant  for  perpetual  renewals ;  but 
perpetuity  and  therefore  opposed  later  cases  have  exploded  this 
to  the  policy  of  the  law.  The  mode  of  construing  covenants  by 
courts  do  not  favor  perpetual  re-  the  equivocal  acts  of  the- parties, 
newals,  and  such  covenants  will  Baynham  v.  Guy's  Hospital,  3  Ves. 
not  be  enforcd  unless  clearly  ex-  398 ;  Iggulden  v.  May,  9  id.  331 ; 
pressed,  nor  if  there  is  any  ground  Eaton  v.  Lyon,  3  id.  694  ;  Clifton 
upon  which  the  court  can  reason-  v.  Walmsley,  5  T.  R.  564 ;  Moore 
ably  refuse  to  interfere.  Boyn-  v.  Foley,  6  Ves.  238  ;  Balfour  v. 
ham  V.  Guy's  Hospital,  3  Ves.  298 ;  Willard,  16  id.  156  ;  Brown  v, 
Tritton  v.  Foot,  2  Cox,  174 ;  Pig-  Tighe,  3  CI.  &  F.  405. 


CHAP,  x'xxvn.]  To  Eenew.  93£! 

through  the  medium  of  a  court  of  law,  in  an  action  for 
damages  for  neglect  of  performance ;  or  of  a  court  of 
equity,  on  a  bill  for  a  specific  performance.'  The  true 
construction  of  the  instrument  must  be  the  same  in  every 
court,  although  it  is  proper  for  equity,  when  the  con- 
struction is  doubtful,  to  send  a  case  for  the  opinion  of  a 
court  of  law,  or  to  retain  a  bill  for  a  time,  for  the  purpose 
of  enabling  a  plaintiff,  by  an  action  at  law,  to  obtain  the 
legal  construction  of  the  contract."  As  previously  stated, 
the  courts  are  opposed  to  perpetual  renewals ; '  but  it  is 
now  indisputably  settled  that  an  action  maybe  maintained 
on  such  covenants  at  law,  and  that  equity  will  carry 
them  into  specific  execution  in  cases  containing  evidence 
of  a  perpetual  renewal  having  been  intended  by  the 
parties : '  and  instances  may  exist  in  which  the  intro- 
duction, so  far  from  being  unreasonable,  might  be  equally 
beneficial  to  both  the  lessor  and  lessee ;  as  in  the  case  of 
a  party  taking  a  lease  of  unproductive  land  upon  a  build- 
ing speculation,  with  an  option  to  relinquish  it  at  the 
expiration  of  the  term  first  granted,  or  retain  it  forever 
under  perpetual  renewals.'  Strong  proof  of  intention, 
.  however,  is  requisite  to  support  such  a  contract ;  and,  in 
the  absence  of  an  intention  to  that  effect,  expressed  or 
clearly  implied,  equity  will  not  decree  a  specific  perform- 
9.nce,  although  the  parties  themselves  might  possibly 
have  contemplated  a  perpetual  renewal."  Nor  will  a 
specific  performance  of  a  covenant  for  perpetual  renewal 
be  decreed  if  it  is  improvident,  absurd  and  unequal,  as  if 

'  Eaton    V.   Lyon,   3    Ves.   692  ;  May,  9  Ves.   330  ;   Attomey-Gen'l 

Iggulden  V.  May,   3  Smith,   269  ;  v.  Brooke,  18  Ves.  326  ;  Blown  v. . 

Maxwell    v.   Ward,   13   Pri.   677  ;  Tighe,  3  CI.  &  Fin.  396. 

Brown  v.  Tighe,  3  Bli.  P.  C.  N.  S.  *  Moore  v.   Foley,  6   Ves.    236  ; 

417.  Baynham    y.    Guy's    Hospital,    3 

2  Eees  V.  Lord  Dacre,  9  Ves.  332  ;  Ves.  298  ;  Iggulden  v.  May,  9  Ves. 

Iggulden  V.  May,  ante ;    Dowling  334 ;    Maxwell     v.    Ward,    ante ; 

V.  Mill,  1  Madd.  541 ;   Maxwell  v.  Willan    v.   WiUan,   16    Ves.    84  ; 

Ward,  sup.;  1  McClel.  458;  Shep-  Dowling   v.    Mill,   1    Madd.    548; 

pard  V.  Doolan,  3  Dr.  &  War.  1.  Brown  v.  Tighe,  ante.     And  see 

« Fumival  v.  Crew,  9  Mod.  446  ;  The  City  of  London  v.  Mitford,  14 

Taylor  v.  Stibbert,  3  Ves.  Jr.  443  ;  Ves.  41,  a  case  of  express  covenant 

Baynham  v.  Guy's  Hospital,  3  Ves.  for  perpetual  renewal. 

398;    Per  WiLLES,  J.,  inCookev.  '  Iggulden  v.  May,  7  East,  243. 

Booth,  Cowp.  833 ;  Moore  v.  Foley,  «  Moore  v.   Foley,   6  Ves.    337  ; 

6  Ves.  237 ;    Maxwell  v.  Ward,  11  Harnett  v.   Yeilding,  2    Soho.   & 

Pri.  13 ;  S.  C.  13  Pri.  674  ;   Tritton  Lef.  549. 
V.  Foote,  2  Cox,  174 ;   Iggulden  v. 

II.— 7 


934  Eenewam.  [§  413. 

the  lessor  grant  a  lease  of  premises  worth  $100  a  year,  at 
a  yearly  rent  of  |10,  and  a  covenant  for  renewal  forever 
on  payment  of  a  fine  of  $10  every  ten  years,  without  any 
other  consideration/  So,  where  one  being  administratrix 
of  her  husband,  for  the  benefit  of  their  children,  made 
an  underlease  of  certain  lands  which  she  held  under  a 
church  lease,  to  the  appellant,  at  a  yearly  rent,  taking  at 
the  same  time  a  fine  of  101.,  and  covenanted  that,  as 
long  as  she  held  the  head  lease  in  question,  and  as  often 
as  she  obtained  a  renewal  from  the  archbishop,  she,  her 
executors,  &c.,  would  renew  the  sublease,  under  a  pen- 
alty of  701.,  it  was  held  that  the  contract  was  so  improv- 
ident that  a  renewal  could  not  be  enforced,  particularly 
as  the  covenantor  was  administratrix  ;  and  that  the  option 
to  pay  the  YOZ.,  was  meant  as  an  alternative,  and  the 
only  means  of  making  it  reasonable."  And  the  same  rule 
prevails  where  the  co  venant  has  been  inserted  by  mistake.  * 
So,  if  a  lease  perpetually  renewable  would  be  in  violation 
of,  or  inconsistent  with,  the  nature  of  a  trust,  the  court 
will  not  compel  the  execution  of  a  covenant  for  the 
purpose.^  And  the  same  course  is  adopted  where  the 
term  covenanted  to  be  granted,  though  not  perpetually  • 
renewable,  would  exceed  the  term  which  the  lessor  can 
legally  grant.  Thus,  where  the  founder  of  a  hospital 
directed  that  no  lease  should  be  made  for  any  longer 
term  than  twenty-one  years,  and  the  trustees  demised  the 
premises  for  that  term,  with  a  covenant  to  renew  until 
the  twenty-one  years  should  be  made  up  to  sixty  years, 
the  lessee's  biU  for  specific  execution  was  dismissed,  the 
court  considering  the  performance  of  such  a  covenant  as 
much  in  violation  of  the  founder's  intention,  and  as 
prejudicial  to  the  charity,  as  an  original  grant  for  sixty 
years.' 

'  Eedshaw  v.   The  Governor  &  346 ;  Ashton  v.  Bretland,  9  Mod. 

Co.  of  the  Bedford  Level,  1  Eden,  58. 

346.      And  see  Attomey-Gen'l  v.  *  Attomey-Gen'l    v.   Brooke,   18 

Brook,  18  Ves.  336.  Ves.  319. 

^  Magi-ane  v.  Archbold,  1  Dow,  '  Lydiatt  v.  Foach,  2  Vern.  410  ; 

P.  C.  107.     But  see  Hackett  v.  Mc-  Taylor  v.  Dulwich  Hospital.  1  P. 

namara,  Lloyd  &  Goo.  383.  Wms.  655  ;  Watson  v.  Hemsworth 

*  Redshaw  v.   The  Governor  &  Hospital,  3  Vern.  596 ;  Watson  v. 

Co.  of  the  Bedford  Level,  1  Eden,  The  Master,  &c.,  of  Hemsworth 


CHAP,  xxxvn.] 


To  Renew. 


935 


Whenever  the  estate  is  held  in  trust,  unless  the  lease 
is  founded  on  ample  consideration,  and  obviously  for  the 
benefit  of  the  trust,  a  perpetual  renewal  will  not  be  en- 
forced. The  burden  of  proving  the  sufficiency  of  the 
consideration  is  cast  on  the  lessee.' 

An  unqualified  covenant  to  renew  a  lease  involves  the 
making  of  a  new  lease  of  the  same  premises,  upon  the 
same  essential  terms,  and  for  the  same  period,  as  in  the 
original  lease."  It  often  happens  that  the  covenant  pro- 
vides that  the  lessor  wiU  renew  "under  the  same  rents 
and  covenants "  as  those  contained  in  the  original  lease, 
and  although  it  has  been  held  that  under  such  a  covenant 
the  new  lease  should  contain  a  covenant  to  renew,'  it  is 
now  well  settled  that  this  covenant  does  not  require  that 
the  new  lease  shall  contain  a  covenant  to  renew,  or  indeed 
any  covenant  of  the  former  lease  that  has  been  fulfilled 


EoBpital,  14  Ves.  334 ;  SomervUle 
V.  Chapman,  1  Bro.  C.  C.  61.  A 
general  covenant  for  a  renewal  is 
not  a  covenant  for  a  perpetual  re- 
newal. It  merely  amounts  to  a 
renewal  for  one  term.  Moore  v. 
Foley,  6  Ves.  237 ;  Cuimlngham  v. 
Pattee,  99  Mass.  448 ;  Whitlock  v. 
Duffield,  HoflE.  'Ch.  (N.  Y.)  110. 
And  where  the  covenant  clearly 
imports  a  perpetual  renewal,  as 
where  it  is  "  to  renew  and  continue 
to  renew,"  it  is  a  covenant  for  a 
perpetual  renewal.  Page  v.  Esty, 
54  Me.  319;  Attorney-Gen'l  v. 
Smith,  3  Vem.  746.  See  also, 
Watson  V.  The  Master,  &c.,  of 
Hemsworth  Hospital,  14  Ves.  333 ; 
Attorney-Gen'l  v.  Warren,  3 
Swanst.  303. 

'  Attorney-Gen'l  v.  Brooke,  18 
Ves.  319 ;  Attorney-Gen'l  v.  War- 
ren, 2  Swanst.  391,  303. 

^  Rutgers  v.  Hunter,  ante ;  Trit- 
ton  V.  Foote,  ante.  Of  course, 
there  may  be  covenants  in  the 
original  lease  that  are  merely  acci- 
dental, and  not  essential  parts  to 
the  lease,  and  which  are  not  to  be 
incorporated  into  the  renewal 
lease ;  as  a  covenant  to  build,  to 
renew,  &c.,  or  any  covenant  that 
has  been  fulfilled,  and  that  is  not 
continuous,  Wilson  v,  Astor,  4 
Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  594;  Rutgers  v. 
Hunter,  6  John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  315. 


At  the  expiration  of  a  lease  which 
contained  a  covenant  for  renewal 
at  its  expiration,  for  the  further 
term  of  twenty-one  years,  a  lease 
was  tendered  by  the  lessor  renew- 
ing the  original  lease  for  the  fur- 
ther term  of  twenty-one  years,  at 
the  same  rent,  and  otherwise  upon 
the  same  terms,  covenants,  and 
conditions  as  "were  in  the  said 
original  lease  contained  and  ex- 
pressed." The  original  lease  also 
contained  a  covenant  that  the 
lessor  had  fuU  power  and  authori- 
ty to  grant  said  renewal,  and  a 
further  covenant  for  the  perform- 
ance by  both  parties  respectively, 
of  all  the  covenants  and  conditions, 
&c. ,  contained  in  the  original  lease. 
The  new  lease  however,  did  not 
contain  a  repetition  of  the  cove- 
nants for  renewal,  or  for  quiet  en- 
joyment, contained  in  the  original 
lease.  It  was  held  that  the  inser- 
tion of  such  last-mentioned  cove- 
nants, in  the  new  lease,  was  not  a 
matter  of  strict  right,  to  be  insisted 
upon  by  the  lessee,  before  he  be- 
came liable  to  an  action  at  law, 
and  that  the  omission  thereof  did 
not  prejudice  him.  Ryder  v.  Jen- 
ny, 8  Robt.  (N.  Y.)  56. 

'  Bridges  v.  Hitchcock,  1  Bro. 
P.  C.  533;  Furnival  v.  Crew,  3 
Atk.  89  ;  Iggulden  v.  May,  7  East, 
345. 


936 


JRenewals. 


[§  413. 


and  is  not  continuous.'  Under  a  lease  containing  a 
covenant  to  deliver  a  new  lease,  "with  all  cove- 
nants, grants  and  articles  "  in  the  then  present  indenture 
contained/  or  "at  the  rents,  covenants  and  reservations 
thereinbefore  expressed  "'  or  "under  the  same  rents  and 


'  Dayis  v.  Taylor's  Co. ,  3  Ridgew.' 
P.  C.  398;  EusseU  v.  Darwin, 
Cowp.  833;  Tritton  v.  Foote,  3 
Cox,  174 ;  Baynham  v.  Guy's  Hos- 
pital, 3  Ves.  295  ;  Moore  v.  Foley, 
6  id.  333.  A  different  rule  would 
convert  leases  into  perpetuities 
which  are  odious  to  the  law. 
Brend  v.  Frumvelle,  38  Mich.  215  ; 
Carr  v.  EUison,  20  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
178;  Tracey  v.  Albany  Ex.  Co.,  7 
N.  Y.  473 ;  Richardson  v.  Suyden- 
ham,  3  Vern.  447.  In  Livingston 
V.  Sulzer,  19  Hun  (N.  Y.)  375,  land 
•was  leased  for  five  years,  with  the 
privilege  of  renewal,  any  building 
erected  thereon  by  the  lessee  with 
the  lessor's  approval,  to  be  paid  for 
at  a  fair  valuation  at  the  end  of 
the  term.  A  building,  100x75  feet, 
for  dancing,  selling  lager  beer, 
&o.,  was  erected  thereon,  upon  a 
stone  foundation  sunk  in  the 
ground.  After  a  second  renewal 
of  the  lease,  the  whole  premises 
and  building  were  taken  by  the 
city  for  a  public  park  ;  and  the 
value  of  the  land  was  awarded  the 
lessor,  and  $35,000  to  the  assignees 
of  the  lessee  for  the  building.  In 
an  action  by  the  lessor  to  recover 
this  sum,  which  had  been  paid  into 
court,  it  was  held, 

1.  That  the  building  was  such 
as  was  contemplated  by  the  lease. 

3.  That  the  lessor's  approval  was 
sufficiently  indicated  by  the  re- 
newals granted  after  the  erection. 

3.  That  the  renewals  did  not  af- 
fect the  lessee's  right  to  be  paid 
the  value  of  the  building  at  the 
end  of  the  term  ;  and  his  assignees 
were  entitled  to  the  whole  amount 
awarded  therefor. 

In  Orphan  Asylum  Society  v.  Wa- 
terbury,  8  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  35,  a 
lease  for  twenty-one  years  con- 
tained a  covenant  that  if  the  ten- 
ant, during  the  first  seven  years, 
or  with  the  consent  of  the  land- 
lord at  any  time  during  the  re- 
mainder of  the  term,  should  erect 
a  house  of  two  stories  on  the  land 
leased,  the  landlord,  at  the  end  of 
the  term,  should  pay  for  the  build. 


ing  or  renew  the  lease  for  twenty- 
one  years;  and  that  the  .second 
lease  should  provide  for  a  further 
renewal  of  twenty-one  years,  if 
there  should  be  standing  on  the 
premises  a  house  three  stories 
high,  or,  if  the  landlord  would  not 
agree  to  a  third  renewal,  that  ho 
sliould  pay  the  value  of  such 
building.  The  landlord,  at  the 
end  of  the  first  term,  granted  a 
renewal  for  twenty-one  years. 
The  second  lease  recited  that,  to 
avoid  dispute,  it  was  agi-eed  that 
it  should  contain  all  the  covenants 
required  in  it  by  the  true  construc- 
tion of  the  first  lease.     It  was  held, 

1.  That  the  omission,  in  the  sec- 
ond lease,  of  provision  for  a  further 
renewal  did  not  make  it  obhga- 
tory,  under  the  second  lease,  that 
the  landlord  should  give  a  third 
lease  for  twenty-one  years,  with  a 
covenant  to  renew  in  case  a  dwell- 
ing house  of  three  or  more  stories 
should  be  standing  on  the  land. 

3.  That  the  meaning  of  the  first 
lease  was  that  if,  at  its  expiration, 
the  landlord  did  not  grant  a  re- 
newal, he  should  pay  for  a  two- 
story  house,  if  erected,  or  if  at  the 
end  of  the  second  term,  he  should 
grant  a  renewal  or  pay  for  a  three- 
story  house,  if  erected. 

3.  That  the  first  lease  provided 
for  two  renewals,  but  had  no 
further  provisions. 

"  Iggulden  V.  May,  7  East,  237. 
In  Copper  Mining  Co.  v.  Beach,  18 
Beav.  478,  it  was  held,  that  when 
a  covenant  provided  that  the  les- 
sor would  at  any  time,  when  re- 
quested by  the  lessee,  "  demise  the 
premises  for  a  further  term  of 
thirty-one  years,"  such  new 
leases  "to  contain  the  same  rents, 
covenants,  articles,  clauses,  pro- 
visos, and  agreements,"  amounted 
to  a  covenant  for  a  perpetual 
renewal.  See  also.  Banks  v. 
Haskie,  45  Md.  207;  Baglor  v. 
Peabody  Heights  Co.,  46  id.  633; 
Blackmore  v.  Boardman,  28  Mo. 
420  ;  Page  v.  Esty,  54  Me.  219. 

2  Kenny  v.  Forde,  Batty,  534. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  To  Renew.  937 

covenants,'"  or  "in  the  same  form,""  or  '"'subject  to  the 
same  rents,  and  pursuant  to  the  same  exceptions,  cove- 
nants, reservations  and  conditions  in  all  respects,  as  were 
contained  in  the  original  lease,"  '  do  not  render  it  obliga- 
tory upon  the  lessor  to  deliver  a  lease  with  a  covenant 
of  renewal.*  If  the  covenant  is  simply  to  renew  at  a 
certain  fixed  rent  named  in  the  covenant,  it  does  not 
carry  any  of  the  covenants  of  the  old  lease  with  it." 

The  covenant  may  he  for  a  lease  upon  entirely  different 
terms  or  upon  terms  to  be  thereafter  agreed  upon,  and 
may,  as  is  often  the  case,  provide  that  the  terms  shall  be 
fixed  by  arbitrators.  Where  a  lease  contains  a  covenant 
for  renewal  upon  a  rent  to  be  fixed  by  arbitrators,  and 
the  covenant  is  silent  as  to  the  time  when  such  arbitra- 
tors shall  be  appointed,  the  covenant  will  be  construed 
to  mean  that  they  shall  be  appointed  a  reasonable 
time  before  the  expiration  of  the  lease."  A  lease, 
containing  a  privilege  of  renewal,  provided  that  if  the 
parties  were  unable  to  agree  upon  the  rent,  an  arbitrator 
should  be  chosen  by  each  party,  the  two  to  determine 
the  value  of  the  lot,  and  allow  five  per  cent,  thereon  as 
rent ;  and  if  they  were  unable  to  agree,  that  they  should 
choose  an  umpire  whose  decision  should  be  final.  It  also 
provided  that,  if  a  renewal  was  refused  by  the  lessor  he 
should  pay  to  the  lessee  the  value  of  the  building 
on  the  lot,  to  "be  ascertained  by  three  disinterested 
persons,  on  oath,  to  be  chosen  as  aforesaid."    It  was  held, 

'  Ichiguin  v.  Burnell,  3  Ridgw,  further  term  6f  twenty-one  years. 
P.  C.  376.  The  owner  of   the   reversion  re- 
^  Iggulden  V.  May,  3  N.  R.  453.  newed  the  lease,  which  renewal 
'  TMtton  V.  Foote,  ante.  contained  a  covenent  for  such  rent 
■'Brown  v.   Tighe,  3  CI.   &  F.  under  the  last  renewal  "as  should 
396 ;  Kenny  v.  Forde,  Batty,  534 ;  be  agreed  upon  by  them  respect- 
Job  V.  Bannister,  3  Ky.  &  J.  374.  ively :    but  in  the  event  of  their 
*  Ryder  v.  Jenny,  3  Robt.  (N.  Y.)  not  agreeing  upon  such  rent,  each 
256  ;    Willis  v.  Astor,  4  Edw.  Ch.  party  shall  choose  a  disinterested 
(N.  Y.)  504.  person  to    ascertain    the   same." 
«  Wells  V.  DeLeyer,  1  Daly,  (N.  Held,  that  by  these  covenants,  one 
Y.  C.  P.)  39.      A  lease  contained  party  was  boimd  to  give  and  the 
covenants    for   two    renewals    of  other  to  accept  such  renewal.    The 
twenty-one  years  each.    The  Ian-  rent,  if  changed,  was  to  be  fixed 
guage  of  the  covenant  was,  that  at  by  arbitrators  chosen  by  the  par- 
the  expiration  of  the  term  to  be  ties,  and  no  notice  was  necessary 
granted  by  such  renewed  lease,  as  from  the  lessees    before  the   ex- 
aforesaid,  he  would  grant  a  "  sec-  piration  of  the  lease.      Johnson  v, 
ond  renewal "  of  such  lease  for  a  Conger,  14  Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  195. 


938  Renewals.  [§  413. 

that  it  was  intended  that  the  value  of  the  building  should 
be  ascertained  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  lot  for 
the  purpose  of  fixing  the  rent,  and  that  the  parties  were 
entitled  to  appear  and  be  heai'd  before  the  arbitrators 
as  to  the  value  of  the  building.  Also,  that  even  if  a 
party  waived  his  right  to  appear  before  the  two  original 
arbitrators,  he  was  still  entitled  to  appear  and  be  heard 
before  the  umpire,  and  that  an  award  by  the  latter  where 
a  party  had  had  no  opportunity  to  appear  before  him 
was  void.'  In  such  cases,  if  the  landlord  elects  not  to 
renew,  and  appraisers  are  appointed,  their  appraisal  is 
in  the  nature  of  an  award  and  is  binding  upon  the  par- 
ties and  their  personal  representatives.*  In  case  the  land- 
lord refuses  to  agree  upon  appraisers  or  arbitrators  the 
tenant  must  resort  to  his  remedy  upon  his  covenant ;  and 
in  such  cases  common  prudence  would  suggest  that  as 
soon  as  may  be  after  the  term  expires  he  should  have 
the  improvements  appraised  by  competent  persons,  as  the 
value  is  to  be  taken  at  the  time  when  the  term  ends.' 
But  the  landlord  may  renew ;  and  if  he  tenders  a  new 
lease  for  the  stipulated  term,  but  which  does  not  contain 
a  covenant  for  renewal  or  quiet  enjoyment,  unless  the 
covenant  is  clearly  perpetual,  such  tender  is  a  bar  to  an 
action  upon  the  covenant.  *  And  where  the  lease  provides 
that  the  landlord  wiU,  at  the  end  of  the  term,  pay  fOT 
the  improvements  or  renew  the  lease  upon  such  terms 
as  might  be  agreed  upon  between  the  parties,  and  the 
tenant  refuses  to  accept  a  renewal  upon  any  terms,  he 

'  Brown  v.  Lyddy,  11  Htiii  (N.  eluding  improvements.  Lowe  v. 
Y.  S.  C.)  451.  A  lease  for  ninety-  Browne,  23  Ohio  St.  463. 
nine  years,  renewable  forever,  ^Van  Cortland  v.  Underhill,  17 
stipulated  for  a  revaluation  of  the  John.  (N.  Y.)  405  ;  Renwick  v. 
"  ground "  every  twenty  years  by  Renwick,  1  Bradf.  (N.  Y.  Smro- 
three  disinterested  men,  one  to  be  gate)  234  ;  HaUiday  v.  Marshall,  7 
selected  by  each  party  and  a  John.  (N.  Y.)  211;  Wells  v.  De- 
third  by  the  two  thus  chosen,  Leyer,  IDaly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)89  ;  Ber- 
the  annual  rent  for  the  next  ry  v.  Van  Winkle,  3  N.  J.  Eq.  390. 
twenty  years  to  be  eight  per  cent.  ^  Halliday  v.  Marshall,  ante  ; 
of  their  assessment.  Held,  that  a  Berry  v.  Van  Winkle,  ante ; 
majority  could  not  make  a  vahd  Whittock  v.  Duffleld,  Hoffm.  Ch. 
report,  and  upon  their  disagree-  (N.  Y.)  110.  If  the  lessee  refuses 
ment,  the  case  should  be  referred  to  appoint  an  appraiser  the  lessor 
to  a  master  to  ascertain  and  report  may  recover  possession.  Conner 
the  "true  value,"— not  the  rental  v.  Jones,  28  Cal.  59. 
value,  but    the    real    worth,  ex-  ■*  Ryder  v.  Jenny,  ante. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.j  To  Eenew.  939 

forfeits  all  claim  to  be  paid  for  the  improvements/  and 
the  landlord,  after  tendering  a  lease,  can  recover  posses- 
sion of  the  premises  without  payment  for  the  improve- 
ments/ "Where  the  lease  provided  that  the  lessor  shall 
not  take  possession  until  he  has  given  a  certain  notice 
and  paid  the  value  of  the  improvements  made  by  the  les- 
see, to  be  ascertained  by  appraisers  to  be  appointed,  one 
by  each,  and  the  lessee  refused  to  appoint  an  appraiser, 
it  was  held,  that  the  lessor,  having  tendered  the  value 
of  the  improvements,  was  entitled  to  possession. ' 

A  covenant  to  pay  for  all  improvements  that  are  made 
upon  the  land,  means  all  that  are  left  there  when  the  term 
expires,  and  does  not  give  the  tenant  a  right  of  recovery 
for  improvements  made,  but  which  are  destroyed  or 
removed  during  the  term.'  Nor  does  such  a  covenant 
extend  to  ordinary  repairs ; '  nor,  if  the  lease  specifies  the 
kind  of  improvements  to  be  made,  can  the  lessee  charge 
the  landlord  with  liability  for  improvements  of  a  different 
kind  :  as,  where  the  covenant  was  "to  renew  or  pay  the 
value  of  such  buildings  as  should  be  erected  in  pursuance 
of  the  lease,"  and  by  the  terms  of  the  lease  the  lessee  was 
to  make  the  buildings  ^reproo/,  within  two  years,  which 
the  lessee  failed  to  do,  it  was  held,  that  the  landlord  was 
not  Uable  upon  the  covenant."  In  the  absence  of  any 
covenant  to  that  effect,  the  landlord  is  under  no  obliga- 
tion to  pay  the  tenant  for  improvements  made  upon  teh 
premises,  however  extensive  or  valuable,  or  however 
much  they  may  enhance  the  value  of  the  prem- 
ises. If  the  improvements  are  such  that  the  tenant 
may    remove    them,    his    right    extends    no    farther 

'  Rutgers  v.  Hunter,  6  John.  Ch.  lots   of  certain   dimensions,    and 

(N.  Y.)  215  ;  Pike  v.  Butler,  4  N.  should  erect  buildings  thereon  of 

Y.  360.  a  certain  description,  or  the  les- 

-  Pearce  v.  Golden,  8  Barb.  (N.  sees'  sub-lessees  should  do  so,  they 

Y.)  332.  should  have  the  privilege  of  pur- 

3  Conner  v.  Jones,  28  Cal.  50.      '  chasing  their  lots  at  the  end  of  the 

*  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Penniman,  term.  It  was  held,  that  the  erec- 
6  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  560.  tion  of  a  building   partly  on  two 

6  Lamette  v.  Anderson,  6  Cow.  lots,  or  of   an    entirely    different 

(N.  Y.)  803.  character  from  those  named  in  the 

*  Fisher  v.  Fisher,  1  Bradf.  (N.  lease,  did  not  give  such  lessees  a 
Y.  Surrogate)  335.  So  where  the  right  to  purchase.  Ostrander  v. 
covenant  was,  that  if  the  lessee  Livingston,  3  Barb.  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
should  divide   the  premises   into  416. 


940  Eenewals.  [§  413. 

than  that ;  and  if  he  fails  to  remove  them  during  the 
term,  or  if  he  surrenders  the  term  without  removing 
them,  his  rights  are  lost.'  If  the  covenant  provides  that 
the  lessor  will  pay  for  the  improvements  at  the  end  of 
the  term  or  convey  the  premises  to  the  tenant  for  a  certain 
specified  consideration,  the  tenant  may  resort  to  equity 
to  (3ompel  a  conveyance  if  the  lessor  declines  to  pay  for 
the  improvements  ;  and  an  assignee  of  the  lessee  has  the 
same  remedy.  And  if  there  are  several  lessees  or  assignees 
any  one  of  them  may  bring  a  bill  for  specific  performance, 
either  in  the  name  of  all  or  in  his  own  name.' 

A  covenant  to  renew  a  lease  * '  upon  such  terms,  and 
for  such  a  term  as  may  be  agreed  upon  by  the  parties," 
implies  a  lease  upon  the  same  terms  and  for  the 
same  duration  as  the  former  lease.'  The  covenant  must 
be  certain  as  to  the  time  and  the  terms  of  the  lease,  either 
in  itself  or  by  some  specific  mode  agreed  upon.  Thus,  it 
has  been  held  that  a  covenant,  that  at  the  end  of  the  terra 
the  lessor  will  take  the  buildings  at  a  valuation,  "or 
grant  a  new  lease ' '  for  a  specified  term  ' '  upon  such  terms 
as  the  lessor,  his  heirs  or  assigns  shall  think  proper,  and 
he  approved  of  by  the  lessee,  "  is  void  as  a  covenant  of 

'  Kutter  V.  Smith,  3  "Wall.  (U.  ently  of  the  appraisers'  report, 
S.)  491 ;  Gudgell  v.  Durall,  4  J.  J.  show  the  value  of  the  building, 
Marsh.  (Ky.)  229 ;  Lawrence  v.  nor  introduce  evidence  of  dam- 
Knight,  11  Cal.  208  ;  Smith  v.  ages  sustained  by  the  lessee's  faU- 
Brown,  5  Rich.  (S.  C.)  Eq.  291.  ure  to  erect  a    more  substantial 

^Ostranderv.  Livingston,  3  Barb,  building  ;  that,  having  made  no 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  416  ;  Van  Home  v.  objection  to  the  character  of  the 
Grain,  1  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  455.  In  building  until  after  the  award, 
such  cases,  where  there  are  sev-  such  objection  would  be  consid- 
eral  lessees  or  assignees,  and  an  ac-  ered  as  waived ;  that  his  having 
tion  is  brought  in  the  name  of  one  no  personal  knowledge  of  the 
to  compel  performance,  the  court  building  until  after  the  appraise- 
vnll  protect  the  rights  of  all  the  ment,  the  appraisers  being  fully 
parties.  It  was  stipulated  in  a  advised  thereof,  was  immaterial ; 
lease  that,  if  the  lessee  would  and  that  his  ignorance,  in  the  ab- 
erecta  certain  building  upon  the  sence  of  fraud  or  concealment, 
demised  premises,  the  lessor  would  was  his  own  laches.  Yeatman  v. 
at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  pay  Clemens,  6  Mo.  App.  210.  Erec- 
to  the  lessee  the  value  thereof,  tions  made  by  a  tenant,  under  a 
such  value  to  be  fixed  by  apprais-  stipulation  in  his  lease  that  he  may 
ers  chosen  by  the  parties.  Ap-  remove  them  at  the  expiration  of 
praisers  were  chosen  who,  upon  a  his  term,  do  not  become  the  prop- 
thorough  examination  of  the  build-  erty  of  the  landlord,  unless  there 
ing,  made  a  valuation.  The  les-  is  a  failure  to  i-emove  them  within 
sor  refused  to  pay  the  appraised  a  reasonable  time.  Kuhlman  v. 
value,  and  the  lessee  brought  suit  Meier,  7  Mo.  App.  260. 
to  compel  payment.  Held,  that  ^  Eutgers  v.  Hunter,  ante, 
the  lessor    could    not,   independ- 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  To  Eenew.  941 

renewal  because  of  uncertainty. '  So  a  covenant  to  renew, 
"the  rent  to  be  proportioned  to  the  valuation  of  said 
premises  at  said  time,"  without  a  provision  for  determin- 
ing that  valuation,  is  too  vague  to  be  enforced  in  equity." 
A  covenant  in  these  words,  to  renew  an  underlease  : 
"And  the  said  lessors  do  promise  to  renew  said  indent- 
ure for  such  further  term  as  their  leasehold  estate  in  the 
premises  may  be  renewed  or  extended,"  was  held  not  to 
be  void  for  indefiniteness.  The  word  "renew,"  ex  vi 
termini,  imports  the  giving  a  new  lease  like  the  old  one, 
on  the  same  terms  except  the  renewal  covenant.  To 
renew  toties  quoties  an  express  stipulation  is  necessary.' 
But  a  covenant  in  a  lease  that  the  lessee  shall  be  entitled 
to  a  renewal,  at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  provided  he 
' '  is  willing  to  give  as  much  as  any  other  responsible  party 
will  agree  to  give, "  fixes  the  amount  of  rent  with  sufficient 
certainty."  Where  the  lease  contains  a  covenant  for  the 
renewal  of  a  lease,  on  a  valuation  or  appraisal  by  arbi- 
trators, and  the  lessor  will  not  comply  with  the  terms  of 
the  covenant,  and  agree  upon  arbitrators  or  submit  the 
matter  to  them,  a  court  of  equity  will  not  decree  specific 
performance  of  that  part  of  the  covenant,  but  will  receive 
evidence  of  the  value,  and  compel  the  execution  of  a 
lease  as  agreed.'  And  if  the  lessor  brings  ejectment 
against  the  tenant,  the  tenant  is  not  obliged  to  try  the 
question  at  law,  but  may  resort  to  chancery  for  an  injunc- 
tion to  restrain  the  action  and  to  compel  the  making  of 

'  Whitlock  V.  Duffield,  1   HofE.  *  Amot  v.  Alexander,  44  Mo.  39. 

Ch.  (N.  Y.)  110.     But  the  doctrine  But  in  Delashmutt  v.  Thomas,  45 

of  tin's  case  was    reversed  in   26  Md.  140,  a  provision  in  a  lease,  that 

Wend.  (N.  Y.)  110,  and  it  was  held  the  lessee  should  "  have  the  pref- 

that  a    court    of    equity   had  no  erence  of  renting  said  property  so 

power  to  restrain  the  lessor's  pow-  long  thereafter  as  it  shall  be  rented 

er  to  prescribe  th.e  terms  of  the  for  a  store,"  was  held  void  for  im- 

second  lease,  and  that  if  the  les-  certainty.     So   in   Whitestone    v. 

sor's  terms  were   not  acceptable,  Davis,  34  Ind.  510,  the  tenant  was, 

and  he  declined  to   pay   for  the  by  the  lease,  given  an  option  of  an 

buildings,  the  lessee's  remedy  was  additional  term  "if  the  farm  is 

to  remove  them.     Abeel  v.  Had-  for  rent  and  the  tenant  suited  the 

cliflEe,  13  John.   (N.  Y.)  297;  Wes-  landlord,  and  they  agreed  on  the 

tern  Trans.   Co.  v.  Lansing,  49  (N.  rent,"   and  it  was  held  that  the 

Y.)  499;  Laird  v.  Boyle,  3  Wis.  covenant  was  void  for  uncertainty. 

431 ;  Pray  V.  Clark,  113  Mass.  283.  'Stromaiher    v.    Zeppenfield,   3 

^Prayv.  Clark,  113  Mass.  283.  Mo.    App.    429;     Hugg    v.    Van- 

» Cunningham  v.  Pattee,  99  Mass.  Berkle,  58  Mo,  802. 
248.     Compare   Creighton  v.   Mo- 
Kee,  2  Brews.  (Pa.)  383. 


942 


Eenewals. 


[§  413. 


a  lease.'  If  the  arbitration  fails  by  reason  of  the  arbi- 
trator chosen  being  unable  to  complete  the  reference,  and 
the  parties  failing  to  agree  on  another  umpire,  the  lessee 
may  maintain  an  action  of  an  equitable  nature  to  compel 
the  execution  of  a  renewal  lease,  and  have  a  reference  to 
ascertain  what  the  amount  of  rent  should  be."  A  cove- 
nant by  the  landlord  to  renew  the  lease  for  a  second  term, 
being  a  contract  to  give  a  new  lease,  does  not  give  the 
tenant  a  right  at  law  to  retain  possession  of  the  premises 
demised  after  the  expiration  of  the  original  term.  If  the 
landlord  refuses  to  comply  with  this  covenant,  the  ten- 
ant has  a  remedy  in  equity,  or  in  an  action  upon  the 
covenants.'  If  the  lessor  refuses  to  perform,  or  if  by. 
alienation  he  puts  it  out  of  his  power  to  perform  he  is 

obtain  a  renewal  within  the  term, 
according  to  the  literal  wording  of 
the  covenant,  it  was  held  that,  he 
having  complied  with  all  the 
conditions  precedent,  equity  would 
compel  the  execution  of  a  new 
lease.  JBut  if  the  lease  provides 
for  a  renewal  fine,  and  there  are 
any  arrearages  of  rent,  they  must 
be  first  paid,  and  the  application 
must  be  made  within  a  reasonable 
time.  If  the  tenant  has  been  guilty 
of  laches  in  seeking  his  remedy,  it 
affords  an  insuperable  bar  to  equit- 
able relief.  Banks  v.  Haskie,  45 
Md.  207. 

i'  Viany  v.  FeiTan,  5  Abb.  Pr.  (N. 
Y.)  N.  S.  110. 

3  Finney  v.  Cist,  43  Mo.  434.  But, 
if  a  tenant  holds  over  under  such 
a  covenant,  which  is  never  per- 
fected, the  landlord  may  treat  the 
tenant  as  a  tenant  or  trespasser  at 
his  election,  and  if  the  terms  are  to 
be  fixed  in  a  specific  manner,  and 
they  are  not  fixed,  the  tenant  holds 
under  the  term  of  the  old  lease 
until  they  are  fixed.  Eyder  v. 
Jenny,  3Eobt.  (N.  Y.)  36  ;  Holsman 
V.  Abrams,  2  Duer  (N.  Y.)  435. 
Before  a  tenant  can  claim  a  re- 
newal of  a  lease  he  must  have  paid 
the  rent  and  performed  all  the 
covenants  of  the  lease,  Behrman  v. 
Barto,  54  Cal.  131.  The  fact  that 
the  lessor  covenants  to  renew,  does 
not  bind  the  tenant  to  take  a  new 
lease.  Bruce  v.  Fulton  Bank,  79 
N.  Y.  154.  In  Canal  Elevator  Co. 
T.   Brown,   36  Ohio  St.   660,    the 


'  Tchieder  v.  Biddle,  4  Dillon  (U. 
S.  C.  C.)  55.  Where  a  tenant  has 
done  aU  that  is  required  of  him  to 
secure  a  renewal,  he  has  an  election 
to  proceed  either  at  law  for  dam- 
ages, or  in  equity  for  a  specific 
performance,  Arnot  v.  Alexander, 
44  Mo.  25,  and  a  court  of  equity 
will  compel  a  specific  performance 
where  there  has  been  a  substantial, 
although  not  a  literal  performance 
by  the  tenant.  "Reed  v.  St.  John, 
2J>aly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  213.  Thus,  in 
the  case  last  cited  the  covenant  to 
renew  required  six  months'  notice 
from  the  lessee.  The  lessor  gave 
his  address  to  the  lessees,  telling 
them  to  communicate  any  matters 
relative  to  the  premises.  The 
lessees,  on  the  day  before  the  six 
months  began  to  run,  mailed  a 
notice  of  their  desire  for  a  renewal, 
but  the  notice  was  not  received  by 
the  lessor  until  a  day  or  two  later. 
It  was  held  sufficient.  So,  too,  the 
condition  may  be  waived.  Thus, 
under  a  lease  in  which  the  lessor 
covenants  to  give  a  renewal  if  the 
lessee  shall  serve  a  notice  binding 
himself  to  take  and  accept  it,  the 
rate  of  rent  upon  such  renewal  to 
be  fixed  by  arbitration,  the  giving 
of  such  notice  becomes  immaterial 
after  the  parties  have  both  pro- 
ceeded to  the  appointment  of 
arbitrators.  Viany  v.  Ferran,  5 
Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  N.  S.  110.  Where 
the  original  term  of  a  lease  for 
99  years,  renewable  forever,  ex- 
pired, and    the    tenant  failed  to 


CHAP,  xxxvn.] 


To  Renew. 


943 


immediately  liable  to  an  action  for  the  breach;'  but  in 
the  case  of  alienation,  if  the  lessor,  before  the  time 
specified  for  the  renewal,  repurchases  the  property,  or 
reinvests  himself  with  the  power  to  lease  it,  an  action 
for  the  breach  must  fail  if  he  performs  or  offers  to  do  so." 
His  executors  are  also  Uable  in  the  same  way,  whether 
the  contract  is  under  seal  or  not."  By  32  Hen.  8,  chapter 
34,  the  assignee  of  a  lessor  is  subjected  to  the  same  liability 
as  the  lessor  himself  would  have  been  liable  to,  whether 


lessees  brought  suit  against  their 
lessor,  under  a  clause  in  their  lease 
which  entitled  them,  at  the  end  of 
their  term,  to  payment  for  im- 
provements placed  by  them  on  the 
premises.  The  lessor  defended  on 
the  ground  that,  by  a  clause  in  the 
lease,  the  lessees  were  required  to 
renew,  if  the  lessor  should,  during 
the  term,  "purchase  the  title  in 
fee-simple  to  said  premises,"  in 
which  event  the  lessees  should  not 
be  entitled  to  payment  for  improve- 
ments until  the  expiration  of  the 
term  ia  the  renewal,  and  that  he 
had,  during  the  original  term, 
purchased  such  title  in  fee-simple, 
and  given  the  lessees  notice  that 
he  required  them  to  renew.  It 
was  held  not  sufficient  for  the 
lessor,  in  proving  his  title,  to  show 
that  he  had,  during  the  tenn,  made 
an  agreement  with  the  owners  of 
the  fee  for  the  purchase  of  the 
premises,  the  evidence  further 
-Bhovdog-that  he  had  not,  during 
the  term,  paia"feepurchase^niDney 
or  received  a  conveyance.  Whether 
temporary  or  partial  occupancy  of 
the  premises  by  lessees,  after  the 
expiration  of  the  term  mentioned 
in  the  lease,  should  be  regarded  as 
consent  to,  or,  in  effect,  a  renewal, 
is  to  be  determined,  not  merely 
from  proof  of  such  occupancy,  but 
from  the  facts  therewith  connected. 
In  a  South  CaroUna  case  A  leased 
a  plantation  to  B  by  a  certain  writ- 
ing which  stipulated  that  "  A 
agrees  to  allow  B  to  appropriate 
11,000  in  improving  the  trunks  and 
banks  on  said  place',  provided  so 
much  be  necessary  to  enable  B  to 
make  a  crop.  B  agrees  to  advance 
$500,  in  equal  amounts  with  A, 
until  the  sum  of  $1,000  has  been 
expended  in  making  the  repairs 
aforementioned,  provided  so  much 


be  necessary ;  and  A  further 
agrees  that,  should  $1,000  prove 
insufficient  to  make  the  repairs 
aforesaid  thorough,  he  will  advance 
something  more,  on  being  advised, 
so  far  as  to  render  the  repairs  com- 
plete. B  agrees  to  return  the 
plantation  to  the  owner  in  good 
repair."  It  was  held  that  B  was 
not  bound  to  advance  more  than 
$500  in  repairs,  occasioned  by  an 
injury  to  the  premises,  after  the 
commencement  of  the  lease,  of 
such  a  nature  as  to  interfere  with 
the  making  of  a  crop.  Mitchell  v. 
Nelson,  13  S.  C.  105.  In  a  Missouri 
case  an  instrument  in  writing,  in 
consideration  of  a  stated  annual 
rental,  leased  and  conveyed,  for 
a  term  of  years,  all  the  coal  on  or 
under  certain  land  therein  de- 
scribed. It  was  held  that  this  was 
not  an  absolute  grant  of  all  the 
coal  in  the  land,  but  must  be  re- 
garded as  a  mining  lease  entitling 
the  lessee  to  mine  .aU  Ifae  oaeA. 
•he  :conld  tluring  fte  term, 
but  that  where  he  had  merely 
accepted  the  lease,  without  enter- 
ing and  taking  possession  of  either 
the  land  or  the  coal,  he  had 
acquired  no  title  to  the  latter. 
Austin  V.  Huntsville  Coal  &  Min- 
ing Co.,  72  Mo.  535. 

1  HiU  V.  Waldron,  Winch.  29 ; 
Mam's  Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  450.  The 
sam.e  rule  prevails  where  the  lessor 
by  his  laches  renders  it  impossible 
for  him  to  perform.  Simpson  v. 
Clayton,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  708 ;  Atty- 
Gen'l  V. ,  3  Mer.  586. 

« Ford  V.  Tiley,  6  B.  &.  C.  325 ; 
Roper  V.  Coombes,  6  id.  584. 

3  Furnival  v.  Crew,  9  Mod.  446. 
But  his  heirs  are  not  liable  unless 
the  contract  is  under  seal,  and  the 
"heirs"  are  specially  bound  by  the 
covenant.    1  Piatt  on  Leases,  731. 


944  Eenewals.  [§  413; 

he  takes  a  freehold  or  merely  a  chattel  interest,"  and  in 
case  the  assignee  refuses  to  perform,  the  lessee  may  sue 
either  or  both/ 

The  right  of  renewal  constitutes  a  part  of  the  tenant's 
interest  in  the  land,  and,  unless  restricted,  may  be  sold 
or  assigned  by  him,  and  the  benefits  of  the  covenant 
pass  to  the  assignee  and  may  be  enforced  by  him  ; '  and 
the  right  also  devolves  upon  his  executors  whether  they 
are  named  in  the  lease  or  not,'  but  all  conditions  prece- 
dent must  be  first  performed ;  °  or,  in  case  the  lessor  has 
by  alienation  or  otherwise  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  per- 
form, the  tenant  must  offer  to  perform  in  order  to  perfect 
his  right." 

It  very  often  happens  that  the  lease  gives  the  lessee  an 
option  to  remain  as  tenant  for  another  term  ;  as,  where 
a  lease  is  for  ten  years,  with  a  provision  that  the  lessee 
"may,  if  he  desire's  to  do  so,  remain  for  ten  years  more," 
the  lease  is,  if  the  tenant  so  elects,  a  good  lease  for  twenty 
years.'    In  such  cases,  if  the  lease  requires  that  notice  of 

'  Vernon  v.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid.  tinue  it  in  force  for  an  additiona 

11 ;  Isteed  v.  Stoneley,  1  And.  62 ;  term  of  years  upon  signifying  their 

Bamford  v,  Hayley,  13  East,  469 ;  election  to  do  so  by  a  written  no- 

Rubery  v.  Jervaise,  1  T.  E.  229.  tice,  is  in  effect  a^  covenant  run- 

'  Bret  V.  Cumberland,  Cro.  Jac.  ning  with  the  land;  so  that  upon 
321 ;  Whitway  v.  Pinsett,  Sty.  300 ;  an  assignment  of  the  lease  by  the 
Burnet  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  &.  C.  589 ;  lessees,  with  the  lessor's  consent, 
Hancock  v.  Coflyn,  8  Bing.  358 ;  the  assigees  are  entitled  to  the  ben- 
Brook  V.  BuLkley,  2  Ves.  298 ;  Pig-  efit  of  such  covenant.  Wilkinson 
gott  V.  Mason,  1  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  v.  Pettitt,  47  Barb.  (N.  Y.)230. 
412;  Eichardson  v.  Suydenham,  2  ■'Bamford  v.  Hayley,  12  East, 
Vern.  477 ;  Barclay  v.  Eichardson,  469 ;  Hyde  v.  Skinner,  2  P.  Wms. 
6  Phila.  (Penn.)  558.  196 ;  Isteed  v.  Stoneley,  1  And.  82. 

2  Eandall  v.  Eussell,  3  Mer.  197 ;  '  Eubery  v.  Jervaise,  1  T.  E.  229 ; 

Winslow  V.  Tighe,  2  BaU.   &.   B.  Mackay  v.  Mackreth,  2  Chitt.  461 ; 

195 ;  Row  v.  DutheUy,  2  Dick.  480 ;  Firman  v.  Lord  Ormonde,  1  Beattv, 

Eowe  V.  Chichester,  3  Ambl.  715.  347.- 

The  rule  is  that,  unless  expressly  '  Hotham  v.  East  India  Co.,  1  T. 

restricted,  any  person  who  takes  E.  638 ;  Scott  v.  Mayn,  Cro.  EUz. 

the  lease,  whether  by  assignment  450. 

or  operation  of  law,  also  takes  the  '  Eanlet  v.  Cook,  45  N.  H.  512. 

right  of  renewal,  and  may  enforce  A  lease  of  a  farm  for  "  one  year 

it.    Vernon  v.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid.  with  the  privilege   of  five  years 

11 ;  Kerne's  Case,  Mo.  27 ;  Furni-  from  the  8th  of  April,  1868,  which 

val  V.  Creer,  ante ;  Isteed  v.  Stone-  term  will  end  at  the  end  of  each 

ley,    ante ;  Bamford    v.    Hayley,  year,  if  the  same  is  sold  any  time 

aiite.    And  this  has  been  held  in  during  said  term,  without  notice," 

the  case  of  an  assignee  of  an  undi-  — Held,   to  create  a  tenancy  the 

vided  half  of  the  premises.    Simp-  duration  of  which  was  so  uncer- 

son  V.  Clayton,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  758.  tain  that  it  was  practically  a  ten- 

A  provision  in  a  lease  for  a  term  ancy  at  will ;  and  on  a  sale  of  the 

of  years  that  the  lessees  may  con-  premises  in  January,  1869,  and  pos- 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  To  Renew.  945 

a  certain  description  must  be  given  of  the  tenant's  elec- 
tion, the  requirement  in  this  respect  must  be  strictly  com- 
plied with.'  If,  as  a  condition  precedent  to  the  exercise 
of  this  election,  certain  things  are  to  be  done  by  the  ten- 
ant, as,  if  the  provision  is  that  "in  case  the  tenant  shall 
erect  a  new  dwelling-house  upon  the  premises,"  describing 
the  kind  of  dwelling  to  be  erected,  or  "in  case  the  tenant 
shall  put  and  keep  the  premises  in  good  repair,"  or  "in 
case  the  tenant  shall  annually  quarry  one  thousand  squares 
of  slate  from  the  premises,"  or  "if  the  tenant  shall  carry 
on  and  cultivate  the  premises  in  a  husbandlike  manner," 
&c.,  &c.,  he  is  to  have  the  privilege  of  remaining  upon 
the  premises  for  the  further  term  of  one,  five,  or  ten  years, 
as  the  case  may  be.  Before  a  right  to  such  additional 
term  vests  in  the  tenant  he  must  perform  the  condition, 
and  neither  a  court  of  law  or  equity  will  enforce  such 
right  unless  performance  or  a  waiver  thereof  by  the  les- 
sor is  shown."  At  law,  strict  compUance  with  these  con- 
ditions is  required,  but  in  equity  a  substantial  compliance 
is  deemed  sufficient.  Thus,  if  the  covenant  contains  a 
provision  that  if  the  lessee  shall  pay  the  rent  and  not  be 
in  arrear  in  respect  thereto  at  the  end  of  the  term,  if  the 
tenant  is  in  arrear  at  the  end  of  the  term,  at  law,  his 
right  to  a  renewal  or  to  exercise  an  option  to  remain  for 

session  given  to  the  purchaser  ia  Y.)  535  ;   Eenaud  v.   Daskam,  34 

April  foUowing,  the  lessee  was  en-  Conn.  512. 

titled  to  emblements.  Pf  anner  v.  ^  Where  the  lessee  covenanted  to 
Stunner,  40  How.  (N.  Y.)  Pr.  401.  repair,  but  has  failed  to  do  so,  the 
The  words,  "This  lease  to  be  re-  court  will  not  decj-ee  a  specific  per- 
newable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  les-  formanoe  of  a  covenant  to  renew, 
sees,"  imply  the  right  of  renewal  Job  v.  Bannister,  2  Kay  &  J.  374. 
for  at  least  another  term  on  -the  Nor  where  the  covenant  is  to  re- 
same  conditions,  at  the  pleasure  of  new  "  if  the  lease  is  not  sooner  de- 
the  lessee.  Creighton  v.  McKee,  termined  by  the  lessee's  acts  or  de- 
7  Phil.  (Pa.)  324.  A  lessee  of  faults."  Thompson  v.  Guyon,  5 
premises  "  for  the  term  of  one  Sim.  65.  But  where  a  breach  re- 
year,  with  the  privilege  of  having  suits  from  the  fault  of  the  land- 
the  same  three  years  at  the  same  lord,  or  without  the  fault  of  the 
rate,"  at  his  option,  who  covenants  tenant,  and  the  landlord  has  not 
"  at  the  end  of  said  term  to  deliver  been  prejudiced  thereby,  specific 
up  quiet  possession  of  the  prem-  performance  will  sometimes  be  de- 
ises,  but  continues  in  possession  creed  upon  the  tenant's  making 
after  the  end  of  the  first  year,  will  compensation.  Hunter  v.  Hope- 
be  adjudged  to  have  elected  the  town,  13  L.  T.  N.  S.  130  ;  Rawston 
full  term  of  three  years.  Delash-  v.  Bentley,  4  Bro.  P.  C.  415  ;  Stat- 
man  v.  Berry,  20  Mich.  293.  ham  v.  Liverpool  Docks  Trustees, 

'  Bradford  v.  Patton,  108  Mass.  3  Y.  &  J.  565. 
153  ;  House  v.  Burr,  24  Barb.  (N. 


946 


Eenewals. 


[§  413. 


another  term  is  lost ;  but  if  the  landlord,  at  the  time  when 
the  rent  falls  due,  is  absent  from  the  country  or  cannot 
be  found,  and  left  no  agent  or  person  authorized  to  receive 
the  rent  for  him,  and  the  tenant  shows  that  he  was  ready 
to  pay  the  rent  at  the  time,  and  avails  himself  of  the 
earliest  opportunity  to  do  so  upon  the  return  of  the  land- 
lord, a  court  of  equity  would  protect  his  rights  by  com- 
pelling the  landlord  to  execute  a  new  lease  or  to  continue 
the  old  one,  upon  the  ground  that  the  failure  of  the  ten- 
ant to  keep  the  condition  was  not  wilful,  but  was  ren- 
dered unavoidable  by  the  fault  of  the  landlord  himself, 
the  rule  in  equity  being  that  when  the  plaintiff  can  show 
that  he  has  done  everything  in  his  power  to  perform,  hut 
by  unavoidable  accident,  fraud,  surprise  or  ignorance 
not  ivilful  he  has  been  prevented  from  literally  performing 
the  condition,  the  court  will  interpose  in  his  favor  upon 
his  making  compensation  for  the  breach,  where  justice 
requires  that  any  compensation  should  be  made ; '  and,  it 


'  Statham  v.  Trustees,  &c. .  Liv- 
erpool Docks,  3  Y.  &  J.  565  ;  Eaton 
V.  Lyon,-  3  Ves.  692  ;  Maxwell  v. 
Ward,  11  Price,  16  ;  Eawstome  v. 
Bentley,  4  Bro.  C.  C.  415  ;  Sanders 
V.  Paple,  12  Ves.  282;  Kane  v. 
Hamilton,  1  Eidgew.  P.  C.  180; 
Firman  v.  Ormonde,  1  Beat.  347; 
Bateman  v.  Murray,  1  Ridgew.  P. 
C.  187.  In  the  last  case  Lord  Lif- 
FOKD  said  :  "I  take  the  rule  to  be 
this,  that  when  the  lessee  has  lost 
his  legal  right  he  must  prove  some 
fraud  on  the  part  of  the  lessor,  by 
which  he  was  debarred  the  exercise 
of  his  right,  or  some  accident  or 
misfortune  on  his  own  part  which 
he  could  not  prevent,  by  means 
whereof  he  was  disabled  from  per- 
forming. Sweet  V.  Anderson,  3 
Bro.  P.  C.  430 ;  Alpine  v.  Swift,  1 
BaU.  &  B.  385 ;  Magrath  v.  Mus- 
kerry,  1  Eidgew.  P.  C.  469  ;  Eoss 
V.  Worsoph,  4  Bro.  P.  C.  411. 
Ignorance  is  considered  willful 
where  a  person  neglects  the  means 
of  information  which  ordinary  pru- 
dence would  suggest,  Harris  v. 
Bryant,  4  Euss.  89,  and  it  is  held 
that  where  the  tenant  ought  to 
know  the  facts,  and  the  landlord 
has  been  guilty  of  no  concealment 
or  fraud  that  has  thrown  the  ten- 
ant oil  his  guard,  lie  cannot  claim 


the  aid  of  a  court  of  equity  in  re- 
lieving him  from  the  penalty  of 
the  breach  of  a  condition.  Max- 
well V.  Ward,  ante.  An  accident 
is  not  unavoidable  which  reason- 
able diligence  on  the  tenant's  part 
might  have  avoided.  Thus  in  Har- 
ris V.  Bryant,  ante,  the  plaintiff, 
having  taken  an  assignment  of  a 
lease  for  three  lives,  which  con- 
tained a  covenant  for  renewal  upon 
the  falling  ofif  of  each  life,  provided 
appUcation  was  made  within  six 
months  after  the  life  dropped,  al- 
lowed nearly  ten  months  to  elapse 
after  the  dropping  off  of  a  life  be- 
fore he  applied  for  a  renewal,  and 
in  excuse  of  his  delay  alleged  that 
he  neither  knew  that  the  deceased 
person  was  the  life  named  in  the 
lease  or  that  he  was  dead  imtil 
more  than  six  months  after  his 
death.  The  court  dismissed  his 
full  relief  upon  the  ground  that 
ordinary  prudence  would  suggest 
that  he  should  ascertain  upon 
whose  Uves  the  lease  depended, 
and  that  he  should  take  early 
measures  to  ascertain  their  death. 
See  also.  City  of  London  v.  Mit- 
f ord,  14  Ves.  41 ;  Boynham  v.  Guy's 
Hospital,  3  id.  295  ;  Eaton  v.  Lyon, 
3  id.  690.  See  also,  as  to  laches, 
Eubery  v.  Jervaise,  1  T.  E.  339. 


CHAP.  XXX vn.] 


To  Eenew. 


947 


should  be  added,  where  the  case  is  one  where  the  breach 
is  such  as  admits  of  compensation,'  gross  laches  will 
not  be  relieved  against  in  equity."  When  the  lease  pro- 
vides that  notice  in  writing  shall  be  given  of  the  tenant's 
intention  to  remain,  the  tenant  cannot  in  equity  be 
regarded  as  guilty  of  such  gross  laches  as  to  defeat  his 
right  if  he  has  fairly  intimated  to  the  landlord  in  any 
way  his  intention  to  remain,  or  if  the  landlord  has  done 
anything  that  warrants  the  tenant  in  understanding 
that  that  species  of  notice  has  been  waived. ' 

When  the  tenant  by  the  terms  of  the  lease  has  an 
option  to  remain  for  a  longer  period,  such  additional 
term  is  not  a  new  demise,  but  a  continuation  of  the  old 
one.*  If  the  lease  does  not  provide  that  notice  shaU  be 
given  by  the  tenant  of  his  election,  merely  remaining  in 
possession  after  his  term  has  expired  is  sufficient,  and 
binds  both  him  and  the  landlord  for  the  additional  term.' 


■  Walker  v,  Jeffoys,  1  Hare,  341 ; 
McAIpine  v.  Swift,  1  BaU.  &  B. 
285  ;  Pendred  v.  Griffith,  4  Bro.  P. 
C.  512  ;  Davis  v.  Oliver,  1  Eidgew. 
P.  0.  1.  In  Ireland,  by  -what  is 
called  an  ancient  equity,  mere 
laches  never  work  a  forfeiture, 
and  it  is  the  practice  to  impose  a 
jSne  upon  the  tenant  for  his  laches, 
and  upon  the  payment  of  such  fine 
to  compel  the  execution  of  a  re- 
newal lease.  Doneraile  v.  Char- 
tres,  1  Eidgw.^  137  ;  O'Neil  v. 
Jones,  1  id.  177'.  Equity  does  not 
regard  or  act  upon  technical  or 
legal  subtleties,  but  by  the  justice 
of  the  case  in  ordering  or  refusing 
to  order  renewals.  Boyle  v.  Ly- 
saght,  1  Ridgw.  P.  C.  399. 

'  Lownley  v.  Bond,  4  Dru.  &  W. 
240  ;  Fitzgerald  v.  O'Connell,  1  Jo. 
&  La.  Tan.  135. 

'  Maxwell  v.  Ward,  11  Price,  16. 

*  Ranlet  v.  Cook,  ante ;  Brown 
V.  Parsons,  32  Mich.  24  ;  Holmes 
V.  Shepard,  49  Mo.  600  ;  Orton  v. 
Noonan,  57  Wis.  372-;  Noonan  v. 
Orton,  27  id.  300. 

*  Delashman  v.  Berry,  30  Mich. 
292;  Clarke  v.  Merrill,  51  N.  H. 
415  ;  Levitzky  v.  Canning,  33  Cal. 
399.  Continuing  in  possession 
after  the  expiration  of  the  lease  is 
equivalent  to  an  election  to  take  a 
further  lease,  stipulated  for  in  the 


original  lease;  and  entitles  the 
tenant  to  hold  the  premises,  sub- 
ject only  to  the  rent  reserved  by 
the  original  lease,  until  the  lessors 
perform  their  covenant,  by  exe- 
cuting a  lease  for  the  additional 
term.  Kelso  v.  KeUy,  1  Daly  (N-. 
Y.  C.  P.)  419.  In  Haley  v.  Young, 
66  Me.  520,  Y.,  by  lease  under  seal, 
took  a  tenement  at  a  specified  rate 
for  a  year,  the  lessors  further 
therein  agreeing  "to  lease  to  said 
Y.  said  premises  at  the  price  and 
conditions  named,  so  long  as  he 
wishes  to  occupy  the  same." 
Held,  that  this  stipulation  was  not 
an  agreement  for  a  lease,  but  a 
lease  upon  Y.'s  election  to  remain  ; 
and  that  his  remaining  in  posses- 
sion at  the  expiration  of  the  year 
was  such  election.  In  McGregor 
V.  Eawle,  57  Penn.  St.  184,  it  was 
held  that  a  provision  in  a  lease 
that  if  the  tenant  "  continues  in  pos- 
session after  the  end  of  the  term  "  it 
should  continue  in  force  for  an- 
other year,  it  was  held  that  the 
lease  tad  reference  to.  a  lawful 
continuance,  and  not  one  in  viola- 
tion of  his  covenant  to  surrender. 
In  Kramer  v.  Cook,  7  Gray  (Mass.) 
560,  it  was  held  that  under  a  lease 
for  a  certain  time,  yielding  and 
paying  certain  rent,  and  at  the 
election  of  the  tenant  for  a  further 


948  Eenewals.  [§  413. 

But  if  the  lease  provides  that  the  tenant  may,  if  he  so 
elects,  remain  in  possession  for  an  additional  term  of  one, 
two,  or  three  years,  by  merely  remaining  in  possession 
he  is  not  treated  as  having  elected  to  remain  for  the 
longest,  but  only  for  the  shortest  term  ;  and  as  the  lease 
gives  him  but  one  election,  his  terra  is  ended  upon  the 
expiration  of  the  shortest  term  named,  and  he  cannot 
afterwards  elect  to  hold  for  a  longer  term.'  If  the  lease 
provides  that  the  tenant  "is  to  get  the  house  at  the 
price  herein  stated,  for  one  year  after  his  present  year 
expires,  and  is  to  have  the  preference  each  succeeding 
year,"  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  not  created,  so  as 
to  entitle  the  tenant  to  notice  to  quit.  He  is  merely  a 
tenant  for  a  year."  If,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,  the 
lease  provides  that  the  landlord  will  renew  on  the  request 
of  the  tenant,  it  is  a  covenant  to  renew  the  lease  upon 
the  same  terms ;  but  a  request  for  a  renewal  is  a  condi- 
tion precedent,  and  must  be  made  before  the  term  ends. 
The  tenant  is  not  bound  to  wait  until  the  term  is  about  to 
expire,  but,  unless,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,  there  is  a 

term  at  a  certain  increased  rent,  provided  therein.  Bradford  v. 
the  election  of  the  tenant  to  re-  Patten,  108  Mass.  153.  An  unre- 
main  in  possession  for  such  addi-  corded  lease  with  a  reservation 
tional  time  at  such  increased  rent  for  an  additional  five  years'  term 
may  be  inferred  from  his  remain-  at  the  election  of  the  lessee,  but 
ing  in  possession  and  paying  rent  without  specifying  any  form  of 
at  such  increased  rate  after  the  notice  of  such  election,  is  good  as 
expiration  of  the  original  term,  against  one  who  obtains  a  Jease  of 
without  proof  of  any  formal  elec-  the  same  premises,  expressly  sub- 
tion,or  notice  to  the  landlord.  In  ject  to  such  reservation.  Clarke 
Despard  v.  Walbridge,  15  N.  Y.  v.  Merrill,  51  N.  H.  415.  A  lease 
374,  the  assignee  of  the  lessor  gave  for  a  term  of  years  containing  a 
the  lessee  notice  of  his  rights  to  provision  giving  the  lessee  the 
the  premises,  and  stated  to  him  privilege  of  keeping  and  occupy- 
upon  what  terms  the  expired  lease  ing  the  premises  for  such  further 
would  be  renewed.  It  was  held  time  after  the  expii-ation  of  the 
that  the  continuance  of  the  tenant  tei-m  as  he  shall  choose  or  elect, 
in  possession  after  the  original  yielding  and  paying  the  same  rent, 
term  had  expired  amounted  to  an  the  most  that  is  created  by  the  pro- 
implied  assent  to  the  terms  stated  vision  is  a  tenancy  from,  year  to 
by  the  assignee,  and  bound  the  year,  determinable  at  the  pleasure 
tenant  thereto.  The  fact  that  the  of  either  party  on  giving  the  neces- 
widow  of  a  deceased  tenant  occu-  sary  notice :  'and  if  before  the  ex- 
pied  the  tenement  for  more  than  a  piration  of  the  specified  term  the 
year  after  the  expiration  of  the  lessor  dies,  the  lessee  is  not  enti- 
term,  and  the  administrator  paid  tied  to  a  renewal  or  extension  of 
rent  for  that  period  out  of  the  in-  the  lease.  Western  Transporta- 
testate's  estae, — Held,  not  to  be,  tion  Co.  v.  Lansing,  49  N.  Y.  499. 
as  a  matter  of  law,  conclusive  of  '  Fuller  v.  Giles,  29  Ind.  114. 
an  election  by  the  intestate  to  ex-  ^  Crawford  v,  Morris,  5  Gratt. 
tend  the  lease  for  two  years,  as  (Va.)  90. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.] 


To  Renew. 


949 


provision  that  the  landlord  will  renew  upon  request  after 
a  certain  time,  as  six,  ten  or  any  other  number  of 
months,  he  may  exercise  the  right  at  any  time.  The 
covenant  is  not  fulfilled  by  an  offer  of  a  lease  upon  differ- 
ent terms  than  the  former  lease  contained.'  If  the  lease 
gives  an  option  to  the  tenant  to  remain  for  an  additional 
term  at  an  increased  rent,  a  new  tenancy  is  not  thereby 
created,  as  a  lease  is  not  dependent  upon  the  amount  of 
rent  paid  ; '  and  the  fact  that  the  lease  is  void  as  to  part 
of  the  term  to  which  the  renewal  applies  does  not  destroy 
the  tenant's  rights  to  so  much  of  the  term  as  is  valid." 

Where  a  lease  containing  a  covenant  of  renewal  is 
made  to  two  or  more  lessees,  and  one  of  them  procures  a 
renewal  in  his  own  name,  the  lease  enures  to  the  benefit 
of  all  the  lessees,  he  being  treated  as  trustee  for  all ;  and 
this  is  undoubtedly  the  case  where  one  of  several  lessees 


'  Driggs  V.  Dwight,  17  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  71.  In  Tracy  v.  Albany 
Exchange  Co.,  7  N.  Y.  473,  a  cov- 
enant by  the  lessor  that  the  lessee 
should  "have  the  refusal  of  the 
premises  at  the  expiration  of  the 
lease,"  for  a  specified  term,  was 
held,  on  a  construction  of  the 
•whole  contract,  to  give  the  lessee 
his  election  to  have  a  renewal  at 
the  oame  rent ;  and  that  his  elec- 
tion might  be  made  and  a  new 
lease  demanded,  before,  as  well  as 
upon,  the  expiration  of  the  first 
lease;  and  accepting  new  lease 
under  protest  does  not  operate  as  a 
surrender  by  the  lessee  of  his 
rights  under  the  covenant.  Where 
the  tenant's  covenant  to  pay  rent 
is  independent  of  the  landlord's 
covenant  to  give  a  renewal,  the 
rents  being  in  arrear  is  no  excuse 
for  a  refusal  to  renew.  5  Barn.  & 
Aid.  584.  Wherealeaseforoneyear 
gave  the  tenant  the  privilege  to 
have  the  premises  for  a  specified 
term  beyond  the  year,  "but  if  he 
leaves,  he  is  to  give  four  months' 
notice  before  the  expiration  of  this 
lease,"  it  was  held,  that  on  the 
omission  of  the  lessees  to  give  such 
notice  the  contract  became  a  lease 
for  the  extended  period,  upon 
similar  terms  as  to  payment  of 
rent.  Chretien  v.  Doney,  1  N.  Y. 
419.    A  lease  for  a  term  of  years, 

11. —8 


"with  the  privilege  of  two  years 
more,  if  desired,"  one  month  be- 
fore the  expiration  of  the  period 
specified,  at  a  certain  yearly  rent, 
to  be  paid  monthly  during  th^ 
term,  with  a  clause  expressing 
that  the  lessees  had  hired  and 
taken  the  premises,"  for  the  term 
and  at  the  rent  aforesaid,"  and 
that  they  agreed  to  pay  the  rent ; 
Held,  not  to  contemplate  a  new 
lease  for  the  renewal ;  but  that  it 
was  intended  that  this  lease,  on 
notice  being  given,  should  cover 
the  whole  period.  An  assignment 
of  the  lease,  after  giving  notice 
that  the  assignee  desired  the  ex- 
tension, and  the  consent  of  the 
lessor  being  given  to  the  assign- 
ment, was  sufficient  notice.  House 
v.  Burr,  24  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  525.  Un- 
der a  lease  for  one  year,  with  the 
privilege  of  extending  it,  at  the 
tenant's  option,  three  years  more, 
the  tenant  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  third  year,  the  rent 
of  two  years  being  paid,  is  not  a 
' '  tenant  from  year  to  year. "  Either 
he  is  a  tenant  at  will,  or  his  term 
has  not  expired.  Cure  v.  Craw- 
ford, 5  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  293. 

«  Taylor  v.  Winter,  6  Phila. 
(Penn.)  136  ;  Kramer  v.  Cook.  ante. 

i*  Hart  V.  Hart,  23  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
606 ;  Stephens  v.  Reynolds,  6  N. 
y.  454. 


950  Renewals.  [§  413. 

secretly  obtains  a  renewal  in  his  own  name,  whether  the 
lease  contains  a  covenant  of  renewal  or  not."  And 
especially  is  this  the  case  where  the  lessees  are  partners, 
and  the  premises  are  employed  in  the  partnership  busi- 
ness ; "  or  in  any  case  where,  in  equity  and  good  faith, 
other  parties  are  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  lease  ;  as, 
if  a  lessee  has  mortgaged  his  term,  and  the  mortgagee 
renews  the  lease,  the  mortgagor  is  held  entitled  to  the 
benefit  of  the  new  lease;  but,  he  must  first  pay  the 
mortgage  debt,  if  due,  as  well  as  all  such  sums  as  the 
mortgagee  has  been  compelled  to  pay  to  secure  the 
renewal. '  So  if  the  mortgagor  obtains  a  renewal  the  new 
lease  is  held  to  be  a  graft  upon  the  old  one  for  the  mort- 
gagee's benefit.*  So  if  an  executor  obtains  a  renewal  in 
his  own  name  of  a  lease  held  by  the  testator,  he  holds  it, 
in  trust  for  the  estate  whether  he  so  intended  or  not."  It 
may  be  stated  generally,  that  a  person  occupying  the 
relation  of  trustee  for  another  who,  in  that  capacity,  has 
taken  a  lease,  stands  in  the  same  relation  as  to  all 
renewals  thereof,'  whether  he  so  intended  or  not,  and 
even  though  the  lessor  would  not  have  renewed  for  the 

'Jackson  v.  Welsh,  1  Piatt  on  'James  t.  Dean,  11  Ves.  383; 

Leased,  764 ;  Palmer  v.  Young,  1  Holt    v.    Holt,    1    Ch.    Ca.    190 ; 

Vern.  276 ;  Eoo  parte  Grau,  1  B.  &  Moody  v.   Mathews,  7  Ves.   174 ; 

P.    376 ;  Phyfe    v.    Wardwell,    5  Rowe  v.  Chichester,  1  Bro.  C.  C. 

Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) ;  Burrell  v.  BuU,  198,  n. ;  Abney  t.  Miller,  3  Atk. 

3  Sandf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  15 ;  Anderson  597  ;  Pickering  v.  Nowles,  1   Bro. 

V.  Lemon,  8  N.  Y.  336.  C.   C.   197 ;  Mulvany  v.   DiUon,  1 

» Mitchell  V.  Eeed,  61  N.  Y.  138 ;  Ball.  &  B.  409 ;  Griffln  t.  GriflSn, 

Burrell  v.  Buel,  3  Sandf.  Ch.  (N.  1  Scho.  &  Lef.  353. 

Y.)  15;  Fawcett  v.  Whitehouse,  1  ^Mansell  v.    O'Brien,  Jones'  Ir. 

E.  &  My.  133 ;  Alder  v.  Fouracre,  Exchq.  176 ;  Holt  v.  Holt,  1  Ch.  Ca. 

3  Swanst.  489 ;  Featherstonhaugh  190 ;  Nesbitt  v.  Tredennick,  ante ; 

V.  Fenwick,  17  Ves.  398.  Row   v.    DutheUy,  3    Dick.    480  ; 

^Manlove  v.   Bale,  3  Vern.  84;  Ex  parte  Phelps,  9  Mod.  357;  Ver- 

Hamilton  v.  Denny,  1  Ball.  &  B.  ney  v.  Vemey,   1  Ves.   438 ;  Ed- 

199 ;  Lucan  v.  Mefrtins,  1  Wils.  34.  ward  v.  Lewis,  3  Atk.  538 ;  Lord 

It  has  been  held  that  a  new  lease  v.  Holmes,  cited  Ambl.  719  ;  Stone 

obtained  by  a  mortgagee  of  a  term,  v.  Theed,  3  Bro.  C.  C.  347  ;  KiUick 

will     be    subject    to    the    trusts  v.  Flexney,  4  id.  161 ;  Nightingale 

and    limitations    of    the    former  v.  Lawson,  1  id.  440.     A  husband 

one,    even    though    the    renew-  renewing  a  term  in  right  of  his 

al    was   not    obtained   until   the  wife  holds  the  new  term  as  her 

former  term  had  expired.    Gibbes  trustee.    Parker  v.  Brooke,  9  Ves. 

V.   Jenkins,  3  Sandf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  583;  Strokes  v.  Clarke,  CaUes'  P. 

180 ;  Rokestraw  v.  Brewer,  3  P.  C.  183.    So  a  stranger  who  wrong-- 

Wms.  511 ;  Nesbitt  v.  Tredennick,  fuUy  interferes  in  the  affairs  of  a 

BaU  &  B.  29 ;  DarreU  v.  Whitcott,  deceased  testator,  and  procures  a 

8  Rep.  in  Ch.  59.  renewal  in  his  own  name,  having 

■•Smith  V.  Chichester,  Saw.  486.  procured  the  executor  to  surren- 


CHAP.  XSXVII.] 


To  Kenew. 


951 


benefit  of  the  cestuis  que  trusV  If  other  premises  are 
embraced  in  the  new  leetse,  the  trust  extends  only  to  the 
premises  embraced  in  the  old  lease." 

Where  a  sort  of  custom  to  renew  has  been  established 
by  the  lessor,  as  is  more  especially  the  case  in  the  case  of 
leases  by  churches,  colleges,  the  government,  and  trustees 
of  charities,  &c.,  the  lessee  is  considered  as  having  an 
interest  beyond  the  subsisting  term,  which  is  called  the 
tenant  right  of  renewal,  although  this  right  does  not 
confer  any  certain,  or  even  contingent  estate  upon  the 
tenant,  and  is  not  enforceable  against  the  lessor,  either 
at  law  pr  in  equity  ; '  yet  it  is  recognized  and  protected 


der  the  subsisting  lease,  is  held  to 
hold  the  renewal  as  trustee  for  the 
estate.  Mulvany  v.  Dillon,  1  Ball. 
&  B.  409 ;  Griffin  v.  Griffin,  ante. 

■  Ex  parte  James,  8  Ves.  337 ; 
Keech  v.  Sanford,  2  Eq.  Ca.  Ab. 
741,  pi.  7.  In  Ee  Emett,  1  Madd. 
575 ;  Ktzgibbon  v.  Scanton,  1 
Dow.  P.  C.  264. 

'  Achison  v.  Fair,  3  Dru.  &  War. 
512 

'Norris  v.  Le  Neve,  3  Atk.  27  ; 
Lee  V.  Vernon,  7  Bro.  P.  C.  432. 
Mr.  PliATT,  in  his  work  on  Leases, 
p.  703,  says :  "It  has  long  been 
customary  for  the  crown,  ecclesi^ 
astical  corporations,  and  collegi- 
ate bodies,  and  it  is  often  usual 
with  private  individuals,  on  the 
determiuation  of  a  lease,  or  the 
surrender  of  the  existing  portion 
of  it,  to  grant  a  new  term  to  the 
lessee  in  possession  ;  from  which 
practice  an  erroneous  notion  has 
rorung,  Watson  v.  The  Master, 
&?.,  of  Hemsworth  Hospital,  14 
Ves.  339.  And  see  1  Bro.  C.  C. 
198  ;  12  Ves.  86,  that  such  lessee 
has  a  prescriptive  right  to  continue 
in  the  tenancy  in  preference  to  any 
other  person.  According  to  Anon. , 
2  Ch.  Ca.  207-8,  A.  D.  1675,  by  the 
French  law,  no  churchman  could 
make  a  lease  to  any  but  the  old 
tenant,  unless  it  were  first  refused 
by  him.  Serious  hardship  would, 
indeed,  be  occasioned  if  a  land- 
lord, by  repeated  renewals  to  the 
.same  individual,  his  descendants, 
or  representatives,  granted,  per- 
haps, in  consideration  of  faroily 
connection,  punctuality  in  pay- 
ment of  rent,  or  superior  agricul- 


tural quaUfications,  were  to  create 
an  ownership  against  himself,  and 
in  favor  of  others  who  might  be 
destitute  of  any  of  these  claims  upon 
his  indulgence.  Accordingly,  we 
find  that  independently  of  local  cus- 
tom, see  Watson  v.  The  Master, 
&c.,  of  Hemsworth  Hospital,  14 
Ves.  324,  the  demand  is  not  en- 
forceable at  law,  nor  have  apphca- 
tions  to  equity  for  the  purpose 
been  attended  with  greater  suc- 
cess. Lee  V.  Vernon,  7  Bro.  P.  C. 
432  ;  Toml.  Ed.  Vol.  5,  p.  10.  And 
see  DarreU  v.  Whitchot,  2  Rep.  in 
Ch.  69,  Ed.  1715,  where  it  is  said 
that  there  is  no  tenant  right  against 
the  king  ;  and  Norris  v.  Le  Neve, 
3  Atk.  27,  38.  The  technical  ex- 
pression, tenant  right  of  renewal, 
is  therefore  extremely  inaccurate. 
Pickering  v.  Vowles,  1  Bro.  C.  C. 
198.  This  right  (as  it  is  termed) 
confers  np  positive  interest,  either 
vested  or  contingent :  it  is  a  naked 
possibiUty,  depending  solely  on 
the  caprice  of  the  lessor  ;  and  Lord 
Eldon  said  in  White  v.  White,  9 
Ves.  557;  Smyth  v.  Nagle,  7  CI.  & 
F.  405,  that  he  had  known  family 
settlements  that  had  gone  on  for 
150  years  put  an  end  to  by  the  les- 
sor's refusal  to  renew ;  though  in 
a  later  case.  The  Attorney-Gen- 
eral V.  The  Bishop  of  Ely,  4  Rubs. 
103,  a  presumption  was  held  to 
have  arisen,  under  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances, on  an  uninterrupted 
possession  of  nearly  150  years.  In 
the  case  alluded  to,  successive 
leases  for  twenty-one  years  of  the 
tithes  of  corn,  grain,  and  hay,  in 
the  parish  of  S,  at  a  rent  and  fine 


952 


Renewals. 


[§  413. 


by  a  court  of  equity,  and  if  conveyed  or  assigned  by  tbe 
tenant,  the  grantee  or  assignee  will  be  protected  as  against 
his  grantor  or  assignor,  and  if  the  latter  obtains  a  renewal 
it  will  be  treated  as  held  by  him  in  trust  for  his  grantee 
or  assignee ;  and  if  an  assignee  of  the  term,  or  a  sub- 
tenant, takes  advantage  of  his  position,  and  secures  a 
renewal,  it  will  enure  to  the  benefit  of  the  parties  having 
the  legal  or  equitable  estate.'  If  a  tenant  has  wilfully 
violated  any  of  the  covenants  of  the  lease,  whether  such 
covenants  are  express  or  implied,  the  lessor  is  excused 
from  renewing  the  lease,  and  performance  in  that  respect 
will  not  be  enforced  in  equity,  as  if  he  has  committed 
waste,  used  the  premises  for  an  unlawful  purpose,  or  in 


certain,  had  been  granted  by  the 
impropriate  rectors  for  the  time 
being,  to  the  vicars  for  the  time 
being  of  S,  from  the  year  1682  to 
the  year  1805,  when  the  last  lease 
for  the  same  term  of  twenty-one 
years  was  made  ;  and  the  court 
presumed  that  what  had  been  en- 
joyed so  long  by  one  party,  and 
conceded  by  the  other,  was  founded 
on  a  rightful  title,  and  could  not 
have  depended  on  the  mere  ca- 
price or  pleasure  of  the  rector  for 
the  time  being  ;  and  that,  as  the 
lease  had  been  originally  granted 
by  way  of  augmentation  of  the 
vicarage  under  the  letter  of  Charles 
the  2d,  and  as  such  augmentation 
was  confirmed  and  made  perpetual 
by  the  act  of  29  Car.  g,  c.  8,  s.  3, 
the  vicar  was  entitled  to  a  renewal 
of  the  lease.  This  letter  (dated  1 
June,  13  Car.  3)  to  the  bishops  con- 
tained the  following  clause  :  "  That 
no  lease  be  granted  of  any  recto- 
ries or  parsonages  belonging  to 
your  see,  belonging  to  you  or  your 
successors,  until  you  shall  provide 
that  the  respective  vicarages  or 
curates'  places  where  are  no  vicar- 
ages endowed,  have  so  much  reve- 
nue in  glebe,  tithes,  or  other 
emoluments,  as  commonly  will 
amount  to  lOOZ.  or  801.  per  annum, 
or  more  if  it  wUl  bear  it ;  and  in 
good  form  of  law  settle  it  upon 
them  and  their  successors.  And 
where  the  rectories  are  of  small 
value,  and  cannot  admit  of  such 
proportions  to  the  vicar  and  curate, 
our  will  is,   that  one-half  of  the 


profit  of  such  a  rectory  be  reserved 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  vicar 
or  curate,  as  is  agreeable  to  the 
rates  and  proportions  formerly 
mentioned.  Gibs.  Codex,  756  ;  and 
3d  ed.  p.  731.  So  valuable,  how- 
ever, is  the  prospect  of  renewal 
considered,  being  available,  as  it 
is,  for  most  purposes  of  sale,  mort- 
gage, devise,  and  family  settle- 
ment, that  it  enhances  the  price  of 
the  lease  on  a  sale,  the  purchaser 
speculating  on  the  improbabihty 
of  his  being  removed  so  long  as  he 
pays  the  fines  and  rents  demanded, 
and  otherwise  performs  the  duties 
of  a  tenant.  Lee  v.  Vernon,  ante. 
And  lately,  on  the  petition  of  trus- 
tees of  a  renewable  leasehold  held 
under  the  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
this  tenant-right  or  interest  was 
so  far  recognized  by  the  Court  of 
Chancery,  that  an  order  was  made 
that  they  should  be  at  liberty  to 
take  steps  for  obtaining  a  clause 
for  compensation  for  it  inserted  in 
an  act  pending  in  parliament  for 
making  a  new  street,  which  would 
require  part  of  their  property. 
Strictly  speaking,  a  right  of  re- 
newal must  be  the  result  of  ex- 
press compact ;  and  to  secure  it  is 
the  object  of  the  covenant  for  re- 
newal occasionally  contained  in 
leases."  Jones  v.  Powell,  4  Beav. 
96. 

'  MitcheU  v.  Eeed,  61  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  310;  Phyfe  v.  Wardwell,  3 
Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  47 ;  S.  C.  5  Paige 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  368. 


CHAP.  XXXVII.]  To  Renew.  953 

an  unhusbandlike  manner ; '  or  if  he  has  done  any  acts 
that,  although  not  in  violation  of  any  of  the  covenants 
of  the  former,  are  nevertheless  in  violation  of  covenants 
agreed  to  be  incorporated  in  the  new  lease."  The  bank- 
ruptcy or  the  insolvency  of  the  lessee,"  or  his  conviction 
of  a  felony,  will  generally  be  sufficient  to  defeat  a  decree 
for  the  specific  performance  of  a  renewal  covenant  in 
equity.*  The  fact  that  the  tenant  has  done  an  act  injurious 
to  the  landlord,  unless  it  amounts  to  waste  or  a  breach 
of  covenant,  will  not  be  sufficient  to  defeat  such  a  decree ; ' 
nor  wiU  a  surrender  and  conveyance  to  the  lessor  of  an 
underlease  operate  as  a  discharge  of  the  covenant  to 
renew,  so  as  to  prevent  its  specific  enforcement  by  a  court 
of  equity."  Formerly,  a  renewal  could  not  be  obtained 
by  a  lessee  without  a  surrender  of  all  the  underleases 
derived  out  of  the  original  lease;  the  consequence  of 
which  was,  that  every  under!  essee  had  it  in  his  power  to 
prevent  or  delay  a  renewal  by  refusing  to  surrender  his 
interest.  And  even  a  court  of  equity  could  not  compel 
such  surrender,  notwithstanding  an  offer  by  the  original 
lessee  to  make  a  new  lease  to  his  lessee  for  the  term  then 
to  come,  and  at  the  same  rent.'  But  the  inconvenience 
was  remedied  by  the  statute  of  4  Geo.  2,  c.  28,  which 
enacted,  "that  in  case  any  lease  shall  be  duly  surren- 
dered in  order  to  be  renewed,  and  a  new  lease  made  and 
executed,  the  new  lease  shall  without  a  surrender  of  all 
or  any  of  the  underleases,  be  as  good  and  vahd,  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  as  if  all  the  underleases  derived  thereout 
had  been  likewise  surrendered  at  or  before  the  taking  of 
such  new  lease ;  and  aU  and  every  person  and  persons  in 

'  Hill  V.  Bonday,  18  Ves.    63 ;  the  fact  that  the  lessee  is  insolvent 

Gannett  v.  Albree,  103  Mass.  372 ;  will  not  prevent  the  assipiee  from 

Lavat  V.  Banelagh,  3  V.  &  B.  19 ;  enforcing  the  covenant  in  equity. 

Gourlay  v.  Somerset,  1  id.  68.  Morgan  v.  Rhodes,  1  Mont.  &  A. 

« "Willingham  v.   Joyce,  3  Ves.  214 ;  Crosbie  v.  Tooke,  1  My.  &  K. 

169;  Pendred  v.  Griffith,  1  Bro.  P.  431. 

C.  314.  ■*  WiUingham  v.  Joyce,  ante. 

» O'Herliny  v.   Hedges,  1  Scho.  '  Gorton  v.  Smart,  1  Sim.  &  S. 

&  li.  128 ;  Buckland  v.  Hall,  8  Ves.  66. 

92 ;  Hyde  v.  Skinner,  2  P.  Wms.  « Peggot  v.  Mason,  1  Paige  Ch. 

196 ;  De  Minckwitz  v.  Udney,  16  (N.  Y.)  412. 

Ves.  466.    But  if  the  lessee  has  as-  '  Colchester  v.  Amott,  2  Vem. 

signed  the  lease  to  a  solvent  party  383. 


954  Eenewals.  [§414. 

whom  any  estate  for  life  or  lives  or  for  years,  shall  from 
time  to  time  be  vested  by  virtue  of  such  new  lease,  and 
his,  her,  and  their  executors  and  administrators,  shall  be 
entitled  to  the  rents,  covenants,  and  duties,  and  have  like 
remedy  for  recovery  thereof,  and  the  underlessees  shall 
hold  and  enjoy  lands  and  tenements  in  the  respective 
underleases  comprised,  as  if  the  original  leases  but  of 
which  the  respective  underleases  are  derived  had  been 
still  kept  on  foot  and  continued ;  and  the  chief  landlord 
and  landlords  shall  have  and  be  entitled  to  such  and  the 
same  remedy  by  distress  or  entry  in  and  upon  the  mes- 
suages, lands,  tenements,  and  hereditaments  comprised 
in  any  such  underlease  for  the  rents  and  duties  reserved 
by  such  new  lease,  so  far  as  the  same  exceed  not  the  rents 
and  duties  reserved  in  the  lease  out  of  which  such  under- 
lease was  derived,"  as  they  would  have  had  in  case  such 
former  lease  had  been  still  continued,  or  as  they  would 
have  had  in  case  the  respective  underleases  had  been 
renewed  under  such  principal  lease,  and  every  custom  or 
usage  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding."  But  both  at 
law  and  in  equity  the  taking  of  a  new  lease  is  regarded 
as  operating  a  surrender  of  the  former  lease,  the  new 
lease  being  regarded  only  as  a  continuance  of  the  old  one 
to  the  extent  necessary  for  the  protection  of  all  legal 
interests  that  have  been  earned  out  of  it." 

Sec.  414.  To  pay  tas.e8.— Prima  facie  a  tenant  in  posses- 
sion is  liable  to  pay  all  taxes  imposed  upon  the  leased 
premises,  the  land  itself  being,  as  to  the  public,  bound  for 
the  same  ;  but,  in  the  absence  of  any  covenant  touching 
the  same,  as  between  the  landlord  and  tenant,  the  land- 
lord is  bound  to  repay  the  same  to  the  tenant,  and  the  ten- 
ant has  a  right  to  deduct  it  from  the  rent ;  or,  if  the  rent  is 
paid  in  advance  for  the  whole  term,  or  if  it  is  inadequate 
to  pay  the  taxes  paid  by  the  tenant,  he  may  recover  the 
amount  in  an  action  for  money  paid  ;  or  may  offset  it  in 
an.  action  for  the  rent. '    Indeed,  it  is  held  in  England 

1  Polk  T.  Marchetti,  1  B.  &  Ad.  Y.)  130 ;  House  v.  Burr,  24  Barb. 

715.  (N.  Y.)325. 

^  CoUett  V.  Hooper,  16  Ves.  260  ;  ^  In  the  absence  of  any  agree- 

Gibbs  V.  Jenkins,  3  Sandf .  Ch.  (N.  ment  in  reference  to  the  matter, 


GHAP.  xxxvn.]        To  Pay  Taxes. 


955 


that  each  year's  tax  must  be  deducted  from  each  year's 
rent,  and  that  if,  after  having  paid  the  tax,  he  pays  the 
rent  to  the  landlord  without  deducting  the  tax,  he  cannot 
deduct  it  from  the  rent  for  any  subsequent  year  or  set  it 
offin  an  action  to  recover  the  rent  for  any  subsequei^t 
year.'  Nor  can  he  bring  an  action  against  the  landlord 
therefor  if  he,  subsequently  to  the  payment  of  the  tax, 
pays  the  rent  without  deduction,  unless  he  did  so  under 
a  promise  from  the  landlord  to  pay  him  the  amount,  or 
under  compulsion,  or  protest,  or  objection."  But,  in 
England,  taxes  and  rates  are  assessed  upon  the  occupier 
of  the  premises  taxed,  and  a  certain  remedy  is  expressly 
given  to  him  by  Stat.  38  Geo.  3,  chap.  5,  §  7,  which 
provides,  "that  the  several  and  respective  tenants  are 
required  to  pay  such  sum  or  sums  of  money  as  shall  be 
rated  upon  such  houses,  &c.,  and  to  deduct  out  of  the 


the  landlord  must  pay  the  taxes- 
Dove  V.  Dove,  18  C.  P.  (Ont.)  424 ; 
but  if  a  tenant  covenants  to  pay 
rent  without  any  deduction,  he 
cannot  claim  to  recover  taxes  paid 
by  him.  Guantham  v.  Elliott,  6 
O.  S.  (Ont.)  192.  A  clause  in  a 
lease,  v^hich  provides  that  the  les- 
see shall  "pay  all  taxes,  water- 
rents,  and  assessments  upon  the 
premises,"  includes  a  charge  for 
paving  and  curbing  the  streets  in 
front  of  the  leased  premises,  when 
ordered  by  the  municipal  author- 
ities. In  an  action  of  covenant  by 
the  lessors  against  the  lessees  for 
the  cost  of  curbing  and  paving  the 
leased  premises,  it  was  held  that 
the  fact  that  the  parties  to  the 
lease  had  agreed  that  a  third  party 
should  do  the  work,  and*  that  the 
question  of  the  UabUity  therefor 
should  be  subsequently  deter- 
mined, was  not  such  an  alteration 
of  the  covenant  as  to  render  neces- 
sary a  change  in  the  form  of  the 
action.  McManus  v.  Cassidy, 
Penn.  St.  260 ;  Griffln  v.  Phoenix 
Co.,  Penn.  St.  [Decided  Feb.  25, 
1884.]  Stubbs  v.  Parsons,  3  B.  & 
Aid.  516 ;  Sapsford  v.  Fletcher,  4 
T.  R.  511 ;  Gamer  v.  Hannah,  6 
Duer  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  262; 
Hunt  V.  Amidon,  4  HiU  (N.  Y.) 
349;  Dawson  v.  Linton,  5  B.  & 
Aid.  521  ;  Taylor  v.  Zamina,  6 
Taunt.  524  ;  Tincklen  v.  Prentice, 


4  id.  549 ;  ConneU  v.  Read,  7  id. 
50.  The  tenant  may  set  off  against 
the  rent  due  or  accruing  any  tax 
which  he  is  compelled  to,  but 
which  the  landlord  ought  to  have 
paid  unless  he  has  covenanted  to 
pay  them,  Fuller  v.  Abbott,  4 
Taimt.  105,  and  as  soon  as  he  ha^ 
paid  such  a  tax  it  is  in  effect  a 
payment  of  so  much  rent.  Denba 
V.  Moore,  ante.  He  should  take  y 
receipt  therefor,  as  it  is  held  that 
it  is  only  upon  its  production  that 
the  landlord  is  bound  to  pay  it, 
Pocock  V.  Eustace,  2  Camp.  181 ; 
Baker  v.  Davis,  3  id.  474,  and  a 
tender  of  such  receipt  with  the 
balance  of  rent  is  equivalent  to  a 
tender  of  so  much  money.  Clen- 
nel  V.  Reed,  7  Taunt.  50.  Water 
rates,  sewer  rates,  land  taxes,  &c., 
&c.,  may  aU  be  set  off  against  the 
rent,  Hyde  v.  HiU,  3  T.  R.  377 ; 
Waller  v.  Andrews,  3  M.  &  W. 
312 ;  Andrew  v.  Hancock,  1  B.  & 
B.  37 ;  .  Bramston  V.  Robins,  4 
Bing.  11;  Saunderson  v.  Hanson, 
3  C.  &  P.  314 ;  Smith  v.  Humble, 
15  C.  B.  321;  Greffenhoofe  v. 
Danbuz,  4  E.  &  B.  336. 

•  Stubbs  V.  Parsons,  ante ; 
Spragg  V.  Hammond,  2  B.  &  B. 
59 ;  Denby  v.  Moore,  1  B.  &  Aid. 
123 ;  Baker  v.  Davis,  3  Camp.  454 ; 
Franklin  v.  Carter,  1  C.  B.  750. 

2  Denby  v.  Moore,  ante ;  Cumming 
V.  Bedborough,  15  M.  &  W.  348. 


956  Eenewals.  [§  414, 

rent  so  much  of  the  rate  as  in  respect  of  the  said  rents 
of  any  such  houses,  &c.,  the  landlord  should  and  ought 
to  bear  :  and  the  landlords  are  required  to  allow  such 
deduction  out  of  the  rent ; "  and  under  this  statute  it  is  held 
that  the  payment  of  the  taxes  is  a  payment  of  so  much 
rent,  and  must  he  deducted  out  of  the  rent  already  due,  or 
that  immediately  accruing.  Under  this  statute  it  would 
seem  that,  while  the  tenant  may  deduct  the  amount  paid 
by  him  for  taxes  out  of  the  rent,  yet,  that  by  neglecting 
to  deduct  it  from  the  rent  then  due,  or  next  immediately 
accuring,  there  is  no  good  reason  why  he  should  be 
treated  as  having  lost  all  right  to  recover  the  same,  and 
in  one  case '  the  court  clearly  intimated  a  different  doc- 
trine. "  The  true  construction  of  this  clause,"  said 
Bayley,  J.,  "is  that  a  payment  of  the  land  tax  can  be 
deducted  only  out  of  the  rent  which  has  already  accrued, 
or  is  then  accruing  due,  for  the  law  considers  the  payment 
of  the  land  tax  as  the  payment  of  so  mach  of  the 
rent  then  due,  or  growing  due  to  the  landlord ; 
and  if  afterwards  he  pays  the  rent  in  full,  he 
cannot  at  a  subsequent  time  deduct  that  overpayment 
from  the  rent.  He  may  indeed  recover  it  back  as  money 
paid  to  the  landlord'' s  use."  Holroyd,  J.,  said,  "If  he 
parts  with  the  rest  without  making  the  deduction  he 
loses  his  lien  and  has  only  his  remedy  by  action  or  set  off." 
In  some  of  the  States  of  this  country  it  is  provided  not 
only  that  the  tenant  may  deduct  the  amount  of  taxes 
which  he  has  been  obhged  to  pay,  but  which  the  landlord 
ought  to  have  paid,  from  any  rent  due  or  accruing,  but 
that  he  may  either  do  that  or  recover  it  back  by  action." 
And,  of  course,  in  those  States  the  English  doctrine  does 
not  prevail,  nor  is  it  believed  that  it  would  be  upheld  in 
any  of  the  states,  but  that  if  the  tenant  is  obliged  to  pay 

'  Stubbs  V.  Parsons,  ante.  by  him,  or  which  he  was  liable  to 

*  N.  Y.  Eev.  Stat.  419,  §  4  ;  also,  pay,  out  of  the  rent,  and  there 

483,  sec.   84;    Mass.    Genl.    Stat,  was  at  the  time  no  personal  liability 

chap.  11,660.  fl  ;  Gamer  V.  Hannah,  upon  any  one  to  pay  the  taxes, 

6  Duer  (N.  T.  Superior   Ct.)  363.  but  any  taxes  assessed  were  a  Hen 

In  McPlierson    v.   Atlantic,    &c.,  upon  the  property,  that  the  stipu- 

E.  R.  Co.,  66  Mo.  103,  it  was  held  lation  amounted  to  the  appropria- 

that  where,  by  the  terms  of  a  lease,  tion  of  a  reserved  fund  out  of  the 

the  lessee  was  entitled  from  time  rental  to  pay  the  taxes, 
to  time  to  deduct  the  taxes  paid 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]        To  Pay  Taxes.  957 

the  taxes  he  may  either  deduct  them  from  the  rent  or 
maintain  an  action  for  money  paid  therefor,  and  that 
the  mere  fact  that  he  elected  not  to  retain  his  hen  upon 
accrued  or  accruing  rent  therefor  would  not  defeat  his 
recovery  or  be  held  to  convert  an  involuntary  into  a 
voluntary  payment.  In  this  country  lands  and  property 
are  generally  assessed  in  the  name  of  the  owner,  and  not 
of  the  tenant ;  consequently,  the  only  ground  upon 
which  the  tenant,  in  the  absence  of  any  covenant  relat- 
ing thereto,  would  be  justified  in  paying  the  tax  and 
holding  the  landlord  liable  to  him  therefor  is,  to  prevent 
the  property  from  being  seized  for  the  payment  of  the 
tax,  and  such  payments  are  held  involuntary,  and  the 
tenant  is  permitted  to  recover  the  same  of  the  landlord, 
because  he  was  compelled  to  pay  them  in  order  to  retain 
the  beneficial  management  of  the  property.  A  covenant 
"to  pay  all  taxes  assessed  upon  the  demised  premises 
during  the  term  "  does  not  include  assessments  for  street 
or  other  improvements,  water  rates,  &c.,  because, 
although  such  assessments  are  a  tax  in  the  generic,  it  is 
not  in  the  ordinary  sense  in  which  the  term  is  used, 
and  consequently  not  the  sense  in  reference  to  which  the 
parties  are  presumed  to  have  contracted.  A  tax,  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  word  is  ordinarily  used,  is  something 
exacted  for  the  public  service,  and  not  by  way  of  com- 
pensation for  benefits  conferred.'    Under  this  rule  it  is 

'  a  covenant  to  pay  all  taxes  as-  frequently  held  in  cases  of  this 
sessed  upon  leased  premises  during  nature  some  amount  of  quahfica- 
the  term  "general  or  special"  in-  tion  must  be  placed  on  words 
eludes  an  assessment  leased  on  the  which  at  first  sight  might  be 
property  to  pay  for  the  recon-  capable  of  a  very  extensive  signi- 
struction  of  an  adjoining  street,  fication."  This  remark  is  borne 
Thomas  v.  Hooker,  Colville  Pump  out  by  the  English  cases  and  by 
Co.,  23  Mo.  App.  8.  Webster,  in  American  authority.  SeeTidsweU 
his  Unabridged  Dictionary,  defines  v.  Whitworth,  L.  R.,  3  C.  P.  326  ; 
the  term  as  "  a  levy  of  any  kind  Baker  v.  Green,  L.  R.,  3  Q.  B.  148  ; 
made  upon  property  for  the  sup-  Southall  v.  Leadbeater,  3  T.  R.  • 
port  of  government, "  and  this  458 ;  Barrett  v.  Duke  of  Bedford, 
definition,  which  will  be  found  to  8  id.  602  ;  Matter  of  College  Street, 
be  practically  the  definition  adopt-  8  R.  I.  474 ;  Boiling  v.  Stokes,  3 
ed  by  the  courts,  excludes  assess-  Leigh  (Va.)  178 ;  Harvard  College 
ments  for  benefits  to  the  property,  v.  Boston,  104  Mass.  483  ;  People 
Second  Congl.  Soc.  v.  Providence,  v.  Mayor  of  Brooklyn,  4  N.  Y. 
6  R.  I.  474 ;  Matter  of  the  Mayor  of  483.  But  in  some  instances  con- 
New  York,  11  John.  N.  Y.  7.  In  stitutional  provisions  with  respect 
Jeffrey  v.  Neale,  L.  R.,  6  C.  P.  to  taxation  have  been  held  to  in- 
240,  it   is  said  that  "  it  has  been  elude  assessments  for  benefits.    la 


958 


Eenewals. 


[§  414. 


held  that  a  covenant  to  pay  all  "taxes  of  every  name 
and  kind  assessed  upon  the  premises  at  any  time  during 
the  term  "  does  not  embrace  assessments  for  benefits,  as 


Minnesota  a  provision  that  all  taxes 
shall  be  as  nearly  equal  as  may  be, 
and  according  to  the  value  of  the 
property  taxed,  was  held  to  apply 
to  a  legislative  act  relating  to  the 
improvement  of  a  street.  Stinson 
V.  Smith,  8  Minn.  366.  And  in 
Alabama  a  like  provision  was  held 
to  forbid  an  assessment  on  abutting 
lots  in  proportion  to  the  number  or 
front  feet.  Mobile  v.  Dargan,  45 
Ala.  310.  See,  also,  Chicago  v. 
Lamed,  34  111.  203.  Also,  Codman 
V.  Johnson,  104  Mass.  491 ;  Curtis 
V.  Pierce,  115  id.  188.  Mr.  Platt, 
in  Vol.  2,  p.  169,  of  his  work  on 
Leases,  says: — "In  leases,  taxes 
are  distinguished  into  ordinary  and 
extraordinary.  The  former  relate 
to  the  poor,  church  &c.  ;  the  latter, 
to  taxes  imposed  by  parliament, 
such  as  the  land  tax.  Hopwood  v. 
Barefoot,  11  Mod.  237-9.  A 
parliamentary  tax  is  one  that  is 
imposed  directly  by  act  of  parlia- 
ment. The  sewer's  rate,  therefore, 
is  not  comprized  in  a  covenant  by 
a  tenant  to  pay  all  taxes  parochial 
and  parliamentary.  Palmer  v. 
Earith,  14  M.  &  W.  428  ;  Waller  v. 
Andrews,  3  M.  &  W.  313 ;  S.  C,  1 
H.  &  H.  87.  So  a  county  rate,  al- 
though it  is,  in  one  sense,  imposed 
by  parliament,  is  not  a  parliament- 
ary tax,  the  rate  not  being  fixed 
or  assessed  by  act  of  parhament. 
"Where  a  party  liable,  ratione 
tenuroB,  together  with  others, 
owners  of  adjoining  property,  to 
the  repairs  of  a  bridge,  leased  his 
estate  for  a  term  of  years,  taking  a 
covenant  from  the  lessee  to  pay 
the  rent  free  and  clear  of  and  from 
any  land  tax  and  all  other  taxes 
and  deductions  whatsoever,  either 
parliamentary  or  parochial,  then 
already  taxed  or  imposed,  or  there- 
after to  be  taxed,  charged  or 
imposed  on  the  premises,  or 
any  part  thereof,  or  on  the 
lessor  in  respect  thereof,  the  land- 
lord's property  tax  or  duty  only 
excepted  ;  it  was  held,  that  a  rate 
levied  for  the  repairs  of  the  bridge 
was  not  a  parliamentary  tax  with- 
in the  covenant,  notwithstanding 
an  act  of  parliament  declared  that 
it  should  be  lawful  for  the  owners, 
proprietors,  lessees  and  occupiers 


of  the  lands,  at  any  meeting  to  be 
held  by  virtue  thereof,  to  make 
any  rate  or  assessment  for  the 
purposes  of  the  act  in  respect  of 
such  lands,  by  a  pound  rate  upon 
all  such  owners,  proprietors,  les- 
sees or  occupiers,  according  to  the 
rents  or  values  of  the  respective 
lands,  and  according  to  the  several 
interests  of  the  owners,  proprietors, 
lessees  and  occupiers  thereof  re- 
spectively, and  to  apportion  such 
rates  according  to  such  several 
interests,  and  to  moderate  or  regu- 
late such  rates  with  respect  to  any 
houses,  new  buildings  or  improve- 
ments in  such  manner  as  should  be 
agreed  on  by  the  major  part  of  the 
persons  present  at  any  such  meet- 
ing. Baker  v.  Greenhill,  3  Q.  B. 
148.  But  where  certain  marsh 
lands  were  demised  at  the  clear 
annual  rent  of  £400,  and  the  lessee 
imdertook  to  pay  and  discharge  all 
outgoings  whatsoever,  rates,  taxes, 
scots,  &c.,  whether  parochial  or 
parhamentary,  that  then  were  or 
should  thereafter  be  charged  or 
chargeable  upon  or  on  account  of 
the  said  marsh  lands,  the  then, 
present  land  tax  only  excepted, 
and  the  commissioners  or  sewers 
decreed  a  large  expenditure  upon 
a  permanent  work  upon  (among 
others)  the  lands  in  question,  and 
assessed  the  owner  and  occupier 
thereof  in  certain  sums  payable  at 
stated  periods,  and  decreed  that  • 
four-fifths  of  such  sums  should  be 
taxed,  assessed  and  charged  upon 
the  owner  and  the  remaining  one- 
fifth  upon  the  occupier-  it  was 
held,  that  though  the  authority  of 
LoED  Holt,  in  Brewster  v.  Kid- 
gell,  2  Salk.  615,  raised  a  doubt 
whether  this  could  properly,  be 
considered  as  a  parliamentary  tax, 
yet  the  very  extensive  words  used 
in  the  agreement,  and  particularly 
the  word  scot,  which  was  com- 
monly applied  to  a  sewers'  rate  on 
marsh  land,  showed  that  the  sewers' 
rate  was  included."  Waller  v. 
Andrews,  3  M.  &  W.  312.  In  Ger- 
man Society  v.  Philadelphia,  9 
PhUa.  (Penn.)  245,  premises  were 
leased  to  the  city,  to  be  used  for 
the  benefit  of  a  charitable  society. 
The  city,  as  lessor,  covenanted  t« 


CHAP. 


.]        To  Pay  Taxijs. 


959 


for  street  improvements,  &c./  nor  any  charges,  except 
"taxes"  within  the  rule  as  previously  stated.  Under 
this  term  would  be  included  all  sums  assessed  for  the 
support  of  the  government,  national.  State  or  municipal, 
as  taxes  assessed  for  the  construction  or  support  of  high- 
ways, for  the  support  of  schools,  or  any  imposition  as- 
sessed against  aU  the  owners  of  property  in  the  nation. 
State,  covmty,  town  or  city,  for  general  purposes,  but 
not  special  rates  or  assessments  made  upon  the  property 
because  of  a  particular  benefit  to  it."    If  the  lessee  cove- 


pay  all  taxes.  Subsequent  to  the 
granting  of  the  lease  the  legislature 
exempted  the  property  from  taxa- 
tion so  long  as  it  was  used  for 
charitable  purposes.  It  was  held, 
that  the  city  was,  nevertheless, 
bound  to  pay  the  amount  of  the 
taxes  to  the  landlord,  as  the  act 
was  passed  for  the  benefit  of  the 
charitable  society,  and  not  for  the 
city.  The  true  ground  for  such  a 
doctrine  would  seem  to  be  that  the 
taxes  to  be  paid  ty  the  lessee  was 
virtually  a  part  of  the  rent,  and, 
if  removed  by  legislative  exemp- 
tion, the  lessor,  and  not  the  lessee, 
is  entitled  to  the  benefit.  But  in 
neither  view  is  such  a  doctrine 
tenable.  A  covenant  to  pay  all 
taxes  requires  the  lessee  to  pay 
only  such  taxes  as  are  assessed 
during  the  term ;  and  if  none  are 
assessed  by  the  government,  the 
tenant  can  be  required  to  pay 
none ;  and  it  would  not  seem  that 
it  could  make  any  difference 
whether  the  omission  arose  from 
the  mistake  of  the  assessors  or 
because  the  property  is  subsequent- 
ly exempted  from  taxation.  All 
the  tenant  by  his  covenant  can  be 
required  to  do  is  to  pay  such  as  are 


'Beals  V.  Providence  Rubber 
Co.,  11  R.  I.  381.  A  covenant  to 
pay  all  parliamentary,  parochial 
and  other  taxes,  tithes  and  assess- 
ments includes  a  charge  on  the  de- 
mised premises,  payable  to  a  party 
who  has  redeemed  or  purchased 
the  land  tax  formerly  charged 
thereon ;  such  rent  charge  being  a 
parUamentaiy  assessment.  The 
Governors  or  Christ's  Hospital  v. 
Harrild,  3  M.  &  G.  707 ;  Ward  v. 
Const.  10  B.  &  C.  635 ;  Bishop  of 


Oxford  V.  Wise,  cited  in  Blandford 
V.  Marlborough,  3  Atk.  544 ;  Dav- 
enant  v.  The  Bishop  of  Salisbury, 
1  Vent.  333.  A  mere  covenant  by 
a  tenant  (independently  of  his  be- 
ing the  owner  of  the  improved 
rent  mentioned  in  the  statute  of  14 
Geo,  3,  c.  78),  to  pay  "the  land  tax 
and  ail  other  taxes,  rates,  assess- 
ments and  impositions  whatso- 
ever imposed  by  authority  of  par- 
liament or  otherwise  howsoever," 
will  not  render  him  liable  to  pay 
for  the  erection  of  a  party-waU ; 
for  the  words  taxes,  rates,  &c.,  ex- 
tend only  to  the  land  tax  and  all 
other  taxes  ejusdem  generis,  among 
which  the  duty  of  erecting  a  party- 
wall  is  not  comprehended.  South- 
all  V.  Leadbetter,  3  T.  R.  458 ;  Bar- 
rett V.  The  Duke  of  Bedford,  8  T. 
R.  603 ;  Sangster  v.  Birkhead,  1  B. 
&.  P.  303.  A  covenant  by  a  lessor 
to  pay  all  the  taxes  on  the  land  de- 
mised, Theed  v.  Starkley,  8  Mod. 
314,  or  to  indemnify  the  lessee 
against  all  duties,  charges  and  tax- 
es whatsoever  to  be  imposed  upon 
the  lands.  Case  v.  Stephens,  Fitz- 
gib.  397,  will  not  include  any  rates 
or  taxes  that  are  charges  on  the 
person  or  occupier  and  not  on  the 
land.  Theed  v.  Starkey,  ante ; 
Anon. ,  4  Mod.  148  ;  Jeffrey's  Case, 
5  Coke.  66  b  ;  Paget  v.  Crumpton, 
Cro.  EUz.  659;  Rowls  v.  Gells, 
Cowp.  451-3 ;  Milward  v.  CafRn,  3 
W.  Bl.  1330;  Rex  v.  St.  Luke's 
Hospital,  3  Bm-r.  1063 ;  Rex  v.  St. 
Bartholomew's  Hospital,  4  Burr. 
3439;  Harrison  v.  Bulcock,  1  H. 
Bl.  73. 

'TwycroBS  v.  Fitchburgh  R.  R. 
Co.,  10  Gray  (Mass.)  393.  The  les- 
sor, in  an  indenture  of  lease  under 
seal  of   an  estate  in   Boston  for 


960 


Eenewals. 


[§  414. 


nants  generally  to  pay  all  taxes,  or  to  pay  the  rent  with- 
out deduction  for  taxes,  he  is  bound  only  to  pay  all 
future  taxes  imposed  upon  the  property  during  the  term, 
of  a  nature  and  for  purposes  similar  to  those  in  existence 
at  the  time  of  the  demise,  and  in  England  this  is  held  to 
include  the  land  tax,"  but  not  taxes  which  were  then 
unknown  or  not  in  esse.' 

The  language  of  the  covenant  must  be  looked  to,  as 
the  rights  and  liabilities  of  the  parties  depend  entirely 
upon  that,  and  vary  as  the  language  varies.  Thus,  if 
the  covenant  is  to  pay  all  taxes  assessed  during  the  term, 
the  tenant  is  liable  for  taxes  for  the  last  year  of  the  term, 
if  assessed  before  the  term  expires,  although  not  levied 
until  after  the  term  has  ended,  and  the  same  is  true 
where  the  covenant  is  to  pay  "all  taxes  assessed  or 
levied;"'  but  if  the  covenant  is  merely  to  "pay  all 
taxes  levied  during  the  term,"  taxes  assessed,  but  not 
levied — that  is,  legal  measures  for  the  collection  of 
which  have  not  been  taken  as  provided  by  statute — are 
not  included.' 


twelve  years  and  three  months, 
for  himself  and  his  legal  represent- 
atives, agreed  to  pay  all  taxes  that 
might  be  assessed  on  the  premises  ; 
and  the  lessee,  for  himself  and  his 
legal  representatives,  agreed  to 
pay  all  costs,  expenses  and  charges 
except  the  yearly  taxes ;  and  it 
■was  mutually  agreed  that  the  les- 
see might  make  any  additions  and 
repairs  at  his  own  costs  and  charges 
that  he  might  choose  not  injurious 
to  the  estate.  Held,  that  the  lessor 
could  not  i"ecover  of  the  lessee  un- 
der the  covenants  in  the  lease  an 
assessment  laid  on  him  by  the  city 
of  Boston  for  having  the  foot-way 
in  front  of  the  estate.  Torry  v. 
WaUis,  3  Cush.  (Mass.)  443 ;  Beals 
V.  Prov.  R.  R.  Co.  11  R.  I.  331 ; 
Love  V.  Howard,  6  id.  116;  Twy- 
cross  V.  Fitchburgh  R.  R.  Co.,  10 
Gray  (Mass.)  293 ;  Municipality  v. 
CurreU,  13  La.  318;  Balling  v. 
Stokes.  3  Leigh  (Va.)  178;  Mat- 
ter of  College  St.,  8  R.  I.  474; 
Congl.  Soc.  V.  Providence,  6  id. 
335. 

'  3  Piatt  on  Leases,   171 ;  Man- 
ning V.  Lunn,  3  C.  &.  K.  13 ;  Ai- 


ran  v.  Crisp,  1  Salk.  321 ;  Anony- 
mous, Comb.  311. 

'  Blandford  v.  Marlborough,  8 
Atk.  543;  Brewster  v.  Kitchen,  1 
Ld.  Rayd.  317;  GUes  v.  Hooper, 
Carth.  135 ;  Bradbury  v.  White,  3 
Doug.  634;  Amfield  v.  White,  1 
Ry.  &  Moo.  346. 

'  Waterman  v.  Harkness,  3  Mo. 
App.  494. 

*  VaUe  V.  Fargo,  1  Mo.  App.  344. 
"  It  was  assumed."  says  Gautt,  J., 
in  the  case  last  cited,  "at  the  ar- 
gument, that  the  covenant  was  to 
pay  '  all  taxes  whatsoever  to  be  as- 
sessed during  the  term.'  We  have 
seen  by  an  examination  of  the  rec- 
ord that  'it  was  to  pay  all  taxes 
*  *  *  levied  during  the  term.' 
There  is  a  wide  difference  between 
the  two  things.  To  assess  a  tax  is 
to  declare  a  tax  to  be  payable ;  to 
levy  it  is  to  raise  or  collect  it. 
Bouv.  L.  Die.  title  Levy.  One  of 
the  first  things  done  by  the  parlia- 
ment of  England,  after  the  revolu- 
tion of  1688,  was  to  pass  an  act  de- 
claring that,  '  to  levy  money  for  or 
to  the  use  of  the  crown  by  pretence 
of  prerogative,  without  grant  of 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]        To  Pay  Taxes. 


961 


A  covenant  by  the  lessee  to  "pay  all  taxes  and  water 
rates  that  may  be  imposed  or  assessed  or  become  a  lien 

the  statute  have  been  complied 
with,  nor  in  any  event  until  the 
time  arrives  when  by  law  it  attach- 
es to  and  becomes  a  lien  upon  the 
property,  and  due  and  payable. 
Valuation  is  one  thing  and  taxation 
is  quite  another.  But  mall  cases  the 
language  of  the  statute  is  to  be 
consulted.  If  by  statute  it  is  pro- 
vided that  a  certain  tax  shall  be 
assessed  upon  the  assessment-rolls 
for  a  certain  year  upon  a  certain 
day,  as  the  10th  day  of  January, 
the  tax  is  regarded  as  being  as- 
sessed upon  that  day,  whether  it 
has  been  made  up  or  not,  and  a 
tenant  taking  a  lease  after  that 
date,  and  covenanting  to  pay  "the 
taxes  assessed  during  his  term," 
is  not  liable  for  such  tax.  Crutch- 
field  V.  Stambaugh,  8  Heisk.  (Tenn.) 
833.  If  the  rule  that  the  tax  is  to 
be  deemed  to  be  assessed  from  the 
time  when  the  property  is  valued 
was  to  be  adopted,  a  tenant  taking 
a  lease  after  such  valuation,  but 
before  a^tax  had  been  laid,  would 
be  exempt  from  the  payment  of 
any  tax  assessed  upon  such  valua- 
tion. It  is  not  the  practice,  nor 
does  the  law  require,  that  real  es- 
tate shaU  be  valued  every  year, 
but  such  valuation  is  made  ofice 
in  three  or  five  years  in  some  of 
the  States.  Can  it  be  said  that 
upon  such  valuation  of  the  land 
the  taxes  for  three  or  five  years 
are  assessed?  It  is  submitted  that 
unless  expressly  so  provided  by 
statute  such  a  construction  would 
be  ridiculous.  The  assessment  of 
property  and  the  making  up  of  as- 
sessment-rolls does  not  operate  as 
the  assessment  of  a  tax  upon  the 
citizen,  but  simply  affords  the 
basis  upon  which  the  taxes  are  to 
be  imposed,  and  a  tax  is  not  im- 
posed until  the  arrival  of  the  pe- 
riod when  by  law  it  is  required  to 
be  assessed.  Barlow  v.  St.  Nicho- 
las Bank,  63  N.  Y.  399 ;  Dowdney 
V.  The  Mayor,  54  id.  186.  In  Skid- 
more  V.  Hart,  20  N.  Y.  S.  C.  441, 
the  defendant,  by  lease  dated 
March  30th,  1875,  secured  certain 
property  under  a  lease  for  a  term 
of  ten  years,  commencing  on  the 
1st  day  of  May,  1875,  and  agreed 
during  the  term  demised  to  bear, 
pay  and  discharge  all  such  taxes  and 


parliament,  is  illegal.'  1  Bla.  Com. 
140.  When  an  execution  is  issued 
for  money,  and  comes  into  the 
hands  of  an  officer,  the  leoy  of  it — 
the  satisfaction  of  it — is  made  by 
seizing  the  property  of  the  defend- 
ant. To  be  sure,  the  conversion  of 
the  thing  seized  into  money  is 
made  before  the  execution  is,  in 
common  parlance,  said  to  be  satis- 
fied. But  a  levy  is  prima  fade 
a  satisfaction.  We  think  it  is  plain 
that  there  is  a  wide  difference  be- 
tween taxes  assessed  and  taxes  lev- 
ied, and  no  tax  can  be  levied  until 
the  assessor's  return  is  made  and 
acted  on  by  the  county  court,  and 
the  books  placed  in  the  hands  of 
the  collector.  This  could  not  have 
been  done  in  the  year  1849,  before 
July  at  any  rate,  as  may  be  seen 
by  the  citations  made  in  Blossom 
V.  Vancourt,  34  Mo.  390.  Hence, 
the  State  and  county  tax  for  the 
year  1849  could  not  have  been  lev- 
ied until  after  the  commencement 
of  the  term  created  by  the  lease  in 
this  cause."  A  tax  is  said  to  be 
assessed  whenever  it  is  imposed, 
that  is,  whenever  by  operation  of 
law  it  becomes  fixed  as  a  burden 
upon  property.  Waterman  v.  Hark- 
ness,  ante.  It  has  been  said  that 
a  tax  in  legal  contemplation  is 
assessed  whenever  the  property 
is  assumed  to  be  valued,  work  of 
assessment  has  hot  been  complet- 
ed, and  the  tax  is  due  from  that 
day,  Taylor's  Landlord  and  Ten- 
ant, 346,  §  899 ;  but  the  fallacy  of 
this  doctrine  is  apparent,  at  least 
when  any  other  steps  are  necessary 
to  be  taken  for  the  layins;  of  a  tax. 
The  valuation  of  property  is  made 
for  the  purpose  of  affording  a  basis 
for  taxation.  It  simply  determines 
upon  what  sum  the  owner  of  the 
property  shall  be  taxed.  It  is  not 
an  assessment  of  a  tax,  in  any 
sense  of  the  word.  When  taxes 
are  imposed,  the  statute  generally, 
indeed  in  all  cases,  so  far  as  I  have 
made  examination,  determines  by 
whom,  how  and  when  it  shall  be 
made  up,  and  when  and  how  it 
shall  be  collected.  If  the  legisla- 
ture imposes  a  tax  either  by  spec- 
ial or  general  legislation,  the  citi- 
zen is  not  liable  to  pay  such  tax 
until  the  formalities  required  by 


962 


Eenewals. 


[§  414. 


upon  the  premises  at  any  time  during  the  term,  when  due 


assessments  extraordinary,  as  well 
as  ordinary,  as  should  be  levied,  as- 
sessed, imposed  or  grow  due  and 
payable  upon,  or  out  of  or  for,  the 
demised  premises  and  all  parts 
thereof  as  the  same  then  existed,  or 
might  thereafter  be  imposed  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  terms  of  the 
lease,  by  virtue  of  any  present  or 
future  law  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  or  of  the  State  of  New 
York,  or  of  the  corporation  of  the 
city  and  county  of  New  York,  or 
either  of  them ,  or  by  other  legal  pro- 
ceedings or  lawful  authority  what- 
ever, when  and  as  the  same  should 
become  due  and  payable.  The 
plaintiff,  the  lessor,  having  paid  a 
tax  that  was  made  up  after  the  lease 
was  made,  brought  an  action  for 
its  recovery,  and  had  Judgment 
therefor.  Brady,  J.,  in  deUver- 
ing  the  opinion  of  the  court  said  : 
"The  taxes  for  the  year  18'75  had 
not  on  the  first  of  May  been  deter- 
mined. The  obligation  resting  up- 
on the  land  to  discharge  them  or 
to  incur  the  burden  of  a  lien  for 
the  amount,  so  to  speakj  existed 
at  the  time  ths  lease  was  executed, 
but  they  had  not  then  been  im- 
posed, because  the  amount  was 
not  ascertained.  They  had  not, 
therefore,  been  assessed ;  they  had 
not  grown  due  and  payable  and 
could  not  be  levied  therefore  out 
of  the  demised  premises.  The 
preliminaries  to  the  collection  of 
the  taxes  were  not  and  could  not 
be  completed,  until  the  action  of 
the  board  of  supervisors  in  the 
month  of  July  following  the  com- 
mencement of  the  term  when  the 
roUs  received  from  the  assessors 
by  the  commissioners  of  taxes  and 
assessments  must  be  sent  to  the 
board  of  supervisors,  a  ceremony 
which  takes  place  on  the  first  Mon- 
day of  July  in  each  year.  Laws 
of  1859,  chap.  302,  §  13.  The  su- 
pervisors are  then  required  by  law 
to  place  opposite  to  the  several 
sums  set  down  as  the  valuation  of 
the  real  and  personal  property  on 
the  rolls,  the  respective  sums  in 
dollars  and  cents  to  be  paid  as  a 
tax  thereon,  rejecting  the  frac- 
tions of  a  cent.  Laws  of  1850, 
chap.  121,  §  25.  It  follows  as  a 
necessary  sequence,  that  the 
amount  of  the  tax  was  unknown 
when  the  term  began,  and  could 


not  have  been  known  until  the 
month  of  July  following.  It  would 
have  been  impossible,  therefore, 
for  the  lessor  to  have  paid  them 
or  to  have  determined  what  the 
amount  would  be.  It  seems  to  be 
C[uite  apparent  that  the  taxes  hav- 
ing thus  been  ascertained  subse- 
quent to  the  commencement  of 
the  term,  they  grew  due  and  be- 
came payable  after  the  term  com- 
menced, and  were  within  the  oper- 
ation of  the  covenant  on  the  part 
of  the  defendant,  and  by  which 
we  have  already  seen  he  promised 
to  discharge  all  taxes  and  assess- 
ments which  should,  during  his 
term,  be  levied,  assessed,  imposed 
or  grow  due.  The  question  thus 
discussed  seems  to  be  determined 
in  favor  of  the  plaintiff  by  two 
cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeals. 
Dowdney  et  al.  v.  The  Mayor,  54 
N.  Y.  186 ;  Barlow  et  al.  v.  The 
St.  Nicholas  Bank,  63  id.  399.  It 
was  expressly  held  in  the  latter 
case  that  the  entry  of  land  in  an 
assessment-roll  did  not  constitute 
an  incumbrance  thereon,  and  the 
assessment  or  the  subsequent  levy- 
ing of  the  taxes  thereon  was  not 
a  breach  of  covenant  against  in- 
cumbrances contained  in  the  deed, 
executed  after  the  completion  of 
the  assessment-roll  and  before  the 
levying  of  the  taxes,  and  it  is  said 
in  that  case  that  the  assessment  is 
the  basis  upon  which  the  board  of 
assessors  act  in  apportioning  the 
taxes,  but  it  is  in  no  sense  imposed 
as  a  charge  upon  the  land  de- 
scribed in  the  roU.  It  is  one  of  the 
prehminary  steps  which  result  in 
taxation.  It  is  further  said  in  that 
case,  and  properly,  that  the  roll, 
when  complete,  fixes  the  valuation 
of  the  property  to  be  taxed,  but  it 
does  not  determine  the  amount  of 
the  taxes,  and  the  most  which  can 
be  claimed  is,  that  it  renders  more 
definite  and  certain  the  liability  to 
taxation  which  nevertheless  ex- 
isted before  the  assessment  was 
made.  The  cases  are  analogous, 
but  the  covenant  of  the  defendant 
is  broader  than  the  covenant 
against  incumbrances,  because  it 
assumes  the  payment  of  all  such 
taxes  and  assessments  as  shall  be 
levied,  assessed,  imposed,  grow 
due  and  become  payable.  The 
plaintiff,  for  this  reason,  is  entitled 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]   To  Pay  Taxes. 


963 


and  payable,"  does  not  impose  upon  him  any  duty  to 
pay  such  taxes  or  water  rates  until  they  become  due,  and 
payable  to  the  proper  authorities ; '  but  the  tenant  must 
pay  the  taxes  or  assessments  where  they  do  become  due, 
or  at  least  save  the  landlord  from  paying  the  same ; '  if 
he  does  not  pay  or  otherwise  assume  them  when  due,  the 
landlord  may  pay  or  assume  them  and  recover  the 
same  of  the  tenant,  and  enforce  any  penalty  attaching  to 
a  breach."  But  a  covenant  to  pay  taxes  or  assessments 
requires  the  tenant  to  pay  only  such  as  are  legal  and  can 
be  legally  enforced  against  the  lessor.  *  "Where  the  tenant 
covenants  to  pay  "all  taxes,"  and  that  the  landlord  shall 
have  his  rent  free  from  all  deductions,  he  is  simply  bound 
to  pay  all  such  taxes  as,  except  for  such  covenant,  he 
would  primarily  have  been  bound  to  pay,  and  which  he 
might  have  deducted  from  the  rent."  Under  a  lease 
with  the  covenant  that  the  lessee  shall  pay  "all  taxes  and 
assessments  of  every  kind  soever  which  should  be  laid  or 
imposed  on  the  premises  during  the  term,"  the  lessee  is 


to  judgment."  Under  a  lease  of 
a  building  in  Boston  for  one  year 
from  September  30,  1857,  in  which 
the  lessee  covenants  to  pay  to  the 
lessor  "all  the  taxes  and  assess- 
ments whatsoever,  whether  in  the 
nature  of  taxes  now  in  being  or 
not,  which  may  be  payable  for  or 
in  respect  of  the  said  premises,  or 
any  part  thereof,  during  said 
term,  the  lessee  is  liable  to  pay 
the  taxes  assessed  on  May  1, 1858, 
although  in  Boston,  taxes  are  not 
payable  until  November  1,  in  each 
year.  Wilkinson  v.  Libbey,  1 
AUen  (Mass.)  375. 

'  Whitman  v.  Nicoll,  34  N.  Y. 
Superior  Court,  538. 

'  Goode  V.  Ruchle,  33  Mich.  30. 
In  this  case  the  tenant  did  not  pay 
the  tax,  but  his  goods  were  dis- 
trained and  sold  therefor,  and  the 
court  held  that  this  did  not  oper- 
ate as  a  breach  of  his  covenant,  as 
the  gist  of  his  undertaking  was 
that  the  landlord  should  not  have 
to  pay  the  taxes,  and  that  this  was 
fuMled  by  the  sale  of  the  tenant's 
goods. 

'  In  Haycock  v.  Richards,  3  E. 
D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  13,  there  was  a 
lease  of  premises  for  a  year,  at  a 


yearly  rent  and  the  Croton  water 
tax  for  the  said  term,  payable 
quarterly.  In  addition  to  the 
words  above,  the  lease  contained 
a  separate  covenant  to  pay  the  an- 
nual rates  assessed  for  the  Croton 
water.  Held,  that  this  payment 
was  to  be  made  to  the  city,  and 
not  the  landlord  ;  but  if  the  ten- 
ant did  not  pay  such  rates  at  the 
time  fixed  by  law,  and  the  land- 
lord did  assume  and  pay  it,  he 
might  recover  the  amount  of  the 
tenant,  together  with  interest  and 
the  penalty  incurred,  if  any. 

*  Clark  V.  Coolidge.  8  Kan.  189. 

«  Armfleld  v.  White,  Ey.  &  Moo. 
286.  And  where  he  takes  a  lease 
at  a  net  rent  he  cannot  complain 
that  a  covenant  requiring  him  to 
pay  the  land  tax  and  sewer  rate  is 
embraced  in  the  lease.  "A  net 
rent,"  said  Lord  Tenterden,  C. 
J.,  in  the  last  named  case,  "  means 
a  sum  clear  of  all  deductions."  If 
he  covenants  to  pay  the  taxes,  and 
that  the  landlord  shall  have  his 
rent  "free  of  all  outgoings,"  he  is 
bound  to  pay  the  tithe  rent  charge. 
Parish  v.  Sleeman,  1  DeG.  F.  &  J. 
336. 


964:  EENKWALS.  [§  4:14:. 

liable  for  an  assessment  imposed  by  a  municipal  corpo- 
ration for  altering  a  street  under  a  statute  in  force  when 
the  lease  was  made,'  or  an  annual  water-rate  created 
subsequent  to  the  lease."  A  covenant  to  pay  all  taxe^ 
and  assessments  includes  assessments  imposed  under  a 
statute  enacted  after  the  lease  was  executed  and  during 
the  term/ 

Under  a  covenant  by  lessees  to  pay  all  taxes  and  assess- 
ments which  shall  be  levied  or  assessed  on  the  lots  dur- 
ing their  term,  at  the  times  when  the  same  shaU  properly 
be  due  and  payable,  they  are  bound  to  pay  a  special  tax 
assessed  against  the  land  for  the  amount  of  a  street  com- 
missioner's certificate  of  work  done  in  paving  the  street 
and  curbing  and  planking  the  sidewalk  in  front  of  the 
premises,  although  the  work  was  done  before  the  com- 
mencement of  their  term,  the  certificate  having  been 
issued  and  the  amount  thereof  insei-ted  in  the  assessment- 
roll  during  the  term.  And  where  the  lessees  permit  the 
premises  to  be  sold  for  the  non-payment  of  such  assessment, 
and  after  the  expiration  of  their  term  become  assignees  of 
the  certificates  of  sale,  and  take  a  deed  of  the  lots  in  pursu- 
ance of  such  sale,  the  lessor  is  entitled,  in  an  action  for  that 
purpose,  to  a  judgment  that  they  quitclaim  the  premises 
to  him  and  be  restrained  from  encumbering  or  disposing 
of  the  same  or  bringing  ejectment  for  them.  And  it  is 
not  necessary  in  such  action  for  the  lessor  to  prove  his 
title  to  the  premises,  the  action  being  based  upon  the 
defendant's  violation  of  their  covenant,  and  they  being 
estopped  from  denying  the  lessor's  title  and  right  of  pos- 
session.* 

Under  a  covenant  to  pay   "all  taxes,  assessments, 
rates,  and  charges  assessed  or  made  on  the  demised  prem- 

'  Mayor,  &c. ,  of  N.  Y.  v.  C^sh-  may  be  assessed,  levied  upon  or 

man,   10  Johns.   (N.   Y.)  96 ;    Os-  charged  against  the  property,"  it 

wald  V.  Gilfert,  11  id.  443.  was  held,    that   the   tenant   was 

^  Garner  v.  Hannah,  6  Duer  (N.  bound  to  pay  all  the  taxes  for  the 

Y.)  363.  last  year,  assessed  prior  to  the  close 

^Bleecker  V.  BaUou,  3Wend.  (N.  of  his  term,  although  such  pay- 

Y.)  363  ;  Post  v.  Kearney,  3  N.  Y.  ment  would  involve  the  payment 

894.    In  Waterman  v.  Hookness,  of   taxes   for    twenty-one    years, 

ante,  the  taxes  for  the  last  year  of  when    his   term    was    only    for 

the  tenant's    term  were  assessed  twenty  years, 

the  previous  year,  and  under   a  ■■  Shepard   v.  Elmore,    19  Wis. 

covenant  to  pay  all  the  taxes  "that  434. 


CHAP.  XXX vn.]        To  Pay  Taxes. 


965 


ises,"  the  tenant  is  bound  to  pay  an  assessment  upon  the 
premises,  although  the  act  under  which  in  was  assessed 
was  passed  subsequent  to  the  making  of  the  lease.'  If 
the  assessment  is  for  a  permanent  improvement  to  the 
property,  as  for  the  paving  of  the  street,  the  laying  of  a 
sewer,  or  the  building  of  a  sluice,"  the  tenant  is  never- 
theless bound  to  pay  it  if  it  is  a  valid  assessment,  as  if 
he  desired  to  limit  his  liability  he  should  have  seen  to  it 
that  the  language  of  his  covenant  was  restricted  so  as  to 
cover  only  ordinary  assessments  or  taxes.' 

In  Massachusetts  it  is  held  that  where  a  tenant  cove- 
nants to  pay  "all  taxes,  rates,  charges  and  assessments 
which  shall  or  may  from  time  to  time,  and  at  any  time 
during  the  term,  be  levied,  assessed  or  made  on  the 
demised  premises,  or  in  respect  of  the  same,  for  any 
cause  whatever,"  binds  the  tenant  to  pay  a  betterment 
assessed  upon  the  premises,  although  the  lease  was  made 


'  Walker  v.  Whittemore,  113 
Mass.  187 ;  Post  v.  Kearney,  2  N. 
Y. ;  Curtis  v.  Pierce,  115  Maes. 
186  ;  Des  Moines  v.  Don,  31  Iowa, 
89. 

« Waller  v.  Andrews,  3  M.  & 
W.  312.  And  the  fact  that  the 
law  imposing  the  burden  was  not 
passed  until  after  the  lease  was 
made,  does  not  relieve  the  tenant 
from  liability.  Post  v.  Kearney, 
2  N.  Y.  374;  Walker  v.  Whitte- 
more, ante  ;  Des  Moines  v.  Don, 
ante. 

'  In  Payne  v.  Burridge,  12  M.  & 
W.  727,  the  tenant  covenanted  to 
pay  "all  taxes,  rates,  duties, 
fevies,  assessments  and  payments 
whatever  which  were  or  during 
the  term  might  be  rated,  levied, 
assessed  or  imposed  on  the  prem- 
ises." It  was  held  that  under  this 
covenant  he  was  bound  to  pay  an 
assessment  for  paving,  and  could 
not  recover  the  same  from  the 
landlord.  "  If,"  said  "  Alderson, 
B.,  "the  parties  had  been  desir- 
ous of  imposing  this  burden  upon 
the  tenant,  I  do  not  see  what  other 
terms  they  could  have  used  than 
those  which  are  contained  in  this 
lease."  "It  cannot  be  doubted," 
said  Pollock,  C.  B.,  "that  the 
qharge  in  question  is  an  assessment 
or  payment  which  according  to 
XL— 9 


the  terms  of  the  contract,  is  to  be 
borne  by  the  tenant."  "The 
words  of  the  covenant,"  said 
Paeke,  B.,  "must  be  construed 
according  to  their  natural  and 
ordinary  sense  ;  and  it  seems  to 
me  that  they  are  too  strong  to  be 
got  over."  In  this  case  the  assess- 
ment amounted  to  £50.  In  Waller 
V.  Andrews,  3  M.  &  W.,  the  plaint- 
iff leased  certain  marsh  lands  to 
the  defendant,  subject  to  a  con- 
dition that  the  defendant  should 
pay  "all  outgoing  rates,  taxes, 
Scots,  &c.,  whether  parochial  or 
parliamentary,  which  then  were 
or  should  be  thereafter  charged  or 
chargeable  upon  or  on  account  of 
such  marsh  land."  An  extraord- 
inary assessment  made  by  the 
commissioner  of  sewers  for  a  work 
of  permanent  benefit  to  the  land — 
to  wit :  a  sluice — came  within  the 
burden  assumed  by  the  tenant. 
Sweet  V.  Seagar,  3  C.  B.  N.  S.  119  ; 
Thompson  v.  Lapworth,  L.  R. ,  3 
C.  P.  149  ;  Crosse  v.  Raw,  L.  R., 
9  Exchq.  309 ;  Astor  v.  Miller,  8 
Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  68 ;  Bleecker  v. 
Ballow,  3  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  263 ;  Cad- 
man  v.  Johnson,  104  Mass.  491 ; 
Harvard  College  v.  Boston,  id.  471 ; 
Simonds  v.  Turiier,  120  id.  188 ; 
Blake  v.  Baker,  115  id.  188  ;  Cur- 
tis V.  Pierce,  id,  186. 


966  Eenewals.  [§  iU. 

many  years  before  the  passage  of  any  betterment  law, 
and  although  the  statute  provides  that  the  landlord  may 
pay  it  and  charge  ten  per  cent,  additional  rent.'  And 
this  has  been  held  even  when  the  covenant  was  merely 
to  pay  "taxes  and  duties,""  but  the  current  of  authority 
is  otherwise ;"  and  under  a  mere  covenant  to  pay  "taxes, 
rates  or  pubhc  dues"  it  is  held  that  the  tenant  is  bound 
to  pay  only  the  ordinary  annual  taxes,  and  is  not  liable 
to  pay  assessments  of  an  extraordinary  character  for  a 
permanent  improvement  to  the  estate.* 

The  tenant  is  not  absolved  from  the  payment  of  taxes, 
assessments,  &c.,  because  the  premises  are  destroyed  by 
fire  during  the  term,  unless  the  lease  provides  that  upon 
the  destruction  of  the  buildings  by  fire  the  term  shall 
cease,  and  the  taxes  are  assessed  or  the  assessments  laid 
after  the  premises  are  destroyed,  nor  can  he  recover  a 
proportionate  part  of  taxes,  &c.,  paid  by  him,  although 
the  landlord  has  covenanted  to  rebuild,  and  the  lease 
provides  that  the  rent  shall  cease  until  the  premises  are 
rebuilt ; '  nor  does  a  termination  of  the  term  under  the 
provisions  of  the  lease  reheve  the  tenant  from  liability 
for  taxes  assessed  before  the  term  was  ended." 

The  liability  of  the  tenant,  under  such  covenants, extends 
only  to  the  payment  of  taxes  assessed  upon  the  leased 
property,  and  does  not  include  a  tax  imposed  upon  the 
rent  reserved,'  nor  any  mere  personal  tax :  °  nor  where 
the  tax  is  imposed  upon  the  owner  of  the  estate  will  the 
tenant  be  liable  for  a  permanent  improvement,  even 
though  his  covenant  binds  him  to  pay  "all  taxes,  rates, 
assessments,  and  impositions."" 

'  Walker  V.  Whittemore,  ante.  *  Wood  v.  Boyle,  115  Mass.   30; 

''Slmonds  v.  Turner,  130  Mass.  Sargeant   v.   Pray,    117    id.    267; 

188.  Games  v.  Hersey,  id.  269. 

^  Pray  v.  Northern  Liberties,  31  «  Paul  v.  Chickering,  117  Mass. 

Penn.  St.   69;   Lane  v.  Howard,  265. 

ante ;  Sharp  v.  Spier,  4  Hill  (N.  Y.)  '  VanRensselaer  v.  Dennison,  8 

76  ;    Matter  of  the  Mayor,  John.  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  23. 

(N.  Y.) 77.  « JefEry  v.  Neale,  L.  E.,  6  C.  P. 

*  Lane  v.  Howard,  ante  ;  Twy-  240. 
cross  V.  Fitchburgh  E.  E.  Co.,  10  « Weber  v.  Eeinhard,  73  Penn.  St. 
Gray  (Mass.)  293  ;  Parrish  v.  Slee-  370 ;  TiddsweU  v.  Whitsworth,  L. 
man,  IDeG.F.&J.  326;  Garner  v.  E.,  C.  P.  336;  Twycross  v.  Fitch- 
Hannah,  6  Duer(N.Y.  Superior  Ct.)  burgh  E.  R.  Co.,  ante;  Eawlins 
262;  Second  Cong.  Society  v.Provi-  v.  Briggs,  3  L,  R.,  C,  P.  Div.  368. 
dence,  ante;  BalUng  v,  Stokes,  ante. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]        To  Pay  Taxes. 


967 


Where  premises  are  leased  for  building  purposes,  and 
the  lease  is  silent  as  to  taxes,  the  lessee  is  entitled  to  charge 
the  landlord  only  with  the  taxes  upon  the  unimproved 
property.  If  the  tenant  goes  on  and  erects  valuable 
buildings,  and  thereby  increases  the  taxable  value  of  the 
property,  he  must  bear  the  burden  of  such  increased 
taxation.  In  other  words,  the  rule  is,  that  the  landlord 
is  burdened  with  the  taxes  only  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  his  rent.  Thus,  where  land  was  let  for  build- 
ing purposes  for  the  rent  of  £7  per  annum,  but  was 
greatly  improved  by  the  tenant,  and  afterwards  under- 
let by  him  for  £54  per  annum,  the  landlord  was  held 
liable  to  pay  the  land-tax  only  in  proportion  to  the  old  rent. ' 


'  Bamfather  v.  Lee,  cited  3  T. 
R.  379 :  Bramston  v.  Robins,  125  J. 
B.  Moore,  68 ;  Yeo  v.  Leman,  3 
Strange,  1191 ;  Whitfield  v.  Brand- 
wood,  3  Stark.  440.  Where  a 
lessee  covenanted  to  pay  all  rates, 
assessments,  &c.,  both  ordinary 
and  extraordinary,  ^^hich  during 
the  term  should  be  rated,  taxed, 
charged,  assessed,  or  imposed,  or 
arise,  or  become  payable  out  of, 
or  in  respect  of  the  demised  premi- 
ses (the  land-tax  excepted),  and  in 
consequence  of  various  new  build- 
ings erected  by  the  lessee,  in  pur- 
suance of  a  covenant  for  that  pur- 
pose contained  in  the  lease,  an 
additional  land-tax  was  imposed, 
it  was  held,  that  the  landlord  was 
bound  only  to  pay  the  amount  of 
land-tax  charged  on  the  premises 
at  the  time  of  the  demise ;  for  the 
act  38  Geo.  3,  c.  3,  s.  17,  directed 
the  tenant  to  pay  the  land-tax  in 
the  first  instance,  and  to  deduct 
out  of  the  rent  so  much  of  the  rate 
as  in  respect  of  the  said  rent  the 
landlord  should  and  ought  to  pay 
and  bear,  Hyde  v.  Hill,  8  T.  R.  377. 
In  the  case  of  Hyde  v.  Hill,  the 
covenant  was  only  on  the  part  of 
the  lessee  to  pay  "all  taxes,  &c., 
except  the  land-tax ; "  but  the 
same  principle  of  construction  was 
adhered  to  in  a  later  case.  Watson 
V.  Home,  7  B.  &  C.  285,  where  the 
lessor  expressly  covenanted  to  pay 
"  as  well  the  land-tax  as  all  other 
taxes,  charges,  rates,  assessments 
and  impositions,  parliamentary, 
or  otherwise,  already  charged,  or 
to  be  charged,  upon  or  in  respect 


of  savi  demised  premises,  or  any 
part  thereof,"  and  the  value  of  the 
lands  was  greatly  increased.  The 
court  said,  that  the  covenant  must 
receive  a  reasonable  construction  ; 
that  if  it  were  literally  construed, 
so  as  to  make  the  landlord  liable 
for  all  taxes  charged  in  respect  of 
the  improved  value^  it  might  pos- 
sibly happen,  in  consequence  of 
the  improved  value  of  the  premi- 
ses, and  the  increased  rate  of  tax- 
ation, that  he  would  have  nothing 
to  receive  for  the  use  of  his  land, 
which  could  never  have  beenhis  in- 
tention. So,  where  a  lessee ,  cove- 
nanted to  pay  his  rent,  all  taxes 
thereon  being  to  him  allowed,  and 
also  all  such  further  or  additional 
rates  and  taxes  as  might  be  as- 
.  sessedon  the  premises,  or  on  any 
additional  buildings  or  improve- 
ments which  the  lessee  might  erect 
on  the  premises ;  and  the  lessor 
covenanted  to  pay  all  rates,  taxes 
and  assessmfents  whatsoever  which 
naight  be  assessed  on  the  premi- 
ses, or  on  the  lessee  in  respect  of 
the  yearly  rent,  save  and  except  as 
to  such  further  or  additional  taxes 
or  assessments  as  might  be  as- 
sessed or  charged  on  the  premises ; 
and  after  the  demise,  the  amount 
of  the  rates  and  taxes  payable  in 
respect  of  the  premises  had  con- 
siderably increased ;  the  court 
held,  that  the  landlord  had  taken 
a  point  at  which  he  wonld  be 
taxed ;  and  that,  however  the 
taxes  might  vary  beyond  that 
point,  he  was  to  be  taxed  only 
according  to  the  then  ad  valorem 


968 


Eenewals. 


C§  415. 


A  tenant  for  life  is  bound  to  pay  the  taxes  upon  the 
estate  out  of  the  profits  thereof,  and  cannot  charge  Ihem 
against  the  reversion ; '  and  he  is  also  bound  to  pay  an 
equitable  proportion  of  assessments  for  the  permanent 
improvement  of  the  estate,"  and  the  whole  of  such  rates, 
as  water  tax,  insurance,  &c. ,  that  are  for  the  benefit  of 
the  tenant,  and  do  not  inure  to  the  reversion.  ° 


Sec.  415.  Against  incumbrances.— In  ordinary  leases  for 
a  short  term  it  is  not  common  or  generally  essential  that 
a  covenant  against  incumbrances  should  be  inserted  in 
the  lease  ;  but  where  a  lease  is  given  for  a  long  term,  or 
for  building  or  other  purposes  that  involve  a  large  outlay 


rate  reserved  ;  and,  therefore,  that 
the  remainder  beyond  the  then 
rate  on  the  premises  was  to  be 
borne  by  the  tenant ;  that  if  it 
were  otherwise,  it  might  happen, 
if  the  rates  were  greatly  increased, 
that  the  landlord  would  have 
nothing  to  receive  from  the  tenant. 
Graham  v.  Wade,  16  East,  29.  To 
the  same  effect  is  the  more  recent 
case  of  Watson  v.  Atkins.  Wat- 
son V.  Atkins,  3  B.  &  Aid.  647. 
The  premises  demised  formed 
about  seven  sixthteenths  of  certain 
premises  belonging  to  the  lessor, 
and  occupied  by  him  ;  the  whole 
of  which  at  the  time  of  the  lease 
Stood  rated  to  the  dififerent  taxes, 
&c.,  at  the  value  of  351.  per  an- 
num. The  lessor  covenanted  to 
pay  all  such  taxes,  charges,  &c., 
whatsoever,  which  were  then  pay- 
able or  chargeable  on  the  prem- 
ises, or  any  part  thereof,  or  on  the 
rent  thereby  reserved;  and  the 
lessee  covenanted  to  pay  all  fresh 
taxes,  charges,  &c.,  which  should 
at  any  time  thereafter  be  ta;xed, 
rated,  &c.  The  lessee  having  con- 
siderably improved  the  property, 
and  a  separate  assessment  to  the 
amount  of  357.  a  year  being  made 
on  the  demised  premises,  a  ques- 
tion arose  whether  the  taxes  im- 
posed on  the  demised  premises 
were  fresh  taxes  or  not.  Abbott, 
C.  J.,  considered  that  from  the 
moment  a  distinct  assessment  was 
made  on  the  demised  premises  the 
taxes  became  fresh  taxes,  and 
that  the  lessee  was  liable  to  the 
payment     of     the     whole ;     but 


Justices  Batlet  and  Holboyd 
dissented  from  tliis  opinion,  and 
held,  that  the  lessee's  covenant 
extended  either  to  new  taxes,  or 
to  such  additional  or  further  taxes 
as  might  be  imposed  in  conse- 
quence of  any  improvement  of  the 
premises ;  aad,  therefore,  that 
the  le-ssrir  ought  to  pay  such  rates 
and  taxes  as  were  chargeable  in 
respect  of  seven-sixteenths  of  the 
premises,  the  whole  to  be  com- 
puted as  of  the  annual  value  of 
357.  Whei-e  a  landlord  covenanted 
for  payment  of  the  land-tax,  and 
all  other  rates,  &c. ,  and  the  prem- 
ises were  afterwards  assessed  at  a 
less  annual  sum  than  the  improved 
annual  value,  in  consequence  of  a 
composition  for  his  taxes  effected 
by  the  tenant  under  the  provisions 
of  a  local  act  of  parliament,  the 
lessor  was  held  to  be  liable  only  to 
that  proportion  of  taxes  which  the 
rent  received  by  him  bore  to  the 
fuU  improved  value.  Watson  v. 
Home,  7  B.  &  C.  385. 

'Prettyman  v.  Walston,  34  111. 
191 ;  Bushans  v.  Van  Zandt,  7  N. 
Y.  523 ;  Cakns  v.  Chabert,  3  Edw. 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  312;  Varney  v.  Stev- 
ens, 34  Me.  361  ;  McMilUan  v.  Bob- 
bins, 5  Ohio,  28 ;  Hughes  v.  Young, 
5G.  &  J.  (Md.)67. 

2  Fleet  V.  Borland,  11  How.  Pr. 
(N.  Y.)  489. 

'Graham  v.  Dunnigan,  2  Bos. 
(N.  Y.)  561 ;  Hepbern  v.  Hepbern, 
3  Bradf.  (SuiTogate  Eep.  N.  Y.) 
74 ;  Booth  v.  Ammerman,  4  id. 
139  ;  Peck  v.  Sherwood,  56  N.  Y. 
615. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  Against  Incumbrances.  969 

on  the  part  of  the  tenant,  he  should  see  to  it  that  the 
lease  contains  such  a  covenant,  or,  after  it  is  too  late,  he 
may  find  that  the  expected  advantages  from  his  lease 
are  seriously  abridged,  or  perhaps  entirely  defeated,  by 
reason  of  certain  incumbrances  upon  the  land,  and  that 
he  has  no  redress  against  the  landlord  for  the  damages 
sustained  by  him  therefrom.  If  he  is  actually  evicted 
from  the  premises  by  title  paramount,  or  under  any 
mortgage,  claim,  or  lien  given  by  the  landlord  either 
before  or  after  the  lease  is  executed,  or  which  is  created 
by  operation  of  law,  he  has  his  remedy  under  the  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjoyment ;  but  if  there  is  an  incumbrance 
upon  the  property  which  impairs  the  value  of  the  prem- 
ises for  the  purpose  for  which  he  leased  it,  he  has  no 
remedy  therefor  unless  the  lease  contains  a  covenant 
against  incumbrances.  Where  a  lease  or  deed  contains 
such  a  covenant,  the  fact  that  the  lessee  knew  of  its 
existence  .at  the  time  he  took  the  lease  does  not  defeat  a 
recovery  for  its  breach.'  A  covenant  against  incum- 
brances is  broken  immediately  upon  the  delivery  of  the 
lease,  if  an  incumbrance  existed  at  that  time,  and  an 
action  for  its  breach  may  be  brought  at  once ; "  but  such 
breaches  are  merely  technical.  Where  no  attempt  is 
made  to  enforce  the  incumbrance,  and  it  does  not  inter- 
fere with  his  free  use  of  the  premises,  merely  nominal 
damages  are  recoverable ;  but  if  the  incumbrance  is  of 
such  a  character  as  to  interfere  with  his  free  use  of  the 
premises,  substantial  damages  are  recoverable.' 

'  Roberts  v.  Levy,  3  Abb.  Pr.  (N.  «  Wyman  v.  Ballard,  13  Mass. 

Y.)  N.  S.  311 ;  Dunn  v.  White,  1  304  ;   Potter  v.  Taylor,  6  Vt.  676  ; 

Ala.  645.     The  tenant  has  a  right  Stewart  v.  Drake,  9  N.  J.  L.  139  ; 

to  understand  that  the  lessor  will  Garrison  v.   Sanford,  13  id.  261 ; 

remove   the   burden.      Snyler   v.  Funk  v.  Venida,  11  S.  &R.  (Penn.) 

Lane,  10  Ind.  434 ;  Neller  v.  Hiatt,  109  ;  Cathcart  v.  Bowman,  5  Penn. 

8  id.  171 ;  Galium  v.  Branch  Bank,  St.  317  ;  Richardson  v.  Dorr,  5  Vt. 

4  Ala.   31.     Evidence   is  not  ad-  9  ;  Bann  v.  Mayo,  5  Me.  94. 

missible  to  prove  that  the  cove-  »  Jackson  v.  Sternbergh,  20  John, 

nantee  knew  of  the  existence  of  ^.  Y.)  49 ;  Jenkins  v.  Hopkins,  8 

theincumbrance,  because  it  neither  Pick.  (Mass.)  346.     The  tenant  may 

operates  as  a  defence  or  in  mitiga-  recover  what  it  reasonably  cost  to 

tion.    Hubbard  V.  Norton,  10  Conn.  remove  the  incumbrance.     Eaton 

431  ;  Harlow  v.  Thomas.  15  Pick.  v.  Lyman,  30  Wis.  41.    But  it  is 

(Mass.)  48  ;  Barlow  v.  McKinley,  held,  that  evidence  of  the  purpose 

24  Iowa,  69  ;  Williamson  v,  Hall,  for  which  the  plaintiflE  rented  the 

63  Mo.  405.  premises  is  not  admissible.    Kel- 


970  Eenewals.  [§  415. 

As  to  what  constitutes  an  incumbrance,  it  may  be  said 
that  any  legal  right  or  interest  in  or  upon  the  premises 
which  is  not  obvious  is,  in  legal  contemplation,  an  incum- 
brance. But  an  easement  obviously  and  notoriously 
affecting  the  physical  condition  of  the  land,  as  a  mill- 
pond  flowage  over  a  certain  part  of  it,  is  not  an  incum- 
brance within  the  meaning  of  such  a  covenant ; '  nor  is  a 
legal  public  highway  over  the  land  in  actual  use  when 
the  conveyance  was  made ; '  nor  any  mere  equitable  claim 
to  the  land,  or  of  any  right  or  interest  in  it.'  In  order 
to  constitute  an  incumbrance,  a  legal  right,  claim,  or 
interest  must  exist  adverse  to  the  lessor.  Thus,  a  judg- 
ment against  the  lessor  in  those  States  where  a  judgment 
operates  as  a  lien  upon  the  land  ;  *  a  right  of  way  for  any 
purpose  ;"  a  right  to  use  a  party- wall ;  °  an  inchoate  right 
of  dower ; '  a  highway  located,  but  not  built  or  in  use ; " 
a  prior  outstanding  lease  of  the  same  land ; '  a  restriction 
imposed  upon  the  land  preventing  its  free  and  full  use." 
A  previous  sale  of  a  part  of  the  premises,  by  articles  of 
agreement,  is  held  an  incumbrance."  So  is  an  existing 
right  in  a  third  person  to  cut  and  remove  standing  trees 
within  a  certain  time;  and  in  an  action  to  recover 
damages  for  a  breach  of  a  covenant  against  incumbrances, 
by  reason  of  the  existence  of  such  a  right,  oral  evidence 
is  inadmissible  to  prove  that  the  parties  both  intended  to 

logg  V.  Malin,  62  Mo.  429.    If  the  '  Shearman  v.  Eanger,  S3  Pick 

iaoumbrance  is  an  easement,  that  (Mass.)    447 ;  Porter  v.   Noyes,  3 

prevents  the  lessee  from  building,  Me.  33. 

under  a  building  lease  substantial  *  Herrick  v.  Moore,  ante, 

damages  would  be  recoverable.  '  Grice  v.  Scarborough,  2  Spears 

1  Kutz  V.  McCune,  32  Wis.  628.  (S.  C.)  649. 

^Scribner  v.  Holmes,  16  Ind.  143.  '» In  Re  Whitlock,  35  Barb.  (N. 

"Marble  v.  Scott,  41  111.  50.  Y.)48,  in  which  it  was  that  a  re- 

*  Holman  v.  Creagmiles,  14  Ind.  striction  on  a  city  lot,  that  the  five 

177 ;  Smith  v.  Campbell,  1  Blackf.  feet  next  the  street  should  not  be 

(Ind.)  100 ;  Hull  v.  Dan,  13  John.  buUt  upon  except  for  steps,  was 

(N.  Y.)  105  ;  Jenkins  v.  Hopkins,  8  held  to  constitute  an  incumbrance. 

Pick.  (Mass.)  346.  In  Roberts  v.  Levy,  3  Abb.  Pr.  (N. 

'Barlow  v.  McKinley,  34  Iowa,  Y.)  N.  S.  311,  a  covenant  entered 

69;    Butler  v.   Gale,  37  Vt.   739;  into    between    adjoining  owners, 

Harlow  V.  Thomas,  15  Pick.  (Mass.)  for  themselves,  heirs,  and  assigns, 

66  ;  Mitchell  v.  Warner,  5  Conn.  that  all  buildings  erected  on  the 

497  ;  Herrick  v.  Moore,  19  Me.  313.  land  should  be  set  back  a  certain 

"  GUes  V.  Durgo,  1  Duer  (N.  Y.  specified  distance  from  the  streeet, 

Superior  Ct.)  331.    But  not  where  was  held  to  be  an  incumbrance, 

a  community  interest  therein  ex-  "  Seitzinger  v.  Weaver,  1  Rawle 

ists    between   adjoining    owners.  (Perm.)  883. 
Hendrick  v.  Stark,  37  N.  Y.  106. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  Miscellaneous  Covenants.  971 

except  this  right  from  the  operation  of  the  covenant, 
and  that  it  was  mutually  understood  between  them  that 
the  trees  were  not  to  pass  with  the  land.'  A  mortgage 
is  an  incumbrance,  but  not  if  the  covenantee  assures  its 
payment."  A  tax  or  assessment  that  operates  as  a  lien 
on  the  land  is  an  incumbrance,  although  the  grantor  was 
not  aware  of  its  existence  when  the  lease  was  made,  or 
not.'  A  covenant  against  incumbrances  is  personal  and 
does  not  run  with  the  land  ;*  but  if  the  covenant  is  with 
the  lessee  and  Ms  assigns,  and  there  has  been  a  breach 
before  assignment,  and  the  breach  continues  after,  the 
covenant  passes  to  the  assignee,  so  as  to  enable  him  to 
recover  for  any  damage  he  sustains  aftet  assignment.' 
The  language  of  the  covenant  is  important,  as  there  is  a 
broad  distinction  between  an  absolute  covenant  against 
incumbrances  and  one  to  protect  the  lessee  against  them. 
In  the  former  case,  as  we  have  seen,  the  covenant  is 
broken  at  once,  if  an  incumbrance  exists,  while  in  the 
latter  case  a  breach  exists  only  where  the  tenant  has  been 
actually  disturbed  in  his  possession  in  consequence  of  the 
incumbrance.' 

Sec.  416.  Miscellaneous  covenants.— If  a  lessor  covenants 
to  pay  the  tenant  for  improvements,  the  latter  has  a  lien 
upon  the  land,  for  their  payment.'    It  would  be  impos- 

'  Spurr    V,    Andrew,    6    Alien  sor,  and  subsequently  the  land  was 

(Mass.)  429.  conveyed  to  the  same  party,  and 

'  Watts  V.  Welman,  3  N.  H.  458 ;  thereafter  the  lessee  paid  the  rent 

Freeman  v.  Foster,  55  Me.  508.  to  him  ia  full,  to  the  expiration  of 

2  Nichols  V.  Alexander,  28  "Wis.  the  lease.    After  the  expiration  of 

118  ;  Jones  v.  Johnston,  104  Mass.  the  lease  the  land  was  conveyed  to 

461 ;  Cochran  v.  Guild,  106  id.  29.  plaiatifl  by  quitclaim  deed,  with 

*Pillsburyv.  Mitchell,  5  Wis.  17.  knowledge  of  the  rights  claimed 

'  Sprague  v.  Baker,  17  Mass.  586.  by  the  lessee,  who  remained  in  pos- 

« Anderson  v.  Knox,  2  Ala.  156.  session,  claiming  that  he  was  en- 

'  In  Ecke  v.  Fetzer,  65  Wis.  55 ;  titled  to  do  so  until  the  value  of 

56  Am.  Eep.  156  n,  a  lease  for  a  the  improvement  had  been  paid  to 

term  of  five  years  provided  that  him.    It  was  held,  in  an  action  to 

the  lessee  "  was  to  have  the  privi-  eject  the  lessee,  that  he  had  a  lien 

lege  to  erect  thereon  a  store  buUd-  on  the  premises  for  the  value. of 

ing,  such  a  one  as  may  be  conven-  his  improvements,  and  that  plaint- 

ient  for  his  use,  to  be  paid  for  by  iff  could  not  eject  him  until  his 

the  lessor  at  the  end  of  the  term  at  claim  for  the  value  of  the  building, 

a  fair  valuation,  to  be  determined  less  the  amount  of  rent  due,  was 

by  disinterested  appraisers  if  need  satisfied,  but  that  the  lessee  should 

be."    The  tenant  erected  a  build-  not  be  allowed  interest  on  the  value 

ing  worth  $500.     The  lease  was  as-  of  the  premises,  as  hei  had  enjoyed 

signed  to  a  third  party  by  the  les-  the  use  and  possession  thereof. 


972  Eenewals..  [§415, 

sible  to  refer  to  every  species  of  covenants  incorporated 
in  leases,  as  they  vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
circumstance  and  the  peculiar  notions  and  views  of  the 
parties.  In  all  cases  covenants,  whatever  they  may  relate 
to,  are  to  be  reasonably  construed,  and  so  as,  if  possible, 
to  effectuate  the  intention  of  the  parties.* 

'  See  ante — Sec.  on  Constiuotion 
of  Leases. 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]    Voluntary  Waste.  973 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

WASTE. 

Sec.  417.  Voluntary  waste. 

Sec.  418.  Permissive  waste. 

Sec.  419.  Accidental  fires. 

Sec.  430.  Fire  spreading  from  railways  to  the  adjoining  property. 

Sec.  421.  Fires  occasioned  by  the  negligence  of  servants. 

Sec.  423.  Injuries  from  gunpowder  and  explosive  substances — Ex- 
plosions of  gas. 

Sec.  423.  Meaning  of,  without  impeachment  for  waste. 

Sec.  424.  Eeiaedies  for  -waste. — ^Who  liable  for,  &c. 

Sec.  435.  Remedy  by  injunction. 

Sec.  426.  Injunction  by  landlord  against  tenant  for  waste. 

Sec.  427.  Where  lease  is  made  "  without  impeachment  of  waste." 

Sec.  428.  Affidavit  for  injunction. 

Sec.  429.  Injunction  by  tenant  against  landlord  to  restrain  the  cut- 
ting of  ornamental  trees,  &c. 

Sec.  430.  To  prevent  a  nuisance. 

Sec.  431.  To  compel  observance  of  restrictive  covenants. 

Sec.  433.  To  restrain  an  ejectment  brought  to  defeat  a  valid  agree-- 
ment  for  a  lease. 

Sec.  433.  By  tenant  against  third  persons. 

Sec.  417.  Voluntary-waste.— Waste  is  either  commissive, 
that  is,  some  injury  resulting  from  something  done  by 
the  tenant,  or  permissive.  Commissive  or  voluntary 
waste  is  committed  by  the  tenant  whenever  he  changes 
the   nature  or   character  of  the  thing  demised,'  even 

'  D'Arcy  v.  Askwith,  Hob.  234.  Whatever,"  he  adds,  "  does  a  last- 
Waste  is  defined  by  Blackstone,  ing  damage  to  the  inheritance  or 
in  Vol.  2  of  his  Commentaries,  freehold,  is  waste."  "  Strictly 
ch.  18,  sec.  6,  to  be  "a  spoil  or  de-  speaking."  say  the  courts  in  Profflt 
struction  of  houses,  gardens,  trees,  v.  Henderson,  29  Mo.  325,  "  -waste 
or  other  corporeal  hereditaments,  to  is  a  lasting  damage  to  the  inherit- 
the  disherison  of  him  who  has  the  ance  caused  by  the  destruction  of 
remainder  of  reversion,        ■*       *  such  things  on  the  land  as  are  not 


974: 


Waste. 


[§  4:17. 


though  the  change  actually  enhances  the  value  of  the 
property,  because  it  is  an  interference  with  the  right  of  the 
landlord  to  have  the  property  remain  in  a  condition 
agreeable  to  his  own  tastes  and  notions.  Thus,  the 
pulling  down  of  an  old  house  and  erecting  a  new  one  in 
its  place  of  greater  value  is  waste  ; '  so  to  convert  a  corn 
mill  into  a  fulhng  mill  or  a  corn  mill  into  a  malt  mill, 
although  the  change  is  to  the  lessor's  advantage,"  or 
ancient  meadow  or  pasture  into  arable  land,"  or  arable 
land  into  wood  or  e  converso,*  or  any  essential  change  in 


essential  to  its  temporary  profit, 
and  may  be  predicated  even  when 
the  act  complained  of  was  neces- 
sary to  the  profitable  enjoyment  of 
the  land,  as  clearing  of  land,  when 
it  was  valuable  only  for  timber." 
It  IS  not  necessarily  the  injury  to 
the  estate  that  constitutes  waste, 
but  the  disherison  of  the  rever- 
sioner. Livingstone  v.  Reynolds, 
36  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  123. 

>  Cole  V.  Greene,  1  Lev.  309  ;  Mc- 
CuUough  V.  Irvine,  13  Penn.  St. 
438  ;  Landon  v.  Greyme,  Cro.  Jac. 
183  ;  Cole  v.  Forth,  1  Mod.  94.  But 
it  is  not  waste  to  tear  down  an  old 
building  so  much  decayed  as  to  be 
in  danger  of  falling.  Clemens  v. 
Stier,  1  R.  I.  272.  The  tenant  has 
the  use,  not  the  dominion,  of  the 
property  demised  to  him,  and  can- 
not make  permanent  changes  or 
alterations  in  the  property  without 
the  landlord's  consent,  however 
much  the  changes  may  enhance 
the  value  of  the  property,  as  this 
would  deprive  the  landlord  of  his 
dominion  over  the  property,  and 
compel  him  to  yield  his  own  tastes 
and  notions,  in  respect  to  the 
property,  to  the  tastes  and  notions 
of  the  tenant.  The  landlord  has 
the  right  to  have  his  houses  and 
lands  kept  in  an  unaltered  state, 
surrounded  with  fill  their  old  feat- 
ures, landmarks,  and  associations. 
Smyth  V.  Carter,  18  Beav.  78  ;  Pro- 
vost V.  Hallett,  14  East,  478;  2 
Rolls's  Abr.  815,  pi.  9.  The  tenant 
has  no  right  to  judge  what  will 
be  an  improvement  to  the  inherit- 
a,nce.  Jackson  v.  Andrews,  18 
John.  (N.  Y.)  433;  Winship  v. 
Pitts,  3  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  263.  In 
the  case  last  cited>  it  was  said  that 
.the  doctrine  of  the  old  cases,  that 
it  might  be  waste  for  a  tenant  to 


erect  a  new  building  on  the  prem- 
ises, is  not  now  the  law,  and  that, 
while  a  tenant  has  no  right  to  pull 
down  valuable  buildings,  or  to 
make  improvements  or  alteratioiis 
that  will  permanently  change  the 
nature  of  the  property,  so  as  to 
render  it  impossible  to  restore  the 
same  premises  substantially  at  the 
end  of  the  term,  yet,  that  it  is  not 
waste  to  erect  a  new  building  on 
the  premises,  if  it  is  done  without 
injury  to  or  the  destruction  of  the 
buildings  or  other  improvements 
on  the  premises,  because  the  new 
buildings  may  be  removed  at  the 
end  of  the  term,  and  the  premises 
returned  in  statu  quo.  See  also 
Beers  v.  St.  John,  16  Conn.  332 ; 
Hasty  V.  Wheeler,  13  Me.  484.  In 
Jackson  v.  Tibbitts,  3  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  841,  a  tenant,  without  permis- 
sion of  the  lessor,  placed  a  door  in 
a  partition  between  two  rooms, 
and  put  a  window  into  another 
door.  It  was  held  not  to  be  waste, 
because  it  did  not  convert  the  prem- 
ises to  purposes  for  which  they  were 
not  intended,  and  did  not  injure 
the  inheritance. 

^  Landon  v.  Greyme,  ante. 

'  Co.  Litt.  53  b ;  Simmons  v.  Nor- 
ton, 7  Bmg.  647. 

<  Co.  Litt.  53  b;  Provost,  &c.,  v. 
Hallet.  14  East,  488.  The  clearing 
of  woodland  by  a  tenant  for  years, 
on  a  farm  let  as  a  dairy  farm,  and 
under  a  covenant  against  waste,  is 
in  itself  an  act  of  waste,  and  evi- 
dence of  persons  that  the  estate  is 
enhanced  in  value,  or  of  a  parol  li- 
cense, is  not  admissible.  McGreg- 
or V.  Brown,  10  N.  Y.  114.  The 
cutting  of  wiUows  and  leaving  the 
stool  or  butts  so  that  they  will  grow 
up  again  is  not  waste,  unless  they 
are  a  shelter  to  a  house  or  a  pro- 


CHAP,  xxxvm.] 


Voluntary. 


975 


the  buildings  or  estate .    Thus,  if  he  takes  down  a  partition 


tection  to  the  banks  or  a  stream 
against  water.  Phillips  v.  Smith, 
14  M.  &  W.  589.  In  Lord  D'Arcy 
V.  Askwith,  Hob.  334,  the  princi- 
ple upon  which  waste  depends  was 
stated  thus:  "It  is  generally  true 
that  the  lessee  hath  no  power  to 
change  the  nature  of  the  thing  de- 
mised ;  he  cannot  turn  meadow  in- 
to arable  land,  nor  stub  a  wood  to 
make  it  pasture,  nor  dry  up  an  an- 
nual pool  or  piscary,  nor  suffer 
ground  to  be  surrounded,  nor  des- 
troy the  pole  of  a  park,  for  then  it 
ceaseth  to  be  a  park,gior  he  may 
not  destroy  the  stock  or  breed  of 
anything,  because  it  disinherits 
and  takes  away  the  perpetuity  of 
succession,  as  villains,  fish,  deer, 
young  spring  of  woods,  or  the 
like."  In  Co.  Litt.  43,  it  is  said  to 
be  waste  to  destroy  the  germs  of 
young  plants  destined  to  become 
trees,  because  thereby  the  future 
timber  is  destroyed.  The  cutting 
of  apple  trees  or  other  fruit  trees 
in  a  garden  or  orchard,  or  a  hedge, 
is  waste,  Co.  Litt.  53  a,  because  all 
these  things  are  prejudicial  to  the 
inheritance ;  Viner's  Abr.  tit.  Waste 
(E);  but  the  doing  of  things  not 
prejudicial  to  the  inheritance  is 
not  waste.  Thus,  in  Barrett  v. 
Barrett,  Hetley,  35,  it  was  held 
that  the  cutting  of  sallows,  maples, 
beeches,  and  thorns,  which  were  al- 
leged to  be  thirty-three  years  old, 
bat  which  were  not  in  fact,  or  by 
the  custom  of  the  country,  timber, 
was  held  not  to  be  waste.  So,  too, 
it  was  held  that  the  cutting  of  oaks 
or  ashes,  where  they  are  of  season- 
able wood,  that  is,  where  they  are 
usually  cut  as  underwood,  and  in 
due  course  are  to  grow  up  again 
from  the  stumps,  is  not  waste. 
With  regard  to  waste  by  a  lessee 
in  felling  trees :  in  Jackson  v. 
Brownson,  7  John.  (N.  Y.)  227,  it 
was  said  by  one  of  the  judges 
that  everything  is  waste  "which 
does  a  permanent  injury  to  the 
inheritance,"  and  by  another  that 
"the  general  definition  of  waste 
is,  that  it  is  a  destruction  in  houses, 
gardens,  trees,  or  other  corporeal 
hereditaments,  to  the  disherison 
of  him  in  remainder  or  reversion ;" 
and  while  a  minority  of  the  judges 
were  of  opinion  that  the  doctrine 
of  waste,  as  understood  in  Eng- 


land, in  relation  to  timber,  was 
inapplicable  to  a  new,  unsettled 
country,  a  majority  held  that  the 
principle  of  the  prohibition  against 
waste  is  the  same  in  both  countries ; 
but  that  in  the  apphcation  of  it, 
regard  must  be  had  to  the  different 
situations  and  customs  of  the 
countries  ;  that  the  felling  of  any 
timber  in  England  is  waste,  be- 
cause it  is  considered  as  being  al- 
ways an  injury  to  the  inheritance, 
but  that  in  this  country  a  dis- 
crimination must  be  made  upon  a 
reference  to  the  state  of  the 
property  at  the  time  of  the  demise, 
and  that  a  lessee  of  land  entirety 
or  chiefly  wooded  has  a  right  to 
fell  part  of  the  timber,  so  as  to  fit 
the  land  for  cultivation,  but  not  so 
as  to  cause  an  irreparable  injury  to 
the  reversion,  by  sweeping  away 
what  might  be  indispensably 
necessary  for  keeping  the  fences 
and  other  erections  upon  the  farm 
in  proper  repair ;  and  that  the 
extent  to  which  wood  may  be  cut 
before  a  tenant  becomes  guilty  of 
waste,  must  be  left  to  the  sound 
discretion  of  a  jury  under  the 
direction  of  the  court :  this  variation 
in  the  apphcation  of  the  general  no- 
tion of  waste  being  similar  in  princi- 
ple to  that  which  in  England  makes 
the  definition  of  timber,  as  the 
subject  of  waste,  vary  with  the 
custom  of  the  country,  and  makes 
the  cutting  of  such  trees  as  serve 
for  ornament  or  shelter,  or  are  not 
fit  for  timber,  punishable  as  waste 
even  in  a  tenant  for  life  without 
impeachment  of  waste.  These 
pnnoiples  are  adopted  in  Keeler  v. 
Eastman,  11  Vt.  293;  Findlay  v. 
Smith,  6  Munf .  (Va.)  134,  142,  148 ; 
and  in  Chase  v.  Hazleton,  7  N.  H. 
171,  where  the  question  was  made 
to  turn  upon  the  finding  of  the 
jury  as  to  good  or  bad  husbandry. 
In  Hastings  v.  Crunckleton  et.  al. , 
3  Yea.  (Penn.)  261,  a  similar  dis- 
tinction between  w^hat  is  waste  in 
this  country  and  in  England,  on 
accoimt  of  differences,  in  local 
circumstances,  was  recognized, 
and  it  was  decided  that  if  a  tenant 
in  dower  clears  part  of  the  lands 
assigned  to  her,  and  does  not  ex- 
ceed the  relative  proportion  of 
cleared  land  considered  as  to  the 
whole  tract,  she  is  not  punishable 


976 


Waste. 


[§41T. 


in  a  house  and  makes  two  rooms  into  one,  or  sets  up  a 
partition  and  makes  one  room  in  to  two,  or  if  he  converts  a 
barn  or  a  warehouse  into  a  dweUing-house,  or  a  grist  mill 
into  a  saw  mill,  or  a  saw  mill  into  a  cider  mill,  or  a  hand 
mill  or  a  water  mill  into  a  horse  mill,  or  indeed  makes 
any  change  in  the  buildings  that  essentially  changes  its 
character  or  plan,  it  is  waste."  So  if  a  lessee  of  ?,  water 
mill  worked  by  a  head  of  water  penned  back  under  a 
prescriptive  right,  for  the  purpose  of  working  the  mill, 
changes  the  height  of  the  tumbling  bay,  or  transposes 
or  alters  the  old  water-marks,  as  it  tends  to  destroy  the 
landlord's  evidence  of  title  to  the  head  of  water,  and  goes 
to  the  destruction  of  the  thing  granted  ; "  so  it  is  waste  to 


for  waste.  And  a  similar  rule  as 
to  proportion  was  laid  down,  in  the 
case  of  a  devisee  for  life,  in  John- 
son V.  Johnson,  3  Hill's  Eq.  (S.  C.) 
277, 283,  where  it  was  held  generally 
that  what  is  waste  in  England  is 
waste  here,  and  that  any  treat- 
ment which  leaves  open  lands  less 
fertile,  or  changes  their  culture, 
or  mars  the  woods  or  structures,  is 
waste ;  but  that  in  the  case  of  vnld 
lands,  the  clearing  of  them  by  a 
devisee  for  life  could  not  be  waste, 
as  without  clearing,  the  benefit  of 
the  devise  could  not  be  realized, 
but  that  the  limits  of  the  right 
were,  that  the  life-tenant's  clearing 
in  wild  lands  must  not  exceed  that 
proportion  to  the  whole  land  which 
the  life-estate  bears  to  the  fee . 
and  in  the  same  case  upon  appeal, 
id..  297,  the  rule  was  said  to  be, 
that  if  the  tenant  for  life  cuts 
down  more  woodland  than  is 
necessary  for  the  enjoyment  of  his 
estate,  and  has  iujuredthe  interest 
in  remainder,  it  is  waste ;  and 
that  the  ultimate  injury  done  to 
the  inheritance  of  reversion  is  the 
test  of  liability,  for  if  the  clearing 
of  the  land  has  improved  its  value 
to  a  co-tenant  or  remainder-man, 
the  tenant  would  not  be  liable 
for  waste.  In  Waples  et.  al.  v. 
Waples,  2  Harr.  (Del.)  281,  it  was 
held  that  actionable  waste  in  cut- 
ting trees,  is  any  material  injury  to 
the  inheritance,  upon  which  the 
jury  are  to  decide.  In  Jackson  v. 
Andrews,  18  John.  (N.  Y.)  431,  the 
tenant,  by  making  a  ditch  in  the 
exercise  of  good  husbandry,  had 


accidently  caused  the  water  of  a 
creek  to  flow  into  a  swamp  con- 
taining timber,  which  was  thereby 
killed  but  had  been  replaced  by 
the  growth  of  new  and  more 
valuable  timber  before  the  action 
for  a  forfeiture  was  brought ;  and 
the  court  held  that  the  tenant 
would  not  have  been  liable  for  the 
unforeseen  consequences  of  an  act 
of  good  husbandry,  and  that  if  the 
act  had  been  waste,  it  was  so  re- 
paired before  action  brought  as  to 
have  ceased  to  be  punishable ;  but 
they  added  that  a  tenant  cannot, 
under  a  i)retence  of  advantage  to 
the  reversioner,  change  the  nature 
of  buildings,  and  thatsuch changes, 
though  beneficial,  are  waste.  In 
Den  V.  Kinney,  5  N.  J.  L.  553,  it 
was  held,  that  cutting  wood  for 
the  common  purposes  of  the  estate 
is  not  waste,  as,  where  land  is 
annexed  to  a  furnace,  cutting 
wood  therefor.  The  cutting  down 
of  a  green  bank  which  is  the 
boundary  of  a  river  in  certain 
states  of  the  water,  and  the  de- 
struction of  trees  upon  the  bank, 
by  means  of  which  trees,  in  part, 
the  bank  had  been  made  secure 
against  the  encroachments  of  the 
river,  is  such  a  lasting  injury  to 
the  inheritance  as  to  be  waste,  and 
will  be  prevented  by  injunction  out 
of  Chancery.  Scudder  v.  Trenton 
Delaware  Falls  Co.,  1 N.  J.  Eq.  698. 

'  Douglas  V.  Wiggins,  1  John. 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  485 ;  Cole  v.  Forth,  1 
Mod.  94 ;  Co.  Litt.  58  a. 

'  1  Addison  on  Torts  (Wood's 
Edn.),  840. 


OHAP.  xsxvin.] 


VOLUNTARY 


977 


remove  wainscots,  doors,  windows,  floors,  or  other  thing 
annexed  to  the  freehold  : '  to  change  the  course  of  hus- 
bandry ; '  to  open  new  mines  or  pits  ; '  to  plough  up  fruit- 
bearing  plants  or  bushes  set  by  the  landlord,'  destroying 
a  hedge, '  cutting  down  fruit,  shade,  or  ornamental  trees  ;' 
to  cut  down  timber  trees,  except  for  the  necessary  repairs 
of  the  buildings,'  or  trees  generally,  except  it  be  for  use 
upon  the  estate  either  for  fuel,  repairs,  or  other  necessary 
purpose,'  or  in  case  wild  land  is  leased   for  farming 


'  Co.  Litt.  53  a.  Where  a  tenant 
in  common  took  the  fixtures  and 
implements  belonging  to  a  mill, 
■which  was  out  of  use  for  the  want 
of  repairs,  and  used  them  tempo- 
rarily in  a  mill  of  his  own,  and 
burnt  some  useless  rotten  timber 
pertaining  to  the  mill-dam,  which 
was  in  his  way,  it  was  held  that  he 
was  not  guilty  of  destructive 
waste.  Dodd  v.  Watson,  4  Jones 
Eq.  (N.  C.)  48. 

Si  7  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Waste  (C),  1. 

^Hill  V.  Taylor,  23  Cal.  191; 
United  States  v.  Parrott,  1  McAll- 
ister (U.  S.  C.  C.)  271.  But  a  ten- 
ant may  work  an  open  mine  or 
quarry.  Co.  litt.  54  b;  Clegg  v. 
Eowland,  L.  R.,  3  Eq.  Cas.  165; 
Viner  v.  Vaughn,  2  Beav.  466. 

■»  WathereU  v.  HoweUs,  t  Camp, , 
as  a  strawberry  bed,  currant  and 
gooseberry  bushes,  an  asparagus 
bed,  &c. ,  &c. 

5  Co.  Litt.  53  a. 

"Id. 

'  In  this  country  generally  the 
tenant  is  not  regarded  as  guUty  of 
waste,  who  merely  commits  an  act 
that  is  dictated  by  good  husbandry, 
and  one  which  a  judicious,  pru- 
dent owner  of  the  inheritance 
w^ould  have  committed,  as  the  cut- 
ting of  timber  for  the  use  of  the  es- 
tate, either  in  repairing  buildings 
or  fences,  and  the  like,  Woodward 
V.  Gates,  88  Ga.  205,  or  cutting 
timber  from  one  parcel  of  land  to 
make  repairs  in  another.  Paddle- 
ford  V.  Paddleford,  7  Pick.  (Mass.) 
152.  But  he  cannot  cut  wood  or 
timber  to  sell,  even  though  his 
purpose  in  cutting  it  was  to  re- 
deem a  piece  of  woodland  and 
convert  it  into  pasture  land,  to 
which  purpose  it  had  formerly 
been  devoted,  nor  even  though  the 
rules  of  good  husbandry  require 


that  it  should  be  cut  and  the 
change  be  made.  Clark  v.  Holden, 
7GrayfMass.)  8;  Syckel  v.  Emery, 
15  N.  J.  L.  387 ;  Stratic  v.  Fehl,  22 
Wis.  337.  But  it  has  been  held  not 
to  be  waste  for  a  tenant  to  cut  tim- 
ber from  a  lot  and  sell  it  to  buy 
boards  to  be  used  upon  the  estate 
in  making  necessary  repairs. 
Loomis  V.  wilbor,  5  Mas.  (U.  S.) 
15.  A  tenant  is  guilty  of  waste, 
even  though  the  timber  was  origi- 
nally cut  for  necessary  repairs  or 
use  upon  the  premises,  if  he  subse- 
quently sells  it ;  and  this  is  said  to 
be  so,  even  though  he  subsequently 
buys  it  back  and  uses  it  in  making 
repairs  upon  the  estate,  as  it  is  the 
vendition  which  makes  the  cutting 
waste;  Co.  Litt.  53  b;  and  it  is 
said  that  he  cannot  sell  the  timber 
to  get  money  with  which  to  make 
repairs ;  Co.  Litt.  53  h ;  but  a  con- 
trary doctrine  has  been  held  in 
this  country,  and  in  one  case, 
Loomis  V.  Wilbor,  5  Mas.  (TJ.  S.) 
13,  it  was  held  that  a  tenant  who 
cut  timber  and  sold  it  to  buy  boards 
to  be  used  in  making  necessary  re- 
pairs upon  the  estate,  was  nqt 
guilty  of  waste.  Waste  may,  how- 
ever, be  predicated  of  the  cutting 
of  trees  even  for  the  necessary  re- 

Eairs  of  the  estate,  if  it  is  bad  hus- 
andry  to  cut  them,  or  an  iryury 
to  the  inheritance.  Proffit  v.  Hen- 
derson, 29  Mo.  325.  And  in  an  ac- 
tion for  damages  for  such  cutting, 
the  plaintiff  is  not  restricted  to  the 
value  of  the  trees,  but  may  recov- 
er the  actual  damage  to  the  inher- 
itance. Achey  v.  Hull,  7  Mich. 
423. 

'  A  tenant  may  cut  timber  upon 
the  estate  for  his  own  use  qr  to 
make  repairs,  but  for  no  other 
purpose  ;  therefore,  in  an  action  on 
the  case  in  the  nature  of  waste,  it 


978 


Waste. 


[§41Y. 


purposes,  for  the  purpose  of  fitting  a  portion  of  the  land 
for  cultivation '  but  he  cannot,  even  under  such  circum- 
stances, cut  all  the  timber,  as  the  rules  of  good  husbandry- 
require  that  he  should  leave  sufficient  to  keep  the  buildings 
and  fences  in  repair  and  to  supply  the  farm  with 
fuel ; "  and  the  extent  to  which  wood  and  timber  may- 
be cut  before  the  tenant  is  guilty  of  waste  is  essentially  a 
question  for  the  jury. '  Waste  (that  is,  commissive  waste) 
can  never  be  predicated  against  a  tenant  for  that 
which  results  from  natural  causes ;  therefor,  if 
trees  are  blown  down,  and  the  tenant  cuts  and 
sells  them,  he  is  not  chargeable  as  for  waste,  but 
the  landlord  may  maintain  trover.  Indeed,  in  aU  cases 
of  cutting  timber,  where  an  action  in  the  nature  of  waste 
will  lie,  trover  may  be  brought  if  the  landlord  so  elects. 
Nor  is  it  waste  for  a  tenant  to  cut  timber,  or  do  any  other 
act,  which  the  parties  evidently  intended  that  he  might 
do  ;  as  if  a  quarry  is  let,  although  there  is  no  provision 


is  not  enough  to  allege  that  the 
timber  was  out  by  the  tenant ;  it 
should  also  be  alleged  that  it  was 
not  cut  for  the  tenant's  use  or  for 
repairs  upon  the  estate.  Wright 
V.  Roberts,  32  Wis.  161 ;  Kidd  v. 
Dennison,  6  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  9.  In 
cutting  trees  for  fuel,  the  tenant 
must  observe  the  rules  of  good 
husbandry,  and  he  will  not  be 
justified  in  cutting  sound  trees 
when  there  are  those  beguming  to 
decay,  or  which  have  been  blown 
down,  sufficient  for  that  purpose. 
Paddleford  v.  Paddleford,  7  Pick. 
(Mass.)  153. 

1  Kidd  V.  Dennison,  6  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  9.  In  Lambeth  v.  Warner,  3 
Jones  (N.  C.)  165,  it  was  held  not 
to  be  waste  for  a  tenant  in  dower 
of  a  large  farm,  but  a  few  acres  of 
which  had  been"  cleared,  to  cut  off 
timber  from  a  portion  of  the  lot,  to 
render  it  tillable  for  the  support  of 
her  family.  The  doctrine  of  waste, 
as  it  existed  in  England,  is  not 
applicable  in  this  respect  in  a 
country  like  ours,  in  wmch  a  large 
portion  of  the  lands  are  new,  and 
have  not  been  redeemed  from  the 
wilderness.  Kidd  v.  Dennison,  6 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  12.  But  if  the  clear- 
ing of  land,  even  for  the  purposes 


of  converting  it  into  tillable  land,  is 
contrary  to  the  rules  of  good  hus- 
bandry and  injures  the  estate,  it  is 
waste.  Chase  v.  Hazleton,  7  N. 
H.  171 ;  Drawn  v.  Smith,  53  Me. 
141  ;  Van  Deusen  v.  Young,  29 
N.  Y.  9.  It  is  not  waste  to 
clear  land  to  reUeve  other  lands 
from  excessive  cultivation.  Owen 
V.  Hyde,  6  Yerg.  (Tenn.)  People  v. 
Davison,  4  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  109,  334 ; 
McCullough  V.  Irvine,  13  Penn.  St. 
488. 

'  Paige,  J.,  in  Kidd  v.  Dennison, 
ante,  p.  13. 

*  Jackson  v.  Brownson,  7  John. 
(N.  Y.)  383  ;  Moores  v.  Wait,  5 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  107;  Jackson  v. 
Auchen,  18  John.  (N.  Y.)  431  ; 
Cooper  V.  Stower,  9  id.  333  ;  Adams 
V.  Breverton,  3  H,  &  J.  (Md.)  134  ; 
Jackson  v.  Tibbetts,  3  Arnd.  (N. 
Y.)  341. 

*  Houghton  V.  Cooper,  6  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  281  ;  Maers  v.  Wait,  3  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  104 ;  Shultz  v.  Barker,  13 
S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  273 ;  Richard  v. 
Torbett,  3  Houst.  (Del.)  173; 
Harris  v.  GosUn,  8  Harr.  (Del.)  19. 
It  is  not  waste  for  a  tenant  to  re- 
move timber  blown  down  by  a 
tempest.  Houghton  v.  Cooper, 
ante. 


CHAP.  xxxvni.J         Voluntary.  979 

that  he  may  open  it,  yet  it  is  not  waste  for  him  to  do  so  ; 
or  if  a  brick-yard  is  let,  it  is  not  waste  for  him  to  dig  the 
clay ;  or  if  a  furnace  and  a  piece  of  woodland  is  let, 
it  is  not  waste  for  him  to  cut  the  timber  to  run  the  furnace 
with,  because  from  the  nature  of  the  transaction  it  is 
evident  that  these  things  were  contemplated  and  intended 
by  the  parties.'  But  where  a  tenant  leases  lands  for 
agricultural  purposes,  it  is  waste  for  him  to  work  gold 
mines  or  other  mines  or  quarries  upon  the  pi'emises  ; " 
and  the  same  is  true  when  the  .  lease  is  for  any  purpose 
inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  the  parties  contemplated 
or  intended  that  the  tenant  should  open  mines,  quarries, 
&c.  Digging  for  gravel,  lime,  clay,  brick-earth,  stone, 
mines  of  metal  or  coal,  or  the  like,  hidden  in  the  earth 
and  not  open  Avhen  the  tenant  went  into  possession,  is 
waste.  °  But  if  the  pits  or  mines  were  open  before  the 
tenant  went  into  possession,  it  is  not  waste  for  him  to 
dig  them  for  his  own  use,*  or  for  the  reparation  of  the 
premises,  °  and  he  may  open  pits  of  gravel  or  clay  for  the 
purposes  of  reparation.  °  It  is  always  a  question  of  degree, 
whether  the  working  of  open  mines  by  a  tenant  for  life 
is  waste,'  and  also  the  reason  for  the  abandonment  of  the 
mine  is  important.  If  it  was  abandoned  because  it 
was  unprofitable,  it  is  not  waste  for  the  tenant  to  work  it, 
but  if  it  was  abandoned  for  the  advantage  of  the  estate, 
it  is  ; '  so  it  is  waste  for  the  tenant  to  do  any  act  that  tends 
to  injure  the  estate,  as  to  turn  hogs  into  a  meadow.' 
Waste  can  be  committed  only  of  the  thing  demised, 
therefore  it  is  not  waste  for  the  tenant  to  cut  down  trees, 
or  open  quanies,  mines  or  pits  that  are  excepted  from 
the  lease.  In  such  cases  the  tenant  is  only  liable  in  trover 
or  trespass.  "    It  is  waste  for  a  tenant  to  take  all  the  fish 

1  Dow  V.  Kennedy,  5  N.  J.  Eq.  552.         «  Co.  Litt.  53  h. 

»  United    States    v.    Parrott,    1         «  Co.  Litt.  53  b. 
McAU.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  271 ;  HUl  v.         '  Bagot  v.  Bagot,  33  Beav.  509. 
Taylor,  22  Cal.  19] .  *  Bagot  v.  Bagot,  ante. 

*  Viner  v.  Vaughn,  2  Beav.  466 ;         » In  Billows  v.  McGinnis,  17  Ind. 

Bacon's  Abr.   tit.    Waste   (C),    8 :  64,  the  tenant  turned  hogs  into  a 

Higgon  V.   Mortimer,  6  C.   &  P.  meadow,  and  they  rooted  up  the 

616  ;  D'Arcv  v.  Askwith,  Hob.  234 ;  grass.     It  was  held  waste. 
Phillips  V.  Smith,  14  M.  &  W.  593.         '»  Goodright  v.    Vivian,  8  East, 

*lWood's  Inst.,b.  2,  c.  5,  s.  41;  190. 
Clavering  v.  Clavering,  2  P.  Wms. 


980  Waste.  [§  418. 

out  of  a  fish-pond,  or  all  the  doves  out  of  a  dove-cote, 
or  take  them  at  a  season  when  they  are  required  for 
replenishment ; '  so  it  is  waste  for  the  tenant  to  remove 
glass  from  a  window,  although  he  put  it  there  himself,  or 
to  remove  anything  annexed  to  and  parcel  of  the  freehold, 
although  annexed  thereto  by  himself  ; "  for  every  chattel 
annexed  to  a  freehold  without  a  license  to  remove  it, 
express  or  implied,  becomes  a  part  of  it,  and  passes  to  the 
landlord  as  soon  as  annexed.  ° 

Sec.  418.  Permissive  Waste,— Permissive  waste  con- 
sists in  suffering  or  permitting  the  premises  to  fall  into 
decay,  as  the  buildings,  fences,  &c.,  or  neglecting  to 
keep  up  the  land  ;  *  as  by  suffering  a  pasture  or  meadow  to 
be  overgrown  with  bushes.'  If  a  tenant  makes  any  essen- 
tial change  in  a  dwelling  he  is  liable  for  waste.  Thus,  if  he 
takes  down  a  partition  and  makes  two  rooms  into  one,  or  if 
he  sets  up  a  permanent  partition  and  makes  one  into  two, 
or  if  he  converts  a  barn  or  a  warehouse  into  a  dwelling,  or  a 
grist-mill  into  a  saw-mill,  or  a  saw-mill  into  a  cider-mill, 
a  hand-miU  into  a  horse-mill,  or  indeed  any  change  that 
changes  the  character  of  the  building  in  any  essential 
respect,  it  is  waste,  for  which  an  action  will  lie.  In  this 
country,  generally,  that  is  not  regarded  as  waste  which 
is  dictated  by  good  husbandry,  and  one  of  such  a  charac- 
ter as  a  judicious  prudent  owner  of  the  inheritance 
would  have  committed.  Thus,  it  is  held,  that  where  a 
tenant  cuts  down  timber  trees,  it  will  not  be  deemed 
waste  if  good  husbandry  and  judicious  and  prudent 
management  of  the  estates  justifies  it.°  But  this  is  con- 
fined strictly  to  the  cutting  of  timber  for  the  use  of  the 
estate.    If  it  is  cut  and  sold  or  not  used  upon  or  for  the 

>  Phillips  V.  Smith,  ante ;  D'Arcy  Barb.  (N.   Y.)  409 ;  People  v.  Al- 

V.  Askwith,  ante.  berty,  11  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  163  ;  Mc- 

*  Herlakenden's    Case,  4   Coke,  Gregor  v.   Brown,  10   N.  Y.  115; 

63  b.    It  has  been  held  to  be  waste  Cook  v.  Transportation  Co. ,  1  Den. 

for  a  husband  to  remove  a  house  (N.  Y.)  104  ;  Herne  v.  Benbaw,  4 

built  by  himself  upon  his  wife's  Taunt.  764. 

lands.     Dozier  v.  Grregory",  1  Jones  *  Clemena  v.  Stier,  1  B.  I.  373  ; 

(N.  C.)  100.  McCuUoughv.  Irvine,  13  Penn.  St. 

'  Lancaster  v.  Eve,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  438. 

717.  "  Douglas  v.  Wiggins,  1  Johns. 

^Kidd  V.  Dennison,  6  Barb.  (N.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  435. 
Y.)  337;    Harder    v.   Harder,   36 


CHAP,  xxxvni.]  Permissive.  981 

estate  it  is  waste,  even  though  the  purpose  in  cutting  it 
was  to  redeem  a  piece  of  woodland  to  pasture  land,  to 
which  use  it  had  formerly  been  devoted,  and  this  even 
though  good  husbandry  required  that  the  change  should 
be  made.'  So  it  is  waste  for  a  husband  to  cut  and  sell 
growing  timber  from  the  lands  of  his  wife,  unless  good 
husbandry  requires  that  a  portion  of  the  lands  should  be 
reduced  to  cultivation,  and  he  must  act  as  a  prudent 
owner  of  the  fee  would,  in  view  of  the  nature  and  situa- 
tion of  the  land  and  the  future  wants  of  the  reversioner." 
A  tenant  may  cut  timber  for  his  own  use,  or  to  make 
repairs  upon  the  estate,  but  for  no  other  purpose  ;  there- 
fore, in  an  action  for  waste,  it  is  not  enough  to  allege 
that  timber  was  cut  by  the  tenant,  but  it  should  also  be 
alleged  that  it  was  not  cut  for  the  tenant's  use,  or  for 
repairs  upon  the  estate.'  Waste  can  never  be  predicated 
against  one  for  that  which  results  from  natural  causes, 
except  where  he  is  bound  to  repair  the  damage.*  Thus, 
where  trees  are  blown  down,  a  tenant  who  cuts  and  sells 
them  cannot  be  pursued  for  waste ;  the  remedy  is  trover.' 
So  in  all  cases  for  cutting  timber,  the  landlord  may 
maintain  trover  if  he  prefers  the  remedy  to  an  action 
for  waste.  Nor  for  mere  ill  husbandry."  It  is  not  waste 
for  a  tenant  to  cut  timber  from  one  parcel  of  land  to 
make  repairs  in  another.'  Nor  is  it  waste  to  cut  trees 
for  that  purpose,  for  fuel  to  be  used  on  the  estate, 
although  in  this  respect  the  tenant  must  obey  the  rules 
of  good  husbandry,  and  would  not  be  justified  in  cuttifig 
sound  trees  when  there  are  those  beginning  to  decay,  or 
which  had  been  blown  down,  sufficient  for  that  purpose ; 
nor  has  he  a  right  to  cut  wood  or  timber  to  sell,  nor  in 
fact  to  do  anything  that  operates  as  an  injury  to  the 
inheritance.'    Neither  is  it  waste  for  a  tenant  who  has 

'  Woodwaxdv.  Gates,  38  Ga.  205.  3  Harr.  (Del.)  19  ;  Maers  y.  Wait, 

Syckel  V.  Emery,  15  N.  J.  L.  387  ;  3  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  104. 

Clark  V.  Holden,  7  Gray  (Mass.)  8.  « Richards  v.  Torbett,  3  Houst. 

'Strabe  v.  Fehl,  33  Wis.  337.  (Del.)  172. 

"Wrightv.  Roberts,  22  Wis.  161 ;  'Paddleford   v.    Paddleford,    7 

Davisv.  Gilliam,  Sired.  (N.  C.)  308 ;  Pick.  (Mass.)  153. 

Kidd  V.  DennisoB,  6  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  9.  «  Jackson  v.  Brownson,  7  Johns. 

'Houghton  V.  Cooper,  6  B.  Mon.  (N.  Y.)  237  ;  Crockett  v.  Crockett, 

(Ky.)  381 ;  Shults  v.  Barker,  13  S. .  2    Ohio    (N.    S.)  180 ;    Smith   v. 

(Jfc B.  (Bsmi,)a72 ;  Bmas.^.  Qo^m,  Sharpe,  Busbee  (N.  C.)  91. 

n.—vi 


Waste.  [§  418. 

leased  wild  land,  whoUy  covered  by  wood  and  timber,  to 
clear  off  a  part  of  the  premises  for  the  purposes  of  cultiva- 
tion ;  but  he  must  not  cut  aU  the  timber  unless  specially 
authorized  so  to  do  ;  and  as  to  whether  his  acts  amount 
to  waste  is  a  question  of  fact  for  the  jury." 

A  trustee  of  lands  appointed  under  a  will  to  have 
charge  of  the  lands  of  an  infant  during  infancy,  is  not  a 
tenant  for  life,  nor  a  guardian  so  as  to  be  hable  for  waste." 
Or  if,  in  point  of  fact,  although  the  purpose  for  which  the 
timber  is  cut  is  to  convert  the  land  into  tillable  land,  yet 
if  it  actually  operates  as  an  injury  to  the  estate,  and  bad 
husbandry,  it  is  waste.'  It  is  not  waste  to  clear  land  of 
timber  to  relieve  the  estate  of  excessive  cultivation.* 
Where  a  furnace  is  leased  to  a  person  with  woodland 
annexed  thereto,  it  is  not  waste,  in  the  absence  of  express 
provisions  in  the  lease  against  it,  for  him  to  cut  wood 
therefrom  for  the  use  of  the  furnace .°  Neither  is  it  waste 
for  a  tenant  to  remove  timber  that  has  been  thrown  down 
by  a  tempest.'  Nor  is  it  waste  for  a  tenant  to  cut  timber 
from  a  lot  and  sell  it  to  buy  boards  to  make  repairs  upon 
the  premises.'  But  it  is  waste  for  a  tenant  who  has  hired 
land  for  agricultural  purposes  to  work  gold  mines  or  other 
mines  or  quarries  thereon. '  So  it  is  waste  for  a  tenant 
for  hf e  or  years,  or  by  curtesy,  or  dower,  to  neglect  to  pay 
the  taxes  upon  an  estate  so  that  it  is  sold  to  pay  them, 
and  an  action  on  the  case,  or  of  waste,  where  the  statute 
permits  it,  lies  therefor.'  But  it  is  not  regarded  as  waste 
for  a  guardian  to  cut  timber  from  the  lands  of  his  ward, 
when  the  timber  is  of  no  great  value  and  does  not  mater- 
ially diminish  the  value  of  the  land."  It  is  waste  for  a 
tenant  negligently  to  suffer  the  buildings  upon  the  estate 

'Id.;    Jackson    v.    Tibbitts,    3  =Dow  v.   Kennedy,  5  N.   J.  L. 

Wend.   (N.-  Y.)  341  ;    Adams    v.  553. 

Breveton,  3  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  134.  « Houghton  v.  Cooper,  6  B.  Mon. 

^Kincaird  v.  Scott,  11  Johns.  (N.  (Ky.)  281. 

Y.)  368.  1  Loomis  v.  WUbor,  5  Mason  CO. 

•    3  Chase  v.  Hazleton,  7  N.  H.  171 ;  S.)  13. 

Drawn  v.  Smith,  53  Me.  141  ;  Van  » United  States  v.  Parrott,  1  Mc- 

Deusen  v.  Young,  29  N.  Y.  9.  AUister  (U.  S.)  271 ;  Hill  v.  Taylor, 

*  Owen  V.  Hyde,  6  Yerg.  (Tenn.)  23  Cal.  191. 

334;    McCuUough    v.    Irvine,    13  'Stetson  v.   Day.    51   Me.   434. 

Perm.  St.  438 ;  People  v,  Davison, .  "  Bond  v.  Lookwood,  33  111.  313. 
4  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  109. 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  Pekmissive.  983 

to  burn '  or  to  turn  hogs  into  a  meadow.'  So  it  is  held 
to  be  waste  for  a  husband  to  remove  a  house  built  by 
himself  upon  his  wife's  estate.'  But  otherwise  if  it  is 
not  affixed  to  the  freehold.*  Suffering  pastures  to  be 
overgrown  with  brush,  cutting  and  selling  wood  upon  the 
farm,  cutting  hoop  poles,  tearing  down  old  buildings, 
unless  so  dilapidated  that  there  is  danger  that  they  will 
fall,  are  regarded  as  waste."  It  is  not  waste  for  a  tenant 
in  dower  of  a  large  farm,  but  a  few  acres  of  which  has 
been  cleared,  to  cut  off  timber  from  a  portion  of  the 
lot  to  render  it  tillable  for  the  support  of  her  family.' 
Nothing  is  regarded  as  waste  in  this  country  unless  it  is 
or  win  become  prejudicial  to  the  estate.  Thus,  a  tenant 
may  properly  open  a  way  over  meadow  land  for  the  con- 
venience of  the  estate,  and  may  dig  ditches  to  drain  it,  or 
carry  on  earth  to  make  it  firm  and  passable,  or  he  may 
erect  houses  where  there  were  none  before,  and  dig'cel- 
lars  for  them,  and  raise  the  earth  around  them,  or  may 
carry  on  earth  to  the  land  around  such  houses  for  the  pur- 
pose of  making  them  dry  ;  but  in  all  these  matters  the 
real  test  of  habihty  depends  upon  the  fact  whether  the 
acts  were  warranted  by  good  husbandry,  and  whether  the 
estate  has  been,  lessened  in  value.'  There  are,  how- 
ever, many  acts  which  amount  to  waste  per  se,  as  the 
tearing  down  of  substantial  buildings,  the  changing  of 
the  character  of  buildings,  the  clearing  of  lands  let  for  a 
dairy  farm,  and  other  acts  of  a  similar  character." 
Strictly  speaking,  waste  is  a  lasting  damage  to  the  inherit- 
ance caused  by  the  destruction  of  such  things  on  the  land 
as  are  not  essential  to  its  temporary  profit,  and  may  be 
predicated  even  when  the  act  complained  of  was  neces- 
sary to  the  profitable  enjoyment  of  the  land,  as  by  the 
clearing  of  land  when  it  was  valuable  only  for  timber." 

1  Cornish  v.  Stratton,  8  B.  Mon.  » Lambeth  v.   Warner,  2  Jones 

(Ky.)  586:  Robinson  v.  Wheeler,  (N.  C.)  165. 

25  N.  Y.  252.  '  Pynchon   v.    Steams,   11   Met. 

^  Bellows  V.  McGinnis,  17  Ind.  64.  (Mass.)  304. 

'  Dozier  v.  Gregory,  1  Jones  (N.  *  McGregor  v.  Brown,  10  N.  Y. 

C.)  100.  114. 

■»  Clemena  v.  Stier,  1  R.  I.  272.  «  Profflt  v.  Henderson,  29  Mo. 

6  Clemena  v.  Stier,  1  R.  I.  272 ;  325. 
McCullough  V.  Irvine,  13  Penn.  St. 
488. 


984  Waste.  [§  419. 

A  tenant  for  years,  or  for  life,  must  not  permit  a  house 
to  remain  uncovered  so  as  to  let  the  timbers  rot,  and  must 
use  all  reasonable  endeavors  to  keep  the  building  wind 
and  water  tight.  But  he  is  not  bound  to  repair  the 
principal  timbers  of  the  roof,  nor  to  replace  old  materials 
with  new,  except  where  the  expenses  are  of  a  trifling 
character,  and  the  mischief,  if  neglected,  would  operate 
as  a  lasting  injury  to  the  inheritance.  If  the  house  was 
uncovered  when  the  tenant  went  into  possession,  it  is  not 
waste  for  him  to  permit  it  to  fall  down.'  It  is  not  waste, 
,  either  wilful  or  permissive,  to  leave  land  uncultivated." 
A  tenant  is  liable  for  waste  if  he  permits  anything  erected 
for  the  benefit  or  protection  of  the  estate  to  fall  into 
decay,  whereby  the  estate  is  injured :  as,  if  he  suffers 
a  wall  or  embankment,  erected  to  protect  the  estate  from 
the^nflux  of  the  water  from  the  sea  or  a  river,  to  fall 
into  decay."  So  it  is  permissive  waste,  for  which  the 
tenant  is  liable,  negligently  to  permit  the  buildings  to  be 
destroyed  by  fire  ;  but  he  is  not  responsible  as  for  waste 
for  buildings  destroyed  by  an  accidental  fLve.*  An  action 
for  permissive  waste  will  lie  against  a  tenant  for  years  or 
from  year  to  year.'  It  is  not  waste  for  a  tenant  for  life 
to  cut  timber  to  fit  the  land  for  cultivation  or  pasturage, 
if  it  does  not  damage  or  diminish  the  value  of  the  inherit- 
ance and  is  in  accordance  with  good  husbandry  ;  and  this 
is  so  even  where  the  timber  is  sold  or  consumed  off  the 
premises."  Nor  is  it  waste  for  a  tenant  of  a  mortgagor 
to  sell  and  remove  growing  stock  in  a  nursery,  in  the 
usual  course  of  business  before  foreclosure.' 

Sec.  419.  Accidental  flres.— By  the  common  law,  every 
person  who  lighted  a  fire  was  bound  to  keep  it  from  doing 
damage  to  others,  at  his  peril/  and  he  was  responsible  for 

'  Co.  Litt.  53  a  ;  Wise  v.  Metcalf ,  '  Newbald  v.  Brown,  44  N.  Y.  L- 

10  B.  &  C.  814 ;  United  States  v.  266.    As  to  growing  timber,  cut  by 

Bostwick,  94  U.  S.  53.  tenant,  see  Lester  v.    Young,   14 

FiUiter  v.  Phippaxd,  11   Q.    B.  B.  I.  479. 

357  ;  Canterbury  (Visct.)  v.  Atty.-  ^Wilkinsonv.  WilMnson,59Wis. 

Genl.,  IPhiU.  338.  557. 

^Huttonv.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  'Hamilton  v.   Austin,  36    Hun 

472.  (N.  Y.)  138. 

*  Huntley  v.    Russell,  13   Q.  B.  *Commis.,  &c.,  v.  Stratton,  8  B. 

572  ;  Callis  on  Sewers,  146.  Mon.  (Ky.)  586.      In  Robinson  v. 


CHAP,  xxxvni.]      Accidental  Fires.  985 

the  consequences,  although  it  was  purely  accidental,  or 
resulted  from  the  mischance  of  himself,  his  servant,  or  a 
lodger ; '  and  nothing  would  excuse  him  from  the  conse- 
quences, except  proof  that  the  flre  was  set  by  some  person 
out  of  his  house,  against  his  will,  and  without  any  Hcense, 
express  or  implied,  from  him,"  or  was  occasioned  by  the 
act  of  God,  or  some  superior  cause,  which  could  not  be 
controlled  by  human  agency.'  To  obviate  the  hardship 
of  this  rule,  the  statute  6  Anne,  chap.  31,  ss.  6,  7,  was 
enacted,  providing  that  no  action  or  suit  shall  be  maintained 
against  any  person  in  whose  house  or  chamber  any  fire 
shall  accidentally  begin.  This  statute  was  subsequently 
repealed  by  Stat.  12  Geo.  3,  c.  73,  s.  46,  but  was  afterwards 
re-enacted  by  14  Geo.  3,  chap.  78,  s.  86,  and  extended  to 
all  accidental  fires  originating  in  a  house,  stable,  barn,  or 
other  buildings,  and  this  statute  is  in  force  in  nearly,  if 
not  in  aU  the  States  of  this  country.  These  statutes  refer 
only  to  fires  produced  by  mere  chance,  or  which  are 
incapable  of  being  traced  to  any  cause,  and  so  stand 
opposed  to  the  negligence  of  either  servants  or  masters, 
and  they  do  not,  consequently,  protect  persons  from  the 
ordinary  common-law  responsibility  in  respect  of  fires 
occasioned  by  negligence.*  Thus,  where  the  occupier  of 
a  meadow  adjoining  some  cottages  belonging  to  the 
plaintiff  stacked  a  hay-rick  on  the  extremity  of  the 
meadow  in  too  green  a  condition,  close  to  the  plaintiff's 
cottages,  and  the  hay  smoked,  and  steamed,  and  exhibited 
unequivocal  symptoms  of  approaching  combustion,  and 
the  defendant  was  frequently  warned  of  the  danger  of 
the  stack's  taking  fire,  and  said  that  he  would ' '  chance  it, " 
but  he  ultimately  caused  a  hole  to  be  cut  through  the 
centre  of  the  rick,  which,  unfortunately,  hastened  the 
catastrophe  it  was  intended  to  avert,  and  the  hay-stack 
caught  fire,  and  the  fire  spread  to  the  barn  and  stables  of 

Wheeler,  35  N.  Y.  253,  it  was  held  'Bacon's  Abr.   tit.    Actions  on 

that  the  plaintiff    might  recover  the  case  (F) ;  1    RoUe's  Abr.   Ac- 

for  negligent  waste,  as  in  suffer-  tions  Sur.  Case  (B) ;   1  Danver's 

ing  abuilding  tobum,  even  though,  Abr.  10. 

he  was  charged  in  the  complaint  "Beaulieu  v.   Finglam,  3  H.  4, 

with  wilfully  setting  flre  to  it.  f ol.  18,  pi.  6. 

'  Panton  v.   Isham,  3  Lev.  356  ;  *  Tubervil  v.   Stamp,  1  Salk.  1. 
Rastr.  Entr.  p.  18. 


986  Waste.  [§'419. 

the  defendant,  and  thence  to  the  plaintiff's  cottages,  and 
totally  consumed  them,  it  was  held  that  the  defendant 
was  responsible  for  the  destruction  of  the  cottages,  and 
that,  in  cases  of  this  sort,  "it  is  for  the  jury  to  say 
whether  or  not,  under  the  circumstances,  the  party  has 
conducted  himself  with  such  a  degree  of  care  and  caution 
as  might  be  looked  for  in  a  prudent  man." ' 

It  has  been  held,  also,  that  these  statutes  respecting 
accidental  fires  do  not  apply  where  the  fire  originates  in 
the  use  of  a  dangerous  engine  or  instrument,  knowingly 
used  by  the  owner  of  the  land  or  estate  on  which  the  fire 
breaks  out ;  so  that  if  the  owners  of  manufactories  and 
steam-engines  are  guilty  of  any  neghgence  or  carelessness 
in  the  management  of  their  furnaces  and  chimneys,  and 
by  reason  thereof  sparks  escape  and  are  blown  on  to  the 
adjoining  buildings,  the  owners  of  the  furnace  will  be 
responsible  for  the  damage  done.  It  has  been  held, 
moreover,  that  a  fire  designedly  hghted  by  the  defendant 
or  by  his  orders,  on  his  own  estate,  and  which  afterwards 
spreads,  and  causes  damage  to  the  plaintiff,  is  not  a  fire 
which  "accidentally  begins"  within  the  meaning  of  the 
statute  ;  so  that  if  a  person  Ughts,  or  causes  his  servants 
to  light,  fires  on  his  land,  for  the  purpose  of  burning 
weeds  and  rubbish,  and  the  fire  spreads  to  and  destroys 
the  hedges  and  woods  or  cornfields  of  the  adjoining 
landed  proprietor,  the  lighter  of  the  fire  will  be  respon- 
sible for  the  damage."  But  a  fire  may  be  knowingly  and 
designedly  lighted  in  the  first  instance,  and  yet  may 
fairly  be  said  to  "accidentally  begin"  the  moment  that, 
through  some  sudden  and  unexpected  wind,  the  fire 
spreads,  or  sparks  and  fragments  of  fire  are  blown  into 
the  air,  and  get  beyond  the  control  of  the  party  who  has 
lighted  and  watched  the  fire.'  Wherever  it  is  practicable 
to  adopt  precautions  that  will  render  damage  by  fire 
from  a  furnace  "next  to  impossible,"  a  failure  to  adopt 
those  precautions  will  be  negligence.     Where  a  spark  of 

'  Vaughan  v.  Menlove,  3  Bing.  ^  Conklin  v.  Thompson,  39  Barb. 

N.  C.  468.  (N.  Y.)  318 ;  Johnson  v.  Barber,  10 

■  Filliter  v.   Phippard ;  Tubervil  111.  425 ;  Ayer  v.  Starkie,  30  Conn. 

V.  Stamp,  supra.  304. 


CHAP,  xxxvra.]  Fires.  S87 

fire  from  the  chimney  of  a  locomotive  epgine  on  a  rail- 
road fell  on  the  thatch  of  a  cart-lodge,  and  set  it  on  fire, 
and  the  fire  communicated  to  several  other  farm-build- 
ings, and  totally  destroyed  them,  it  was  held  that  the 
very  occurrence  of  the  disaster  was  prima  facie  proof  of 
negligence  on  the  part  of  the  company  and  their  servants 
having  the  management  of  their  engine,  rendering  it 
incumbent  on  them  to  show  that  every  possible  precau- 
tion had  been  taken  to  prevent  the  escape  of  sparks.' 

Sec.  420.  Fire  spreading  from,  railways  to  the  adjoining 
property.— If  railway  companies  allow  quantities  of  long 
dead  grass,  or  any  other  combustible  material,  dan- 
gerously to  accumulate  along  their  railway,  and  the  com- 
bustible matter  is  ignited  from  lighted  coals  or  sparks 
escaping  from  their  locomotive  engines,  and  the  fire 
spreads  from  the  railway  to  the  adjoining  fields  and 
fires  them,  the  railway  company  wiU  be  responsible 
for  the  damage  done,  for  such  a  fire  is  not  a  fire  which 
accidentally  begins  on  the  their  estate,  but  is  a  fire 
caused  by  their  negligence  in  not  keeping  the  railway 
free  from  combustible  materials  likely  to  be  ignited  by 
their  furnaces,  and  to  cause  damage  to  their  neighbors. 
And  they  will  be  liable,  although  they  could  not  reason- 
ably anticipate  that  such  consequence  would  ensue  from 
their  negligence."  They  may  be  expressly  authorized  by 
statute  to  use  locomotive  furnaces  of  a  dangerous  char- 
acter, but  no  statute  can  exempt  them  from  the  conse- 
quences of  negUgence  in  the  management  of  their  rail- 
ways, or  the  construction  of  their  fire-boxes,  chimneys, 
or  furnaces,  whereby  coals  of  fire  are  thrown  on  the 
adjoining  property.  If  they  neglect  to  avail  themselves 
of  all  such  contrivances  as  are  in  known  practical  use  to 
prevent  the  emission  of  sparks  from  "their  engines,  they 
will  be  responsible  for  such  neglect.'    And  if  they  run 

'  Piggot  V.  Eastern  Co.  Rail.  Co.,         '  Smith  v.  Lond.  &  South-West. 
3  C.  B.  239 ;  Aldridge  v.  Gt.  West.      Rail.,  L.  R.,  5  C.  B.  98. 
Rail.   Co.,  2  M.   &  Gr.  515;  Fre-         « Fremantle  v.  Lond.  &  North- 
mantle    V.   Lond.   &  North- West.     West.    Rail.   Co.,    ante;  Vaughan 
RaU.  Co.,  2  F.  &  F.  337.  v.  Ta£E  Vale  Rail.  Co.,  3  H.  &  N. 

743 ;  also  5  H.  &  N.  679. 


988  Waste.  [§  421. 

locomotive  engines  without  statuable  authority,  in  that 
case  they  are  responsible  for  any  damage  caused  by  such 
engines  in  setting  fire  to  adjoining  property  or  otherwisje, 
although  they  have  not  been  gUilty  of  negligence.' 

Sec.  421.  Fire  occasioned  by  the  negligence  of  servants.— 
The  12  G-eo.  3,  c.  73,  s.  35,  imposes  penalties  upon  serv 
ants  who,  through  neghgence  or  carelessness,  fire  any 
house  or  buildings ;  but  this  enactment  does  not  exempt 
the  master  from  responsibility  for  the  negligent  acts  of 
the  servant  whilst  carrying  into  execution  the  master's 
orders,  and  doing  something  which  the  master  has 
employed  him  to  do."  If  the  work  the  servant  is 
employed  to  execute  does  not  require  the  use  of  fire,  but 
the  servant,  nevertheless,  kindles  a  fire  for  his  own  pur- 
poses, to  cook  his  dinner  or  light  his  pipe,  and  carelessly 
throws  burning  material  amongst  combustibles,  and 
destroys  valuable  property,  the  master  is  not  respon- 
sible for  the  unathorized  act  of  his  servant.'  Where  a 
maid-servant,  in  order  to  clear  a  chimney  of  soot,  set  fire 
to  the  soot  with  a  quantity  of  furze,  and  burnt  the  house 
down,  it  was  held  that  the  master  was  not  responsible 
for  the  damage,  as  it  was  no  part  of  the  servant's  busi- 
ness to  clean  the  chimney,  or  to  use  fire  for  the  purpose.* 

Amongst  the  Eomans,  where  fire  was  little  used,  and 
candles  were  unknown,  it  was  considered  that  damage 
from  fire  seldom  occurred  without  imprudence  or  negli- 
gence, and  those  through  whose  neglect,  however  slight, 
a  fire  occurred,  were  held  answerable  for  the  damage 
done  by  it.' 

Sec.  422.  Injuries  from  gunpowder  and  explosive  sub- 
stances. —  Explosions  of  gas.— Whoever  introduces  gun- 
powder or  explosive  materials  into  a  building  is  respon- 
sible for  damage  occasioned  by  the  introduction  of  such 
dangerous  substances.     If  a  person  mixes  things  together, 

'  Jones  V.  Festiniog  Bail.  Co.,  L.  'Williams  v.  Jones,  33   Law  J. 

E.,  3  Q.  B.  783.  Exchq.  397. 

'"Vaughan  v.  Menlove,  3  Bing.  *McKenzieY.  McLeod,  10  Bing. 
N.  C.  468.  385. 

'Domat,  Uv.  3.  tit.  8,  s.  4. 


CHAP,  xxxvin.]  Meaning  of.  989 

which  alone  are  perfectly  innocent,  but  which  are  liable 
to  explode  on  coming  into  contact,  he  is  responsible  for 
the  consequences ;  and  if  an  explosion  ensues  he  must 
make  good  the  damage.'  Every  tenant  of  a  house  is 
responsible  for  not  taking  care  that  the  stop-cocks  for 
regulating  the  supply  of  gas  to  a  house  are  properly 
turned  ;  and  if  these  stop- cocks  are  negligently  left  open 
by.  the  tenant  or  servants  when  the  gas-lights  are  not 
burning,  and  an  explosion  ensues,  and  injures  the  house, 
the  tenant  will  be  responsible  for  the  injury.  But  if  a 
thief  enters  the  house  in  the  absence  of  the  tenant,  and 
cuts  and  carries  away  a  gas-pipe  without  the  knowledge 
of  the  tenant,  or  against  his  will,  the  latter  is  not  then 
responsible  for  the  resulting  damage.  When  the  entry 
of  gas  into  a  house  is  under  the  control  of  the  occupants 
of  the  house,  the  gas  company  supplying  the  gas  is  not 
bound,  on  receiving  notice,  that  no  more  gas  will  be 
required,  to  stop  the  supply  from  the  outside  by  putting 
on  an  outer  stop-cock,  or  cutting  off  the  communication 
between  the  gas-pipes  in  the  interior  of  the  house  and 
the  main  in  the  street."  In  supplying  gas  to  a  house,  a 
gas  company  is  bound  to  use  every  reasonable  precaution 
to  prevent  injury  during  the  operation  of  "tapping  the 
main."' 

All  tenants  are  liable  for  commissive  wastej  but,  tenants 
from  year  to  year,''  or  at  wiU,  are  not  liable  for  permissive 
waste  merely." 

Sec.  423.  Meaning  of,  without  impoachment  for  waste.— 
Tenants  for  life,  not  made  unimpeachable  for  waste  by 
the  person  granting  the  estate,  are  liable  for  both  commis- 
sive and  permissive  waste."    In  any  event,  he  is  entitled 

'  TiNDALL,  C.  J. ,  in  Vaughan  v.  Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C.  &  P.  8  ; 
Menlove,  4  Sc.  353  ;  Myers  v.  Hartnett  v.  Maitland,  16  M.  &  W. 
Malcolm,  6  Hill  (N.  Y.)  590.  357  ;    Eedfern  v.   Smith,   1  Bing. 

^  Holden  v.  Liv.  Gas.  Co.,  3  C.  B.  383  ;  Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  C.  &  P. 
14.  337. 

3  Bienkiron  v.   Gt.    Central  Gas  '  Litt.    Sec.  71 ;  Co.  'Litt.  57  a  ; 

Constimers'  Co.,  3  F.  &  F.  438.  Harnett  v.  Maitland,  16  M.  &  W. 

*  Gibson  v.  Wells,  1  B.  &  P.  390 
Horsefall  v.  Mather,  Holt.  7 
MartiQ  v.  Gilham,  7  Ad.  &  El.  543 
Heme  v.  Benbaw,  4  Taunt.  764 


363. 

« Co.  Litt.  53  a ;  3  EoUe's  Abr. 
tit.  Waste  (C.) ;  7  Bacon's  Abr.  tit. 
Waste. 


990 


"Waste. 


[§  423. 


to  such  trees  as  fall,  and  to  the  thinnings  of  the  estate, 
as  well  as  all  coppices,  ozier  beds,  &c.,  cut  in  the  nature 
of  crops,  but  it  is  doubted  whether  he  has  a  right  to  cut 
poles  for  sale.'  But,  the  real  intention  of  this  clause, 
"without  impeachment  for  waste,"  is  to  enable  the  ten- 
ant to  do  many  things,  such  as  cutting  wood,  opening 
new  mines,  &c.,  which  would  otherwise,  at  the  common 
law,  amount  to  waste ;  but  they  do  not  operate  as  a  license 
to  the  tenant  to  destroy  the  estate,  or  to  commit  malic- 
ious waste,  such  as  cutting  down  fruit-bearing  trees, 
or  trees  which  serve  for  shade  or  ornament.'  The  priv- 
ilege is  annexed  to  the  privity  of  estate,  so  that  if  the 
estate  is  changed,  it  is  lost :  °  but  so  long  as  the  estate 
continues,  he  may,  by  leave  or  license,  authorize  others 
to  do  whatever  he  is  entitled  to  do.'  If  he  is  tenant  with- 
out impeachment  for  waste,  he  has  the  same  right  to  cut 
timber,  work  mines,  &c.,  for  his  own  use,  as  the  owner 
of  the  inheritance  ; '  but  those  words  do  not  justify  him 
in  demolishing  the  building  or  doing  that  which  operates 
as  destructive  or  malicious  waste,  as  to  unlead  a  house 
or  pull  down  the  tiles." 


1  Bateman  v.  Hotchkin,  33  L.  J. 
Ch.  6  ;  Carr  v.  Carr,  i  Dev.  &  B. 
(N.  C.)  170. 

'^Tudor's  L.  C.  Real  Property, 
90 ;  Packington's  Case,  ante ; 
Ford  V.  Lynte,  2  John.  &  H.  150  ; 
Turner  v.  Wright,  Johns.  (English) 
740.  So  a  tenant  for  years,  with- 
out impeachment  for  waste,  has 
been  restrained  from  carrying 
away  brick-earth,  as  it  destroys 
the  field  and  causes  lasting  injury 
to  the  estate.  London  v.  Webb,  1 
P.  Wms.  528. 

3  Co.  Litt.  53  b;  220,  n.  1. 

*  Gordon  v.  Woodford,  37  Beav; 
608. 

5  Payne  y.  Dor,  1  T.  R.  54; 
Gordon  t.  Woodford,  27  Beav. 
603  ;  Richards  v.  Torbett,  3  Houst. 
(Del.)  173. 

*  Vane  v.  Lord  Barnard,  1  T.  R. 
56  n.  "As  to  the  distinction  be- 
tween waste  and  destruction, " 
said  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Payne  v. 
Dor,  1  T.  R.  55,  in  which  Vane  v. 
Lord  Bamax'd  is  referred  to  as  the 
Eaby  Castle  Case,  "it  has  lately 
been  introduced  into  the  Court  of 


Chancery,  and  I  agree  with  the 
counsel  at  the  bar,  that,  when  a 
general  rule  of  property  is  estab- 
lished by  a  court  of  equity,  it 
should  be  followed  by  a  court  of 
law.  In  the  case  of  Raby  Castle, 
which  was  a  suit  for  maliciously 
unleading  the  house  and  pulling 
down  the  tiles,  &c.,  which  oc- 
casioned the  ruin  of  the  castle,  the 
friends  of  the  infant  brought-  a 
bill  to  restrain  the  tenant  for  Kfe ; 
the  court.  Lord  Cowper,  thought 
that  this  waste  could  not  be  pro- 
tected, within  the  clause,  without 
impeachment  for  waste."  By 
steps,  that  court  have  gone  a  little 
further,  and  they  have  protected 
an  avenue  leading  to  an  house,  but 
not  all  ornamental  timbers ;  and  in 
the  case  of  Sir  Henry  Packing- 
ton,  3  Atk.  316,  they  went  a  little 
further,  and  protected  trees  that 
were  an  "  ornament  and  shelter  to 
the  house."  See  also  Carleton  v. 
Carleton,  3  Atk.  215,  where  the 
court  extended  the  protection  to 
trees  in  a  park.  This  clause  does 
not  enable  the  tenant  to  deal  with 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]         Who  Liable. 


991 


Sec.  424.  Remedies  for  waste.-Who  liable  for,  &e.-At 
the  common  law  an  action  for  waste  lay  only  against 
tenants  by  curtesy,  dower  and  guardians  whose  estates 
were  created  by  act  of  law,'  and  tenants  for  life  and 
years  were  not  liable  tot  permissive  waste  unless  provis- 
ion to  that  effect  was  made  in  the  lease,  because  they 
have  an  interest  in  the  land;'  but  under  the  statute  of 
Gloucester  they  are  liable  for  either;'  and  it  is  said  that 
a  tenant  for  one  year,  or  even  for  half  a  year,  comes 


the  estate  as  the  absolute  owner 
might.    He  may  cut  or  sell  timber, 
and  growing  trees  fit  for  timber, 
Smith  V.   Smith,   3  Swanst.   251  ; 
Gordon  v.  Woodford,  39  L.  J.  Ch. 
232,  and  convert  them  to  his  own 
use  ;  or  open  new  mines  and  work 
them  for  his  own  benefit ;  but  he 
cannot  open  gravel  pits,  or  dig  up 
brick-earth,  and  destroy  a  field,  to 
the  lasting    prejudice  of  the  in- 
heritance ;    London  v.  Web,  1  P. 
Wms.  538 ;   nor  can  he  wantonly 
or  maliciously  destroy  buildings, 
pull  down   ancient  boundaries,  or 
walls,  or  fences,  Leeds  v.  Anherst, 
14  Sim.  357  ;    Aston  v.   Aston,   1 
Ves.  Sr.  365  ;  Vane  v.  Lord  Barn- 
ard, 3  Vern.    739,  or    cut  down 
thriving  trees  unfit  for  timber,  the 
felling  of  which  would  injure  the 
estate,  Chamberlayne  v.  Dummer, 
1  Br.  &  C.  C.  160  ;  also  3  id.  548,  or 
fruit,  shade,  or  ornamental  trees. 
Bubb  V.  Yelverton,  L.  E.,  12  Eq. 
Cas.      465 ;       Micklethwaite      v. 
Micklethwaite,  36   L.  J.  Ch.  271 ; 
Surges  V.    Lamb,    16   Ves.    174 ; 
WeUesley  v.  WeUesley,  6  Sim.  497. 
The  words  are  not  to  be  treated  as 
importing  a  license  to  destroy  or 
injure  the  estate,  but   to  do  all 
reasonable  acts  consistent  with  the 
preservation  of  the  estate,  which 
otherwise  mi^ht  in  law  be  waste. 
It  exempts  mm  from  permissive 
waste,  Powys  v.  Blagrave,  4  De  Gr. 
M.    &    G.    448 ;    Lansdowne    v. 
Lansdowne,  1  Jac.  &  W.  533,  and 
justifies  him  in  puUing  down  old 
buildings  in  a  ruuious  condition. 
Morris  v.  Morris,  8  De  G.  &  J.  333. 
'  Greene  v.  Cole,  3  Wms.  Saund, 
253. 

^  Countess  of  Shrewbury's  Case, 
5  Coke,  13  a.  Loed  Coke,  in  Co. 
Litt.  57  o,  says  that,  "for  permis- 
sive waste  by  a  tenant  at  will,  the 


lessor  hath  no  remedy  at  aU,  for 
the  statute  of  Gloucester  extends 
not  to  tenant  at  wiU."  From  this, 
as  well  as  from  what  Littleton 
says,  sec.  71,  that  "the  lessee  at 
will  is  not  bound  to  sustain  or  re- 
pair the  house  as  tenant  for  teim 
of  years  is  tyed."  It  might  be  in- 
ferred that  an  action  on  the  case 
did  lie  against  a  tenant  for  years 
for  permissive  waste,  and  Sehgt. 
Williams  was  of  this  opinion. 
See  Pomfret  v.  Ricroft,  1  Saund. 
333  h.  But  in  some  early  cases 
this  was  doubted.  See  Gibson  v. 
Wells,  1  N.  R.  360;  Heme  v.  Ben- 
ham,  4  Taunt.  764 ;  Jones  v.  Hill, 
7  id.  393.  But  it  is  never  well  set- 
tled that  a  tenant  for  years  is  lia- 
ble both  for  permissive  and  com- 
missive waste  under  the  statute  of 
Gloucester.  Hartnett  v.  Maitland, 
16  M.  &  W.  363 ;  Yellowly  v.  Gow- 
er,  11  Exchq.  294;  Smith's  L.  &  T. 
367  (2d  Eng.  Ed.). 

^  See  last  note.  The  statute  of 
Marlbridge,  52  H.  3,  c.  23,  s.  2,  en- 
acted "that  farmers  during  their 
terms  shall  not  make  waste  or  ex- 
ile of  houses,  woods  or  men,  nor 
of  anything  belonging  to  the  tene- 
ments that  thejr  have  to  farm. 
ivithout  special  license  had  by  tvrit- 
ing  of  covenant  making  mention 
that  they  may  do  it,  which  thing, 
if  they  do,  and  thereof  be  convict, 
they  shall  yield  full  damage,  and 
shall  be  punished  by  amerciament 
greviously."  By  a  later  statute, 
which  is  called  the  Statute  of 
Gloucester,  6  Edw.  1,  o.  5,  a  writ 
of  waste  was  given  against  a  lessee 
for  Ufe,  years,  a  tenant  pur  autre 
vie,  or  an  assignee  of  a  tenant  for 
life  or  years,  for  waste  done  after 
the  assignment.  By  the  statute  3 
&  4  Will.  4,  c.  27,  s.  36,  the  writ  of 
waste  was  abolished. 


992  Waste,  [§  424, 

within  the  purview  of  this  statute,'  and  a  tenant  for  one 
year,  and  so  on  from  year  to  year,  being  a  tenant  for  two 
years  at  least,"  is  clearly  within  the  statute  a  tenant  for 
years.'  A  tenant  at  will,  or  sufferance,  strictly  is  not 
within  the  statute,  and  consequently  is  not  liable  for 
^permissive  waste ;  *  but  there  are  cases  in  which  it  has 
"been  held  that  a  tenant  for  years  who  has  given  another 
a  base  at  will  of  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  demised 
estate  may  have  an  action  on  the  case  against  his  lessee 
at  win  for  permissive  waste,  because  he  is  answerable 
•over  in  waste  brought  by  his  lessor. "  If  a  tenant  at  will 
icommits  waste  he  thereby  puts  an  end  to  his  estate,  and 
becomes  liable  in  trespass  to  his  landlord.  °  Tenants  from 
year  to  year,  being  considered  as  tenants  at  will,  subject  on- 
ly to  the  difference  in  the  mode  of  terminating  the  tenancy, 
ajne  also  held  not  liable  for  permissive  waste,'  and  in  the 
aibsene©  of  any  express  stipulation  as  to  repairs,  he  is 
only  bound  to  use  the  premises  in  a  tenantable  manner, 
and  teep  them  wind  and  water  tight."  If  there  is  an 
express  covenant  or  agreement  to  do  repairs,  and  not  to 
commit  waste,  the  remedy  is  upon  that  rather  than  upon 
any  implied  contract  as  to  the  use  of  the  premises. "  If  the 
plaintiff  declares  for  commissive  waste  only,  he  cannot 
recover  thereunder  for  permissive  waste. "  It  sometimes 
happens,  when  the  action  is  upon  a  deed,  that  the  tenant 
can  recover  either  in  covenant  or  case. "  The  landlord  can 
proceed  against  an  assignee  of  a  lease  only  upon  the  cov- 
enants ;  he  cannot  maintain  assumpsit." 

» litt.  S.  67;  S  Inst.  302.  Q.  B.  135 ;  Bickford  v.  Parson,  5 

^  Chad.  Com.'  v.  Green,  9  Ad.  &  C.  B.  930.     If  there  are  two  counts 

EI.  658,  ante,  p.  in    the  declaration  or  complaint, 

*  Bro.  Abr.  tit  Waste,  pi.  53.  one   upon   an   express,    and    the 

*  Hartnett  v.  Maitland,  16  M.  &  other  upon  an  implied  covenant, 
W.  304;  Co.  Liifct.  57  a;  Gibson  v.  there  can  be  a  judgment  only  up- 
Wells,  1  B.  <&  P.  290  ;  Countess  of  on  one.  Halford  v.  Dunnett,  7  M. 
Shrewsbury's  Case,  5  Coke,  13  a.  &  W.  348 ;  Deene  v.  Quey,  4  Q.  B. 

*  Cudlip  V.  Rundle,  Garth.  308 ;  379. 

Pantoa  v.  Isham,  1  Salk.  19.  '» Martin  v.  Gilham,  7  Ad.  &  El. 

"Countess  of  Shrewsbury's  Case,  540  ;  Harris  v.  Mantle,  3  T.  E.  307. 

5  Coke,  13  a.  "  Marker  v.  Kendrick,  13  C.  B. 

'  Horsefall  v.   Mather,   Holt.  7  ;  188 ;  Kinlyside  v.  Thornton,  3  W. 

Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C.  &  P.  8.  Bl.  1111. 

8  Woodf  all's  L.  &  T.  507.  '^  Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C.  &  P.  8. 

»  Line  v.  Stephenson,  4  Bing.  N. 
O.  678 ;   Standen  v.  Chrismas,  10 


CHAP,  xxxvni.]  Eemedy.  993 

Sec.  426.  Bemedy  by  injunction.— Besides  an  action  at 
law  the  landlord  may  have  an  injunction  in  equity  to 
restrain  any  act  of  commissive  waste  which  the  tenant' 
contemplates,"  or  against  the  tenant's  assignee  or  any 
person  claiming  under  him."  A  court  of  equity  will  not, 
however,  interfere  to  make  a  tenant  liable  for  permissive 
waste  unless  there  is  an  express  contract  in  respect 
thereto.^  It  will  interfere  between  tenants  in  common 
when  one  tenant  threatens  the  spoliation  of  the  estate.* 

Sec.  426.  Injunction  by  landlord  against  tenant  for 
■waste.— A  court  of  equity  will,  upon  a  bill  filed  for  an 
injunction  by  the  landlord  or  his  assigns,  against  the 
tenant  or  any  person  claiming  through  or  under  him, 
restrain  the  defendant  from  committing  waste  on  the 
demised  premises.  Thus,  a  tenant  will  be  restrained 
from  puUing  down  a  house,  and  building  another  which 
the  landlord  objects  to,°  or  from  making  material  altera- 
tions in  a  dwelling-house,  as  by  changing  it  into  a  shop 
or  warehouse  ;  °  or  from  throwing  down  inclosures,   or 

'Smyth  V.  Carter,  18  Beav.  78;  Phenix  v.  Clark,  3  Halst.  (N.  J.) 

Norway  v.  Rowe,  19  Ves.  154.    A  447 ;  Gray  v.  Baldwin,  8  Blackf. 

court  of  equity  wiU  interfere  by  (Ind.)  164;  or  a  grantee  who  has 

injunction  to  stay  waste,  when  it  obtained  a  deed  by  undue  means, 

appears  that  the  tenant  is  doing  an  during  the  pending  of  Utigatioh, 

injury  to  the  estate  not  warranted  to  determine  his  rights  under  the 

by  the  lease,  or  the  title  by  which  deed.    Staats  v.  IVeeman,  3  Halst. 

he  holds,  and  the  injury  is  not  (N.  J.)  490.    And  mere  threats  to 

properly  compensated  m  damages,  commit  waste  will   authorize  an 

either  by  reason  of  some  peculiar  injunction ;  Canal  Co.  v.  ComeygS; 

value  in  the  timber,  or  because  of  3  Carter  (Ind.)  469;   Leflforge  v. 

the  inability  of  the  tenant  to  re-  West,  3  id.  514 ;  Turnpike  Co.  v. 

spond   therefor    pecuniarily,    and  Burnett,  3  id.   536;  but  where  a 

will  also  proceed  to  take  an  ac-  suit    at   law    has   been    brought 

count  for  the  waste  actually  aom-  against  the  defendant  for  similar 

mitted.     GrifiSn  v.  Sketal,  30  Ga.  acts,  and  the  verdict  has  been  for 

300 ;  Porch  v.  Frees,  3  Green  (N.  the  defendant,  an  injunction  will 

J.)  304 ;  Parker   v.  -Chambless,  13  not  issue.    West  v.  Page,  1  Stockt. 

Ga.  385 :  Hastings  v.  Perry,  30  Vt.  (N.  J. )  119. 

273;  Green  v.  Keen,  4   Md.  98;  ^Caulson  v.  White,  3  Atk.  31; 

Natoma,   &c.,  Co.   v.  Clarkin,   14  Mayor,  &c.,  v.   Hedger,   18   Ves. 

Cal.   544 ;  Howe  v.   Green,  Phill.  855 ;  Farrant  v.  Lovell,  Atk.  733 ; 

(N.  C.)  350;  Dickenson  v.  Jones,  Jackson  v.  Cator,  5  Ves.  688. 

36  Ga.   97;Kidd  v.   Dennison,  6  ^laReStingiey,  3Mac.  &G.  321 ; 

Barb.  (N.  Y.)  9.    Thus,  a  tenant  Powysv.  Blagrave,4DeG.  M.  &G., 

by  curtesy,  or  his  assignees,  wiU  448  ;  Wood  v.  Gaynon,  Ambl.  895. 

be  restrained  from  cuttmg  timber  *Arthurv.  Lamb, 3Dr.&Sm.  438. 

from  the  estate,  upon  bill  filed  by  '  Smith  v.  Carter,  18  Beav.  78. 

an  heir ;  Wane  v.  Wane,  3  Halst.  «  Douglass  v.  Wiggin,  Johnson 

(N.  J.)  447  ;  or  a  mortgagor,  upon  Ch.  R.  (American)  435  ;  Story  Eq. 

application    of    the    mortgagee ;  Jur.  s,  913. 


994  Waste.  [§  426.. 

pulling  down  houses  ; '  or  from  ploughing  up  meadow  o? 
pasture  which  has  not  been  ploughed  for  twenty  years,' 
'  unless  indeed  a  penal  rent  of  so  much  per  acre  is  reserved.' 
So  an  injunction  wiU  be  granted  to  restrain  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  under  notice  to  quit,  as  in  the  case  of 
a  lessee,  for  a  longer  term,  from  doing  damage  and  from 
removing  crops,  manure,  &c.,  except  according  to  the 
terms  of  his  lease  or  the  custom  of  the  country.*  An 
injunction  has  been  granted  to  restrain  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year,  his  servants,  agents  and  workmen  "from 
pulling  down,  damaging  or  destroying  any  of  the  build- 
ings upon  the  farm  and  premises ;  and  from  cutting 
down,  injuring  or  destroying  any  of  the  timber  or  other 
trees,  timber-like  trees,  bark,  wood  or  under-wood, 
hedges  or  fences  now  standing  upon  the  said  farm  and 
premises  ;  and  from  ploughing  up  any  of  the  ancient 
meadow,  or  any  of  the  old  pasture  land  belonging  to  the 
said  farm  ;  and  from  sowing  any  part  of  the  said  farm 
and  lands  with  mustard-seed  or  any  other  pernicious 
crop  ;  and  from  removing  off  the  said  farm  and  lands 
any  of  the  hay  or  straw,  dung  or  manure  pro- 
duced or  made  thereon ;  and  from  doing  any  other 
waste  or  destruction  to  the  said  farm,  lands 
and  premises,  or  any  part  thereof,"  until,  &c.°  So  an 
injunction  has  been  granted  against  ploughing  up  pasture 
where  there  was  only  a  covenant  to  manage  the  farm  in 
a  husbandlike  manner.'  Also  to  restrain  a  tenant  from 
breaking  up  meadow  for  the  purpose  of  building,  con- 
trary to  an  express  covenant ;  but  the  lord-chancellor 
doubted  if  it  could  be  done  without  an  express  covenant.' 
An  underlessee  who  neglects  to  inquire  into  the  provis- 
ions of  the  original  lease  does  so  at  his  own  risk,  and 
may  be  restrained  by  injunction  from  violating  cove- 
nants therein  contained  ; '  even  a  yearly  tenant  may  be  so 

'  Com.  Dig.   tit.  Chancery  (D),  '  Pratt  v.  Brett,  3  Madd.  63. 

11;    Mayor,    &c.,    of    London   v.  « Dnry  t.  Molins,  6  Ves.  338. 

Hedger,   18  Ves.   355  ;  Hindley  V.  '  Ld.  Grey  de  Wilton  v.  Saxon, 

Emery,  L.  E.,  1  Eq.  52.  6  Ves.  106 ;   Kimpton  v.  Eve,  3  V. 

2  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Chancery  (D),  11.  &  B.  349. 

3  Woodward  v.   Gyles,  3  Vem.  sparker  v.  Whyte,  1  H.  &  M. 
119.  167 ;  Jay  t.  Eichardson,  30  Beav. 

*  Onslow  V. ,  16  Ves.  173.  563  ;  Clements  v.  Welles,  L.  E.,  1 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  Lease.  905 

restrained.'  Where  the  construction  of  a  contract  is 
clear,  and  the  breach  clear,  it  is  not  a  question  of  damage  ; 
but  the  mere  circumstance  of  the  breach  of  covenant 
affords  sufficient  ground  for  the  court  to  interfere  by 
injunction."  Where  a  breach  of  covenant  is  threatened 
and  has  been  partly  executed,  the  court  having  jurisdic- 
tion to  restrain  the  threatened  breach,  will  also  award 
damages  in  respect  of  the  executed  breach.'  An  injunc- 
tion has  been  granted  to  restrain  a  breach  of  covenant 
secured  by  a  forfeiture  of  the  lease  and  a  penalty.*  The 
circumstance  that  a  lessor  has  a  right  of  re-entry  for 
breach  of  a  covenant  does  not  preclude  him  from  coming 
into  equity  to  restrain  the  commission  of  the  breach ;  for 
he  may  have  a  desirable  tenant  and  not  wish  to  get  rid 
of  him.°  An  injunction  has  been  granted  to  prevent  a 
tenant  from  injuring  fish-ponds,'  or  a  dove-cote  or  fix- 
tures annexed  to  and  forming  part  of  the  freehold  ;  but 
not  articles  commonly  called  fixtures  which  are  not  so 
annexed ; '  nor  fixtures  which  the  tenant  is  entitled  to 
remove  during  the  term,  unless  his  lessor  will  purchase 
them  according  to  the  terms  of  the  lease.' 

Sec.  427.  Where  lease  is  made,  "without  impeachment 
ofwaste.— Wherea  lease  is  made  "without  impeachment 
of  waste,"  equity  will  not  restrain  the  lessee  from  cutting 
timber,  ploughing  up  meadow  or  pasture,  opening  mines, 
or  the  like  ;  but  he  will,  if  necessary,  be  restrained  from 
pulling  down  houses,  defacing  seats,  &c.°  A  tenant  of 
life,  without  impeachment  of  waste,  will  be  restrained 
from  cutting  down  trees  in  lines  or  avenues,  or  ridings 
in  a  park,  whether  planted  or  growing  naturally,  if  they 

Bq.  200 ;  Mitchell  v.    Steward,  L.  '  Parker  v.  Whyte,  1  H.  &  M 

R.  1  Eq.,  541 ;  Eobson  v.  Flight,  11  1.67.. 

Jur.  N.  S.  147  ;  Herbert  v.  Maclean,  « Earl  Bathurst  v.  Burden,  2  Bro. 

11  Ir.  Ch.  84.  C.  C.  64. 

>  Wilson  V.  Hart,  L.  U. ,  1  Ch.  Ap.  '  Kimpton  v.  Eve,  2  V.  &  B.  349 ; 

463.  Amos  &  F.  287  (2d  ed.). 

'Tipping  V.  Eckersley,  2  K.  &  J.  *  Rolleston  v.  New,  4  Kay  &  J. 

264.  640. 

»Hmdley  v.  Emery,  L.  E.,  1  Eq.  'Williams  v.  Day,  2  Cas.  Ch.  32 ; 

53.  Com.  Dig.   tit.  Chancery  (D),  11 ; 

*  Barrett  v.  Blagrave,  5  Ves.  555  ;  Bac.  Atar.  tit.  Waste  (N). 
but  see  Woodward  v.  Gyles,  2  Vern. 

119.  ..... 


996  Waste.  [§  428. 

serve  for  ornament  or  shelter,  and  were  planted  or  left 
standing  for  that  purpose.'  This  extends  to  a  clump  of 
firs  planted  on  a  common  two  miles  from  the  house  for 
ornament."  What  a  prudent  owner  would  do  in  the 
proper  course  of  management  is  no  measurti  of  what  a 
tenant  for  life  without  impeachment  of  waste  may  do  as 
to  cutting  timber  planted  or  left  standing  for  ornament .' 
An  injunction  against  cutting  ornamental  timber  must 
be  confined  to  timber  standing  for  ornament  or  shelter, 
and  will  not  be  extended  to  trees  which  "  contribute  to 
ornament."* 

Sec.  428.  Affidavit  for  the  injunction.— It  seems  that  it 
is  not  enough  for  the  affidavits  for  the  injunction  to  show 
that  the  trees  are  ornamental,  but  it  must  be  shown  that 
they  were  planted  or  left  standing  for  the  purpose  of 
ornament."  The  relief  by  injunction  will  not  be  granted 
on  slight  or  uncertain  grounds  ;  for  in  the  affidavit  upon 
which  it  is  founded,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  plaintiff 
merely  swears  that  he  apprehends,  or  has  been  informed, 
that  the  defendant  intends  to  commit  waste ;  but  there 
must  appear  an  actual  waste,  or  some  act  from  which 
the  intention  is  fully  evinced.'  Sending  a  surveyor  to 
mark  out  trres  to  be  felled  is  sufficient,  without  waiting 
till  some  of  them  are  cut  down.'  So  a  threat  by  the 
tenant  to  open  mines  entitles  the  landlord  to  come  into 
court  to  restrain  him.  Even  if  a  tenant  for  life  insist  on 
a  right  to  do  waste  (having  no  such  right),  the  reversioner 
may  have  an  injunction,  though  no  proof  of  waste 
appear.'  In  the  case  of  a  breach  of  covenant^  the  court 
may  so  interfere  whether  the  breach  has  or  has  not  been 
actually  committed,  provided  the  defendant  claims  and 
insists  on  a  right  to  do  the  act  which  would  constitute 
such  breach." 

'  Packington's  Case,  8  Atk.  215 ;         *  VvilDams  v.  Macnamara,  8  Ves. 

Gaxa  V.    Cotton,  id.  758 ;   Cham-  70. 

terlajBft  V.  Dumorier,  1  Bro.  C.  C.        '  Coffin  v.  CofSn,  Sacob,  70. 
166  ;  3  ia.  549.  «  Amos  &  F.  284  C2d  ed.). 

-Marquis  of  Downshke  v.  Lady        '  Jackson  v,  Cator,  5  Ves.  691. 
Sandys,  6  T^es.  107.  «  Gibson  v.  Smith,  2  Atk.   182 ; 

^FordT.  TjTBte,  2  De  Gex,  J.  &  Barnard,  (Ch.  E.)  491,  497,  S.  C. 
S.  133.  » I^pBBg  T.  Et^esskf ,  2  K.  & 


CHAP,  xxxvra.]    Ornamental  Trees.  997 

A  tenant  having  obtained  judgment  and  issued  execu- 
tion against  his  landlord,  afterwards  became  indebted  to 
him  for  arrears  of  rent  and  dilapidations  :  held,  that  the 
landlord  was  not  entitled,  hj  injunction,  to  restrain 
proceedings  upon  the  judgment,  on  the  ground  of  set-off.' 
On  the  other  hand,  a  bill  in  equity  will  not  lie  by  a  tenant 
against  his  landlord  to  restrain  proceedings  upon  a 
replevin  bond  on  the  ground  of  a  set-off  against  the  rent 
distrained  for."  The  court  has  no  jurisdiction  at  the  suit 
of  the  owner  of  property  to  resti'ain  a  mere  stranger  from 
vexatiously  distraining  on  or  otherwise  molesting  the 
tenants. ' 

Sec.  429.  Injunction  by  tenant  against  landlord  to  restrain 
the  cutting  of  ornamental  trees,  &c.— An  injunction  ha«  been 
granted  to  restrain  the  landlord  from  cutting  ornamental 
trees  in  a  lawn  during  the  term  (although  the  lease 
expressly  reserved  to  him  aU  trees,  &c.,)  upon  his  conduct 
amounting  to  a  consent  to  the  tenant's  plan  of  impi'ove- 
ment,  laying  out  the  lawn,  &c.*  A  dweUing-house  and 
grounds,  with  ornamental  water,  were  demised,  together 
with  the  control  of  a  plantation  (which  was  on  the  oppo- 
site side  of  the  ornamental  water,  and  belonged  to  the 
lessor,  but  was  not  demised  to  the  lessee)  for  the  purpose 
of  preventing  trespassers  thereon,  but  so  as  not  to  inter- 
fere with  the  persons  employed  by  the  lessor,  his  heirs 
or  assigns.  The  lease  referred  to  a  plan,  on  which  the 
plantation  was  represented :  held,  that,  on  the  con- 
struction of  the  lease  as  explained  by  the  plan,  the  lessor 
was  not  at  liberty  during  the  term  to  destroy  the  planta- 
tion, and  an  injunction  was  granted  to  restrain  him  from 
so  doing.' 

Sec.  430.  To  prevent  a  nuisance.— A  lessor  will  be 
restrained  from  heating  or  polluting  water  in  such  a  man- 
ner as  to  injure  the  demised  premises,'  or  from  obstruct- 

'  Langmead  v.  Maple,  18  C.  B.  ^  Jackson  v.  Cator,  5  Ves.  688. 

N.  S.  355.  °  Nicholson  v.  Rose,  4  De  Gex  & 

2  Maw  T.  Ulyatt,  31  L.  J.  Ch.  33.  J.   10.      Compare  this    case  with 

'  Pratt  V.  Keith,  10  Jur.  N.  S.  305.  Armstrong  v.  Courtnay,  15  Irish 

*  Best  V.  Drake,  11  Hare,  868.  Ch.  138. 
II.— 11 


998  Waste.  [§  431. 

ing  lights  ;  but  if  the  tenant  holds  merely  under  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  he  must  pray  for  a  specific  performance ; 
otherwise  he  will  not  be  entitled  to  an  injunction."  A 
lessor,  pending  a  contract  for  granting  a  building  lease, 
represented  to  an  intended  lessee  that  he  could  not  obstruct 
the  sea  view  of  the  house  to  be  built  by  the  lessee  pursu- 
ant to  the  proposed  lease,  because  he  was  himself  under 
alease  for  999  years  containing  covenants  which  restricted 
him  from  so  doing.  The  building  lease  having  been 
taken  and  the  houses  built  upon  the  faith  of  this  repre- 
sentation, the  lessor  surrendered  his  999  years  and  took 
a  new  lease,  omitting  the  restrictive  covenants.  The 
court  restrained  him  from  so  building  as  to  obstruct  the 
sea  view.' 

Sec.  431.  To  compel  observance  of  restrictive  covenants.— 
An  owner  in  fee  of  two  plots  of  land  demised  the  first 
for  an  hotel,  and  covenanted  that  he  would  not  let  any 
house  or  land,  within  a  certain  distance  of  it,  to  be  used 
as  an  hotel.  He  demised  the  second  plot,  which  was 
within  the  distance,  to  another  person.  The  defendant 
purch  ased  the  reversion  of  the  second  plot,  and  after 
wards  bought  up  the  lease  of  it,  but,  with  notice  of  the 
restrictive  covenant  relating  to  the  first  lot :  held,  that 
he  was  in  equity  bound  by  the  covenant,  which  prevented 
him  from  allowing  the  land  to  he  used  for  an  hotel.' 

Where  an  estate  is  vested  in  trustees,  who  sell  plots 
for  building,  subject  to  restrictive  covenants,  each  pur- 
chaser has  an  equity '  against  the  other  purchaser  to  com- 
pel the  observance  of  the  covenants,  but  such  equity 
may  be  lost  by  acquiescence.' 

Sec.  432.  To  restrain  an  ejectment  brought  to  defeat  a  valid 
agreement  for  a  lease.— Where  there  has  been  a  written 
agreement  for  a  lease  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  provisions 

1  Tipping  V.  Eckersley,  3  Kay  &  '  Piggott  y.  Stratton,  1  De  Gex, 
J.  26i;  Lingwood  v.  Stowmarket      F.  &  J.  33. 

Co.,  L.  R.,   1  Eq.  77.    Wood  on  *Jay    v.   Eichard>son,   30  Beav. 

Nuisances,  478.  563. 

2  Fox  V.  Purssell,  3  Sm.  &  Giff.  <■  Eastwood  v.  Lever,  12  W.  R. 
243;  and  see  Heath  v.  Maydew,  195. 

13  W.  R.  199. 


CHAP,  xxxvni.]  Ejectment. 

of  the  Statute  of  Frauds  ; '  or  an  agreement  not  in  writing, 
for  a  lease,  coupled  with  part  performance  thereof,  suf- 
ficient to  take  the  contract  out  of  the  operation  of  the 
Statute  of  Frauds ;  but  the  lessor  refuses  to  grant  such 
lease,  and  after  the  tenant  has  entered  into  possession 
and  paid  rent  gives  him  notice  to  quit  at  the  end  of  some 
current  year  of  the  tenancy,  and  brings  an  ejectment  to 
recover  the  premises,  intending,  thereby  to  defeat  the 
agreement,  a  court  of  equity  will,  upon  a  bill  being  filed 
and  proper  evidence  produced,  grant  an  injunction  to 
restrain  such  action,  and  decree  a  specific  performance 
of  the  agreement  with  costs.  But  the  bill  must  pray  not 
only  for  an  injunction,  but  also  for  a  specific  performance 
of  the  agreement ; "  and  before  it  is  filed  the  opinion  of 
counsel  should  be  taken,  as  before  suggested.  When  a  six 
months'  notice  to  quit  is  given,  as  above  mentioned,  the 
lessee  should  not  permit  that  period  to  elapse,  and  wait 
till  an  ejectment  is  commenced,  before  adopting  proceed- 
ings in  equity ;  or,  at  all  events,  making  reasonable 
endeavors  to  obtain  a  lease  pursuant  to  the  agreement. 
Where  a  yearly  tenant,  with  the  option  of  purchasing 
within  two  years,  after  that  period  had  elapsed,  elected 
to  purchase  :  but  the  lessor  gave  him  notice  to  quit  and 
brought  ejectment ;  whereupon  the  tenant  filed  a  bill  for 
a  specific  performance  and  applied  for  an  injunction,  the 
court  refused  such  appUcation,  except  upon  the  terms  of 
the  plaintiff  undertaking  to  continue  to  pay  rent  without 
prejudice.'  It  seems,  however,  that  in  such  a  case  no 
relief  ought  to  have  been  granted.  If  a  lessor  demises 
for  twenty-one  years,  and  covenants  to  renew  from  time 
to  time  for  eighty-four  years,  but  instead  of  doing  so 
brings  an  ejectment  upon  the  expiration  of  the  first 
twenty-one  years,  the  remedy  is  in  equity.  No  equitable 
defence  can  be  raised  by  plea  or  otherwise  in  the  eject- 
ment." A  court  of  equity  will  not  relieve  against  such 
action  where  the  lessee  has  neglected  to  repair,  &c.,  and 

'  Parker  v.  Taswell,  2  DeGex  &  243 ;   and  see  Davis  v.  Shepherd 

J.  557  ;  Pain  v.  Coombs,  1  DeGex  L.  E.,  1  Ch.  Ap.  410. 
&  J.  34.  « Pyke  V.  Northwood,  1  Beav.  153. 

'-  Fox  V.  Purssell,  3  Sm.  &  Giff.  -  Neave  v.  Avery,  16  C.  B.  328. 


1000  Waste.  [§  433. 

thereby  incurred  a  forfeiture,'  which  has  not  been  waived. 
But  if  the  alleged  forfeiture  be  disputed,  relief  may 
sometimes  be  obtained  in  equity,  subject  to  the  question 
of  forfeiture  to  be  decided  in  the  action  of  ejectment." 

If  an  ejectment  be  commenced  by  the  heir  or  remainder- 
man to  defeat  a  lease  made  under  a  power,  and  such 
lease,  although  invalid,  is  good  in  equity  as  a  contract  for 
such  a  lease  as  might  have  been  granted  under  the  power, 
a  bill  for  a  specific  performance  of  such  contract,  and  for 
an  injunction  to  restrain  the  ejectment,  may  be  main- 
tained ;  but  at  law  the  only  question  would  be,  whether 
the  lease  was  a  valid  execution  of  the  power,  or  whether 
any  defect  therein  had  been  cured  by  statute.' 

Eelief  may  be  obtained  in  equity  against  an  action  of 
ejectment  for  a  forfeiture  by  non-payment  of  rent." 

Eehef  cannot  be  obtained  in  equity  against  a  forfeiture 
for  non-payment  of  rent  and  for  hreaches  of  other  cove- 
nants contained  in  the  lease,  except,  perhaps,  for  not 
insuring."  No  rehef  by  injunction  can  be  obtained  in 
equity  against  an  action  of  ejectment  for  not  repairing,' 
nor  has  the  court  in  which  such  action  is  brought  any 
jurisdiction  to  stay  the  proceedings,  although  it  clearly 
appears  that  all  the  repairs  were  done  before  the  com- 
mencement of  the  action.'  But  in  a  case  where  a  lessor 
brought  ejectment  for  breach  of  covenant  to  repair  within 
three  months  after  notice,  it  appearing  that  out  of  twenty- 
one  items  twenty  had  been  proceeded  with  and  fourteen 
completed ;  that  the  works  had  been  partially  delayed  by 
weather,  and  that  no  further  remonstrance  had  been  made 
by  the  lessors,  the  court  restrained  the  action  and  directed 
an  inquiry  whether  the  covenants  had  been  performed.' 

Sec.  433.  By  tenant  against  third  persons.— An  injunction 
wiU  not  be  granted  to  restrain  a  person  from  committing  , 

>  Job  V.  Bannister,  2  Kay  &  J.  374.  Cole  Ejec.  431  ;  but  see  Bamford 

2  Pain  V.   Coombs,  1  De  Gex  &  v.  Creasv,  3  Giff.  675. 
J.  34.  »  mU  V.    Barclay,   18    Ves.   56 ; 

^  Morris  v.  The  Ehydydefed  Col-  Gregory  v.  Wilson,  9  Hare,  683  ; 

liery  Co.,  8  H.  &  N.  885.  Job  v.  Banister,  2  Kay  &  J.  374. 

•*  Cole  Ejec.  420.  «  Doe  d.  Mayhew  y.  Asby,  10  Ad. 

5  Wadman  v.  Calcraft,  10  Ves.  &  El.  71 ;  Cole  Ejec.  425. 
67;  Davis  v.  West,  12  Ves.  475;  »  Bargent  v.  Thompson,  4  Gifl. 

Bowser  v.  Colby,  1  Hare,  109,  184 ;  473  ;  9  Jur.  N.  S.  1192  ;  Stuart  V. 


CHAP,  XXXVm.J  iNJXmCTION.  1001 

a  trespass  where  it  is  temporary  only ;  otherwise  where 
it  has  continued  so  long  as  to  become  a  nuisance,"  but 
there  must  be  no  unnecessary  delay  or  acquiescence."'  The 
court  will  sometimes  restrain  by  injunction  the  erection 
of  a  building  which.  wiU  obstruct  the  light  and  air  of 
another  building,  after  a  right  to  such  hght  and  air  has 
been  acquired  by  grant,  either  express  or  implied."  The 
court  win  not  restrain  the  erection  of  a  building  merely 
because  it  deprives  a  window  of  some  portion  of  light : 
but  it  wiUdo  so  when  the  obstruction  is  such  as  to  occasion 
substantial  damage  and  to  interfere  with  the  ordinary 
occupations  of  Ufe.*  The  court  wiU  not  interfere  by  way 
of  mandatory  injunction,  except  in  cases  in  which  expense 
or  very  serious  damage  will  ensue  from  its  non-inter- 
ference; and  each  case  in  which  such  an  injunction  is 
sought  must  depend  on  its  own  circumstances."  Upon 
an  application  for  any  such  injunction  there  is  no  neces- 
sity for  the  party  complaining  to  be  in  the  occupation  of 
the  house  affected,  or  to  have  any  intention  of  occupying 
it,  to  entitle  him  to  the  interference  of  the  court."  A 
tenant  from  year  to  year  may  file  a  bill  for  an  injunction 
to  protect  the  right  to  the  access  and  use  of  light  j,  but 
the  injunction  wiU  be  limited  to  the  period  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  his  tenancy.'  The  court  will  interfere  to 
restrain  an  apprehended  injury,  where  it  is  clear  that  the 
act  intended  to  be  committed  would  injure  or  destroy  a 
clear  legal  right.  °  In  an  order  for  an  injunction  to  restrain 
the  defendants  from  polluting  a  stream  it  is  proper  to 

C. ;  and  see  Bamf ord  v.  Creasey,  3  Iseuberg  v.  The  East  India  House 

Gifl.  675.  Estate  Co.,  13  W.  E.  450 ;  Jaoomb 

'  Coulson  V.  White,  3  Atk.  21.  v.  Knight,  32  L.  J.  Ch.  601. 

"  Cooper  V.  Hubbuck,  80  Beav.  *  Clarke  v.  Clark,  L.  R,  1  Ch. 

160 ;  Cotching  v.  Bassett,  33  Beav.  Ap.  16 ;  Currier's  Co.  v.  Corbett, 

101 ;  Davies  v.  Marshall,  10  C.  B.  11  Jur.  N.  S.  719 ;  Eobson  v.  Whit- 

N,  S.  697.  tingham,  L.  R.,   1  Ch.  Ap.  443 ; 

a  Gooch  V.  Marshall,  1  L.  T.  N".  Yates  v.  Jack,  L.  R.,  1  Ch.  Ap.  395. 

S.  310,  Wood,  V.  C;  Arcedeckne  '  Durell  v.  Pritchard,  L.  R.,  1 

V.  Kelk,  8  Giflf.  683  ;   Herz  v.  The  Eq.  344. 

Union  Bank  of   London,  3  GiBf.  «Wilsonv.  Townend,  IDrewSm. 

686 ;    Johnson  v.  Wyatt,  33  L.  J.  334. 

Ch.  394 ;    Swaine   v.    The  Great  ■"  Simper  v.  Foley,  3  Johns.  & 

Northern  R.  Co. ,  id.  399 ;  Jackson  v.  H.  455. 

Duke     of     Newcastle,     id.     698 ;  « Herz  v.   The  Union   Bank  of 

Weatherly  v.  Ross,  1  H.  &  M.  349 ;  London,  3  Giff.  686. 

Cotching  V.  Bassett,  83  Beav.  101 ;  ' 


1002  Waste.  I§  433. 

insert  the  words  "to  the  injury  of  the  plaintiff,"  in  order 
to  establish  aground  for  the  interference  of  the  court,  and 
to  prevent  its  authority  being  invoked  for  trivial  pur- 
poses.' 

'  Lingwood  v.  Stowmarket  Co., 
L.  R.,  1  Eq.  77. 


CHAP.  xxxEC.]  -Ownership.  1003 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

FENCES  AND  PAETT  WALLS. 

Sec.  434.  Ownership  of  agricultural  fences. 

Sec.  435.  Ownership  of  party-walls. 

Sec.  436.  Obligation  to  repair  fences. 

Sec.  437.  Eights  respecting  fences,  boundaries  and  party-walls. 

Sec.  438.  Waste  and  destruction  of  fences. 

Sec.  434.  Ownership  ofagrieultural  fences.— Where  there 
are  two  adjacent  fields,  separated  by  a  hedge  and  ditch, 
the  ditch  prima  facie  belongs  to  the  owner  of  the  field 
in  which  the  hedge  is  ;  and  if  there  are  two  ditches,  one 
on  each  side  of  the  hedge,  then  the  ownership  of  the 
hedge  must  be  ascertained  by  proving  acts  of  ownership." 
The  rale  about  ditching  is  this — "no  man  making  a 
ditch  can  cut  into  his  neighbor's  soil,  but  usually  he 
cuts  it  to  the  very  extremity  of  his  own  land ;  he  is  of 
course  bound  to  throw  the  soU  which  he  digs  out  upon 
his  own  land,  and  often,  if  he  likes  it,  he  plants  a 
hedge  upon  the  top  of  it ;  therefore,  if  he  cuts  after- 
wards beyond  the  edge  of  the  ditch,  which  is  the  extremity 
of  his  land,  he  cuts  into  his  neighbor's  land,  and  is  a 
trespasser:"  proof,  therefore,  of  the  ancient  width  of 
the  ditch  is  evidence  that  the  owner's  land  did  not 
extend  beyond  the  outer  edge  thereof."  One  tenant  in 
common  of  a  hedge  may  maintain  trespass  against  his 
co-tenant  if  the  latter  grub  it  up  ;  but  a  mere  clipping 
of  the  hedge  may  be  justified  under  the  general  issue.' 

Sec.  435.  Ownership  of  party-waUs.— The  common  use 
of  a  wall  separating  adjoining  lands  belonging  to  differ- 

'  Guy  V.  West,  3  Selw.  N.  P.  ^^Vowles  v.  MiUer,  3  Taunt.  137. 

1297,  12th  (Eng.  ed.)  ;Cole  Ejec.  ^Voyce  t.  Voyce,  Gow,  201. 

332,  243. 


1004  Fences  and  Party  Wails.  [§  436. 

ent  owners  (tlie  origin  of  which,  wall  is  unknown),  is 
prima  facie  evidence  that  the  wall  and  the  land  on  which 
it  stands  belong  to  the  owners  of  those  adjoining  lands, 
in  equal  moieties  as  tenants  in  common.  Where  such  an 
ancient  wall  was  pulled  down  by  one  of  the  two  tenants  in 
common,  with  the  intention  of  rebuilding  the  same,  and 
a  new  wall  was  built  of  greater  height  than  the  old  one  ; 
it  was  held  not  to  be  such  a  total  destruction  of  the  wall 
as  to  entitle  one  of  the  two  tenants  in  common  to  main- 
tain an  action  of  trespass  against  the  other.'  But  where 
a  tenant  in  common  of  a  wall  took  off  the  coping  stones 
and  heightened  it,  and  built  a  washhouse  against  it,  the 
roof  of  which  occupied  the  whole  width  of  the  top  of  the 
wall,  and  also  let  a  stone  into  the  wall,  with  an  inscrip- 
tion on  it  stating  that  t"he  wall  and  the  land  on  which  it 
stood  belonged  to  him :  held,  that  on  these  facts  the 
j  ury  might  find  an  actual  ouster  of  the  co-  tenant. '  Where 
a  _party-waU  was  built  at  the  joint  expense  of  the  two 
adjoining  proprietors,  and  half  its  thickness  stood  on 
the  land  of  each,  the  property  in  the  wall  follows  the 
land  on  which  it  stands,  and  the  two  proprietors  are  not 
tenants  in  common  of  the  wall.'  In  contemplation  of 
law  such  wall  constitutes  two  distinct  walls,  and  must 
be  so  described  in  pleading.*  If  a  house  or  office  be 
separated  from  other  premises  by  a  wall,  and  that  wall 
belongs  to  the  owner  of  the  house  or  office,  he  is  of  com- 
mon right  bound  to  repair  it ;  and  an  action  on  the  case 
will  lie  against  him  for  any  damages  occasioned  by  his 
not  doing  so. 

Sec.  436.  Obligation  to  repair  fences.— An  action  on  the 
case  for  not  repairing  fences,  whereby  another  party  is 
damaged,  can  be  maintained  only  against  the  occupier, 
and  not  against  the  owner  of  the  fee,  who  is  not  in  pos- 
session. °    It  is  so  notoriously  the  duty  of  the  actual 

>  Cubitt  V.  Porter,  8  B.  &  C.  257  ;  ^  Matts  v.  Hawkins,  5  Taunt.  20  ; 

Wiltshire  v.   Sidford,  id.  259,  n.  ;  Tayler  v.  StendaU,  7  Q.  B.  634. 

Murley  v.  McDermott,  8  Ad.  &  El.  ■•Murley  v.  McDermott,  8  Ad.  & 

138.  El.  138,  142. 

2  Stedman  v.  Smith,  8  E.  &  B.  1 ;  "^  Cheatham  v.  Hampson,  4  T.  R. 

and '  see  Wawn  v.  Horn,  3  M.   &  318 ;    Russell  v.  Shenton,  3  Q.  B. 

W.  333  ;  5  id.  564.  449  ;    Chauntler   v.    Robinson,    4 


CHAP.  XXXIX.]  EePAIRS.  1005 

occupier  of  lands  to  repair  the  fences,  and  so  little  the 
duty  of  the  landlord,  that  without  any  agreement  to 
that  effect  the  landlord  may  maintain  an  action  against 
his  tenant  for  not  so  doing,  upon  the  ground  of  the  injury 
done  to  his  inheritance ; '  and  where,  to  a  declaration 
against  a  tenant  for  years  for  not  using  premises  in  a 
husbandlike  manner,  in  repairing  fences,  &c.,  on  his 
implied  promise  so  to  do,  the  tenant  pleaded  that  the 
fence  became  out  of  repair,  by  natural  decay,  and  that 
there  was  not  proper  wood  which  he  had  a  right  to  cut 
for  repairing  the  fences,  and  that  the  plaintiff  ought  to 
have  set  out  proper  wood  for  the  purpose  of  repairs, 
which  he  had  neglected  to  do  ;  the  plea  was  considered 
bad,  because  it  did  not  aver  any  request  to  the  plaintiff 
so  to  do,  or  a  custom  of  the  country  in  that  respect." 
The  tenant  in  this  respect  takes  upon  himself  the  same 
duties  as  would  rest  upon  the  landlord,  if  in  possession. 
If  the  landlord  is  bound  to  maintain  the  fence,  the  ten- 
ant must,  and  vice  versa.  Where  the  tenant  or  an 
adjoining  owner  neglects  to  maintain  his  fence,  the 
statutes  in  the  several  States  provide  proper  redress,  by 
enabling  the  party  aggrieved  to  call  out  the  fence  viewers, 
or  such  oflBLcer  as  bylaw  is  charged  with  authority  to  ihafc 
end.  If  two  persons  are  possessed  of  adjoining  closes, 
neither  being  under  any  obligation  to  fence,  each  must 
take  care  that  his  cattle  do  not  enter  the  land  of  the  other : 
but  it  may  be  doubted,  if  two  persons  have  the  concur- 

Exchq.  163.    At  common  law,  the  land,  Sec,  R.  R.  Co.,  35  Vt.  116; 

owner  of  a  close  was  not  obliged  Holden  v.   Shattuck,  34  Vt.  336 ; 

to  fence  against  the  cattle  of  the  Wilder   v.    Wilder,  38    Vt.    678 ; 

occupant  of   an    adjoining  close.  Taylor  v.  Whitehead,  3  Doug.  745 ; 

The  statute  imposing  the  duty  on  Tewksbury  v.   Bucklin,   7  N.   H. 

adjoining  proprietors   of  land  to  518.    A   person  who  leases  farm 

erect  and  maintain  fences  recog-  lands  is  bound  to  keep  the  fences 

nized  the  same  principle ;  for  the  in  proper  repair,  and   this  is  so 

object  and  design  of  fencing  is  not  whether  he  is  a  tenant  under  a 

to  keep  the  cattle  of  others  off  the  specific    rent     or    upon    shares, 

premises,  but  to  keep  at  home  the  Fenton    v.   Montgomery,   19    Mo. 

cattle    of    the    occupant.      This  App.  156. 

principle  has  equal  appUcation  to  '  Cheetham  v.  Hampson,  4  T.  R. 

the  owners  of  land  adjoining  public  319,  per  Ld.    Kbnyon,  C.  J. ;  but 

highways ;  and  where  no  statutes  this  doctrine  does  not  extend  to 

exist,  and  no  obligation  is  imposed  tenants  at  wUl  or  from  year  to 

by    covenant    or    prescription,  a  year. 

railroad  company  is  not  bound  to  *  Whitfield  v.  Weedon,  8  Chit, 

fence  their  land.     Hurd  v.  Rut-  R.  685. 


1006  Fences  and  Party  "Walls.  [§  436. 

rent  possession  of  land,  for  the  purpose  tliat  each,  may 
take  profits  of  a  special  nature,  and  distinct  from,  but 
not  inconsistent  with,  the  right  to  the  other,  whether 
either  one  is  bound  to  guard  against  casual  damage, 
which,  during  and  by  fair  enjoyment  of  his  right,  may 
happen  to  the  other. '  A  person  entitled  to  the  minerals 
under  the  land  of  another,  with  license  to  make  a  shaft 
opening  into  it,  is,  in  the  absence  of  any  stipulation  to 
the  contrary,  under  a  legal  obligation  to  the  owner  of 
the  surface  soil  to  fence  the  shaft,  so  as  to  prevent  its 
being  a  source  of  danger  to  his  cattle  which  may  be  upon 
it,  and  is  liable  to  an  action  for  injury  occurring  to  those 
cattle  for  want  of  such  fencing.'  Where  the  owner  of 
two  adjoining  closes  (A  and  B)  separated  by  a  fence  and 
gate,  which  had  always  been  repaired  by  the  occupier  of 
B,  sold  A  to  the  plaintiff,  and  two  years  afterwards  sold 
B  to  the  defendant ;  it  was  held,  that  the  latter  was  not 
bound  to  repair  the  gate,  unless  he  or  his  vendor  had 
made  some  specific  bargain  with  the  plaintiff  to  that 
effect ;  and  that  the  doing  of  occasional  repairs  was  not 
evidence  of  such  bargain.'  The  liability  of  railway  com- 
panies under  the  various  statutes  in  the  several  States, 
to  make  and  repair  fences  between  their  railway  and  the 
adjoining  land,  is  not  generally  more  extensive  than  that 
imposed  on  ordinary  tenants  by  the  common  law.  They 
are  not  bound  to  fence  as  against  mere  trespassers  and 
wrongdoers,  but  only  as  against  the  owners  and  occupiers 
of  the  land  adjoining  the  railway.  ■"  If  any  accident  which 
occurs  be  attributable  partly  to  their  neglect  to  fence 
properly,  and  partly  to  want  of  ordinary  care  and  caution 
on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff  or  his  servants,  the  company 
are  entitled  to  a  verdict.*    The  owner  of  land  adjoining 

'  ChurchUlv.  Evans,  1  Taunt.  539.  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  506;  37  L.  J.  C.  P. 

'  In  Ee  Williams  v.  Groucott,  4  266  ;    Hardcastle   v.  South  York- 

B.  &  S.  149 ;  33  L.  J.  Q.  B.  339.  shire  Railway  and  River  Dun  Co.,. 
3  Boyle  V.  Tamlyn,  6B.  &  C.  339.  4  H.  &  N.  67  ;  Bessant  v.  Great 
"Ricketts    v.   East,    and   West  Western  R.  Co.,  8  C.  B.  N.  S.  368; 

Lidia    Docks     and    Birmingham  Marfell  v.  South  Wales  R.  Co.,  id.. 

Junction    R.   Co.,   13    C.   B.   160;  535. 

Manchester,  ShefiSeld  and  Lincoln-  *  Haigh  v.  London  and  North- 
shire  R.  Co.,  app.  Wallis,  resp.,  14  Western  E.   Co.,   1  F.  &  F.  646; 

C.  B.  313;  Midland  R.  Co.,  app.,  EUis  v.  London  and  South- Western 
Daykin,    resp.,     17     C.     B.    126  ;  R.  Co.,  3  H.  &  N.  434. 

Roberts  v.  Great  Western  R.  Co. 


CHAP.  XXXIX.]  Eights.  1007 

a  public  road  is  under  no  obligation  to  fence  excavations 
in  his  land,  unless  they  are  so  near  tbe  road  as  to  be 
dangerous  to  persons  lawfully  using  it.'  ^ 

Sec.  437.  Bights  respecting  fences,  boundaries,  and  party- 
walls.— All  owners  of  lands  adjoining  and  exposed  to  tbe 
inroads  of  the  sea,  have  a  right  to  erect  such  works  and 
defences  as  are  necessary  for  the  protection  and  pres- 
ervation of  their  own  land,  even  although  they  may  be 
prejudicial  to  others,  by  rendering  it  necessary  for  them  to 
do  the  same.  A  tenant  is  obliged  to  preserve  the  bounda- 
ries of  the  land  demised  to  him,  and  if  he  permit  them 
to  be  destroyed,  so  that  his  landlord's  land  cannot  be 
distinguished  from  his  own,  he  shall  either  restore  the 
land  specifically,  or  give  other  land  of  equal  value  in 
lieu;'  and  the  same  obligation  extends  to  cases  where 
there  are  several  co-lessees."  A  person  has  no  right  to 
undermine,  either  partially  or  wholly,  a  party-wall 
between  his  own  house,  which  he  has  pulled  down,  and 
his  neighbor's,  unless  it  can  be  done  without  injniry  to 
his  neighbor's  house ;  even  although  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  interests  of  the  parties  in  the  waU  are  several, 
or  whether  they  are  tenants  in  common  of  it."  To  an 
action  of  covenant  for  non-repair  of  a  messuage,  the 
defendant  may  plead  performance,  except  as  to  the  repairs 
of  a  party-wall,  and  that  those  did  not  become  necessary 
by  the  defendant's  default,  and  that  the  defendant  was 
not  the  owner  of  the  improved  rent.' 

Sec.  438.  'Wasteanddestructionoffenees.— Although  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year  is  not  bound  to  put  the  prem- 
ises into  repair,  he  is  not,  on  the  other  hand,  at  liberty 
to  do  anything  which  amounts  to  waste,  or  to  a  breach 
of  the  rules  of  good  husbandry ;  he  is  not,  therefore,  enti- 
tled to  cut  and  sell  hedgerows,  or,  at  least,  not  without 
making  up  the  hedges  according  to  the  course  of  good 

'  Binks  V.  South  Yorkshire  Eail-  '  Willis  v.  Parkinson,  1  Swanst. 

way  and  Elver  Dun  Co.,  3  B.  &  S.  49. 

S44  ■  32  L.  J.  Q.  B.  36.  *  Bradbee  v.  Governors  of  Christ's 

2  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Fullerten,  5  V.  Hospital,  4M.  &  G.  714. 

&  B.  263.  '  Moore  v.  Clark,  5  Taunt,  90. 


1008  Fences  and  Party  Walls.  [§  438. 

husbandry.  If  there  be  a  quickset  fence  of  white  thorn, 
and  the  tenant  stub  it  up  or  suffers  it  to  be  destroyed,  this 
is  destruction ;  but  cutting  quickset  hedges  is  not  waste ; 
it  shall  be  accounted  rather  good  husbandry,  because  they 
will  grow  the  better.  ' 

'  Gage  V.  Smith,  Godb.  209. 


CHAP.  XL.]  What  is  Timber.  1009 


CHAPTER  XL. 

TREES  AND  HMBEK. 

Sec.  439.  What  is  timber. 

Sec.  440.  Implied  rights  as  to  trees. 

Sec.  441.  Windfalls. 

Sec.  443.  Express  contracts  as  to  trees. 

Sec.  443.  For  what  purpose  trees  may  be  cut  without"waste. 

Sec.  444.  What  acts  amount  to  waste. 

Sec.  439.  What  is  timber.— By  tlie  term  timber  is 
meant  properly  sucli  trees  only  as  are  fit  to  be  used  in 
building  and  repairing  houses  ;  thus  oak,  ash  and  elm 
trees  are  considered  timber  in  all  places,  and  under 
whatsoever  circumstances  they  are  grown.'  But  only 
trees  of  not  less  than  six  inches  diameter  or  two  feet  girth 
(allowing  for  irregularities  of  shape)  appear  to  be 
reckoned  or  considered  as  "timber.""  Many  descrip- 
tions of  trees,  which  are  not  generally  considered  as 
timber,  are  so  in  some  places  by  the  custom  of  the 
country,  being  there  used  for  the  purpose  of  building ; 
thus  it  has  been  laid  down  that  horse-chestnuts,  limes, 
birch,  beech,  asp,  walnut  trees,  and  the  like,  may,  under 
such  circumstances,  be  deemed  timber,  and  are  there- 
fore protected  by  the  law  as  such.*  In  this  respect,  the 
local  custom  largely  controls,  as  well  as  the  uses  to  which 
the  trees  are  or  may  be  devoted.  Thus  in  England,  in 
the  county  of  York,  birch  trees  are  held  timber,  because 
they  are  used  in  that  country  for  building  sheep-houses, 
cottages,  and  such  mean  buildings ;  *  and  in  Hampshire 
willows  have  been  considered  as  timber  by  the  custom  of 

•  Co.  Litt.  53  a ;  Craig  on  Trees  P.  Wms.  606  ;  Palmer's  Case,  Co 

and  Woods,  11.  Litt.  58  a,  note  (10). 

2  Whitty  v.Ld.  DiUon,  2  F.&  F.67.  '  ■■  Countess  of  Cumberland's  Case, 

s  Duke  of  Chandos  v.  Talbot,  2  Moor,  813. 


1010  Trees  AND  Timber.         •  [§440. 

the  country.'  Where  beech  is  admitted  to  be  timber  by 
the  custom  of  the  country,  the  general  rule  of  law- 
applicable  to  timber  trees  in  general  attaches  upon  it,  so 
as  to  give  it  the  properties  and  privileges  of  timber  at 
twenty  years'  growth  ;  and  therefore  upon  an  issue 
whether  certain  beech  trees  in  the  county  of  Bucks  were 
or  were  not  timber  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
country,  the  inquiry  is  confined  to  the  nature  of  the 
wood  and  the  period  of  its  growth,  whether  of  twenty 
years ;  and  no  evidence  can  be  received  to  qualify  its 
character  of  timber,  by  showing  that  it  was  not  deemed 
to  be  such  in  the  country  unless  the  tree  contained  ten 
feet  of"  solid  wood." 

Although  pollards  have  been  said  not  to  be  timber, ' 
yet  Lord  King  inclined  to  think  them  timber,  provided 
their  bodies  were  sound  and  good  ;  and  in  an  action  to 
recover  the  value  of  poUards  under  the  description  of 
timber  and  timber-like  trees,  the  plaintiff  recovered  a 
verdict." 

Sec.  440.  Impliedrightsastotrees. — The  property  in 
trees  is  vested  in  the  owner  of  the  inheritance  of  the  land 
upon  which  they  grow  ;  for  the  property  in  trees,  or  of 
that  which  is  likely  to  become  timber,  is  in  the  landlord, 
and  the  property  in  bushes  in  the  tenant,  even  when  they 
are  cut  down  by  a  stranger."  If  a  tree  grow  near  the  con- 
fines of  the  land  of  two  parties,  so  that  the  roots  extend 
into  the  soil  of  each,  the  property  in  the  tree  belongs  to 
the  owner  of  that  land  in  which  the  tree  was  first  sown  or 
planted  ; '  but  formerly  the  parties  in  such  a  case  were 
held  to  be  tenants  in  common.'  A  farmer  who  raises 
young  frui.t  trees  on  the  demised  land,  for  filling  up  the 
orchards,  is  not  entitled  to  sell  them  ;  but  it  is  otherwise 
of  a  nurseryman  by  trade.'     Therefore,  a  nurseryman 

'  Layfleld  v.   Cowper,   1  Wood,  *  Channon  v.  Patch,  5  B.  &  C.  893. 

Ex. 330; Gruflly V.Pindar, Hob. 319.  =  Berriman  v.  Peacock,  9  Bing. 

2  Aubrey  v.  Fisher,  10  East,  446  ;  384. 

Duke  of  Chandos  v.  Talbot,  3  P.  «  Holder  v.  Coates,  Moo.  &M.  112. 

Wms.  606 ;  Co.  Litt.  53 ;  Craig  on  '  Waterman    v.    Soper,    i    Ld. 

Trees  and  Woods,  11.  Eaym.   787  ;  Masters   v.   PoIUe,   2 

«Plowd.    470;  Craig   on   Trees  EoU.  R.  141,  Anon.,  id.  255. 

and   Woods,   13,  18  ;    PhilUps   y.  "  Wyndham  v.   Way,  4  Taunt. 

Smith,  14  M.  &  W.  589.  316 ;  Penton  v.  Eobart,  3  East,  90. 


CHAP.  XL.J  Windfalls.  1011 

who  has  planted  fruit  trees  in  the  way  of  his  trade,  may 
remove  them,  if  not  of  larger  growth  than  could  be  dealt 
with  in  his  trade,  even  though  they  are  producing  fruit.' 
A  tenant,  not  being  a  gardener,  cannot  remove  a  border 
of  box  planted  on  the  demised  premises  by  himself, 
unless  by  special  agreement  with  his  landlord.'  A 
tenant  of  a  garden  is  not  permitted  to  plough  up  and 
destroy  the  strawberry-beds,  although  he  paid  the 
preceding  tenant  for  them." 

Sec.  441.  Windfalls.— Windfalls  are  the  property  of 
the  lord ;  for  the  timber  while  standing  is  part  of  the 
inheritance ;  but  whenever  it  is  severed,  either  by  the 
act  of  God,  as  by  a  tempest,  or  by  a  trespasser  and  by 
wrong,  it  belongs  to  him  who  has  the  first  vested  estate 
of  inheritance,  whether  in  fee  or  in  tail,  and  he  may 
bring  trover  for  it.  So  where  there  are  intermediate 
contingent  estates  of  inheritance,  and  the  timber  is  cut 
down  by  combination  between  the  tenant  for  life  and  the 
person  who  has  the  next  vested  estate  of  inheritance ; 
or  if  the  tenant  for  life  himself  has  such  an  estate  and 
fells  timber  ;  in  these  cases  the  Court  of  Chancery  wiU 
order  it  to  be  preserved  for  him  who  has  the  first  contin' 
gent  estate  of  inheritance  under  the  settlement.* 

Sec.  442.  Express  contracts  as  to  trees.— The  effect  and 
construction  of  exceptions  and  reservations  (in  a  demise) 
of  trees,  &c.,  have  been  already  considered.'  Woods, 
which  were  excepted  out  of  the  lease,  but  subsequently 
granted  by  the  lessor,  to  the  lessee,  have  been  held  not 
to  pass  by  an  assignment  of  the  lease.'  A  covenant  not 
to  remove  or  grub  up  trees  is  broken  by  removing  trees 
from  one  part  of  the  premises  to  another  ;  and  so  it  is  by 
taking  away  trees,  even  if  the  lessee  plant  a  greater 

'  "Warden  v.  Usher,  3  Scott,  N.  ot  and  Legge  v.  Legge,  33  Beav. 

R.  508.  509,  where  it  was  held  that  the 

'  Empson  v.  Soden,  4  B.  &  Adol.  proceeds  of  windfalls  must  be  in- 

655.  vested  and  dealt  with  as  part  of 

2  WethereU  v.  Howells,  1  Camp,  the  corpus  of  the  settled  estate. 

227.  '  Smith  L.  &  T.  133,  136  ( 2d  ed.). 

<  Bewick  r.     Wingfield,     3    P  «Godb.  188. 
Wms.  368.    But  see  Bagot  v.  Bag- 


1012  Trees  and  Timber.  [§  442. 

quantity  than  he  takes  away,  unless  those  taken  away 
were  dead.'  A  covenant  to  keep  all  the  trees  standing  in 
an  orchard,  whole  and  undefaced,  "reasonable  use  and 
wear  only  excepted,"  is  not  broken  by  cutting  down  trees 
past  bearing,  provided  the  landlord  is  likely  to  get  back 
the  premises  at  the  end  of  the  term  in  an  improved  condi- 
tion ; '  a  covenant  to  leave  all  the  timber  which  is  growing 
on  the  land  when  the  lessee  took  it,  is  broken,  if  at  the  end 
of  the  term  he  cut  i  t  down,  but  leave  i  t  there,  for  that  would 
be  defeating  the  intent  of  the  covenant,  although  a  literal 
perfonnance  of  it.'  A  lease  was  granted  of  a  farm,  and 
quarries  of  stone  thereon,  with  liberty  to  work  the  quar- 
ries ;  out  of  this  demise  were  reserved  timber  saplings 
and  underwood  growing  on  the  premises :  there  was  a 
covenant  not  to  commit  waste  by  cutting  down  saplings 
or  underwood :  it  was  held,  that  the  cutting  down 
saplings  and  underwood  for  the  necessary  purpose  of 
working  a  quarry  on  the  premises  was  no  breach  of  the 
covenant,  there  being  no  excess  of  the  right  that  it  was 
intended  the  tenant  should  exercise.*  Where  there  was 
a  liberty  in  a  lease,  for  the  lessee  to  cat  down  and  dispose 
of  all  timber  and  coppice,  and  also  a  proviso  to  give 
notice  in  writing  to  the  lessor  of  his  intention,  that  the 
latter  might  have  the  option  of  purchasing  ;  and  the  les- 
see gave  a  bona  fide  notice,  and  the  lessor  disclaimed  any 
intention  of  purchasing;  it  was  held,  that  the  lessee 
might  afterwards  proceed  to  cut  down  the  whole,  without 
giving  a  fresh  notice,  at  such  seasons  as  suited  his  con- 
venieijce,  even  though  the  lessor  had  in  the  meantime 
parted  with  his  interest  to  another."  While  a  court  of 
equity  has,  and  will  fully  exercise  its  preventive  juris- 
diction by  injunction,  to  protect  the  reversion  against 
waste  by  the  tenant  in  possession,  it  will  not  interfere 
unless  it  is  shown  that  a  positive  injury  to  the  premises, 
repugnant  to  the  terms  of  the  lease  or  a  positive  misuse 
of  the  premises,  or  their  conversion  to  uses  unauthorized, 
is  contemplated  and  reasonably  apprehended. 

■WefhereU  v.    Bird,  6   C.  &  P.  "  Doe  d.  Rogers  v. Price,  8  C.  B. 

195.  894. 

'Jones  V.  Crouch,  3  Camp.  449.  'Goodtitle  d.  Luxmore  v.  Saivle, 

n  Esp.  N.  P.  371.  16  East,  87. 


CHAP.  XL.]        Cutting  Without  Waste.  1013 

Henoe,  where  by  the  terms  of  the  lease  the  tenant  is 
not  only  expressly  authorized,  but  is  required,  as  one  of 
the  considerations  moving  the  landlord  in  its  execution, 
to  reduce  to  cultivation  during  the  term  uncleared 
portions  of  the  demised  premises,  a  court  of  equity  wiU 
not  intervene  by  injunction  to  restrain  him  from  catting 
down  timber  on  the  lands,  for  the  purpose  authorized  by 
the  lease. 

A  reservation  in  a  lease  of  lands  which  are  largely  if 
not  wholly  uncleared  and  unimproved  to  the  lessee  of 
the  right  to  the  use  and  occupation  for  a  designated 
period  of  such  parts  of  the  premises  as  he  may  reduce  to 
cultivation,  or  clear  during  the  term,  like  a  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment  or  a  covenant  to  cultivate  the  land  in  a 
particular  manner,  or  a  covenant  for  the  renewal  of  the 
lease,  runs  with  the  land,  and  is  binding  upon  the 
assignee  of  the  reversion. 

Under  a  stipulation  in  such  lease  that  in  the  event  of 
a  sale  of  the  demised  premises  by  the  lessor  during  the 
term,  the  lessee  should  surrender  the  possession  on  ' '  being 
paid  a  reasonable  valuation  for  the  unexpired  term," 
a  mere  sale  and  conveyance  of  the  premises  by  the  lessor 
do  not  operate  a  determination  of  the  lease  ;  but  the  stip- 
ulation merely  reserves  to  the  purchaser,  or  the  assignee 
of  the  reversion,  the  privilege  or  option  of  determining 
the  lease  upon  a  performance  of  the  condition  expressed — 
the  payment  or  tender  to  the  lessee  of  the  reasonable 
value  of  the  unexpired  term;  and  until  such  payment 
or  tender  is  made,  the  lessee  has  the  right  to  the  un'mo- 
lested  use  and  enjoyment  of  the  premises,  and  the  right 
to  continue  the  clearing,  or  reduction  to  cultivation,  of 
the  lands  according  to  the  terms  of  the  lease.' 

Sec.  443.  Por  what  purpose  trees  may  be  cut  without 
waste.— A  tenant  who  is  answerable  for  waste  only,  may 
cut  down  trees  for  the  purposes  of  reparation  without 
committing  waste,  either  where  the  damage  has  accrued 
during  the  time  of  his  being  in  possession,  in  the  ordinary 

•  McDaniel  v.  CaUan,  75  Ala.  327. 
II.— 12 


1014  Trees  and  Timber.  [§  444. 

course  of  decay,  or  where  the  premises  were  ruinous  at 
the  time  he  entered  ;  but  if  the  decay  happened  by  his 
default,  to  cut  down  trees  to  do  the  repair  would  be 
waste.  And  if  a  tenant,  having  cut  down  trees  for 
reparations,  sell  tbem,  and  afterwards  buy  them  again 
and  employ  them  about  necessary  reparations,  it  is  waste 
by  the  sale : '  so,  although  he  cut  for  repairs,  if  upon 
turning  out  unfit  they  are  exchanged  for  others  which 
are  so  applied."  But  the  tenant  may  not  cut  timber  for 
repairs,  wh^ch  his  lessor  has  covenanted  to  do.°  .  It  is 
not  waste  for  a  tenant  to  cut  timber  for  necessary  botes.* 
It  is  an  inseparable  incident  to  an  estate  tail,  that  the 
tenant  shall  not  be  punishable  for  committing  waste  by 
felling  timber ;  but  this  power  must  be  exercised  during 
the  life  of  the  tenant  in  tail,  for  at  the  instant  of  his  death 
it  ceases :  if,  therefore,  a  tenant  in  taU  sell  trees  growing 
on  the  land,  the  vendee  must  cut  them  down  during  the 
life  of  the  tenant  in  tail ;  for  otherwise  they  will  descend 
to  the  heir,  as  parcel  of  the  inheritance.' 

Sec.  444.  What  acts  amount  to  waste.— Cutting  down, 
destroying  or  topping  all  trees  which  are  timber,  either 
by  the  general  law,  or  by  the  particular  custom  of  the 
country,  is  waste  ;  so  is  the  doing  of  any  act  which  has 
the  effect  of  causing  a  decay  of  the  wood:  and  cut- 
ting down  willows,  beech,  birch,  asp,  maple,  or  any 
trees  of  that  description,  which,  though  not  timber, 
afford  a  defence  or  shelter  for  the  house,  has  been  con- 
sidered destruction.  Upon  the  same  principle,  cutting 
down  or  destroying  fr  ait-trees  growing  in  the  garden  or 
orchard  is  waste ;  but  if  such  trees  grow  upon  any  of  the 
ground  which  the  tenant  holds  out  of  the  garden  or 
orchard,  it  is  not  waste ;  and  it  has  been  laid  down  that 
suffering  the  germins  or  young  shoots  springing  from 
trees    which    have    been  felled,    to    be    destroyed,    is 

ildtt.  Co.  53  b,  320.  Co.  Litt.  53 ;  Hob.  334 ;  Fitz.  N.  B. 

'Simmons   v.   Norton,  7    Bing.  59    (N);  Archdeacon    v.    Jenner, 

640.  Cro.  Eliz.  604. 

2  Com.  Dig.  Pleader  ( 3  O ),  14.  ^  Cruise  Dig.  tit.  2  C.  I. ,  s.  33. 

*Com.  Dig.  Pleader  (3  O),  12;  ^Co.  Litt.  53  a;  Id.,  note  (6). 


©HAP.  yL.j  Waste.  1015 

waste ; '  and  tibat  if  it  is  done  after  previous  waste  in 
cutting  trees,  it  is  double  waste."  Cutting  down  willows 
and  leaving  the  shoots  to  silQot  afresh,  has  been  held  not 
to  be  waste,  MnZesstheyareashaiato  a  house  or  a  support 
to  the  bank  of  a  stream.'  A  tenant  may  cut  down  such 
bushes,  shoots,  &c.,  as  will  never  be  timber,  without 
being  amenable  for  waste.* 

•Gage  V.   Smith,   Godb.   210:  3         « Phillips  v.  Smith,'14  M.  &.  W. 
EoUe's  Abr.  835.  589. 

2  Ktzherbert's  N.  B.  .59.  <  Godb,,  4  pi.  6.     ^ 


1016  Rent.  [§  445. 


CHAPTER   XLL 

KENT. 

Sbc.  445.  Definition  of  the  term. 

Sec.  446.  Kinds  of  rent. 

Sec.  447.  Rents  payable  in  advance. 

Sec.  448.  Covenants  to  pay  rent. 

Sec.  449.  When  ahd  where  rent  is  payable. — Demand  to  create  for^ 

feiture. 

Sec.  450.  Payment  of  rent  as  evidence  of  tenancy. — Effect  of.     * 

Sec.  451.  Assignable  qualities  of  rent. 

Sec.  452.  Reservations  of  rent,  or  sums  in  gross  as  quasi  rent. 

Sec.  453.  Penalty  or  liquidated  damages. 

Sec.  454.  How  distinguished. 

Sec.  455.  Payment  of  rent. 

Sec.  456.  Allowances  by  mistake  of  deductions  from  rent. 

Sec.  457.  Where  rent  is  payable. 

Sec.  458.  How  rent  may  be  paid. 

Sec.  459.  Payment  by  bUls,  or  notes. 

Sec.  460.  What  payments  operate  as  payments  pro  tanto  of  the  rent. 

Sec.  461.  Payment  of  taxes,  rates,  &c. 

Sec.  462.  When  other  payments  may  be  deducted  from  the  rent. 

Sec.  463.  To  whom  rent  should  be  paid. 

Sec.  464.  Payment  before  the  rent  day. 

Sec.  465.  Tenant  holding  over. 

Sec.  466.  Alternative  provisions. 

Sec.  467.  Rent  payable  in  specific  articles. 

Sue.  468.  Incidental  benefits. 

Sec.  469.  Surety  for  lessee. 

Sec.  470,  liability  of  under-tenant. 

Sec.  445.  Definition  ofthe  term.— Rent  is  a  compensation 
for  the  use  of  lands  demised,  and  is  treated  as  a  profit 
issuing  out  of  the  land  and  tenements  cotporeal.    It  is  of 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


Definition. 


1017 


a  twofold  nature ;  that  is,  it  is  something  issuing  out  of 
the  land  as  a  compensation  for  the  tenant's  possession 
thereof,  and  also  an  acknowledgment  of  the  tenant's 
fealty  to  the  landlord,'  and  this  distinction  is  regarded  as 


'  Constantine  v.  Wake,  1  Sweeney 
(N.  Y.)  239  ;  Smith's  Landlord  and 
Tenant,  111  (3d  Eng.  Edn.). 
"  Rent,"  says  Finiay,  in  his  work 
upon  Landlord  and  Tenant,  327, 
"signifies  a  return  or  compensa- 
tion, and  a  certain  profit  issuing 
yearly  out  of  lands  and  tenements 
corporeal.  It  must  he  a  profit, 
though  it  need  not  be  in  money.  It 
WMst  he  certain  or  that  which  may 
be  reduced  to  a  certainty  by  either 
party.  It  must  issue  yearly, 
though  it  need  not  issue  every  suc- 
cessive year,  but  may  be  reserved 
every  second,  third  or  fourth  year, 
&c.  It  must  issue  out  of  the  thing 
granted  (it  must  issue  out  of  lands 
and  tenements  corporeal) ;  there- 
fore, a  rent  cannot  be  reserved 
out  of  an  advowson,  or  the  like. 
But  a  grant  of  such  a  sum  may 
operate  as  a  personal  contract,  and 
obUge  the  grantor  to  pay  the 
money,  or  subject  him  to  an  action 
of  debt,  Co.  Litt.  47,"  [or  assump- 
sit, Whitton  V.  Bye,  Cro.  Jac.  486, 
H.  G.  W.]  "  This,"  continues  he, 
"  is  the  definition  of  rent  given  by 
Blackstone ;  but  that  part  of  it 
included  within  parenthesis  is  not 
now  the  law.  *  *  Rent  is  npt 
confined  to  lands,  and  extends  to 
incorporeal  hereditaments."  But 
the  proposition  so  broadly  stated 
by  him  does  not  appear  to  be  sus- 
tained by  the  authorities ;  and 
rent,  as  such,  does  not  appear  to 
be  incident  to  incorporeal  heredit- 
aments alone,  except  in  the  case 
of  the  sovereign.  Co.  Litt.  47  a. 
The  term  is  often  used  indiscrimi- 
nately, and  is  appUed  to  a  sum 
reserved  for  the  use  of  personal 
chattels  as  well  as  real,  but  the 
legal  effect  at  the  term  is  quite  dif- 
ferent in  the  two  cases,  DoneUan 
V.  Reed,  3  B.  &  Ad.  905,  and  the 
parties  cannot  in  any  way,  or  by 
any  use  of  terms,  or  any  pro- 
visions, in  a  lease,  make  that 
"rent"  which  in  law  is  not  so. 
Miners'  Bank  v.  HeUner,  41  Penn. 
St.  453.  The  reason  why  rent,  as 
such,  cannot  issue  out  of  an  in- 
corporeal hereditament  is,  "be- 
cause they  are  such  things  in  their 


nature  as  a  man  can  never  recur 
to  for  a  distress."  6  Bacon's  Abr. 
tit.  Rent  (A),  p.  8.  In  6  Bacon's 
Abr.  tit.  Rent.  (B),  8,  the  author, 
under  the  head  of  "Out  of  what 
things  a  rent  may  issue,"  says : 
"As  a  common  was  originally 
granted  for  the  benefit  of  the 
beasts  of  every  one  of  the  tenants, 
and  as  the  right  of  common  which 
every  man  has,  runs  through  the 
whole  common,  and  no  particular 
tenant  has  a  right  to  one  part 
more  than  another,  it  follows  that 
no  distress  can  be  taken  thereon, 
nor  can  the  recognizors  of  the  assize 
have  the  view  of  any  particular 
part  to  which  the  grantee  of  the 
rent  had  a  right,  and  therefore 
cannot  put  him  in  seizin  of  the 
rent  by  a  twig  or  a  turf.  So,  of  a 
warren,  Noy,  60,  3  Leon,  1.  So, 
of  a  piscary,  Co.  Litt.  144.  Though 
a  rent  cannot,  for  the  reasons 
herein  mentioned,  issue  out  of  a 
common,  yet  by  the  11  G.  3,  c.  19, 
s.  8,  it  is  enacted,  that  it  shall  be 
lawful  for  every  landlord,  his 
steward,  bailiff,  receiver,  or  other 
person  empowered  by  him,  to 
seize  as  a  distress  for  rent  any 
cattle  or  stock  of  their  tenants 
feeding  upon  any  common  ap- 
pendant or  appurtenant,  or  any 
ways  belonging  to  any  part  of  the 
premises  demised.  So,  rent  can- 
not issue  out  of  a  rent,  for  the 
statute  of  Westm.  3  (13  ed.  1  stat. 
1),  gives  an  assize  m  certo  loco 
capiendo;  but  a  rent  cannot  be 
put  in  view.  Bro.  Assize,  pi.  3. 
So  it  is  of  tithes,  for  a  reservation 
of  rent  upon  a  lease  of  them  is  not 
good,  hecause  there  is  no  place  up- 
on which  the  distress  can  be  taken, 
nor  any  land  to  be  put  in  view  to 
the  recognitors,  or  of  which  they 
may  give  hini  seizin.  Jewel's  Case, 
5  Co.  3 ;  Cro.  Jac.  Ill,  173.  But  it 
has  been  decreed  in  equity,  that 
where  a  rent-charge  of  wL  was  de- 
vised out  of  a  rectory,  the  glebe 
whereof  amounted  hut  to  40s,  per 
annum,  that  the  whole  rectory 
should  be  liable  to  the  jjayment  of 
the  rent ;  and  the  proprietor  of  the 
rectory  was  decreed  to  pay  the  ar- 


1018 


Eent. 


[§  445. 


important.'    Eent  must  always  be  a  profit,  but  it  is  not 


rears  of  the  rent  and  costs.  Thom- 
cide  V.  Allinton,  Chan.  Ca.  79; 
GUb.  on  Rents,  32.  A  rent  cannot 
issue  out  of  a  hundred,  fair,  office, 
&c.,  for  these  were  instituted  for 
particular  purposes,  and  are  for 
public  utiUty.  So  of  an  advowson, 
in  which  the  patron  has  no  interest 
but  to  appoint  an  able  and  fit  per- 
son to  the  church,  without  making 
any  profit  to  himself.  But,  though 
a  reversion  or  remainder  be  incor- 
poreal, and  can  pass  only  by  grant, 
yet  a  rent  reserved  upon  a  grant 
of  them  is  good ;  for  though  the 
grantor  has  no  remedy  for  them 
during  the  continuance  of  the  par- 
ticular estate,  yet,  since  they  relate 
to  lands  which  were  originally 
granted  to  make  profit  of,  the 
judges  have  gone  as  far  as  they 
could  to  pursue  the  intention  of 
Such  original  donations,  and  there- 
fore have  admitted  such  reserva- 
tions to  be  good  immediately,  since 
the  lands  in  which  the  grantor  had 
the  reversion  were  originally  given 
for  that  purpose,  viz. ,  to  make  prof- 
it of.  And  this  constniction  is 
the  more  reasonable,  because  in 
this  case  there  is  a  remedy  by  dis- 
tress for  all  the  arrears,  when  the 
reversion  executes  by  the  determin- 
ation of  the  particular  estate, 
■whereas  there  is  no  possibility  of 
such  remedy  in  the  case  of  tithes, 
commons,  fairs,  &c.  Bro.  title 
Distress,  47  ;  Perk,  sect.  627,  Co. 
62 ;  Capel's  Case,  Co.  Litt.  47  a ; 
Gilb.  on  Rents,  24.  So,  and  for  the 
same  reason  it  is,  if  the  lord  grants 
his  seignory,  reserving  rent ;  for 
here  is  a  prospect,  though  it  be  dis- 
tant, of  a  remedy  by  distress  upon 
the  escheat  of  the  tenancy.  "  2 
Roll.  Abr.  446.  So,  if  there  be 
lord  mesne  and  tenant,  and  the 
mesne  make  a  gift  in  tail  of  the 
mesnalty,  reserving  rent,  this  is  a 
good  reservation,  because  the  ten- 
ancy ihay  escheat  to  the  donee, 
and"  then  the  doner  shall  have  rem- 
edy by  distress  for  all  the  arrears. 
Also,  if  a  lease  be  made  for  years 
of  an  incorporeal  inheritance, 
which  lies  only  in  g^ant,  reserving 
rent,  such  reservation  is  good  to 
bind  the  lessee  by  way  of  contract, 
for  the  non-performance  of  which 


the  lessor  shall  have  an  action  of 
debt,  because,  if  the  lessee  under- 
takes to  pay  such  an  annual  sum 
by  his  deed,  such  undertaking 
gives  the  lessor  a  right  to  it,  and 
the  law  in  all  cases  gives  remedies 
adequate  and  correspondent  to 
every  man's  right.  Jewel's  Case, 
5  Coke,  3;  3  Saund.  303.  As, 
when  in  covenant,  for  non-pay- 
ment of  rent,  the  plaintifif  declared 
that  he  was  seized  of  tithes,  and 
by  indenture  demised  them  to,  the 
defendant,  rendering  rent,  which 
he  covenanted  to  pay,  and  for  the 
non-payment  thereof  the  plaintiff 
brought  his  action  ;  the  defendant 
having  pleaded  eviction,  to  which 
the  plaintiff  demurred ;  it  was 
adjudged  for  the  defendant ;  the 
court  holding  that  this  was  rent, 
and  that  the  eviction  was  a  sus- 
pension of  it,  and  therefore  that 
the  plea  was  good.  Dalston  v. 
Reeve,  Ld.  Raym.  77.  If  a  man 
makes  a  lease  of  Blackacre  to  com- 
mence in  futuro,  and  of  White- 
acre  to  begin  in  prcesenti,  render- 
ing rent,  payable  at  Michaelmas, 
before  the  commencement  of  the 
term  of  Blackacre,  this  is  a  good 
reservation  immediately,  for  it  is 
but  one  entire  rent,  and  as  such  is 
payable  according  to  the  reserva- 
tion. Fallstaff's  Case,  3  RoUe's  R. 
467.  So  it  is,  if  a  man  grants  a 
futmre  interest  in  land,  as,  if  it  be 
a  lease  for  years,  to  commence  five 
years  after  the  making  of  the 
lease,  the  lessor  may  reserve  a  rent 
immediately,  because  this  is  a  good 
contract  to  oblige  the  lessee,  and 
to  ground  an  action  of  debt ;  and 
the  lessor  may  likewise  have  his 
remedy  by  distress  for  the  arrears 
when  the  lessee  comes  into  posses- 
sion. 2  RoUe's  Abr.  446 ;  Plow. 
423  ;  2  RoUe's  Rep.  407.  A  I6ase  of 
the  vesture  or  herbage  of  land, 
reserving  rent,  is  good,  because  the 
lessor  may  come  upon  the  land  to 
distrain  the  lessee's  beasts  feeding 
thereon.  Co.  Litt.  47.  Also  the 
king  may  reserve  rent  out  of  an 
incorporeal  inheritance,  because 
by  his  prerogative  he  may  distrain 
in  all  the  lands  of  his  lessee  for 
such  rent ;  and  therefore,  since  he 
has  a  remedy  for  the  rent,  there  ig 


>  "WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  336. 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


Definition. 


1019 


essential  that  it  should  consist  of  a  payment  in  money, 
as  a  reservation  of  any  species  of  property,  as  hens,  cattle, 
horses,  grain,  &c.,  may  constitute  a  rent,  as  they  are 
treated  by  the  law  as  profits  ; '  so  may  the  rendition  of 
services."  Thus,  services,  such  as  cleaning  a  church,' 
shearing  sheep,*  and  carrying  coals,"  reserved  in  a  lease  as 
compensetion  for  the  use  of  premises,  have  been  held  to 
amount  to  a  sufficient  reservation  of  rent.  But  a  reserva- 
tion of  a  part  of  the  profits'  of  the  premises  is  not  a  reser- 
vation of  rent  within  the  strict  legal  meaning  of  the  term. ' 
But  this  profit,  in  whatever  it  consists,  must  be  certain,  or 
capable  of  being  reduced  to  certainty  by  either  party,  and 
must  issue  yearly,  although  there  is  no  necessity  that  it 
should  issue  every  successive  year ;  it  may  be  reserved 
every  second,  third,  or  fourth  year,  yet,  as  it  is  to  be  pro- 
duced out  of  the  profits  of  land  and  tenements,  as  a  recom- 
pencefor  their  enjoyment,  it  ought  to  be  reserved  annually 


no  reason  that  such  reservation 
should  not  be  good.  Co.  Litt.  47  ; 
Lord  Mountjoy's  Case,  5  Coke,  4  a. 
But,  if  the  king's  tenant  makes  a 
lease  of  the  lands  not  holden  of  the 
king,  either  for  years  or  at  will, 
the  king  cannot  distrain  such  lands 
in  the  hands  of  the  under-lessee. 
So,  if  they  are  extended  on  an 
elegit,  or  if  they  be  xmder  seques- 
tration ;  but  in  this  last  case,  upon 
application  to  the  Court  of  Chan- 
cery, liberty  will  be  given  to  dis- 
train without  iacurring  any  con- 
tempt of  that  court.  Atty.-Genl. 
V.  Mayor  of  Coventry,  1  P.  Wms. 
306."  I  have  given  this  extract 
from  Bacon,  because  it  illustrates 
the  questions  under  consideration 
more  clearly  than  is  done  by  any 
other  author,  and  because  of  the 
high  authority  of  his  work. 

'  Co.  Litt.  142  a. 

°  In  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Chadwick, 
24  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  349,  it  was  held 
that  rent  payable  in  fowls,  and 
services  with  carriage  and  horses, 
was  apportionable.  In  Cross  v. 
Lome,  14  Md.  347,  the  rent  of  a 
qiiarry  at  a  certain  number  of 
cents  a  perch,  the  am^ount  varying 
with  the  quality,  was  held  to  be  a 
certain  money  rent  within  the 
statute.  Where  rent  is  payable  in 
grain  raised  upon  the  land,  the 
title  thereto  does  not  vest  in  the 


landlord    until    it     is    delivered. 
Bums  V.  Cooper,  31  Penn.  St.  436. 

'  Edney  v.  Benham,  7  Q.  B.  796. 

"Co.  Litt.  96  a. 

« Doe  V.  Morse,  1  B.  &  Ad.  3?5. 

*  A  reservation  of  herbage  is  not 
rent,  Co.  Litt.  143  a ;  3  Blackstone's 
Com.  41,  but  a  royalty  payable  to 
the  owner  of  a  quarry,  or  of  a 
brick-field,  is  a  rent,  altliough  the 
land  is  being  consumed.  Eegina 
V.  Westbrook,  10  Q.  B.  178 ;  Barns 
V.  Lea,  13  W.  R.  535;  Reg.  v. 
Everest,  10  Q.  B.  178 ;  Daniel  v. 
Gracie,  6  id.  145.  In  Boudette  v. 
Pierce,  50  Vt.  212,  the  plaintifiE 
permitted  the  defendant  to  erect  a 
hovel  on  his  premises  to  keep  his 
colt  in,  the  plaintiff  to  have  the 
manure  for  the  rent.  Subsequently 
the  defendant  enlarged  the  hovel 
and  moved  into  it  with  his  family, 
and  the  plaintiff  continued  to 
receive  the  manure.  The  defend- 
ant continued  to  occupy  the 
premises  for  about  a  year  and  a 
half,  the  plaintiff  taking  the  mar 
nure  each  spring ;  and  then  the 
plaintiff  requested  the  defendant  to 
remove,  without  stating  when. 
July  10th  he  gave  the  defendant 
iiotice  to  quit  at  once,  and  July 
14th  brought  ejectment  against 
him,  but  the  court  held  that  a 
tenancy  from  year  to  year  existed, 
and  the  notice  was  insufficient. 


1020 


Eent. 


[§445. 


as  the  profits  arise  and  are  renewed  annually.  But,  it 
seems  that,  if  the  sum  to  be  paid  is  susceptible  of  being 
reduced  to  an  annual  rent,  it  is  sufficient.'  So,  too,  the 
rent  must  issue  out  of  land  or  tenements,  corporeal  merely, 
or  rather  "from  some  inheritance  whereunto  the  owner 
or  grantee  of  the  rent  may  have  recourse  to  distrain," " 


'  The  Queen  v.  Westbrook,  10  Q. 
B.  In  Eex  v.  Mirfleld,  10  East,  319, 
the  saleable  underwoods  produced 
no  profits  until  the  twenty-first 
year,  yet  it  was  held  that  they 
might  be  rated  under  the  statute 
according  to  the  value  they  might 
be  worth  to  rent  for  a  lease  of  the 
duration  of  their  intended  growth. 
Woodfall's  L.  &  T.  336.  When  a 
lease  was  made,  and  a  rent  re- 
served of  one  bale  of  cottott  for 
each  twenty  acres  cultivated,  it 
was  held  that  although  the  value 
was  not  fixed  it  was  sufficiently 
certain,  because  susceptible  of  as- 
certainment, and  that  a  distress 
would  lie  for  the  rent.  Brooks  v. 
Cunningham,  49  Miss.  108.  Say 
the  coiMt  in  the  last  named  case ; 
"  Distress  for  rent  will  obtain 
where  produce  is  agreed  to  be 
paid,  though  the  value  is  not  fixed 
and  certain,  if  the,  amount  is  so 
stipulated  as  to  make  it  capable 
of  ascertainment  by  calculation. 
*  *  Cotton  has  a  certain  com- 
mercial value  from  day  to  day, 
and  its  price,  with  other  products, 
stocks  and  coin,  are  quoted  by  tel- 
egraph throughout  the  country 
daily.  The  value  of  the  rent, 
therefore,  was  capable  of  exact 
and  positive  calculation.  In  a 
coal-mining  lease,  the  lessees 
agreed  to  sink  a  shaft  in  the  land 
and  mine  coal  within  a  year  from 
its  date,  and,  in  default  thereof,  to 
pay  the  lessor  $100  a  month  tmtil 
they  should  put  such  shaft  into 
operation ;  further,  that  they  would 
mine  coal  enough  so  that  the  roy- 
alty thereon,  at  twenty-five  cents 
a  ton,  should  amount  to  $1,200,  and 
that  if  they  failed  so  to  do,  they 
would  pay  that  sum  in  equal 
monthly  instalments  of  $100  each ; 
all  such  payments  to  be  applied  to 
rent  or  royalty.  Held,  that  under 
the  second  laranch  of  the  contract, 
the  lessees  were  bound  to  the  pay- 
ment of  the  fixed  minimum  rent 
of  $100  per  month,  in  any 'event, 


after  they  had  sunk  a  shaft,  &c., 
and  were  mining  coal,  and  to  the 
payment  of  a  royalty  of  twenty- 
five  cents  per  ton,  with  the  agree- 
ment, however,  that  if  the  royalty 
upon  the  coal  mined  in  any  one 
year,  at  the  rate  aforesaid,  should 
amount  in  the  aggregate  to  more 
than  the  sum  of  $1,200,  the  mini- 
mum rent  of  $100  per  month 
should  be  applied  in  payment  of 
such  aggregate  sum,  and  the  les- 
sees should  be  required  to  pay  only 
the  excess  of  the  royalty,  as  such, 
over  and  above  the  said  sum  of 
$1,200.  Watson  Coal  &  Mining 
Co.  V.  Casteel,  73  Ind.  296.  A  sim- 
ple general  hiring  of  a  pasture  for 
one  season  terminates  by  its  own 
terms ;  there  need  be  no  notice 
that  the  stock-owner  will  not  want 
the  pasture  another  year.  So, 
where  lands  owned  by  A,  B,  and 
others  was  enclosed  in  a  common 
field,  and  A  hired  of  B  his  right  to 
pasture  therein  for  a  year,  but  the 
next  year  put  in  only  his  own  pro- 
portion of  cattle  to  which  he  was 
entitled  as  owner, — it  was  held 
that  there  was  no  implied  holding 
over  under  the  former  tenancy. 
Fort  V.  McGrath,  7  lU.  App.  802. 
Where  a  lease  covenanted  that  the 
tenant  should  remove  all  rubbish 
from  the  leased  premises,  and  sur- 
render them  in  as  good  condition 
as  when  granted,  it  was  held  that 
he  was  bound  to  remove  only  the 
rubbish  accumulating  during  his 
own  term,  and  not  that  left  upon 
the  premises  by  a  former  tenant. 
Coppinger  v.  Armstrong,  8  HI. 
App.  210. 

«  Gilbert  on  Eents,  20.  But  in 
Pennsylvania  it  is  held,  that  where 
chattels  are  leased  with  land  the 
rent  is  distrainable,  the  same  as 
rent  from  lands  and  tenements 
alone.  Mickles  v.  Miles,  1  Grant's 
Cas.  (Penn.)  320.  But,  generally, 
it  is  held  that,  while  personal 
chattels  may  be  leased,  yet,  if  land 
and  chattels,  as  a  house  and  f  urni- 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


DEPmiTION. 


1021 


and  must  issue  out  of  the  thing  demised '  and  not  be 
a  part  of  it.  Thus,  a  part  of  the  herbage  of  lands  can- 
not be  reserved  as  rent,"  but  a  royalty  payable  upon 
the  stone  or  ore  taken  from  the  land,  or  upon  brick  made 
from  the  earth  thereon,  is  held  to  be  a  rent  that  may  be 
distrained  for  although  the  soil  is  gradually  exhausted, 
and  the  royalty  is  not  paid  out  of  the  renewing  produce  of 
the  land  ; '  but  if,  instead  Of  a  reservation  of  a  certain 
sum  to  be  paid  for  each  perch  of  stone,  ton  of  ore,  or 
thousand  of  brick,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  stone,  ore, 
or  bricks,  are  reserved  for  the  use  of  the  premises,  it  is 
not  a  reservation  of  rent  according  to  the  strict  legal  im- 
port of  the  term,  and  a  distress  will  not  lie  for  its  non- 
payment.* Rent  may  be  reserved  out  of  reversions  and 
and  remainders,  and  will  become  operative  when  such 
remainder  or  reversion  comes  into  possession,' but  pay- 
ments reserved  on  a  lease  of  an  incorporeal  hereditament 
are  not  rent ;  °  neither  is  a  reservation  by  the  way  of  rent 


ture,  are  leased  together,  the  rent 
issues  out  of  the  land ;  and  that,  if 
there  is  no  means  for  apportioning 
the  compensation  to  be  paid  to  each 
kind,  there  can  be  no  distress,  but 
otherwise  when  the  rent  can  be  ap- 
portioned. Coen  V.  Coutner,  18 
Penn.  St.  439  ;  Fay  v.  HaUoran,  35 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  S95 ;  Morris  v.  TiU- 
son,  81  111.  607;  Sutlifl  v.  Atwood, 
15  Ohio  St.  186 ;  Spencer's  Case,  5 
Coke,  16  a;  Salmon  v.  Matthews, 
8  M.  &  W.  837 ;  Newton  v.  Wilson, 
3  H.  &  M.  (Va.)  470.  It  seems 
that  rent  may  be  reserved  by  the 
sovereign  out  of  an  incorporeal 
hereditament,  Co.  Litt.  47  a;  and, 
in  any  event,  a  sum  reserved  for 
the  use  of  things  personal  may  be 
recovered  by  action  upon  the  con- 
tract, but  cannot  be  distrained  for 
as  "rent."  Gilbert  on  Rents,  30; 
Co.  Litt.  47  a.  If  lands  and  per- 
sonal chattels,  as,  lands  and  sheep, 
or  farming  implements,  or  a  house 
and  furniture,  &c. ,  are  leased,  the 
rent  issues  out  of  the  land  or  house, 
and  the  lessor,  in  bringing  an  ac- 
tion upon  the  lease,  may  declare, 
as  on  a  demise  of  the  lancfs  or  house 
merely,  and  need  not  notice  the 
personal  chattels.  Farwell  v. 
Dickinson,  6  B.  &  C.  251 ;  Fay  v. 
Halloran,  ante. 


'  If  two  pieces  of  land  are  leased, 
to  only  one  of  which  the  landlord 
has  title,  or  an  interest  that  will 
sustain  a  lease,  the  rent  issues  out 
of  that  part  of  the  premises  to 
which  he  has  title.  Croom  v.  Tal- 
dot.  Comb.  338 ;  Neale  v.  Macken- 
zie, 1  M.  &  W.  747 ;  Anonymous, 
Mo.  50,  pi.  150. 

*  Co.  Litt.  143  a;  2  Blackstone's 
Com.  41. 

'Eegina  v.  Westbrook,  10  Q.  B. 
178 ;  Daniel  v.  Gracie,  6  Q.  B.  145  ; 
Pilhtt  V.  Forrest,  11  id.  949  ;  Ed- 
monds V.  Eastwood,  3  H.  &  N.  836. 

■"Co.  Litt.  143  a. 

'  Gilbert  on  Rents,  23 ;  Capell's 
Case,  1  Coke,  63  b. 

*  Gardner  v.  Williamson,  3  B.  & 
Ad.  336.  Although  the  sum  pay- 
able in  respect  of  a  lease  of  an  ad- 
vowson,  or  the  like,  has  acquired 
the  name  of  rent,  yet,  strictly,  a 
rent  cannot  issue  out  of  an  incor- 
poreal hereditament,  Lovelaw  v. 
Reynolds,  Noy.  59 ;  Neale  v.  Mac- 
kenzie, 2  Cr.  M.  &.  R.  34 ;  1  Piatt 
on  Leases,  37,  but  it  may  be  recov- 
ered on  the  express  covenant  for 
payment,  or  on  the  reddendum, 
which  amounts  to  an  impUed  cov- 
enant, but  will  not  warrant  a  dis- 
tress. Gardiner  v.  Williamson, 
a,nte  ;  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  37. 


1022 


Eent. 


[§  445. 


on  personal  chattels  alone, '  but  where  personal  chattels  are 
leased  -with  the  land,  as,  in  the  case  of  a  lease  of  fur- 
nished houses,  or  a  farm  with  the  stock,  or  a  mill  with  the 
tools  and  machinery,  the  rent  is  treated  as  issuing  out  of 
the  land  alone  ; '  and  such  is  also  the  case  where  a  room 
or  a  definite  part  of  it  is  leased  to  a  person,  together  with 
a  supply  of  power  for  the  propulsion  of  machinery,  °  but 
not  where  standing-room  for  machinery,  together  with 
power  for  its  propulsion,  is  let,  because  there  is  no  demise 
of  the  room  or  any  particular  part  of  it/  A  payment  re- 
served as  a  compensation  for  a  mere  license  to  use  premises 
for  a  special  purpose,  is  not  rent,"  nor  payments  reserved 
on  3j  mere  agreement  for  a  lease  where  there  has  been  no 
payment  of  rent,  or  tenancy  in  fact  created  ; '  and  even 
where  a  tenant  holds  over,  although  he  is  treated  as  hold- 
ing upon  the  terms  of  the  former  demise,  yet  there  can 
be  no  distress  for  rent  until  a  new  tenancy  has  been  ex- 
pressly or  impliedly  created.'  Payments  reserved  upon  the 


'  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke,  16  a. 

2  Salmon  v.  Matthews,  8  M.  & 
W.  837  ;  CoUins  v.  Harding,  Cro. 
Eliz.  607  :  Farwell  v.  Dickenson,  6 
B.  &  C.  351.  If  lands  and  goods, 
or  lands  and  a  stock  of  sheep  and 
cattle,  or  a  house  and  furniture,  are 
to  be  leased  for  a  gross  rent,  the 
rent  issues  out  of  the  land  alone, 
Eede  v.  Lawnse,  Dyer,  312  h ;  New- 
man V.  Anderton,  3  B.  &  P.  234  ; 
Bird  V.  Higginson,  3  Ad.  &  El.  696; 
Groom  v.  Talbot,  238  ;  CoUins  v. 
Harding,  Cro.  Eliz.  '606  ;  Farwell 
■V.  Dickenson,  6  B.  &  C.  351 ;  Shury 
V.  Brown,  Latch.  99 ;  Walsh  v. 
Pemberton,  Selw.  N.  P.  603  ;  Spen- 
cer's Case,  5  Coke,  16  a;  Emat' 
V.  Cole,  Cro.  Ehz,  255,  andifaman 
leases  two  distinct  parcels  of  land, 
in  one  of  which  he  has  no  interest, 
the  whole  rent  issues  out  of  the 
other  parcel.  FarweU  v.  Dicken- 
son, ante ;  Neale  v.  Mackenzie,  1 
M.  &  W.  747  ;  Anonymous,  Mo.  50 
pi.  150.  But  where  distinct  rent 
for  each  parcel  is  reserved,  or 
where  the  rent  is  apportionable,  or 
where,  as  may  be  done,  the  lease 
charges  a  certeiin  part  of  the  prem- 
ises with  the  rent,  in  exoneration 
of  the  rest,  the  rule  is  otherwise. 
Winter's    Case,    3    Dyer,    308    b; 


Knight  V.  Beach,  3  Leon,  134 ; 
ICnight's  Case,  5  Coke,  54  b.  So  a 
rent  may  be  reserved  out  of  one 
parcel  for  one  period,  and  out  of 
another  for  another  period. 
Knight's  Case,  ante,  or  one  rent 
may  be  reserved  for  one  year,  and 
another  for  another  year,  for  the 
same  premises.  Smith  v.  Newsam, 
Yelv.  189 ;  Holland  v.  Hopkins,  4 
Leon,  8.  So  one  rent  may  be  re- 
served subject  to  a  condition  pre- 
cedent, another  to  a  condition  sub- 
sequent, and  another  absolutely 
and  to  be  paid  at  one  day  and 
place,  or  at  several  days  and 
places,  and  a  surrender  of  one  par- 
cel under  such  leases,  does  not  op- 
erate as  an  extinguishment  of  the 
rents  of  the  others.  Knight's  Case, 
ante. 

^Selby  V.  Greaves,  L.  R.,  3  C.  P. 
594. 

■•  Hancock  v.  Austin,  14  C.  B. 
N.  S.  684. 

'  Hancock  v.  Austin,  ante. 

^  Regnant  v.  Porter,  7  Bing.  451 ; 
Hegan  v.  Johnson,  3  Taunt.  148 ; 
Dunk  V.  Hunter,  5  B.  &  Aid.  333. 

'  Jumer  v.  Clegg,  1  Moo.  &  R. 
313;  Alford  v.  Vickery,  Car.  & 
M.  380 ;  SulUvan  v.  Bishop,  3  C. 
&  P.  359. 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


Depinition. 


1023 


assignment  of  a  lease  are  not  rent ; '  but,  while  such  pay- 
ments  are  not  rent,  so  that  a  distress  will  lie  therefor,  yet 
they  may  be  recovered  under  the  contract  by  action  there- 
on." Payments  in  addition  to  the  rent  reserved  in  the 
lease,  which  the  lessee,  for  any  cause,  agrees  to  pay  for  the 
balance  of  the  term,  are  not  recoverable  as  rent,  although 
the  word  rent  is  used  ;  the  agreement  is  a  mere  personal 
contract  to  pay  an  additional  sum,'  and  the  same  is  true 
of  an  agreement  to  pay  a  certain  sum  "  over  and  above 
the  rent."  *  The  most  important  bearing  of  the  technical 
distinctions  between  rent  as  such  and  a  payment  reserved 
that  is  not  technically  rent,  consists  in  the  fact  that  in 
the  one  case  a  distress  lies,  and  in  the  other  it  does  not. 
But  in  all  cases,  the  sum  reserved  in  the  lease,  whether  it  is 
to  be  treated  as  strictly  rent  or  a  mere  personal  agreement 
can  be  recovered  in  an  action  upon  the  contract,  and  the 
party  is  not  absolved  from  its  payment,  because  it  is  not 

nauts  to  pay  yearly  over  and 
above  six  shillings,  or  any  other 
sum,  a  couple  of  capons,  or  the 
like,  the  latter  is  not  treated  as  a 
part  of  the  rent,  but  as  a  sum  or 
thing  in  gross,  Morris  v.  Antro- 
bus,  Hardr.  325 ;  Lambert  v.  Mor- 
ris, 2  M.  &  W.  333 ;  Hoby  v.  Roe- 
buck, 7  Taunt.  157  ;  Danellan  v. 
Reed,  3  B.  &  Ad.  899.  and  the 
same  was  held  where  the  lessor 
agreed  with  th«  assignee  of  a  lease 
to  have  the  house  on  the  terms 
mentioned  in  the  lease,  and  to  pay 
£8  10s.  over  and  above  the  rent, 
annually,  towards  the  good  will. 
Smith  v.  Mapleback,  ante.  So, 
also,  where  the  tenant,  in  consid- 
eration of  certain  improvements 
made  by  the  landlord,  agreed  to 
pay  £5  over  and  above  the  rent. 
Danellan  v.  Reed,  ante.  In  all 
these  cases,  that  can  only  be  treat- 
ed as  rent  which  is  provided  for 
in  the  lease  as  rent,  and  the  other 
sums  pass  to  the  executor,  while 
the  rent  passes  to  the  heirs  or  re- 
versioners. Danellan  v.  Reed, 
ante ;  Hoby  v.  Roebuck,  ante. 
And  in  the  case  of  the  bankruptcy 
of  the  lessee,  his  assignees  are  not 
liable  to  pay  any  more  than  the 
original  sum,  or  that  which  is 
properly  rent.  Lambert  v.  Norris, 
ante. 


'  Preece  v.  Corrie,  5  Bing.  24 ; 
Poultney  v.  Holmes,  1  Stra.  405  ; 
Parmeter  v.  Webber,  8  Taunt.  593. 

« Witton  V.  Bye,  Cro.  Jac.  486  ; 
Preece  v.  Corrie,  ante  ;   Winton  v. 

Pinlmey,    2    Lev.   80;    v. 

Cooper,  2  Wils.  375;  Lloyd  v. 
Langford,  2  Mod.  174;  Co.  Litt. 
47  a.  But  neither  at  the  common 
law,  Preece  v.  Corrie,  ante  :  Par- 
meter  V.  Webber,  8  Taunt.  593, 
nor  under  the  stat.  4  Geo.  2,  chap. 
28,  is  it  the  subject  of  a  distress. 
WoTlaston  v.  Hakewell,  3  Scott, 
593. 

'  Lambert  v.  Norris,  2  M.  &  W. 
333 ;  Hoby  v.  Roebuck,  7  Taunt. 
157 ;  Danellan  v.  Reed,  3  B.  &  Ad. 
899;  Foquet  v.  Moor,  7  Exchq. 
870.  In  Hatherton  v.  Bradbum, 
13  Sim.  599,  this  was    ?    ? 

^  Smith  V.  Mapleback,  1  T.  R. 
441 ;  Morris  v.  Antrobus,  Hardr. 
385.  In  Miner's  Bank  v.  HeUner, 
47  Penn.  St.  453,  the  lease  con- 
tained a  stipulation  for  the  repay- 
ment of  an  improvement  iund  by 
"an  additional  rent  of  ten  per 
cent,  on  all  coals  taken  out."  The 
court  held  that  this  additional 
sum  was  not  rent,  but  a  mere 
agreement  for  the  repayment  of  a 
loan.  If  rent  is  reserved  in  a  lease 
by  the  ordinary  words  of  reserva- 
tion, "yielding  and  paying,"  or 
"rendering,"  and  the  lessee  cove- 


1024  Eent.  [§  446. 

technically  rent.  The  distinction  also  becomes  impor- 
tant in  adjusting  the  rights  of  executors  and  reversioners, 
and  those  who  come  into  the  rights  of  the  lease  by  oper- 
ation of  law.' 

Sec.  446.  Bands  of  rent.— At  common  law  there  are 
three  kinds  of  rent,  to  wit :  rent-service,  rent-charge, 
and  rent-seek.  Eent-service  is  so  called  because  it  has 
some  corporeal  service  incident  to  it,  as  at  the  least, 
fealty,"  or  fealty  and  ten  shillings  rent ;  and  for  these,  if 
they  are  in  arrear,  the  landlord  may  distrain,  whether 
such  power  is  reserved  in  the  lease  or  not.'  A  rent 
charge  is  where  land  is  charged  with  a  rent  by  deed  or 
will,  with  power  to  distrain  therefor ;  and  the  owner  of 
the  rent  has  no  reversion  in  the  land  :  as,  where  land  is 
conveyed  in  fee,  reserving  a  certain  rent  payable  out  of 
the  same,  with  a  clause  of  distress,  that  if  the  rent  is  in 
arrear  for  a  certain  number  of  days  it  shall  be  lawful  to 
distrain  for  the  same.  In  such  case,  the  land  is  liable  to 
the  distress  by  virtue  of  the  clause  in  the  deed,  and  it  is 
because  the  land  is  charged  with  a  distress  that  it  is 
called  a  rent-charge.*  A  fee  farm  rent  is  a  rent-charge 
reserved  on  a  grant  in  fee.  The  name  is  founded  on  the 
perpetuity  of  the  rent  or  service,  and  not  on  the  amount ; " 
and  this  species  of  tenancy  still  exists  in  this  country.' 
Eent-seck  or  barren  rent  is  in  effect  nothing  more  than  a 
rent  reserved  by  deed  or  wiU,  without  any  clause  of  dis- 

'  See  the  last  note.  N.  Y.  33.    But  in  Pennsylvania  a 

^  Gilbert  on  Bents,  9 ;   Co.  Ldtt.  ground  rent  is  held  to  be  a  rent- 

87  b ;  Laugher  v.  Humphrey,  Cro.  service,  and   not    a   rent-charge, 

Eliz.  534.  and  a  release  of  a  part  of  the  land 

*  Litt.  §  315  ;  Finlay's  L.  &  T.  from  the  rent  releases  so  much  o£ 
337.  the  rent.     Ingersoll  v.  Sargeant,  1 

*  Gilbert  on  Rents,  17 ;  Wood-  Whart.  (Penn.)  337.  It  is  a  sepa- 
f all's  L.  &  T.  337 ;  Smith's  L.  &  rate  estate  from  the  ownership  of 
T.  113-116  ;  Bradbury  v.  Wright,  the  fcround,  and  the  owner  of  the 
3  Doug.  638 ;  Co.  Litt.  143  b.  rent  is  not  charged  with  notice  of 
Eent  reserved  upon  manor  leases  the  sub-division  of  the  land  and 
in  New  York  is  held  to  be  a  rent-  the  rates  that  are  made  among 
charge.  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Chad-  the  owners.  McQuigley  v.  Mor- 
wick,  34  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  333.  ton,  39  Penn.  St.  31. 

'  The  Governors  of  Christ's  Hos-  "  Alexander    v.    Warrance,    17 

pital  V.  HarrUd,  3  M.  &  G.  713  n.;  Mo.  338.     The  difference  between 

Co.  Litt.  143  b.    Rent  reserved  up-  rents  seek,  rents  assize,  fee  farm 

on  a  conveyance  in  fee  is  a  rent-  rents,  &c.,  was  abolished  by  4  Geo. 

charge   and    not    a    rent-service.  3,  c.   38,  and    by  that   statute  a 

Van  Rensselaer  v.   Chadwick,  33  right  of   distress  was    given  for 


CHAP.  xLi.]         Payable  m  Advance.  1025 

tress,  and  this  is  the  only  difference  between  it  and  a  rent- 
charge.'  Eents  of  assize  are  the  certain  established  rents 
of  ancient  tenants  paid  in  a  set  quantity  of  money  or 
provisions.  It  is  called  "rent-assize,"  because  it  has 
been  assized  or  made  certain,  to  distinguish  it  from 
vedditus,  mohilis,  or  variable  rent,  that  rose  and  fell 
according  to  circumstances."  Quit  rent  is  a  certain  rent 
reserved,  payable  yearly,  whereby  the  tenant  goes  quit 
of  aU  other  service.  Old  rent  is  such  yearly  rent,  neither 
more  nor  less,  as  has  always  been  paid.  Improved  rent  is 
wherethe  old  rent  has  been  raised.  A  fine  or  premium 
given  by  the  lessee  to  the  lessor  at  the  time  of  taking  or 
renewing  a  lease,  is  in  the  nature  of  a  fore-hand  rent, 
and  is  considered  as  an  improved  rent.°  Eack  rent  is 
rent  supposed  to  be  of  the  full  value  of  the  tenement,  or 
nearly  so.* 

Sec.  447.  Rents  payable  inj  advance.— Although,  ordi- 
narily, rent  does  not  accrue  as  a  debt  until  the  lessee  has 
enjoyed  the  use  of  the  land,'  yet  if  the  lease  contains  a 
stipulation  that  the  rent  shaU  be  payable  in  advance,  it 
becomes  a  debt  upon  the  day  when,  by  the  terms  of  the 
lease,  it  becomes  payable,  even  though  the  tenant  has  not 
enjoyed  the  use  of  the  premises.  In  other  words,  where 
the  lease  provides  that  the  rent  shall  be  paid  in  advance 
the  provision  is  binding,  and  the  rent  becomes  due  before 
the  tenant  has  enjoyed  the  use,  and  an  action  may  be 
maintained  or  a  distress  made  therefqr."    When  rent  is 

rents  seek  and  assize,  as  in  the  576 ;  Giles  v.  Comstock,  4  N.  Y- 

case  of  rents  reserved  upon  lease.  370 ;  Jenner  v.  Clegg,  1  Moo.  & 

'  Gilbert  on  Rents,  38 ;  Cornell  R.  213 ;   Lee  v.  Smith,  9  Exchq. 

V.  Lamb,  4  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  653.    But  663 ;    Smith's  L.   &    T.   318.     fii 

a  right  to  distrain  for  such  rent  is  Witty  v.  Williams,  18  W.  R.  755, 

given   by  4   Geo.  3,  c.  38,  s.  5.  the  lease  provided  that  the  tenant 

Cuthbert     v.    Kuhn,    3    Whart.  shotdd    pay  the  last    half   year's 

(Penn.)  357 ;  People  v.  Haskins,  7  rent  in   advance.     It  was  held, 

Wend.  (N.  Y.)463.  that  the  landlord  was  entitled  to 

^  Finlay's  L.  &  T.  231.  distrain  for  it  at  any  time  between 

'  Wynne    v.   Bampton,   3    Aik.  the  date  of  the  commencement  of 

473 ;  Irish  Society  v.  Needham,  1  the  last  half  year  and  the  termina- 

T.  R.  486 ;  SouthaU  v.  Leadbitter,  tion  of  the  tenancy,  without  de- 

3  T.  R.  461.  mand,    prior   to    the  commence- 

■*  Co.  Litt.  395.  ment  of  the  last  half  year.    Con- 

'  Boardman  v.  Osborn,  33  Pick.  way  v.  Starkweather,  1  Den.  (N. 

(Mass.)  295.  Y.)  113.     In  Clark  v.  Halford,  3 

« Russell  V.  Doty,  4  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  C.  &  K.  540,  the  leage  contained  o 


1026  Eents.    ■  ,,  [§44r, 

reserved  in  advance  it  should  be  clearly  expressed ;  as, 
"yielding  and  paying  therefor  the  yearly  rent  of  one 
hundred  dollars,  payable  quarterly  (or  weekly,  semi- 
annually, &c.),  in  advance,"  or  other  words  that  clearly 
indicate  that  the  advance  payments  are  intended  to  apply 
to  the  rent  for  the  whole  term  ;  and  a  lease  under  which 
premises  were  let  for  one  year,  "at  the  3'early  rent  of 
£80,  the  rent  to  commence  at  Michaelmas  and  to  be  paid 
three  months  in  advance,"  on  taking  possession,  was  held 
not  to  apply  to  rent  subsequently  accruing.'  Where  a 
tenant  pays  the  rent  of  a  building  in  advance,  and  it  is 
destroyed  by  fire  or  other  casualty,  but  is  rebuilt  by  the 
lessor  before  the  term  expires,  the  tenant  is  entitled  to  its 
occupancy  for  the  balance  of  the  term  ;  and  if  the  lessor 
lets.it  to  another  person,  the  tenant  may  recover  of  the 
landlord  all  the  rent  paid  by  him  for  the  period  subse- 
quent to  the  second  lease."  But  as  previously  stated, 
unless  there  is  an  express  provision  as  to  the  time  when 
the  rent  is  to  commence,  and  of  payment,  rent  does  not 
commence  until  the  tenant's  right  of  possession  attaches, 
nor  become  due  until  the  tenant  has  enjoyed  the  use  of 
the  premises ;  and  a  weekly,  monthly,  quarterly,  or  yearly 
rent,  is  not  payable  until  the  end  of  the  week,  month, 
quarter  or  year,'  unless  there  is  a  custom  of  the  country, 
by  which  the  rent  may  be  due  in  advance,  or  quarterly, 
or  otherwise,*  in  which  case,  unless  excluded  by  the  terms 
of  the  lease,  it  vpill  control  it  in  this  respect.'  Where,  by 
the  terms  of  the  lease,  rent  is  payable,  and  has  been  paid 
by  the  tenant,  in  advance,  he  is  not  liable  for  the  same 
rent  to  the  grantee  of  the  lessor  who  had  no  notice  of 

condition  that  the  rent  should  be  '  Ward  r.  Bull,  1  Fla.  371. 

paid  in  advance  if  the  landlord  re-  ^  Bentley    v.    SiU,    35  111.   414 ; 

quired  it,  nothing  being  said  as  to  Finch    v.    Miller,    5    C.    B.   428 ; 

the    day    upon    which    payment  Bpardnian    v.    Osborn,  33    Pick, 

should  be  made.    After  a  quarter  (Mass.)  395  ;  Coomber  v.  Howard, 

had    expired,    the     landlord  de-  1  C.   B.   440 ;    Turner  v.   Allday, 

manded  a  quarter's  rent  only,  and  Tyr.  &  Gr.  819 ;  Garvey  v.  Dobyns, 

it  was  held  that  he  could  not  dis-  8  Mo.  213  ;    Menough's  Appeal,  5 

train  for  the  rent  for  the  whole  W.  &  S.  (Penn.)  433 ;  Raymond  t. 

year,  but  only  for  the  quarter  de-  Thomas,  34  Ind.  476. 

manded.     But  see    Pemberton  v.  *BuckIy  t.  Taylor,  3  T.  E.  600; 

Van  Rensselaer,  1   Wend.   (N.  Y.)  Eidgeley  v.    Stilwell,  37   Mo.  428. 

307,  and  GUes  v.  Comstock,  4  (N.  » In  Doe  v.  Benson,  4  B.  &  Aid. 

Y.)  370.  588. 
'  Holland  V.  Falser,  3  Starkie,  161. 


CHAP.  XLi.]  Payable  in  Advance.  1027 

such  payment,'  and  such  is  the  case  where  the  rent  has 
been  in  fact  paid  in  advance,  although  the  lease  does 
not  provide  for  such  advance  payment.  But  such  pay- 
ments are  treated  rather  as  advances  on  account  of  rent, 
than  as  an  actual  payment  of  rent,  and  consti- 
tute an  equitable  defence  to  an  action  for  the  rent 
on  account  of  which  it  was  advanced;'  as  strictly,  a 
payment  of  rent  before  the  rent  day  arrives  is  treated  as 
a  voluntary  payment,  which  does  not  operate  as  a 
discharge.'  The  fact  that  rent  is  payable  in  specific  prop- 
erty, as  grain  and  the  like,  does  not,  in  the  absence  of  a 
contrary  custom,  change  the  rule  as  to  the  time  of  pay- 
ment.* Where  the  rent  is  expressly  made  payable  in 
advance,  the  practice  of  the  landlord  to  receive  the  rent 
at  the  end  of  the  quarter  instead  of  at  the  beginning  of 
it,  does  not  overcome  the  effect  of  the  provision,  or 
deprive  the  landlord  of  the  right  at  any  time  to  insist 
upon  advance  payment. '  But  where  rent  is  made  payable 
generally,  no  time  being  fixed  for  its  payment,  an  agree- 
ment to  pay  it  weekly,  monthly,  quarterly  or  otherwise, 
in  advance,  or  at  the  end  of  the  week,  month,  or  quarter, 
&c.,  may  be  impUed  from  the  practice  of  the  parties  in 
that  respect;  as,  that  the  landlord  has  demanded,  and 
the  tenant  frequently  paid  it  weekly,  monthly,  quarterly, 
«fec.,  in  advance,  or  at  the  end  of  the  week,  month,  or 
quarter.'  Where  a  lease  is  made  April  1st,  for  one  year 
or  any  other  number  of  years,  at  a  certain  yearly  rent, 
"payable  quarterly  on  the  first  days  of  April,  July,  Octo- 
ber and  January,"  the  rent  is  payable  in  advance.' 
Where  rent  is  paid  in  advance,  according  to  the  terms  of 
the  lease,  for  the  entire  year  or  term,  and  before  the  term 
is  ended  the  land  is  sold  either  by  the  lessor  or  at  sheriff's 
sale,  the  purchaser  cannot  recover  the  rents  for  the 
balance  of  the  term.'    But  where  the  rent  is  payable 

'  stone    V.   Patterson,   19    Pick.  '  Giles  v.  Comstock,  ante. 

(Mass.)  476.  «L.  I.  R.  E.  Co.  v.  Marquand,  6 

»Nash  V.  Gray,  3  F.  &  F.  391 ;  N.  Y.  Leg.  Obs.   160.     See  also, 

Eockingham  v.  Pennice,  1  Swanst.  Clarke  v.  Halford,  ante. 

345  n.  '  Deyo  v.  Bleakly,  34  Barb.  (N. 

^Cline's  Case,  10  Coke,  137  a;  Y.)  9. 

Cromwell  v.   Andrews,  Cro.  EUz.  '  Farmer's  Bank  v.  Ege,  9  Watts 

113.  (Penn.)436. 

*  Dixon  V.  Nicholls,  39  111.  373, 


1028  Rent.  [§  M8. 

generally,  payment  in  advance  does  not  shield  the  tenant 
from  accounting  to  an  execution  creditor,  or  purchaser, 
for  rent  accruing  subsequent  to  the  levy  and  sale.  Thus, 
where  the  tenant  under  such  a  lease  accepted  orders  drawn 
by  the  landlord,  in  anticipation  of  rent  which  was  not 
due  at  the  time  of  acceptance,  and  in  advance  of  the  time 
of  payment,  it  was  held  that  he  was  nevertheless  liable  to 
the  purchaser  of  the  estate  at  sheriff's  sale  for  the  rent 
subsequently  accruing,  even  though  such  orders  covered 
the  rent  for  a  considerable  period  that  had  not  expired  at 
the  time  of  sale,' 

Sec.  448.  Covenant  to  pay  rent.— If  rent  is  to  be  paid 
under  the  lease  it  should  be  so  expressed  and  a  covenant 
to  that  end  should  be  inserted  therein,  as,  in  the  absence 
of  such  special  covenant,  the  lessee  may  relieve  himself 
from  all  responsibiUty  for  the  rent,  except  during  the 
period  of  his  actual  occupancy,  by  assigning  his  term," 
and  this  too  without  any  reference  to  the  question 
whether  the  assignee  is  responsible  or  wholly  irrespon- 
sible,' or  whether  he  intends  to  occupy  the  premises  or  to 
remain  in  the  country  or  not,  as  an  assignment  to  a 
person  about  to  leave  the  country  permanently  has  been 
good,  in  the  absence  of  such  a  covenant,  to  release  the 
lessee  from  liability  for  subsequeAtly  accruing  rent.' 
For  this  reason,  as  well  as  for  others  hereafter  stated,  it 
wiU  be  seen  that  a  special  covenant  to  pay  i-ent  is  of  vital 
importance  to  the  lessor.  A  lease  may  be  good  without 
any  reservation  of  rent,  as  in  such  cases  the  law  reserves 
the  fealty ;  °  but  generally,  when  no  valuable  return  is  to 
be  made  for  the  use  of  the  premises,  a  nominal  sum  is, 
or  should  be,  reserved  to  indicate  the  relation  of  tenant 
and  reversioner ;  and  it  was  formerly  the  practice  to 

'Martin  v.    Martin,  7   Md.  368,         « Knight's   Case,  5   Coke,  55   a. 

^  Staines  v.  Morris,  1  Ves.  &  B.  If,  by  the  terms  of  a  lease,  no  rent 

11  ;  Pitcher  v.  Toney,  4  Mod.  71  ;  is  payable,  or  due,  none  can   be 

Treackle  v.   Coke,   1    Vem.    165.  recovered,  even  though  the  lessee 

'  An  assignment  to  a  pauper  has  has  had  some  beneficial  enjoyment, 

this  effedt,  Taylor  v.  Shum,  1  B.  &  and  did  not  give  up  the  premises 

P.  21,  or  a  bankrupt.     Onslow  v.  upon     non-performance     of    the 

Currie,  3  Madd.  330.  conditions  by  the  lessor,    Epping 

*Dalstoa  V,  Beeve,  1  Ld.  Kayd,  v.  Devanny,  88  Ga.  422. 
77. 


CHAP.  xLi.]  Covenant  to  Pay.  1029 

reserve  a  peppetcorn.'  No  formal  reddendum  in  neces- 
sary in  a  lease,  as  any  words  that  indicate  that  rent  was 
intended  to  be  reserved  is  sufficient,  but  the  reservation 
should  be  certain  as  to  the  amount  and  time  of  payment ; ' 
but  in  this,  as  in  the  case  of  other  contracts,  the  maxim 
id  certum  est  quod  certum  reddi  partut  appUes,  and  if 
there  is  anything  in  the  reservation  from  or  by  which 
certainty  as  to  the  amount  of  rent  or  time  of  payment 
can  be  arrived  at,  it  is  sufficient.'  So  if  rent  is  made 
payable  half-yearly,  quarterly,  &c.,  although  the  specific 
day  upon  which  it  is  to  beconie  payable  is  not  named, 
yet  it  is  sufficient,  as  it  can  be  certainly  ascertained.*  If 
the  time  of  payment  is  left  optional  with  the  lessor,  as,  if 
it  is  to  be  paid  "yearly,  semi-annually,  or  quarterly,  if 
required,"  the  lessor,  by  receiving  the  rent  yearly,  so  far 
fixes  the  time  of  payment  that  he  cannot  afterwards 
change  it  without  a  previous  demand.  Thus,  if,  under 
such  a  lease,  the  landlord  has  received  the  rent  semi- 
annually, he  cannot,  without  a  previous  demand,  distrain 
for  a  quarter's  rent,  nor  bring  an  action  therefor.  And, 
if  he  has  really  elected  to  receive  it  semi-annually,  it  is 
not  believed  that  he  can,  even  by  a  demand  and  notice  to 
the  tenant,  make  it  payable  at  any  other  time.'    When 

'  Collins  V.  Harding,  13  Coke,  57 ;  within  the  time,  was  liable  for  the 

5  Piatt  on  Leases,  83.  rent  for  the  year.     Matthews  t. 

s  Parker  v.  Harris,  4  Mod.  79  ;  Morris,  31  Ark.  233. 
Gilbert  on  Eents,  9  ;  Bains  v.  Knel-  "  Brooks  v.  Cunningham,  48  Miss, 
ler,  4  C.  &  P.  4.  Where  a  person  108  ;  Orby  v.  Mohun,  3  Bro.  P.  C. 
in  possession  of  lands  either  ex-  348.  As  where  a  certain  number 
pressly  or  impliedly  agrees  to  pay  of  bushels  of  grain  is  reserved,  or 
rent  therefor  unless  a  certain  con-  a  certain  sum  for  each  perch  of 
tingenoy  transpires,  unless  such  stone  quarried,  or  for  each  cubic 
contingency  exists  he  is  liable  upon  yard  of  brick-earth,  &o. ,  it  is  suffl- 
his  proniis«  to  pay  rent  for  the  cient,  because  the  reservation  can 
whole  period  of  his  occupancy.  be  reduced  to  a  certainty.  Ed- 
Thus  where  land  was  sold  at  a  tax  monds  v.  Eastwood,  3  H.  &.  N. 
sale,  and  a  short  time  previous  to  811 ;  Daniel  v.  Grain,  6  Q.  B.  145 ; 
the  expiration  of  the  time  of  re-  PoUitt  v.  Forrest,  11  id.  649  ;  Bow- 
demption  the  person  in  possession  ers  v.  Nixon,  13  id.  546. 
induced  the  purchaser  to  extend  ■*  3  Rolle's  Abr.  (M),  pi.  2  ;  HUl  v. 
the  time  of  redemption  to  the  fol-  Grange,  Plowd,  164. 
lowing  fall,  and  told  thepurchaser  '  Mallam  v.  Arden,  10  Bing.  290. 
that,  unless  he  redeemed  the  land  In  this  case  the  court  declined  to 
by  the  time  that  the  term  of  re-  decide  whether  the  lessor,  by  re- 
demption expired,  he  would  be  ceiving  the  rent  _  quarterly,  must 
willing  to  pay  rent  for  the  whole  be  treated  as  having  elected  so  to 
year,  and  Iw  was  permitted  to  re-  receive  it,  or  whether,  even  if 
main  in  possession,  it  was  held  he  had  elected  so  to  receive 
that  he,  having  failed  to  redeem  it  he  could  afterwards  change 
II.— 13 


1030 


Ebnt. 


[§448. 


the  lease  provides  that  the  rent  shall  be  payable  quarterly, 
and  that  the  first  payment  shall  be  made  on  a  certam  day, 
before  the  arrival  of  which  two  quarters  have  elapsed, 
still,  but  one  quarter's  rent  then  becomes  due,  and  the 
first  quarter's  rent  is  treated  either  as  having  been 
foi'given  altogether  or  postponed  until  the  end  of 
the  term.'  The  words  "yielding  and  paying"  are  the 
words  usually  employed  for  the  reservation  of  rent,  and 
an  implied  covenant  to  pay  the  rent  arises  from  those 
words  when  the  lease  is  executed  by  both  parties,'  but 
not  otherwise."  A  covenant  for  the  payment  of  rent 
runs  with  the  land,*  and  binds  aU  persons  who 
hold  under  the  lessee  by  indenture  "  or  as  assignee  of  the 
lease,"  whether  the  assignment  is  the  voluntary  act  of 
the  lessee  or  is  effected  by  operation  of  law.'  But  an 
assignee  is  not  liable  for  rent  that  accrued  before 
the  assignment  was  made,'  nor  can  he  be  made  liable 
therefor  upon  an  express  promise  to  pay  it,  unless  a.  good 
consideration  for  such  promise  is  shown.     Thus,  in  the 


the  time  of  payment,  but  did 
hold  that  in  either  case  he  could 
not  change  the  time  without 
a  previous  demand,  and  that  bring- 
ing a  distress  did  not  amount  to  a 
demand. 

'  Hutchins  v.  Scott,  2  M.  &  "W. 
808,  by  an  agreement  dated  Sep- 
tember 8th,  the  defendant  agreed 
to  let  a  house  to  the  plaintiff  for 
seven  years  at  an  annual  rent, 
payable  quarterly,  the  first  pay- 
ment to  be  made  March  25th  fol- 
lowing. After  March  25th  the  de- 
fendant distrained  for  two  quar- 
ters' rent.  In  an  action  against 
him  for  a  wrongful  distress,  the 
court  held  that  only  one  quarter's 
rent  was  due  March  25th,  and  that 
the  distress  was  illegal  as  to  the 
other  quarter.  If  the  landlord,  in 
pursuance  of  a  power  reserved  to 
him  in  the  lease,  puts  an  end  to  the 
term  before  the  rent  becomes  due, 
he  cannot  recover  any  rent,  either 
upon  the  lease,  or  for  use  and  oc- 
cupation. Nicholson  v.  Munigle, 
6  Allen  (Mass.)  215.  And  the  same 
rule  prevails  whether  the  lease  is 
in  writing  or  by  parol.  Fuller  v. 
Sweet,  6  Allen  (Mass.)  219  n. 

^Iggulden  V.  May,  9  Ves.  330; 
Webb  V,    Russell,  3    T.  E.  402; 


Church  V.  Brown,  15  Ves.  364; 
Vyvyan  v.  Arthur,  1  B.  &  C.  416. 
But  contra,  see  Steward  v.  Wol- 
veridge,  9  Bing.  67 ;  Newton  V. 
Osborn,  Sty.  387. 

^  Piatt  on  Covenants,  50. 

*  Sandwith  v.  DeSilver,  1  Browne 
(PenH.)  331 ;  Hurst  v.  Rodney,  1 
Wash.  (Va.)  375  ;  Main  v.  Feathers, 
31  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  646;  Van- 
Rensselaer  v.    Hays,  19  N.  Y.  68. 

'  Hurst  V.  Rodney,  ante  ;  Carley 
V.  Lewis,  24  Ind.  23. 

'Bret  V.  Cumberland,  Gro.  Jac. 
533  ;  Porter  v.  Swetnam,  Sty.  406. 
The  transfer  of  an  estate  to  which 
a  privilege  is  annexed  by  lease  as 
appurtenant  to  the  estate,  is 
sufficient  to  charge  the  person 
acquiring  the  principal  estate  with 
rent,  as  assignee  of  the  interest 
conveyed  by  the  lease.  Provost  v. 
Calder,  3  Wend.  (N.  Y.)517. 

'  A  purchaser  at  shenff's  sale  of 
the  interest  of  a  lessee  in  demised 
premises  is  liable  as  assignee  for 
after-accruing  rent,  whether  he 
occupies  the  premises,  or  not. 
Smith  V.  Brinker,  17  Mo.  148. 

» Lawlor  v.  MoUer,  4  Bos.  (N.  Y. 
Superior  Ct.)  149. 


CHAP.  XLi.]  Covenant  to  Pay.  1031 

case  last  cited,  the  assignee  of  a  lease,  under  which  there , 
was  a  considerable  sum  due  from  the  assignor,  for  back 
rent,  promised  the  landlord  that  if  he  would  allow  him  to 
remain  he  would  pay  the  back  rent  due  from  the  assignor, 
it  was  held  that  he  could  not  be  held  liable  upon  such 
promise.  An  under-tenant  is  not  ordinarily  liable  to  the 
landlord,  in  any  form  of  action,  for  rent.  He  can  be  made 
liable  only  to  his  lessor,  or  the  assignees  of  such  lessor.' 
But  the  original  lessee  is  liable  therefor,  even  in  an  action 
for  use  and  occupation,  the  same  as  though  he 
occupied  the  premises  himself."  When  rent  is  payable 
weekly,  quarterly,  or  annually,  the  tenant  has  the, 
whole  of  the  last  day  of  the  term  in  which  to  pay  it  but 
where,  by  the  terms  of  the  lease,  the  rent  is  rnade  pay- 
able weekly,  in  advance,  the  tenant  has  the  whole  of  the 
eighth  day  to  pay  it  in."  Where  the  lease  commences 
on  a  given  day,  as,  on  the  10th  day  of  January,  1878,  and 
the  rent  is  payable  annually,  the  rent  is  in  arrear  after 
12  o'clock  at  night  of  January  9th,  18T9.*  There  is  a 
broad  distinction  between  a  reservation  of  an  entire  rent 
for  several  distinct  parcels  of  land,  and  one  where  the 
rent  is  apportioned  to  each  distinct  parcel.  Thus,  if 
several  tenements  are  demised  for  the  yearly  rent  of  one 
thousand  dollars,  to  wit :  five  hundred  dollars  for  one 
tenement,  two  hundred  dollars  for  another,  and  three 
hundred  dollars  for  the  other,  the  rent  is  entire,  and  the 
non-payment  of  the  rent  for  one  of  the  tenements,  where 
the  lease  provides  for  a  forfeiture  for  non-payment  of  the 
rent,  operates  as  a  forfeiture  of  the  rights  of  the  tenants 
as  to  all ;  but  where  several  tenements  are  leased  and  the 
rent  is  apportioned  to  each,  as,  for  one  of  them  five  hun- 
dred dollars,  for  another  two  hundred  dollars,  and  the 

'  Bedford  v.   Terhune,  30  N.  Y,  thenceforth  quarterly.      Wolf  v. 

453  ;  Dartmouth  College  v.  Clou^,  Merritt,   21    Wend.    (N.    Y.)  836. 

8  N.  H.  32.                             .  But    in    a  later    case,   Curtis    v. 

^  Moffatt  V.  Smith,  4  N.  Y.  126.  Miller,  17  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  477,  where 

«  Sherlock    v.    Thayer,   4  Mich.  the  lease  began  upon  the  10th  day 

355.     In  New  York  City,  under  a  of  the  month,  for  a  term  of  years 

lease  for  less  than  a  year,  payable  ending  ,  on  the    first    day  of  the 

quarterly,  as  from  Oct.  1st  to  May  month,  a   contrary   doctrine  was 

1st,  the  rent  is  held  to  be  payable  held. 

on  the  yearly  quarter-days,  that  is,  *  Donaldson  v.  Smith,  1  Ashm. 

one   month's   rent  Nov.   1st,   and  (Penn.)  197. 


1032  Ebnt.  [§  448. 

other  three  hundred  dollars,  the  entire  sum  not  being 
at  first  reserved,  the  lease  as  a  separate  demise  operates 
of  each  tenement,  and,  although  there  is  a  reservation 
of  a  right  of  re-  entry  for  the  non-payment  of  the  rent, 
yet  the  landlord  can  re-enter  only  as  to  those  tenements 
for  which  the  rent  is  unpaid ;  and  if  the  rent  of  one  or 
more  of  them  has  been  paid,  the  tenant  can  hold  that 
or  those  for  which  the  rent  is  paid,  and  the  landlord  can 
re- enter  only  the  others,"  the  rule  being  that,  if  two  or 
more  tenements  are  demised  at  distinct  rents,  each  is 
charged  only  with  the  rent  reserved  for  it ; '  but,  if  an 
entire  rent  is  reserved,  although  it  is  in  a  subsequent  part 
of  the  lease  distributed  to  each  tenement  in  several  distinct 
sums,  each  tenement  is  charged  with  the  whole  rent,"  and 
it  is  for  this  reason  that  a  lease  of  premises  at  an  entire 
rent,  to  only  a  part  of  which  the  lessor  has  title,  or  a 
right  to  demise,  is  at  least  voidable  :  *  but,  if  a  tenant 
goes  into  possession  of  a  part  of  the  premises  he  is 
liable  for  the  whole  rent,  unless  it  is  apportionable." 
Where  there  is  a  special  covenant  to  pay  rent,  the  fact  that 
the  tenant  never  occupied  the  premises,  or  in  any  manner 
took  possession  thereof  or  asserted  a  right  thereto,  will 
not  relieve  him  from  liability  upon  his  covenant,  but  he 
will  be  held  to  pay  the  rent  for  the  full  term  ;  °  and 
the  same  rule  also  prevails,  although  the  tenant  has  lost 
the  use  of  the  premises  by  the  casualties  of  war,'  or  by 
fire,  even  though  the  premises  were  insured,  and  the 
landlord  has  received  the  insurance  money  and  refuses  to 
apply  it  to  a  restoration  of  the  buildings."    In  the  case 

'  Gilbert  on  Rents,  35,  36  ;  Tan-  '  Coy  v.  Downie,  14Fla.  544. 

field  V.  Rogers,  Cro.  Eliz.  341.  « Fowler   v.    Batt,  6  Mass.  63; 

'  Tanfield  v.  Rogers,  ante.  Fowler  v.  Glover,  4  Davis  Abr. 

'Gilbert  on  Rents,  34,  36.  383  ;  WaU  v.  Hind,  4  Gray  (Mass.) 

*  Griffith  V.  Lloyd,  3  Esp.  78.  256.    But  if  certain  rooms  in   a 
6  Commissioners  v.  O'Connor,  9  building  only  are  leased,  a  destruc- 

Irish  C.  L.  243.  ticfti  of  the  building  releases  the 

*  McGlynn  v.  Brock,  111  Mass.  tenant  from  the  payment  of  rent. 
319  ;  McMurphy  v.  Minot,  4  N.  H.  StackweU  v.Hunter,  11  Met.(Mass.) 
351.  But  in  such  a  case  it  is  com-  448 ;  Shawmut  Bank  v.  Boston, 
petent  to  investigate  the  landlord's  118  Mass.  135.  Bussman  v.  Gan- 
-titie,  and  if  he  had  no  power  to  ster,  73  Penn  St.  385.  In  Loflt  v. 
lea^  the  premises,  rent  cannot  be  Dennis,  1  E.  &  E.  474,  in  an  action 
recovered,  notwithstanding  the  for  use  and  occupation,  the  defend- 
covenant.  Fuller  ,  v.  Sweet,  30  ant  set  up  an  equitable  plea,  that 
Mich.  337.  being  tenants  to  the  pkintiff  of 


CHAP,  xu.]  Covenant  to  Pay.  1033 

of  a  demise  of  a  single  room,  or  of  a  part  of  the  upper 
stories  of  a  building,  there  being  no  demise  of  the  land, 
a  different  rule  prevails,  and  a  destruction  of  the  building 
by  fire  or  otherwise  releases  the  tenant  from  rent  from 
that  time.  Thus,  in  an  Oregon  case'  the  defendant 
leased  a  single  room  in  a  building,  which  during  the  term 
was  destroyed  by  fire.  In  an  action  to  recover  the  rent 
for  the  balance  of  the  term,  it  was  held  that  the  tenant 
was  not  liable  therefor.  Lord  J.,  in  substance,  said : 
"The  authorities  indicate  that  there  is  an  exception  to 
this  rule  and  that  the  destruction  of  the  building  does  not 
discharge  the  liability  of  the  tenant  for  rent,  where  the 
lease  is  of  an  upper  story,  or  basement  or  apartment 
in  a  building,  because  in  such  case  it  is  not  the  intention 
of  the  lessor  to  grant  an  interest  in  the  land,  except  so  far 
as  is  necessary  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  rooms  demised, 
and  when  tJie  rooms  are  destroyed,  there  is  nothing  left 
upon  which  the  demise  can  operate,  and  the  lease  termi- 
nates with  the  estate ;  as  is  the  case  where  the  estate  is 
washed  away  by  the  sea,  or  swallowed  by  an  earthquake. " ' 
the  lease  purports  to  demise  the  land  with  the  building 
or  a  part  of  it,  there  is  then  something  upon  which  the 
lease  can  operate  although  the  building  is  destroyed,  and 
in  such  case  liability  for  rent  continues."  Nor,  under 
such  a  covenant,  can  the  lessee  relieve  himself  from  lia- 
bihty  for  rent  during  the  whdle  term  by  assigning  the 
lease,*  or  in  any  way  short  of  an  actual  eviction  by  the 

the  premises  and  buildings  thereon,  '  Harrington  v.  Watson,  11  Ore- 

they  had  agreed  to  pay   a   rent  gon,  67  ;  50  Am.  Rep.  465. 

larger  than  they  would  have  done  '  Whitaker  v.  Hawley,  25  Kan. 

had  the  buildings  not  been  stand-  674  ;  37  Am.  Rep.  277  ;  Ainsworth 

ing  on'  the  land  ;    and   that  the  v.  Ritt,  38   Cal.  89  ;  Shawmut  Na^ 

plaintiffs  had  insured  the  buildings  tional  Bank  v.Boston.l  18  Mass.  128 ; 

against  fire,  by  a  policy  which  al-  McMiUen  v.  Solomon,  42  Ala.  356  ; 

lowed  the  insurers  to  reinstate  or  Stackwellv.  Hunter,  11  Met.  (Mass.) 

pay  for  the  buildings,  by  reason  of  449;Grave8  v.Bendan,  26  N.  Y.  498; 

which  the  defendants  did  not  in-  Kerr  v.  Merchants'  Exchange,  3 

sure,  as  they  otherwise  would  have  Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  316  ;  Womack  v. 

done.    That   the   buildings   were  McQuarry,  28  Ind.  103 ;  Winters  v. 

destroyed  by  fire,  and  that  the  in-  Cornish,   5   Ohio,  477  ;  Austin  v. 

surerspaid  the  loss  to  the  lessors.  Field,  7  Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  34. 

who  then  refused  to  restore  the  "  Sheppard's  Touchstone,  90. 

buildings,  whereby  the  value  of  *  Harmony  Lodge  v.  White,  24 

the  defendant's  tenancy  was  great-  Ohio  St.  569;  Snyder  v.  Middle- 

ly  reduced.    Held,  that  the  plea  ton,  4  Phila.  (Penn.)  343 ;  Pitcher 

did  not  disclose  any  defence  to  the  v.  Toney,  12  Mod.  23  ;  Partridge 

action,  either  legal  or  equitable.  v.  Shaw,  17  Vt.  626  ;    Lloyd  v. 


1034  Rent.  [§  449. 

landlord,  or  some  person  acting  under  him,  or  by  a  sur- 
render of  the  premises  which  is  accepted  by  the  landlord," 
or  he  quits  the  possession  for  a  vahd  legal  cause ."  Where 
there  is  a  special  covenant  to  pay  rent,  the  lessor,  in  case 
of  an  assignment  by  the  lessee,  acquires  a  double 
security  for  the  rent,  as,  by  reason  of  the  privity  of  estate 
created  by  the  assigiiment  he  may  proceed  against  either 
the  lessee  or  his  assignee  therefor  ;  °  and  being  a  covenant 
that  runs  with  the  land,  an  assignee  of  the  lessor  acquires 
the  same  remedies  to  enforce  it,  and  the  same  rights  that 
the  lessor  would  have  had  if  he  had  not  assigned  the  lease.' 
A  surety,  or  guarantor,  who  endorses  upon  the  lease,  a 
guaranty  for  "the  payment  of  the  rent,  is  responsible 
only  for  the  rent  accruing  during  the  term.  But  if  the 
lease  provides  for  the  payment  of  the  same  rent,  for  such 
further  time  as  the  lessee  may  occupy,  he  is  responsible  for 
all  the  rent  accruing  during  the  tenant's  occupancy." 

Sec.  449.  When  and  where  rent  is  payable.— Demand  to 
create  forfeiture.— The  tenant  has  the  whole  of  the  day 
upon  which  the  rent  falls  due  in  which  to  pay  it,  and  it 
is  not  in  arrears  until  after  twelve  o'clock  at  night  of 
such  day,  although  strictly  it  is  due  in  the  morning  of 
the  day  fixed  for  payment ;  °  but,  except  in  the  case  of  a 

Cozens,    2    Ashm.    (Penn.)     131.  term  of  one  year "  from  a  certain 

And  in  Pingrey  v.  Watkins,  15  Vt.  date,  paying  a  certain  rent  per  an- 

479,  it  was  held  that  the  landlord  num.      The  lessee  covenanted  to 

might  recover  of  an  assignee  of  a  pay  the  rent  in  equal  monthly  in- 

part  of  the  premises  a  share  of  the  stalments  in  advance  on  the  first 

rent  reserved  in  the  lease,  proper-  day  of  each    month,   diu'ing  the 

tionedtothe  relative  value  of  the  tenancy  "and  to  pay  the  rent  as 

part  assigned.    Fletcher  v.  McFar-  above  stated  during  the  term,  and 

lane,  13  Mass.  43.  also  the  rent  as  above  stated  for 

'  See  post.  Eviction,  Surrender,  such  further    time  as   the  lessee 

Mere  acceptance  of  rent  from  the  may   hold    the    same."     On    the 

assignee  of  a  lessee  does  not  dis-  back  of  the  lease  was  a  writing  by 

charge  the  lessee  from  his  cove-  which  the  signer   guaranteed   to 

nant.     Fletcher  v.  McFarlane,  13  the  lessor  "the  payments  of  the 

Mass.  43;  Dyer  v.  Wightman,  66  rent"  stipulated  in  the  lease.    It 

Penn.  St.    525 ;    Cleves   v.    WU-  was    held  that,"  if  the  lessee  held 

loughby,  7  Hill  (N.  Y.)  83.  over  after  the  expiration  of  the 

^  Wolveridge  v.  Stewart,  1  Cr.  year,  and  failed  to  pay  rent  for 

&  M.  644i  such  further  time,  the  guarantor 

3  Dolph  V.  White,  13  N.  Y.  296 ;  was  liable.    Rice  v.   Loomis,  139 

Pingney  v.  Watkins,  15  Vt.  479.  Mass.  303. 

*  Dolph  V.  White,  ante ;  Main  v.  '  Sherlock   v.  Thayer,  4    Mich. 

Feathers,  21  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  646.  355  ;    Duppa     v.   Mayo,    1  Wms. 

'  A  lease  of  a    house  was  exe-  Saund.  387 ;  Dibble  v.  Bowater,  3 

cuted,  the  lessee  "to  hold  for  the  E.  &  B.  564;  Cutting  v.  Derby,  3 


CHAP.  XLi.]     When  and  Where  Payable. 


1035 


personal  tender  to  the  landlord,  where  a  forfeiture  is 
provided  for  in  the  lease,  or  a  right  of  re-entry  is  given, 
in  order  to  save  the  forfeiture  the  tenant  should  tender 
the  rent,  or  be  present  at  the  place  appointed  in  the  lease 
for  payment,  or  in  case  no  place  is  named  in  the  lease, 


W.  Bl.  1077;  Smith  v.  Ayles- 
worth,  40  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  104; 
Academy  of  Music  v.  Hackett,  3 
Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  217 ;  Orthout 
V.  Ballard,  41  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  33 ; 
Thomas  v.  Hayden,  19  Vt.  587. 
In  Ordway  v.  Bemmgton,  12  R.  I. 
319;  34  Am.  Rep.  646;  under  a 
lease  for  years  from  a  specified 
day,  payable  quarterly,  the  ques- 
tion arose  whether  the  rent  be- 
came due  upon  the  last  day  of  the 
quarter  so  that  it  was  attachable 
by  a  trustee  process  served  at  3:15 
on  the  afternoon  of  that  day. 
Said  DuR:fEE,  C.  J.  :  "This  ques- 
tion depends  on  another,  to  wit, 
whether  the  quarter  expired  on 
that  or  the  previous  day?  For  if 
the  quarter  expired  on  that  day, 
then  the  rent,  though  payable, 
was  not  due  until  after  midnight, 
and  until  due,  the  lessor  being 
owner  In  fee  of  the  premises  de- 
mised, it  was  not  personal  estate, 
but  the  lessor  dying,  it  would  have 
gone  as  realty  to  his  heirs." 
Glun's  case,  10  Rep.  127;  Rock- 
ingham V.  Penrice,  1  P.  Wms. 
177 ;  Norris  v.  Harrison,  3  Madd. 
368;  Duppa  v.  Mayo,  1  Wms. 
Saund.  383,  286,  and  note  13; 
note  to  ex  parte  Smyth,  1  Swanst. 
342;  3  Gfreenl.  Cruise,  *288-5. 
"Whether  the  quarter  expfred  De- 
cember 1st  or  November  30th,  de- 
Eends  on  the  construction  of  the 
sase.  The  lease,  as  we  have  seen, 
ran  "from  the  first  day  of  Sep- 
tember." If  the  first  day  of  Sep- 
tember is  included,  the  quarter  ex- 
pired November  isOth ;  if  it  is  ex- 
cluded, the  quarter  expired  De- 
cember 1.  The  day  is  to  be  in- 
cluded or  excluded  according  to 
the  apparent  intention  of  the 
parties  to  the  lease ;  but  if  the  de- 
mise ia  from  a  given  day  and  there 
is  nothing  else  to  indicate 
the  intention,  then,  unless  there 
is  some  particular  reason  for  hold- 
ing otherwise,  according  to  the 
weight  of  authority  we  think  the 
given  day  must  be  excluded.  4 
Greenl.    Cruise,    *59,    and    note ; 


Atkins  V.  Sleeper,  7  AUen  (Mass.) 
487 ;  FarweU  v.  Rogers,  4  Cush, 
(Mass.)  460,-    Bemis    v.   Leonard 
118  Mass.  503 ;  19  Am.  Rep.  470 
Bigelow  V.  Willson,  1  Pick.  (Mass. 
485  ;    Styles  v.  Wardle,  4  B.  &  C! 
908 ;    Clayton's   case,  5    Rep.  1 
Webb  V.  Fairmanner,  3  M.  &  W, 
478 ;  Millard  v.  WiUard,  3  R.  I.  43 
Handley  v.  Cunningham's  Trustee 
13  Bush.  (Ky.)  401 ;   Sheets  v.  Sel 
den's  Lessee,  3  WaU.  (U.  S.)  177 
190  ;  Weeks  v.  Hull,  19  Conn.  376 
Blake  v.  Crowninshield,  9  N.  H 
804.    The  case  of  Ackland  v.  Lut 
ley,  8  Ad.  &  El  879,  is  precisely  in 
point.      There    a    house  was   de- 
mised habendum   for  twenty-one 
years  from  March  35, 1809,  paying 
rent    on    certain    days  of  which 
March  25th  was  one,  and  it  was 
held  that  the  term  under  the  lease 
did  not   expire    tiU    the    end    of 
March  35,  1830.    Lord   Denman, 
in     delivering     judgment,    said : 
"The    general    understanding    is 
that  terms  for  years  last  during 
the  whole  anniversary  of  the  day 
from    which    they    are    granted. 
Indeed,  if  this  were  otherwise,  the 
last  day  on  which  rent  is  almost 
uniformly  made    payable,  would 
be    posterior  to    the  lease.      The 
affidavit  made  by  the  tenant  as 
garnishee  indicates  that   he  sup- 
posed the  quarter   ended  on  the 
last  day  of  November.     Why  he 
supposed  so  does  not  appear.    We 
do  not  think  we  can  rightly  let  his 
opinion    influence    our    decision. 
Our  decision  is  that  the  garnishee 
did  not  have  any  of  the  personal 
estate    of    the  defendants    or   of 
either  of  them  in  his  hands  until 
after  the  first  day  of  December, 
1877,  and  consequently  that  he  is 
liable  only     as    garnishee    in  the 
case  of  Markland  v.  Remington. 
In  commg  to  this  conclusion  we 
assume  that   the    lessor  was  the 
owner  in  fee  of  the  premises  de- 
mised.   If  he  was  merely  a  lease- 
holder we  should  have  to  consider 
the  case  in  another  light," 


1036 


Eent. 


[§449. 


upon  the  land,  because  the  land  is  regarded  as  the  debtor, 
at  a  convenient  place,  before  sunset  of  the  precise  day 
upon  which  the  rent  becomes  due,  with  the  money,  or,  if 
the  rent  is  payable  in  specific  articles,  with  the  property 
ready  to  pay  it.'  But,  except  where  otherwise  provided 
by  statute,  in  order  to  work  a  forfeiture  for  non-paynaent 
of  rent,  so  as  to  authorize  a  re-entry  by  the  landlord,  he 
must  have  demanded  the  precise  sum  due  for  the  last 
current  quarter,'  half  year,  or  year,  as  the  case  may  be, 
and  if  the  demand  included  any  portion  of  a  previous 
quarter,  half  year,  or  year,  it  is  bad.'  But  the  demand 
may  include  interest,  which  is  an  incident  of  the  rent.* 
So  the  rent  must  be  demanded  upon  the  precise  day 
when  it  becomes  due,"  and  a  demand  made  before  or  after 


'  Eemsen  v.  Conklin,  18  John. 
(N.  Y.)  450;  Lush  v.  Druse,  4 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  313  ;  Academy  of 
Music  V.  Hackett,  3  Hilt.  (N.  Y.) 
317.  Under  the  rule  that  the  de- 
mand must  be  made  at  the  most 
convenient  place  upon  the  land,  it 
follows  that  if  there  is  a  dwelling 
house  upon  the  land  the  demand 
must  be  made  there,  and  at  the 
front  door  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary 
that  the  demand  should  be  made 
in  the  hoiise,  and  the  landlord  need 
not  enter  the  house  for  that  pur- 
pose, even  though  the  door  is  open. 
If,  however,  the  tenant  meets  the 
laiidlord  either  on  or  off  the  land, 
a  personal  tender  of  the  rent  to  him 
or  his  ageilt  is  sufBcient,  because 
the  law  leans  against  forfeitures. 
Kinwelly  v.  Brandt,  Plowd,  70  a, 
b  ;  Doe  v.  Wandlass,  7  T.  R.  117  ; 
Mound's  Case,  7  Coke,  38.  But  the 
landlord  must  demand  the  rent 
upon  the  land,  or  at  the  place  of 
payment  designated  in  the  lease, 
whether  there  is  any  one  there  to 
pay  it  or  not,  and  a  personal  de- 
nmnd  made  off  the  land  is  not  suf- 
ficient. Mound's  Case,  7  Coke,  38 
h;  Forster  v.  Wandlass,  7  T.  E. 
117.  The  niceties  of  the  common 
law  in  this  respect  have  been 
greatly  obviated  by  statute  in 
many  of  the  States. 

^  In  Fabian's  Case,  1  Leon,  305  ; 
S.  C.  Cro.  Eliz.  309,  it  was  said 
that  the  landlord  must  demand  the 
precise  svun  due,  and  that  "  if  he 
demands  one  penny  more  or  less, 
it  will  be  ill."    See  also,  Connor  v. 


Bradley,  1  How.  (U.  S.)  311.  A  de- 
mand is  indispensable,  except 
where  the  statute  otherwise  pro- 
vides, or  where  the  lease  contains 
a  provision  expressly  dispensing 
witii  a  demand.  The  parties  may 
expressly,  by  a  provision  to  that 
effect,  d&pense  with  a  demand,  or 
may  waive  it.  Fifty  Associates  v. 
Howland,  5  Cush.  (Mass.)  214; 
Sweeney  v.  Garrett,  3  Dis.  (Ohio) 
601 ;  Doe  v.  Mastens,  3  B.  &  C. 
490.  And  even  where  a  forfeiture 
has  accrued  in  favor  of  the 
landlord,  he  may  waive  it,  either 
expressly  or  by  implication.  Grif- 
fith V.  Pritchard,  5  B.  &  Ad.  765 ; 
Green's  Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  3 ;  Camp 
V.  Pulver,  5  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  91  ;  Coon 
V.  Brickett,  3  N.  H.  163  ;  Garnhom 
V.  Finney,  40  Mo.  449  ;  Jackson  v. 
Brownson,  7  Dana  (Ky.)  327  ;  Cam- 
ber V.  Hackett,  6  Wis.  323.  See 
post,  FOEFEITUEE.  And  slight 
acts  on  his  part  will  have  that 
effect,  as  forfeitures  are  odious  to 
the  law.  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  468. 
And  for  the  same  reason,  the 
waiver  of  a  demand,  or  any  other 
act  essential  to  be  done  by  a  land- 
lord to  perfect  his  right  tore-enter, 
will  never  be  implied.  GaskeU  v. 
Trainer,  3  Cal.  334. 

2  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Jewett,  2  N. 

Y.   147 ; V.  Paul,  3  0.   &  P. 

613. 

*  People  V.  Dudley,  58  N.  Y.  338. 

«aun's  Case,  10  Coke,  128  a; 
Kirby  v.  Green,  2  Lutw.  1139  ;  Co. 
Litt.  203  a ;  HUl  v.  Grange,  Plowd. 
172  6;  Cropp  v.  Hambleton,  Cro. 


-CHAP  XLi.]      When  and  Where  Payable.  ' 


1037 


the  day  when  the  rent  becomes  due  is  not  sufficient  to 
defeat  the  tenant's  estate.'  So,  too,  the  demand  must  be 
made  such  a  time  before  sunset  as  to  allow  sufficient 
light  for  counting  the  money,"  and  the  petson  making 
the  demand  must  remain  upon  the  land  until  after  sun- 
set, and  actively  or  constructively  continue  the  demand 
until  after  that  time,  because  if  at  the  last  instant  the 
tenant  is  upon  the  land  ready  to  pay  the  rent,  the  land- 
lord must  be  there  ready  to  receive  it,  or  he  cannot  claim 
a  forfeiture."  Although,  as  previously  stated,  the  rent 
strictly  becomes  due  in  the  morning  of  the  day  fixed  for 
payment,  yet  a  demand  made  then,  or  even  in  the  after- 
noon of  such  a  day,  is  not  sufficient,  especially  unless  the 
landlord,  or  the  person  authorized  to  make  it,  remains 
upon  the  land  and  continues  the  demand  actually  or  con- 
structively until  after  sunset,*  and  this  is  the  rule,  even 


Eliz.  48 ;  Kidwelly  v.  Brand, 
Plowd.  70  a ;  Smith's  Case,  1  Leon, 
142  ;  Wood's  Case,  1  id.  180  ;  Con- 
nor V.  Bradley,  ante  ;  Bro.  tit.  De- 
mand, pi.  19. 

'  In  Forster  v.  Wandlass,  ante, 
the  landlord  brought  ejectment. 
The  lease  contained  a  provision  as 
follows  :  Provided  that,  if  it  shall 
happen  that  the  said  yearly  rents 
hereby  reserved,  or  any  part  there- 
of,  shall  be  behind  and  unpaid  by 
the  space  of  thirty  days  next  after 
the  said  days  of  payment,  &c.,  con- 
trary to  the  true  intent  and  mean- 
ing of  these  presents ;  or  in  case 
the  said  defendant,  his  executors, 
&c.,  shall,  at  any  time  during  the 
said  term,  alien,  &c. :  then,  and  in 
either  of  such  cases,  it  shall  and 
may  be  lawful  for  the  said  J.  &c., 
into  the  said  demised  premises  to 
re-enter,"  &c.  There  was  also  a 
special  covenant  by  the  tenant  to 
pay  rent.  The  landlord,  upon  the 
trial,  proved  a  demand  for  a  half 
year's  rent  after  the  day  upon 
which  it  became  due,  and  it  was 
held  that  the .  landlord  could  not, 
under  such  a  demand,  avail  him- 
self of  the  forfeiture. 

*Tinckler  v.  Prentice,  4  Taunt. 
649 ;  Mound's  Case,  7  Coke,  38  b ; 
Thompson  v.  Field,  Cro.  Jac.  499  ; 
Fabian's  Case,  1  Leon,  305 ;  Co. 
I;itt.  202  a;  Jackson  v.  Harrison, 
17  John.  (N.  Y.)  66  ;  Jones  v.  Reed, 
15  N.  H.  68. 


'  Motmd's  Case,  ante  ;  Fabian's 
Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  309  ;  Wood's  Case, 
4  Leon,  179  ;  Acocks  v.  PhilUps,  5 
H.  &  N.  183. 

^In  Acocks  V.  Phillips,  5  H.  & 
N.  183,  a  demand  was  made  at 
half -past  ten  in  the  morning.  The 
landlord  had  previously  demanded 
the  rent  by  mail,  and  the  tenant 
sent  back  a  verbal  message  to  the 
plaintiff  that  he  must  come  to  him. 
The  defendant  did  so,  and  the 
plaintiff  then  told  him  that  he 
could  not  pay  the  rent,  and  that  he 
might  "do  his  best  or  his  worst." 
At  half -past  ten  of  the  same  day 
the  defendant  went  upon  the  land 
and  demanded  the  rent  of  the 
plaintiff's  clerk,  but  did  not  remain 
upon  the  land,  or  continue  the 
demand  until  sunset.  On  a  subse- 
quent day  the  defendant  entered 
into  possession.  The  defendant 
brought  ejectment,  which  was  up- 
held, Maetin,  B.,  saying:  "The 
defendant  is  in  this  condition — hov 
entered  without  bringing  an  eject- 
ment, and  therefore  he  must  prove 
that  he  had  a  right  of  entry  at 
common  law.  The  rule  laid  down 
in  Co.  Litt.  203  a,  is,  that  the 
uttermost  time  for  the  demand  is  a 
convenient  time  before  the  last 
instant ;  and  it  is  stated  in  Wheel- 
don  V.  Paul,  8  C.  &  P.  613,  *  * 
that  the  tenant  has  tUl  sunset  of 
the  last  day  to  pay  the  rent.  The 
demand  was  therefore  bad."    In 


1038 


Rent. 


[§  449. 


though  the  tenant  has  previously  dedined  or  refused  to 
pay  the  rent,  and  has  told  the  landlord  he  might  do  "  his 
best  or  his  worst"  to  get  it.'  Therefore,  the  landlord 
must  show  not  only  that  a  demand  was  made,  but  also 
the  time  of  day,  and  the  place  upon  the  premises  where 
it  was  made,  in  order  that  it  may  be  ascertained  whether 


Wheeldon  v,  Paul,  ante,  a  demand 
made  at  one  o'clock  was  held  bad. 
In  Jackson  v.  Harrison,  17  John. 
(N.  Y.)  66,  it  appeared  that  the 
landlord's  agent  made  the  demand 
in  the  afternoon  of  the  day  upon 
which  the  rent  became  due.  'This 
was  held  bad,  Van  Ness,  J.,  say- 
ing :  "  The  agent  says  he  made  the 
demand  in  the  afternoon.  Now, 
this  may  have  been  immediately 
after  twelve  o'clock,  and  a  demand 
at  so  early  an  hour  would  not  be 
good.  'The  last  time  of  the  de- 
mand of  the  rent,'  says  Lord 
Coke,  '  is  such  a  convenient  time 
before  sunset  of  the  last  day  of 
payment  as  the  money  may  be 
numbered  and  received  ; '  and  it  is 
laid  down  in  Duppa  v.Mayo.l  Wms. 
Saund,  287,  by  Hale,  C.  B.,  that 
the  time  of  sunset  is  the  time  ap- 
pointed by  law  to  demand  rents, 
and  though  this  is  not  probably 
literally  correct,  yet,  it  serves  to 
show  that  the  demand  necessary 
to  be  made  to  create  a  forfeiture 
must  he  immediately  preceding  sun- 
set, so  that  the  money  may  be 
counted,  and  the  necessary  receipts 
or  acquittance  given,  while  there 
is  hght  enough  reasonably  to  do 
so."  See,  also,  Jones  v.  Reed,  15 
N.  H.  68,  where  a  similar  doctrine 
was  intimated,  although,  in  that 
case,  the  right  of  re-entry  was  not 
upheld,  because  the  rent  was 
tendered  to  the  landlord  before  the 
lapse  of  the  period  within  which 
the  forfeiture  would  attach.  See, 
also,  holding  that  the  demand 
must  be  made  as  stated  in  the  text, 
Gaskill  V.  Trainer,  3  Cal.  334 ;  Con- 
ner V.  Bradley,  1  How.  (U.  S.) 
217  ;  McQuester  v.  Mengher,  34  N. 
H.  400 ;  Eemsen  v.  Conklin,  18 
John.  (N.  Y.)  450  ;  Phillips  v.  Doe, 
3  Ind.  133 ;  Jackson  v.  Kipp,  3 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  230  ;  Chapman  v. 
Wright,  20  HI.  120 ;  Tale  v.  Craw- 
son,  6  Ired.  (N.  C.)  65  ;  Van  Rens- 
selaer V.  Jewett,  3  N.  Y.  147 ; 
Mackubin  v.   Wheetcraft,  4  H.  & 


M.  (Md.)  135 ;  McCormick  v.  Cas- 
well, 6  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  153  ;  Eichart 
V.  Barqus,  13  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  464 ; 
Gage  V.  Smith,  14  Me.  46& ;  Jewett 
V.  Barry.  20  N,  H.  36  ;  Stover  v. 
Whitman,  6  Binn.  (Penn.)  419; 
Chapman  v.  Harney,  100  Mass. 
353;  Bowman  v.  Foot,  29  Conn. 
331  ;  Smith  v.  Whitbeck,  13  Ohio, 
471;  Chapman  v.  Kirby,  49  111. 
211  ;  Pi-octer  v.  Keith,  12  Ky.  252 ; 
Bacon  v.  Western  Furniture  Co., 
53  Ind.  339 ;  O'Conner  v.  Kelly,  41 
Cal.  432.  And  it  has  been  held 
that,  even  though  the  lease  fixes  a 
place  for  payment  off  the  premises, 
a  demand  must,  nevertheless,  be 
made  upon  the  land,  and  also  at 
the  place  fixed  for  payment. 
Borough's  Case,  4  Coke,  73  a ;  Van 
Rensselaer  v.  Jewett,  ante.  But 
it  is  not  believed  that  a  demand  is 
essential,  except  at  the  place  fixed 
for  payment,  as  by  agreeing  upon 
a  place  of  payment,  the  parties 
must  be  treated  as  waiving  the 
right  to  demand  payment  else- 
where. By  statute,  in  Illinois,  both 
a  demand  and  ten  days'  notipe  are 
necessaiy  to  create  a  forfeiture. 
Woodard  v.  Cone,  73  111.  241.  The 
tenant  may  defeat  the  forfeiture 
by  paying  or  tendering  the  rent  at 
any  time  before  or  after  sunset, 
and  before  midnight  of  the  day 
upon  which  it  becomes  due,  Cropp 
V.  Humberton,  Cro.  Ehz.  43  ;  Plow. 
173  a;  Gilbert  on  Rents,  91,  and 
courts,  both  of  law  and  equity,  are 
inclined  to  interpose  to  save  the 
tenant's  term  if  he  pays  or  tenders 
the  rent,  and  such  damages  as  the 
landlord  has  sustained  at  any  time 
before  the  lapse  of  his  term.  At- 
kins V.  ChiUson,  11  Met.  (Mass.) 
113 ;  Phillips  v.  Doolittle,  8  Mod. 
345  ;  Wilson  V.  Jones,  1  Bush.  (Ky.) 
173  ;  Goodright  v.  Noright,  3  W. 
Bl.  746  ;  Lovatt  v.  Raneleigh.  3  V. 
&B.  24. 
'  See  Acocks  v.  Phillips,  ante. 


CHAP.  xu.J     When  and  Wheee  Payable. 


1039 


or  not  the  demand  was  properly  made.'  He  must  also 
show  the  precise  time  when  the  sun  set  upon  the  day 
when  the  demand  was  made,  as  the  court  will  not  take 
judicial  notice  of  such  time."  Such  demand  may  be 
expressly  waived  by  a  provision  in. the  lease  to  that 
effect,  as,  by  inserting  the  words  "  without  previous 
demand  "  in  the  clause  providing  for  a  re-entry  upon 
non-payment  of  rent ; "  but  such  a  waiver  wiU  never 


•  McQuester  V.  Mangher,  34  N.  H. 
400.  To  summarize,  unless  a  de- 
mand has  been  expressly  waived 
in  the  case  itself,  the  demand  must 
be  for  the  sum  due  for  the  last 
quarter,  half  year,  or  year,  as  the 
case  may  be,  and  must  not  em- 
brace any  portion  of  the  arrears  of 
a  previous  quarter,  half  ^ear,  or 
year,  but  it  may  embrace  interest 
upon  the  sum  due  for  the  quarter, 
&c.,  for  which  the  demand  is 
made.  People  v.  Dudley,  58  N. 
Y.  323 ;  Fabian  v.  Winston,  Cro. 
Eliz.  309  ;  Doe  v.  Paul,  3  C.  &  P. 
613.  And  it  must  be  made  at  a 
convenient  time  before  sunset  of 
the  very  day  upon  which  it  be- 
comes due,  Co.  Litt.  202  a,  upon 
the  land,  Co.  Litt.  201  b,  unless  the 
rent  is  expressly  made  payable 
elsewhere  ;  in  which  case  the  de- 
mand should  be  made  at  such 
place.  Clun's  Case,  10  Coke,  129 
a ;  Connor  v.  Bradley,  1  How.  (U. 
S.)  211.  And  it  has  been  iatimated 
that  a  demand  should  be  made 
upon  the  land  also,  Boraghi's  Case, 
4  Coke,  78  a ;  Van  Rensselaer  v. 
Jewett,  2  N.  Y.  147,  but  this  can 
hardly  be  necessary.  The  demand 
must  be  made  upon  the  most  no- 
torious part  of  the  land,  that  is, 
upon  that  part  of  it  where  the  ten- 
ant would  be  most  Ukely  to  enter 
upon  or  leave  it,  or  would  be  most 
likely  to  be  found ;  consequently, 
if  there  is  a  dweUing-house  upon 
it,  it  should  be  made  at  the  front 
door  thereof,  or,  if  there  is  no 
dwelling  upon  it,  at  the  gate  or 
bar  way,  if  there  be  one,  or  upon 
the  highway  leading  to  or  by  it ; 
or  if  there  be  no  highway,  in  the 
path  or  road,  if  there  is  one  lead- 
ing to  or  through  the  premises ; 
or,  if  there  are  none  of  these,  then 
upon  the  most  convenient  place 
upon  the  premises,  Co.  Litt.  203  a, 
and  there  must  be  a  demand,  in 


fact  whether  any  one  is  there  upon 
whom  demand  can  be  made  or 
not,  and  the  landlord  or  his  agent 
must  remain  upon  the  premises 
until  the  sun  has  set,  ready  to  re- 
ceive the  rent,  if  tendered. 

5  Collier  v.Nokes,  3C.  &K.  1012. 

'  Fifty  Associates  v.  Howland,  5 
Cush.  (Mass.)  314.  In  Dormer's 
Case,  5  Coke,  39,  it  was  expressly 
held  that,  by  the  consent  of  the 
parties,  re-entry  might  be  had  for 
a  default  of  payment  of  rent,  with- 
out any  demand.  In  Doe  v.  Mas- 
ters, 2  B.  &  C.  409,  the  lease  con- 
tained a  proviso  that,  if  the  rent 
was  in  arrears  for  twenty-one  days 
the  lessor  might  re-enter,  "  al- 
though no  legal  or  formal  demand 
should  be  made ; "  it  washeld  that, 
after  the  lapse  of  such  time  with- 
out payment  of  the  rent,  eject- 
ment might  be  maintained  with- 
out actual  re-entry,  and  without 
any  demand.  See  also,  Smith  v. 
Doe,  7  Price,  392;  Goodright  v. 
Cator,  2  Doug.  477.  In  Fifty  Asso- 
ciates V.  Howland,  ante,  where  the 
lease  contained  a  stipulation  that 
the  lessor  might  enter  "without 
further  demand,"  it  was  held  that 
no  demand  was  necessary.  Swee- 
ney V.  Garrett,  2  Dis.  (Ohio)  601. 
In  Maryland,  where  the  statute  4 
Geo.  2,  chap.  28,  sec.  3,  has  been 
adopted,  it  has  been  held  that  un- 
der a  lease  giving  a  right  of  re-en- 
try for  non-payment  of  rent,  "  the 
same  having  been  first  lawfully 
demanded,"  the  landlord  may 
maintain  ejectment  without  any 
demand.  Campbell  v.  Shipley,  41 
Md.  81.  And  in  an  English  case, 
where  the  lease  contained  a  similar 
clause,  the  premises  being  vacant, 
the  landlord  asked  for  payment  of 
the  rent  from  the  person  liable  to 
pay  it,  and  the  rent  not  being  paid, 
he  re-entered,  and  under  the  stat- 
ute 4  Geo.  2,  it  was  held  that  the 


1040  Eent.  [§  449. 

be  implied.'  A  demand  is  necessary  only  for  the  pur- 
poses of  fixing  the  landlord's  right  of  re-entry.  An 
action  for  the  rent  may  be  maintained  without  any 
demand,  and  a  distress  may  be  made  in  those  States 
where  the  right  to  make  a  distress  exists.  In  many  of 
the  States,  by  statute,  the  landlord  may  bring  ejectment 
where  a  half  year's  rent  is  due  and  no  sufficient  distress 
can  be  found  upon  the  premises,  and  this  is  the  case  in 
all  those  States  where  the  statute  4  Geo.  2,  chap.  28,  is 
in  force.  In  New  York,  and  in  many  of  the  States,  by 
statute,  digtress  for  rent  is  abolished,  and  a  right  of  re- 
entry for  non-payment  of  rent,  where  a  forfeiture  is 
provided  for  in  the  lease,  is  given,  after  the  service  of  a 
notice  to  quit  of  fifteen  days'  duration,  and  this,  with- 
out any  reference  to  the  question  whether  a  sufficient 
distress  can  be  found  upon  the  premises  or  not.'  But  in 
New  York,  under  the  statute  relating  to  summary  pro- 
ceeding's, the  tenant  may  defeat  the  forfeiture  by  paying 
or  tendering  the  rent  at  any  time  before  a  dispossession 
warrant  issues,  and,  if  his  unexpired  term  has  more 
than  five  years  to  run,  gives  him  one  year  in  which  to 
redeem  his  term  by  payment  of  the  rent  and  costs,  and 
the  technical  rules  of  the  common  law  relating  to 
forfeitures  do  not  apply  where  a  remedy  is  sought  under 
the  statute ;  °  but,  where  the  landlord  seeks  to  re-enter 
under  the  provisions  of  the  lease,  of  his  own  motion,  and 
independent  of  legal  proceedings,  the  requirements  of 
the  common  law  as  to  demand  must  be  strictly  complied 
with,  unless  expressly  waived,*  as  well  in  New  York  as 
in  neai-ly  all  the  States.'    At  common  law,  the  courts, 

demand  was  insufficient,  and  that  '  McAdam's  L.  &  T.  236.  In  all 
the  lease.was  forfeited.  Manser  v.  cases  where  proceedings  are  com- 
Dix,  8  De  G.  M.  &  Gr.  703.  Where,  menced  under  a  statute,  the  land- 
however,  the  lease  provides  for  re-  lord  must  comply  with  the  requh-e- 
entry;  for  non-payment  of  rent,  un-  ments  of  the  statute,  and  if  no  de- 
less  it  is  paid  within  a  certain  mand  is  made  necessary  by  it,  none 
number  of  days  after  it  becomes  need  be  made.  Spooner  v.  French, 
due,   as  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  &c.,  32  Minn.  37. 

the  demand  should  be  made  upon  *  Van  Rensselaer  v.   Snyder,  13 

the  last  day,  as  the  tenth,  twentieth  N.  Y.  299. 

&c.    Phillips  V.   Bridge,   L.  R.,  9  '  Bowman  v.  Foot,  29  Conn.  331 ; 

C.  P.  48.  Bacon  v.  Western  Furniture  Co., 

•  Gaskell  v.  Trainer.  3  Cal.  334.  53  Ind.  239  ;  Proctor  v.  Keith,  12 

*  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Ball,  19  N.  Ky.  252  ;  Chapman  v.  Harney,  100 
Y.  100.  Mass.  353 ;  Smith  v.  Whitbeck,  13 


CHAP.  XLi.J  Payment.  1041 

both  of  law  and  equity,  have,  in  order  to  defeat  forfeit- 
ures which  are  odious  to  the  law,  treated  the  provision 
for  re-entry  for  non-payment  of  rent  as  one  of  indem- 
nity, inserted  rather  as  a  security  against  the  loss  of  the 
rent,  than  to  enable  the  landlord  to  repossess  the 
premises ;  and,  where  the  tenant  pays  or  tenders  the 
rent,  and  such  loss  as  the  landlord  has  sustained  by 
reason  of  the  omission,  they  will,  even  where  all  the 
requirements  of  the  common  law  as  to  demand,  &c., 
have  been  complied  with,  interfere  to  preserve  the  term 
to  the  tenant ; '  and  especially  will  a  court  of  equity 
relieve  the  tenant  from  a  forfeiture,  where  the  breach 
resulted  either  from  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  landlord  or 
accident  or  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  tenant,  or  where 
the  damages  to  the  landlord  therefrom  can  be  readily 
estimated.' 

Sec.  450.  Payment  of  rent  as  evidence  of  tenancy.— Effect 
of.— The  receipt  of  rent  is  only  prima  facie  evidence  of  a 
tenancy,  and  this  presumption  may  be  overcome  by 
showing  that  the  money  paid  is  referable  to  some  other 
consideration,'  as  to  a  former  lease,*  or  that  it  was  made 

Ohio  St.  4'5'1 ;  Chapman  v.  Kirby,  establish  a  tenancy  from  the  mere 

49  111.  211 ;  O'Conner  v.  Kelly,  41  payment  of  rent  it  must  appear  that 

Cal.   432.     But  in  Louisiana  for-  the  payment  was  made  by  the  oc- 

feitures  are  not  favored  where  no  cupant  in  the  capacity  of  a  tenant ; 

loss  or  inconvenience   results   to  and  where  it  is  made  under  an  or- 

the  lessor  from  the  act  creating  it,  der  of  court,  or  to  prevent  a  distress, 

but  leaves  him  to  his  remedy  for  in-  it  does  not  have  that  effect.    Stra- 

demnification,    Denman  v.  Lopez,  han  v.   Smith,  4  Bing.  96.     Nor, 

12  La.  An.  833.    And,  even  where  even  where  the  money  is  paid  as 

a  forfeiture   will   is   upheld,  the  rent,  does  it  establish  any  particu- 

strict  requirements  of  the  common  lar  kind  of   holding,  and,  if  the 

law  as  to  demand  are  not  adopted,  terms   of  the  ofacuimncy,  ta*  the 

Hyde  v.  Palmer,  13  La.  359.  species  of   tenancy  are  essential, 

'Atkins    V.    Chillson,    11    Met.  they  must  be  shown.    Phillips  v. 

(Mass.)  113  ;  Phillips  v.  Doolittle,  8  Mosely,  1  C.  &  P.  363.    And  in  the 

Mod.  345 ;  Wilson  v.  Jones,  1  Bush,  last    case,    where    the    plaintiff 

(Ky.)  173 ;    Goodright  v.  Noright,  brought    an    action   of    trespass 

2  W.  Bl.  746 ;  Hill  v.  Barclay,  16  against  the  defendant— the  land- 

Ves.  403 ;  Downes  v.  Turner,  ISalk.  lord— for   breaking   and  entering 

597  ;  Harris  v.  Masters,  3  B.  &  C.  the  plaintiff's  house,  he  alleged  in 

490.  his   pleadings   an  entry  under  a 

2  Hagar  v.  Buck,  44  Vt.  285.    See  lease  from  April  23d,  1831,  for  one 

Chap,  on  Forfeiture,  post.  year,  and  afterwards  from  year  to 

'Phillips  V.   Mosely,  1  C.  &  P.  year.    He  merely  proved  payment 

363 ;    Denn  v.    Rawlins,.  10   East,  of  rent,  and  did  not  show  what  the 

261 ;  Right  v.  Bawden,  3  id.  460.  agreement  was.    He  was  held  not 

"Den  V.   Rawlins,  10  East,  361 ;  entitled  to  recover,  Abbott,  C.  J., 

Eight  V.  Bawden,  3  id.  860.     To  saying:  "Payment  of  rent  would 


1042  Eent,  [§  450. 

to  prevent  a  distress/  or  under  such  circumstances  as  re- 
pel the  presumption  of  a  tenancy,'  as,  that  the  sum  paid 
bears  only  a  small  proportion  to  the  actual  rental  value, 
or  indeed  any  circumstance  that  shows  the  real  purpose 
of  the  payment;"  and  the  question  is  for  the  jury, 
■whether  the  payment  was  made  or  was  not  made  as 
rent.*  Where  money  is  paid  as  rent,  and  a  receipt  is 
given  therefor,  as  for  rent  to  a  particular  date,  such 
receipt  is  prima  facie  evidence  of  the  beginning  of  a  ten- 
ancy either  upon  that  or  a  previous  day  ;  and  where  rent 
is  payable  quarterly,  semi-annually  or  otherwise,  at  cer- 
tain stated  or  uniform  periods,  the  presumption  is,  that 
the  holding  is  intended  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  reg- 
ular quarter-days  stated  in  the  lease,  rather  than  with 
the  date  of  the  lease  ; '  but  if  no  such  periods  are  stated 
in  the  lease,  then  the  date  of  the  lease  controls.  °  If  a 
tenant  enters  in  the  middle  of  a  quarter,  and  pays  rent 
to  the  beginning  of  the  succeeding  quarter,  but  from 
that  time  pays  semi-annually,  the  tenancy  is  treated,  as 
having  begun  from  the  quarter-day  up  to  which  he 
paid.'  Where  the  tenant  enters  under  a  voidable  lease, 
the  payment  or  receipt  of  rent  does  not  create  a  new  ten- 
ancy, but  it  does  tend  to  establish  a  former  one ; '  nor 
does  an  agreement  for  an  increase  of  rent,  before  the 
time  has  expired,  have  that  effect.'  But  where  the  term 
has  ended,  and  the  tenant  agrees  to  pay  more  or  less 
rent,  or  to  pay  it  in  another  or  different  manner,  or  to  a 
different  person,  a  new  tenancy  is  created  upon  the  terms 
of  the  former  lease,  except  in  so  far  as  they  have  been, 
changed  by  the  agreement ; '°  and  it  seems  that  notice 
to  the  tenant,  given  by  the  landlord,  that  if  he  holds 

be  as  much  evidence  of  a  demise  *  Doe  v.  Matthews,  11  C.  B.  675. 

for  31  years,  as  of  the  demise  laid  '  Halcombe  v.  Johnson,  6  Esp.  10. 

in  the  replication.''  *  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B.  &  Aid. 

'  Strahan  v.  Smith,  ante.  401. 

2  Doe  V.  Francis,  2  M.  &  Bob.  57  ;  '  Adams'  Ejectment,  129 ;  Monck 

Doe  V.  Crago,  6,  C.  B.  90.  v.  Geekie,  5  Q.  B.  841. 

'  Right  V.  Bawden,  ante  ;  Doe  v.  '"Monck  v.  Geekie,  ante;  Bed- 
Bastard,  11  Ad.  &  El.  307  ;  Den  v.  ford  v.  Kendrick,  cited  in  Adams 
Eawlins,  ante ;  Claridge  v.  Mac-  on  Ejectment,  144 ;  Powis  v. 
kenzie,  4  M.  &  G.  143.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid.  850 ;  HUton  v. 

*  Dpe  V.  Wilkinson,  3  B.  &  C.  418.  Goodrich,  3  C.  &  P.  591. 

^  SandhiU  v.  FrankUn,  L.  R.,  10 
C.  B.  343. 


CHAP.  XLi.]  Payment.  1043 

over  it  must  be  upon  certain  terms  other  and  different 
from  those  of  the  former  lease,  has  the  effect  to  change 
the  contract  to  the  extent  embraced  in  such  notice.' 
Payment  of  rent  also  raises  a  presumption  that  the  party 
receiving  it  has  a  good  title  to  the  rent;  but,  if  pa^id  to  a 
person  other  than  the  one  from  whorii  possession  was 
originally  had,  it  may  be  rebutted. °  Thus,  while  a  ten- 
ant cannot  deny  the  title  of  his  landlord,  yet,  if  he  went 
into  possession  under  a  former  owner,  and  has  paid,  or 
agreed  to  pay,  the  rent  to  one  who  claims  to  be  succeed- 
ing owner,  in  ignorance  of  a  defect  in  his  title,  he  may 
show  that  he  is  not  the  landlord,  and  may  also  dispute 
his  title.' 

Sec.  451.  Assignable  qualities  of  rent.— Rent  is  a  mere 
incorporeal  hereditament,  and  may  be  detached  from  the 
estate  and  assigned  to  one  who  has  no  interest  in  the 
estate  from  which  it  issues,  or  it  may  be  reserved  when 
the  estate  itself  has  been  assigned.  In  other  words,  the 
rent  may  be  assigned  and  the  reversion  reserved,  or  the 

'  Griffith  V.  Kinseley,  75  111.  361.  unless,  at  the  time  of  payment,  the 
''Rodgersv.  Pitcher,  6  Taunt.  208;  lessee  knew  the  precise  nature  of 
Cornish  v,  Searell,  8  B.  &  C.  471 ;  such  adverse  claim,  or  the  manner 
Cox  V.  Knight,  18  C.  B.  645 ;  Doe  in  which  the  lessor's  title  had  ex- 
V.  Clarke,  Peake's  Addl.  Cas.  239.  pired.  "  A  tenant  may  show," 
'  In  Gregory  v.  Daidge,  3  Bing.  said  Best,  C.  J.,  "though  he  can- 
474,  the  pEiititiflf,  who  had  occu-  not  dispute  the  right  of  his  land- 
pied  lands  under  A,  upon  A's  death  lord  to  demise,  may  show  that  his 
agreed  to  pay  to  the  defendant,  not  title  has  expired,  and  this  rule  is 
knowing  that  his  title  was  disput-  founded  on  good  sense  and  justice  : 
ed.  It  turned  out  that  the  defend-  because,  if  it  were  otherwise,  the 
ant  had  no  title.  It  was  held,  that  tenant  might  be  called  on  to  pay 
the  plaintiff  might  dispute  the  de-  his  rent  twice  over.  Although, 
fendant's  title,  upon  a  plea  of  non  however,  a  tenant  may  show  that 
tenuit  in  repleviu.  See  also,  Eog-  his  landlord's  title  has  expired,  yet, 
ers  V.  Pitcher,  6  Taunt.  202.  In  if  he  enters  on  a  new  tenancy,  he 
WiUiams  v.  Bartholomew,  1  B.  &  shall  be  bound ;  but,  before  he  can 
P.  826,  BULLEE,  J.,  said,  "If  the  be  bound,  it  must  appear  that  he 
tenant  could  have  proved  that  his  was  acquainted  mm  all  the  eir- 
attornment  proceeded  on  the  mis-  cumstances  of  the  landlord's  title ; 
representation  of  him  who  claimed  the  landlord  must  say  openly  '  my 
as  remaiader-man,  he  might  have  former  title  is  at  an  end ;  will 
proved  that  another  was  stUl  alive  you,  notwithstanding,  go  on?'  *  * 
and  entitled."  In  Turner  v.  Dup-  Payment  of  rent  may  be  evidence 
lock,  2  Bing.  10,  in  was  held  that  of  an  attornment,  but  before  we 
payment  of  rent  by  a  tenant,  after  can  decide  whether  an  attornment 
the  lessor's  title  had  failed,  even  has  taken  place  we  must  look  at 
though  he  had  had  notice  of  an  ad-  the  circumstances  and  see  whether 
verse  claim,  did  not  amount  to  an  they  do  not  rebut  the  presumption 
acknowledgment  of  title  in  the  of  an  attornment."  See  Doe  v. 
lessor,  or  to  a  virtual  attornment,  Wilkinson,  3  B.  &  C.  413. 


1044  Rent.  [§451., 

reversion  assigned  and  the  rent  be  reserved/  Indeed, 
rents  may  be  granted  by  way  of  lease."  An  action  of 
debt  may  be  maintained  by  the  assignee  of  rents  for 
arrears  that  accrue  subsequent  to  the  assignment,  but 
covenant  cannot  be  maintained  therefor.'  Where,  how- 
ever, rent  already  accrued  is  assigned  at  common  law  the 
action  must  be  in  the  name  of  the  lessor.*  Where  the 
rent  has  not  been  reserved  from  the  estate  it  passes  to  the 
assignee  or  grantee  of  the  reversion  or  estate,  whether 
the  assignment  or  grant  is  the  voluntary  act  of  the  lessor 
or  is  effected  by  operation  of  law ;  but  rents  that  have 
already  accrued  do  not  pass.'  But  in  the  case  of  a  pur- 
chaser at  sheriff's  sale  the  right  to  the  rents  exists  only 
from  the  time  when  the  deed  is  delivered,  and  does  not 
exist  from  the  day  of  sale,'  and  a  promise  by  the  lessee 
to  pay  either  the  assignor  or  the  assignee  does  not  affect 
the  question  ; '  but  payments  made  by  the  lessee  to  the 
assignor,  before  he  has  notice  of  the  assignment,  are 
good  against  the  assignee,  even  though  it  is  in  advance.' 
Unless  severed  therefrom,  rent  follows  the  reversion  to 
which  it  is  incident,  and  goes  either  to  the  heir-at-law  or 
to  the  executor,  according  as  the  reversion  may  be  an 
estate  of  inheritance  or  a  chattel  interest.  All  rents 
reserved  by  lessees  or  under-leases  made  by  them  pass 
with  the  reversion  of  the  original  term  to  the  personal 
representative,  although  the  rent  may  be  reserved  to  the 
lessee  and  his  heirs  during  the  term,  without  mentioning 

'Leonard  V.  Burgess,  16 Wis. 41 ;  6  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  260. 

Patten  v.  Deshon,  1  Gray  (Mass.)  See  United  States  v.    Hickery,  17 

325  ;  Willard  v.  Tillman,  3  HiU  (N.  WaU.  (U.  S.)  9. 

Y.)    274;    Perrin    v.    Lepper,    34  *Van  Wicklen  v.    Paulson,   14 

Mich.  293 ;  Watson  v.  Hunking,  13  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  654 ;  Bank  of  Penn- 

Iowa,547;  Childsv.Childs,3Barb.  sylvania  v.  Wise,  3  Watts  (Penn.) 

Ch.  (N.  Y.)  52.    Dixon  v.  NicoUs,  394  ;  Childers  v.  Smith,  10  B.  Mon. 

39  lU.  372 ;  Hunt  v.  Thompson,  3  (Ky.)  335. 

AUen  (Mass.)  341.    When  the  rent  «  Casey  v.  Woodruff,  45  N.  Y.  98. 

has  been  assigned  it  does  not  pass  'Payne  v.  Beale,  4  Den.  (N.  Y.) 

by  a  conveyance  of  the  reversion.  405  ;  Stout  v.  Kean,  3  Harr.  (Del.) 

Childers  v.  Smith,  10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  83  ;  Sharp  v.  Key,  8  M.  &  W.  379. 

235.  8Stowe  V.     Patterson,  19  Pick. 

^  Comyn's  Dig.  tit.  Annuity  (A.),  (Mass.)  476  ;  Farley  v.  Thompson, 

1 ;    6   Bacon's  Abr.    tit.   Leases ;  15  Mass.  18.    But  in  some  of  the 

Thomas  v.  Frederick,  10  Q.  B.  775.  EngUsh  cases  the  rule  is  held  to  be 

*  Ryerson  v.  Quackenbush,  35  N.  otherwise  as   between  the  lessee 

J.  L.  236.  and  a  mortgagee.    Cook  v.  Guerra, 

"Thasker  v.  Henderson,  63  Barb.  L.  R.,  7  C.  P.  133.    See  NicoUs  v, 

N.  Y.)  371 ;  Huerstel  v.  Lorrillard,  -Saunders,  5  id.  589. 


CHAP.  XLI.J         Assignable  Qualities. 


1045 


the  executors  ;  and  if  a  man,  seized  of  one  acre  in  land  in 
fee,  and  possessed  of  another  acre  for  a  term  of  years, 
makes  a  lease  of  both,  reserving  rent,  and  dies,  the  rent 
shall  be  apportioned  with  the  reversion,  and  the  heir-at- 
law  and  the  executor  shall  each  have  his  proportion  of 
the  rent.'  When,  however,  a  rent  payable  for  a  term  of 
years  has  been  severed  from  the  reversion,  it  will  pass  to 
the  personal  representative  and  not  to  the  heir-at-law.  If 
a.  man,  for  example,  seized  of  land  in  fee,  makes  a  lease 
for  years,  reserving  rent,  and  afterwards  devises  the  rent 
to  a  stranger,  and  dies,  and  the  stranger  is  seized  of  this 
rent,  and  dies,  his  personal  representatives  shall  have  the 
rent,  and  uot  his  heirs."  The  stafc.  4  &  5  Wm.  4,  c,  22, 
for  the  apportionmsnt  of  rents  and  other  periodical 
payments,  applies  to  cases  in  which  the  interest  of  the 
party  entitled  to  the  rents,  annuities,  or  other  periodical 
payments,  determines  by  death  or  some  other  means. 
Eents,  therefore,  are  not  apportionable  between  the  heir 
and  personal  representative  of  a  tenant  in  fee  simple.' 


1  Gilb.  Rents,  188.  If  the  rever- 
sion of  a  term  of  years  is  conveyed 
by  the  lessor,  and  no  reservation 
of  the  rent  is  made,  it  passes  to  the 
grantee,  as  an  incident  of  the  res- 
ervation, Hatfield  v.  Lockwood,  18 
Iowa,  296;  Gale  v.  Edwards,  53 
Me.  363  ;  Johnson  v.  Smith,  3Penn. 
St.  496,  and  carries  with  it  the  ac- 
cruing rent. .  Dixon  v.  Nichols,  39 
lU.  373,  and  the  grantee  becomes 
the  landlord.  Page  v.  Esty,  64  Me. 
319,  with  all  the  rights  of  the  orig- 
inal landlord  under  the  lease,  Ken- 
dall V.  Garland,  5  Gush.  (Mass.)  74  ; 
Abercrombie  v.  Eedpath,  1  Iowa, 
111 ;  Scott  V.  Lunt,  7  Pet.  (U.  S.) 
596 ;  both  as  to  recovery  of  rent 
for  breaches  of  any  of  the  cove- 
nants and  re-entry  for  forfeiture. 
Page  V.  Estey,  ante ;  Crosby  v. 
Loop,  13  111.  635.  But  a  right  to 
re-enter  for  a  forfeiture  does  not 
pass  by  assignment.  Trask  v. 
Wheeler,  7  AUen  (Mass.)  109.  The 
rule  is  the  same  whether  the  rever- 
sion is  conveyed  voluntarily  or  by 
operation  of  law,  as  under  a  levy 
of  execution.  Montague  v.  Gay, 
17  Mass.  439  ;  Key  v.  Goodwin,  17 
id.  489.  And  a  conveyance  to  the 
II.— 14 


tenant  extinguishes  the  rent,  York 
v.  Jones,  3  N.  H.  454,  and  if  a  part 
of  the  estate  is  conveyed  either  to 
the  tenant  or  a  stranger,  a  propor- 
tionate part  of  the  rent  passes. 
Farley  v.  Craig,  11  N.  J.  L.  363. 
A  conveyance  of  a  reversion  car- 
ries with  it  the  growing  crops. 
Bmmside  v.  Weightman,  9  Watts 
(Penn.)  46.  Rent  service  passes 
with  the  reversion.  Lewis'v.  Wil- 
kins,  Phill.  (N.  C.)  Bq.  303.  But 
rent  that  is  in  arrear  at  the  time 
of  the  conveyance  does  not  pass. 
But  rent  is  not  in  arrear  until  it 
becomes  due  ;  therefore,  if  A  leases 
to  B  for  one  year  certain  premises 
at  a  certain  rent,  payable  at  the 
end  of  the  year,  and  after  B  has 
been  in  possession  six  months  A 
conveys  the  premises  to  C,  C  at  the 
end  of  the  year  can  recover,  and  is 
entitled  to  the  whole  year's  rent, 
unless  the  conveyance  otherwise 
provides.  Gibbs  v.  Ross,  3  Head 
(Tenn.)  438. 

^  KnoUe's  Case,  Dyer,  5  & ;  Jeni- 
son  V.  Lord  Lexington,  1  P.  Wms. 
555. 

'  Browne  v.  Amyot,  3  Hare,  173. 


1046  Eent.  L§  452; 

If  rent  is  granted  to  a  person  generally,  withont  words 
of  limitation,  the  rent  is  a  freehold  rent,  payable  during 
the  life  of  the  grantee,  and  if  the  latter  assignst  his  rent, 
and  the  assignee  thereof  dies  in  the  lifetime  of  the  ceskd 
que  vie,  the  rent  will  now  pass  by  force  of  the  statutes  to 
the  personal  representatives  of  the  assignees.  By  the 
common  law,  if  rent  was  granted  to  A  during  the  life  of 
B,  and  the  grantee  died,  living  B,  the  rent  was  determined, 
and  the  grant  ceased,  and  became  void.'  But  if  the  rent 
vpas  granted  to  A,  and  his  heirs  nominatim,  the  heir-at- 
law  of  the  grantee  took  the  rent  pur  autre  vie,  as  a 
special  occupant  expressly  named  and  designated  in  the 
deed."  The  personal  representatives,  however,  could  not 
by  the  common  law  take  the  rent  as  special  occupants, 
although  included  in  the  words  of  the  grant;  and  if  a 
rent  pur  autre  vie  was  granted  to  a  man  and  his  executors 
by  name,  and  the  grantee  died  in  the  lifetime  of  the  cestui 
que  vie,  the  rent  was  determined  and  the  grant  ceased.' 
To  put  an  end  to  this  anomaly,  and  the  legal  niceties  by 
which  it  was  supported,  and  to  preserve  and  continue 
estates  for  life,  and  facilitate  their  transfer  from  one 
person  to  another,  it  has  been  enacted  that  estates  pur 
autre  vie  shall  be  devisable  by  will,  and  that  if  no  dis- 
position by  will  shall  be  made  of  any  estate  pur  autre  vie 
of  a  freehold  nature,  the  same  shall  be  chargeable  in  the 
hands  of  the  heir,  if  it  shall  come  to  him  by  special 
occupancy,  as  assets  by  descent ;  and  in  case  there  shall 
be  no  special  occupant  of  any  estate  jswr  autre  vie,  whether 
a  corporeal  or  incorporeal  hereditament,  it  shall  go  to  the 
executor  or  administrator  of  the  party  that  had  the  estate 
thereof  by  virtue  of  the  grant ;  and  if  the  same  shall 
come  to  the  executor  or  administrator,  either  by  reason 
of  a  special  occupancy  or  by  virtue  of  the  act,  it  shall  be 
assets  in  his  hands.'  All  estates  pur  autre  vie  in  rents ; 
as  well  as  in  lands  or  tenements,  will  consequently,  by 
force  of  the  statute,  pass  to  the  personal  representative 

1  Holden        v.        SmaUbrooke,  "  2  EoU.  Abr.  151. 

Vaughan,  199.  ^  7  Wms.  4,  and  1  Vict.  c.  26,  s. 

^  Hassell  v.  Gothwaite,  Willes,  6 ;  Bearpark  v.  Hutchinson,  4  M.  & 

505.  P.  860. 


CHAP.  XLI.J  EeSERVATIONS  OF.  1047 

of  the  grantee,  when  the  heir  is  not  expressly  named  in 
the  grant,  and  they  may  maintain  an  action  of  debt  for 
its  recovery.'  By  the  common  law,  when  a  tenant  for 
life  made  a  lease  reserving  rent,  and  died  between  two 
rent  days,  the  rent  growing  due  was  lost  both  to  the 
executor  of  the  lessor,  and  also  to  the  remainder  man. 
This  defect  has  been  remedied  by  statute,  and  the  rent  is 
made  apportionable  between  the  personal  representative 
of  the  lessor  and  the  party  entitled  in  remainder." 

Sec.  452.  Eeservations  of  rent,  or  sums  in  gross  as  quasi 
rent.— As  has  previously  been  stated,  no  formal  reserva- 
tion of  rent  in  a  lease  is  essential  to  its  validity,  but 
where  a  special  reservation  is  made  it  should  be  made 
to  the  person  entitled  to  the  estate  ;  as,  while  a  reserva- 
tion, for  the  benefit  of  a  third  person  may  be  good  by 
way  of  contract,  yet  it  is  not  a  sufficient  reservation  of 
rent,  and  the  person  to  whom  the  rents  are  so  made 
payable  cannot  distrain  therefor,'  but  he  may  maintain 
an  action  of  debt  therefor.  "Because,"  says  Gilbert,* 
' '  if  the  lessee  undertakes  to  pay  such  an  annual  sum  by 
his  deed,  such  undertaking  constitutes  a  right  to  it ;  and 
the  law  in  aU  cases  gives  remedies  adequate  to  the  right."  ' 
But  the  right  to  the  rent  ceases  when  the  lessor's  estate 

'  Gilb.  Rent,  tit.  Debt.  eral,  merely  for  congruity's  sa;ke." 
'^  11  Geo.  3,  c.  19;  4  W.  4,  c.  Rent  must  be  originally  reserved  to 
23.  the  lessor  or  his  heirs,  and  is  inoi- 
'  Gates  V.  Frith,  Hob.  130.  Ac-  dent  to  the  reversion ;  but  it  may 
cording  to  Lobd  Nottingham,  Co.  be  severed  from  the  reversion  and 
Litt.  313  b,  n.  1,  Lord  Notting-  assigned  so  as  to  give  the  assignee 
ham's  MSS.  ,  although  the  reserva-  a  right  to  sue  for  it,  and  it  may  be 
tion  to  a  stranger  is  void  as  to  him,  appoi'tioned  on  different  portions 
yet  it  is  good  as  to  the  lessor,  not  of  the  estate,  and  among  different 
only  during  his  life,  but  generally  parties,  so  as  to  give  to  each  a  right 
during  all  the  term.  "For,"  says  of  action  therefor;  and  the  fact 
he,  "when  it  was  said,  rendering  that  the  lease  specifies  that  the  rent 
to  J  S,  the  words  J  S  should  be  shall  be  applied  to  a  specific  pur- 
void,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  he  pose  does  not  change  its  character 
had  said,  rendering  rent  generally ;  as  rent.  Ryprson  v.  Quackenbush, 
because,  1st.  If  a  man  leased,  ren-  36  N.  J.  L.  336. 
dering  rent  to  himself  and  a  stran-  *•  Gilbert  on  Rents,  24. 
ger,  it  was  good  to  him  clearly,  and  '  See  also  Co.  Litt.  47  a;  Jewel's 
void  to  the  stranger.  31  Ass.  30.  Case,  5  Coke,  3.  So  covenant  lies 
3dly.  ^jPhen  a  man  leased,  render-  for  the  rent,  as  the  reservation  is 
ing  rent  to  Mm  and  his  heirs  g,en-  good  as  for  a  sum  in  gross.  Frontin 
eral,  yet  the  law  would  direct  it  to  v.  Small,  2  Ld.  Raym.  1418 ;  Dur- 
an  issue  who  was  not  his  heir  gen-  ing  v*.  Farrington,  1  Mod.  113. 


1048  Eent.  [§  452. 

ceases  because  the  rent  follows  the  reversion,'  and  passes 
to  the  person  entitled  to  the  reversion."  Thus,  if  a  lessor 
reserves  rent  to  himself  and  his  wife  the  reservation  is  good 
so  long  as  the  husband  lives  ;  but  upon  his  decease  the 
wife,  being  a  stranger  to  the  title,  ceases  to  have  any 
interest  in  the  rent.'  But,  -wrhile  a  reservation  of  rent  to 
the  lessor's  heirs  during  his  life  is  bad,'  yet  a  reserva- 
tion of  rent  to  the  lessor's  heirs  in  a  lease  that  does  not 
take  effect  until  his  death  is  good,  because  the  estate 
passes  to  them,  and  they  are  entitled  to  the  rents  by 
operatioti  of  law,  independent  of  the  lease.  °  But  a 
reservation  of  rent  to  the  lessor,  or  his  heirs,  is  void  as 
to  the  heir,'  but  a  reservation  to  a  lessor  or  his  successors 
is  good.'  The  most  judicious  course  is  to  reserve  the 
lent  generally  during  the  term,  without  saying  to  whom, 
and  the  law  will  distribute  it  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  reversion.'  If  the  reservation  is  only  to  the  lessor, 
and  the  words  "to  his  heirs,  executors,  &c.,"  are  not 
used,  the  reservation  continues  only  during  the  lessor's 
life,  and  determines  with  his  death  agreeably  with  the 
maxim,   expressum  facit  cessum  taciturn;'    but  if  the 

'  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Hays,  19  N.  sor,  his  executors,  administrators, 

Y.   68  ;  Ryerson  v.  Quackenbush,  and  assigns,  during  the  term,  it  is 

26  N.  J.  L.  236  ;  Childers  v.  Smith,  held  good  to  continue  the  rent  for 

10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  235.  the   whole   term.      Sacheverel  v. 

'  If  the  husband  has  an  estate  in  Frogatt,  3  Saund.  367.    If  the  les- 

right;  of    his  wife,  the   reversion  sor  had  an  estate  in  fee  under  a 

passes  to  the  heirs  of  the  wife,  and  general  reservation  the  rent  will 

the  rent  f  oUowb,  notwithstanding  go  to  the  heir,  but  if  he  had  simply 

any  provision  in  the  lease.    Loftus'  a  chattel  interest,  to  the  executor. 

Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  279,  Co.  Litt.  46  b;  and  the  law  distributes  it  withref- 

Van  WickUn  v.  Paulson,  14  Barb,  erence  to  the  nature  of  the  estate. 

(N.  y.)  654 ;  Jaynes  v.   Gould,  4  Gilbert  on  Rents,  64,  71 ;  Bland  v. 

Cush.  (Mass.)  384.  Inman,  Cro.  Car.  288  ;  Whitlock's 

3  2  RoUe's  Abr.  447, 1.  33 ;  2  Piatt  Case,  8  Coke,  71  a ;  Anon.,  Dyer, 

on  Leases,  90 ;  Wotton  v.  Edwin,  43  a,  pi.  1 ;  Sacheverel  v.  JVogate, 

Latch,  374.    But  when  the  reser-  1  Vent.  161 ;  Regina  v.  Austin,  3 

vation  is  to  the  lessor,  his  execu-  Dyer,  115  a;  Cother  v.   Merrick, 

tors,    administrators,    or    assigns  Hard.  90  ;  3  RoUe's  Abr.  450,  n.  1. 

during  the  whole  term,  it  is  good.  •  Shep.  Touch.  114.     Mr.  Platt, 

Sacheverelv.  Frogatt,  2  Saund.  367.  in  Vol.  3,  p.  89,  of  his  work  on 

■» Co.  Litt.  996,313 b;  Whitlock's  Leases,  says:  Where  rent  is  re- 
Case,  8  Coke,  69  h.  served  to  the  lessor  particularly, 

'  Co.  Litt.  99  h,  313  h ;  Gates  v.  without  the  words  his  heirs,  &c.,  a 

Prithe,  2  RoUe's  Abr.  447.  difference  of  opinion  has  existed 

*  Co.  Litt.  214  a ;  Sacheverel  v.  whether  it  will  continue  payable 

Frogate,  1  Vent.  163.  after  his  death.     On  the  one  hand, 

'  Mallory's  Case,  5  Coke,  113  a.  we  find  it  laid  down  by  Cottismore 

«  Whitlock's   Case,   8  Coke,  70.  in  the  14th  year  of  Henry  the  6th, 

Where  the  reservation  is  to  the  les-  14  H.  6,  36,  pi.  77 ;  and  afterwards 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


Eeservations  of. 


1049 


words  during  the  term  are  added,  they  are  held  to  amount 
to  an  express  authority  that  the  reversioner  shall  have  the 
rent  after  the  lessor's  death.'  If  a  lessee  covenants  to 
pay  a  certain  sum  annually  without  mentioning  it  as  a 

by  Littleton  in  the  10th  year  of 
Edward  the  4th,  10  E.  4,  18,  pi.  22, 
that  if  a  man  leaBsd  land  for  a 
term  of  years,  rendering  to  him  a 
certain  rent,  the  heir,  after  his 
father's  death,  should  have  the 
rent,  because  the  rent  and  the  re- 
version vFere  all  one.  So  it  is  said, 
that  if  the  lord  of  a  manor  grant 
a  copyhold,  rendering  rent  to  the 
said  lord,  and  the  services  due  and 
of  right  accustomed,  his  heirs 
after  his  death,  and  his  assigns, 
shall  have  the  rent,  it  bein^;  re- 
served by  copy.  Crispe  v.  Fner,  2 
Eol .  Ab.  450,  n.,  pi.  50 ;  Dy.  45  a, 
n.  (1).  This  case  is  reported  in 
Cro.  Eliz.  505 ;  Noy,  58 ;  and  Mo. 
350 ;  but  this  point  is  not  noticed. 
And  Willoughby  and  Jenney  are 
reported  to  have  said,  that  there 
was  little  diflference  between  a 
reservation  generally  and  a  reser- 
vation to  the  lessor  without  more. 
Anon.,  Dy.  45  b.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  a  case  as  early  as 
the  11th  year  of  King  Edward  the 
Third's  reign,  where  a  lease  was 
granted  of  two  acres  of  land,  with 
a  reservation  of  IDs,  a  year  to  the 
lessor  and  his  heirs  for  one  acre, 
and  of  10s.  a  year  to  the  lessor 
without  saying  and  to  his  heirs, 
for  the  other ;  and  it  was  held, 
that  the  rent  for  the  latter  acre 
determined  by  the  lessor's  death. 
Ktz.  Ab.  tit.  Assize,  pi.  86.  Per- 
haps the  difference  in  the  terms  of 
the  two  reservations  would  not 
admit  of  any  other  construction  ; 
but  there  are  several  cases  in 
which  the  right  of  the  heir  to  the 
rent  has  been  expressly  denied. 
MoiLE,  J. ,  for  instance,  denied  the 
position  of  Littleton  above  noticed. 
"  In  your  case,"  said  he,  "the  heir 
shall  not  have  the  rent ;  for  it  is  aU 
one  to  say,  rendering  to  me  certain 
rent,  and  to  sajr,  rendering  to  me 
during  my  life,  in  which  case  the 
heir  should  not  have  the  rent."  10 
E.  4,  18,  pi.  22.  AuDUiT,  C,  was 
of  the  same  opinion  ;  and  he  de- 
clared that  if  rent  were  reserved 
to  the  lessor,  without  saying,  dur- 
ing the  term,  or  to  the  successors, 
or  to  the  heir,  neither  the  heir  nor 


successor  should  have  it,  for  the 
reservation  was  the  cause  of  the 
rent.  27  H.  8,  18  [B]  ;  2  Rol.  Ab. 
450,  n.,  pi.  2.  Shelley  and  Con- 
ingesby  seemed  to  incline  the  same 
way.  Anon.,  Dy.  45,  a,  pi.  (1). 
And,  afterwards,  Gawdy  (Sir 
Francis),  J.,  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth, 
Gouldsb.  148,  pi.  68,  and  Whitlock 
and  Jones,  Js.,  in  the  20th  year  of 
James  the  First,  Sury  v.  Brown, 
Latch,  99, 100,  and  Richardson,  0. 
J.,  and  Jones  and  Croke,  Js.,  in  8 
Car.  1,  Bland  v.  Inman,  W.  Jo. 
308-9  ;  S.  C.  Cro.  Car.  2B8  ;  S.  C, 
nom.  Bland's  Case,  Godb.  448, 
and  Hale,  C.  J.,  in  23  Car.  2; 
Sacheverel  v.  Frogate,  1  Vent.  162, 
declared,  that  if  a  man  made  a 
lease  reserving  rent  to  the  lessor, 
without  more,  the  rent 
should  go  but  to  the  lessor. 
And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
this  is  the  better  opinion.  Co. 
Litt.  47  a;  Cro.  Jac.  288;  W.  Jo. 
308-9.  So,  it  will  determine  with 
the  life  of  the  lessor,  though  re- 
served to  him  and  his  assigns ;  for 
the  assignee  can  take  no  more  than 
the  assignor  has  to  grant,  and  the 
assignor  was  entitled  to  the  rent 
for  his  own  life  only ;  Wotton  v. 
Edwin,  Latch,  274;  Co.  Litt.  47  a; 
though,  according  to  Hale,  C.  J., 
it  is  said  in  37  H.  8,  19,  where  the 
reservation  is  to  the  lessor  and  his 
assigns,  it  will  go  to  the  heir.  1 
Vent.  162.  And  a  reservation  of 
a  heriot  to  the  lessor  and  his  as- 
signs, at  the  election  of  the  lessor, 
his  heirs,  and  assigns,  was  held 
not  to  extend  to  the  devisee,  not- 
withstanding the  word  heirs  in 
the  latter  part,  the  reservation  be- 
ing in  itself  defective.  Ingram  v. 
Tothill,  1  Mod.  !sl6 ;  S.  C.  2  Mod.  93. 
'  Sury  V.  Brown,  Latch,  99 ; 
Anonymous,  Dyer,  45  a,  pi.  1 ; 
Sacheverel  v.  Frogatt,  2  Saund. 
367.  If  rent  is  payable  yearly — 
although  the  words  "during  the 
term  "  are  not  used — yet  payment 
must  be  made  every  year  that  the 
lease  continues.  Harrington  v. 
Wise,  Cro.,  Eliz.  486;  Gilbert  on 
Rents,  51.      The  efficacy  of  these 


1050  Eent.  [§  453. 

consideration  for  the  use  of  the  property,  it  has  been 
held  that  the  sum  so  stipulated  to  be  paid  cannot  be 
regarded  as  rent  strictly,  but  merely  as  a  sum  in  gross  ; ' 
and  the  same  has  been  held  as  to  a  building  lease,  when 
certain  sums  were  agreed  to  be  paid  before  the  lessee  had 
the  occupancy  of  the  premises,"  and  as  to  sums  agreed  to 
be  paid  in  addition  to  the  sum  reserved  as  rent,  in  con- 
sideration of  certain  alterations  or  changes  made  by  the 
landlord,'  or  for  the  good  will  of  the  premises.* 

Sec.  453.  Penalty  of  Uquidated  damages.— When,  as  is 
sometimes  the  case,  the. payment  of  rent,  or  the  perform- 
ance of  other  covenants  in  a  lease,  are  secured  by  a  pen- 
alty, either  with  or  without  sureties,  the  penalty  passes 
with  the  reversion  as  one  of  its  incidents,  and  may  be 
enforced  against  an  assignee  of  the  term. "  But  a  demand 
for  the  rent  must  be  made  upon  the  day  it  becomes  due 
before  the  penalty  can  be  enforced."  The  penalty  may 
be  waived  either  expressly  or  impliedly,  and  the  accept- 
ance of  the  rent  after  the  penalty  attaches  is  treated  as  a 
waiver.'  In  an  action  for  damage  upon  a  lease  with  a 
penalty,  the  penalty  need  not  be  mentioned  in  the  declara- 
tion, °  and  if  the  lessor  elect  to  proceed  for  general  damages 
he  may  recover  his  actual  damages,  although  they  are  in 
excess  of  the  penalty  ;  °  and  in  no  case  whether  expressly 

words  "during  the  term"  is  re-  '^  Maxquis  Camden  v.  Batterbury, 

markable,   and  they  are  held   to  7  C.   B.    N.   S.   864 ;   Howlett  v. , 

remedy  almost  any  defect  or  in-  Tarte,  10  id.  913. 

formality.      Their  remedial  effect  ^  Lambert  v.  Norris,  3  M.  &  W. 

was  brought  into  play  as  early  as  333  ;    Danellaji  v.   Read,   3  B.   & 

the  reigii  of  Henry  8th,  where  the  Ad.    899  ;    Hoby    v.    Roebuck,   7 

distinction  between  a  reservation  Taunt.  158. 

to  the  lessor  alone,  and  a  reserva-  *  Smith  v.  Mapleback,  ante, 

tion  to  him  during  the  term,  was  '  Gilbert  on  Rents,  153  ;  Co.  Litt. 

made  by  Audley,  C.  J. ,  and  was  61  6 ;    Egerton  v.   Sheaf e,  Sutw. 

subsequently  sustained  in  Sury  t.  1151 ;    Budloss   v.    Phillips,    Cro. 

Brown,    Latch,    99,    and    in    an  EUz.  895  ;  Thynn  v.  Chahnley,  id. 

anonymous  case.  Dyer,  45  a,  pi.  1,  885. 

in  which  the   court  concurred  in  ^  Thynn  v.  Chalmley,  ante;  Gran- 

the     doctrine     that     the    words  ham  v.    Thomborough,    Hob.  82, 

amounted  to  an  express  authority  133  ;  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.   Condition 

that  the  reversioner  ehould  have  (O),  3 ;  id.  tit.  Rent  (I) ;  Gilbert  on 

the  rent,  although  this  opinion  was  Rents,  84,  141. 

opposed     by    Ceew,    C.    J.,    and  '  Cheney  v.  Batten,  Cowp.  347. 

DoDDBRlDGE,     J.,    in      Sury     v.  'Reindell  v.  Schell,  4  C.  B.  N. 

Brown,  ante,  and  by  Baeklbt,  J.,  S.  97  ;  Clarke  v.  Gray,  6  East,  564. 

in  Bland  v.  Inman,  Cro.  Car.  288.  '  Mercer  v.   Irving,  E.   B.  &  E. 

'  Smith  V.  Mapleback,  1 T.  R.  441.  563 ;  Lowes  v.  Peers,  4  Bm-r.  3238 ; 


CHAP.  XLi.]         Liquidated  Damages.  1051 

declared  upon  or  not,  can  the  penalty,  as  such,  be 
recovered.  The  recovery  is  restricted  to  the  actual  dam- 
age." When,  however,  the  damages  are  liquidated  the 
amount  fixed  upon  is  the  measure  of  recovery,  although, 
unless  the  landlord  sues  for  the  precise  amount,  while  he 
can  never  recover  more  than  the  sum  fixed  upon,  yet  it 
has  been  held  that  he  may  recover  less,  or  even  nothing 
at  all."  It  becomes  important  right  here  to  mark  the 
distinction  between  a  penalty  and  liquidated  damages. 
In  the  first  place,  it  should  be  observed  that,  while  the 
lawful  intention  of  the  parties,  in  a  case  free  from  fraud, 
vdll  have  a  decisive  influence  in  determining  the  question 
whether  a  sum  agreed  upon  is  to  be  treated  as  a  penalty, 
or  as  liquidated  damages ; '  the  fact  that  the  parties  fix 
upon  a  certain  sum,  and  call  it  a  "penalty"  or  "liqui- 
dated damages,"  is  not  decisive  of  their  intention  even. 
The  question  is  purely  one  of  construction,  and,  although 
the  words  of  the  parties  are  to  be  taken  as  pioved,  yet 
the  court  will  look  into  the  matter  of  contract,  the  situ- 
ation of  the  parties,  as  well  as  other  facts  and  circum- 
stances of  their  conduct,*  and  will,  if  necessary,  resort  to 
matter  extraneous  to  the  contract."  The  real  test  for 
determining  the  question,  is  whether  the  damages  result- 
ing from  a  breach  are  certain  or  uncertain.  If  they  are 
certain,  and  the  sum  expressed  in  one  event  would  be  too 
small,  and  in  another  too  large,  it  cannot  be  considered 
as  liquidated  damages,  but  where  the  damages  are  uncer- 
tain, and  cannot  be  measured  with  any  reasonable  degree 
of  accuracy,  the  sum  fixed  upon  wiU  be  treated  as  liqui- 
dated damages." 

Harrison  V.  Wright,  13  East,  343;  'Foley  v.  McKeegan,  4  Iowa,  1, 

Winter  v.  Trimmer,  1  W.  Bl.  895.  and   determines  the  question  ac- 

1  Kemble  v.  Farrier,  6  Bing.  141 ;  cording  to  the  reason  and  justice  of 

Boys  V.  Ancell,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  390  ;  the  case,  according  to  the  oircimi- 

EeindeU  v.  ScheU,  ante.  stances.      WaUis  v.   Carpenter,  13 

= Hurst  V.  Hurst,  4  Exchq.  571.  Allen    (Mass.)    19  ;     Chaddick    v. 

'Gowen  v.  Garrish,  15  Me.  278 ;  Marsh,  31  N.  J.   L.  463  ;  Baird  v. 

Calwell  V.  Lawrence,  38  N.  Y.  71.  TaUiner,  6  Humph.  (Tenn.)  186. 

*Hosmer  V.   True,  19  Barb.   (N.  « Watts  v.  Sheppard,  ante ;  Coth- 

Y.)  106 ;  Watts  v.  Sheppard,  3  Ala.  al  v.  Talmage,  9  N.  Y.  551 ;  Chase 

435 ;  Straper  v.  Williams,  48  Penn.  v.  Allen,  13  Gray  (Mass.)  43  :  Brin- 

St.  450 ;  Perkinsv.  Lyman,  11  Mass.  kerhoflE  v.  Olf ,  35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  27  ; 

76 ;  Durat  v.  Swift,  11  Tex.  273  ;  Myers  v.  Hays,  3  Mo.  98 ;  Hise  v. 

Brewster  v.  Edgerly,  13  N.  H.  375.  Foster,   17  Iowa,   38 ;  Walker  v. 


1052 


Eent. 


[§453.' 


It  may  be  said  that  liquidated   damages  are  sums 
agreed  to  be  paid,  and  intended  to  be  actually  paid,^  for 


Engler,  30  Mo.  130.  For  this  rea- 
son the  doctrine  of  liquidated 
damages  is  never  applied  to  con- 
tracts for  the  payment  of  money. 
Gower  v.  Carter,  2  Iowa,  244 ; 
Fitzpatrick  v.  Cottingham,  14  Wis. 
219.  The  fact  that  the  parties  fix 
upon  a  certain  sum,  and  call  it  a 
"penalty"  or  "Uqmdated  dama- 
ges," does  not  determine  the  ques- 
tion as  to  whether  the  sum  fixed  is 
to  be  treated  as  a  penalty  or  liqui- 
dated damages,  but  the  question  is 
always  one  of  construction,  and,  al- 
though the  words  of  the  parties  are 
to  be  taken  as  proved  by  the  writing 
exclusively,  yet  there  may  be  an 
inquiry  into  the  matter  of  the  con- 
tract, the  situation  of  the  parties, 
and  the  usages  to  which  they  may 
be  understood  to  refer,  as  well  as 
other  facts  and  circumstances  of 
their  conduct.  Watts  v.  Sheppard, 
3  Ala.  425 ;  Struper  v.  Williams, 
48  Penn.  St.  450  ;  Durat  v.  Swift, 
11  Tex.  273 ;  Perkins  v.  Lyman,  11 
Mass.  76 ;  Brewster  v.  Edgerley, 
18  N.  H.  275  ;  Hosmer  v.  True.  19 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  106 ;  and  in  deter- 
mining the  question  the  court  may 
resort  to  matter  extraneous  to  the 
writing.  The  terms  applied  by  the 
parties  to  the  sum  fixed  upon  is 
never  decisive,  though  the  parties 
may  call  it  a  penalty,  or  give  it  no 
name  whatever ;  the  court  in  any 
and  aU  such  cases  treat  the  sum 
either  as  a  penalty  or  liquidated 
damages,  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  agreement,  the  surrounding 
circumstances,  the  intention  of 
the  parties,  and  the  reason  and 
justice  of  the  case.  Foley  v.  Mc- 
Keegan,  4  Iowa,  1,  but  if  it  is 
doubtful  how  it  should  be  regarded 
it  will  be  treated  as  a  penalty. 
The  tendency  and  preference  of 
the  law  is  to  regard  a  sum  stated 
to  be  payable  if  a  certain  thing  is, 
or  is  not  done,  in  the  nature  of  a 
penalty,  unless  such  a  construction 
is  clearly  excluded.  Chiddick  v. 
Marsh,  21 N.  J.  L.  463 ;  Wallis  v.  Car- 
penter, 13  Allen  (Mass.)  19 ;  Baird 
V.  Talliner,  6  Humph.  (Tenn.)  486  ; 
and  it  will  not  permit  the  parties 
to  make  that  liquidated  damages, 


by  calling  it  such  in  their  contract, 
which  in  its  nature  is  clearly  a 
penalty  or  forfeiture  for  non-per- 
formance. Thus,  in  a  case  where 
A  agreed  to  draw  a  certain  quan- 
tity of  timber  for  B  at  $1.50  per 
thousand  feet ;  $1  per  thousand 
feet  to  be  advanced,  and  the  bal- 
ance to  be  held  to  secure  the  com- 
pletion of  the  contract,  or  as  "  set- 
tled, fixed  and  liquidated  dama- 
ges," in  case  A  failed  to  perform 
his  contract ;  it  was  held  that  this 
sum  was  to  be  construed  as  a  pen- 
alty and  not  as  liquidated  damages, 
and  that  the  recovery  must  be  pro- 
portional to  the  quantity  of  timber 
which  A  failed  to  draw,  and  not  of 
the  whole  sum.  Davis  v.  Freeman, 
10  Mich.  188.  See  also,  Halleck  v. 
Slater,  9  Iowa,  599 ;  Lord  v.  Gaddis, 
id.  265.  In  a  California  case  A 
owed  B  $5,000,  and  tlu-ough  his 
agent  C  conveyed  to  B  certain 
lands,  partly  to  be  sold  by  B  to 
distant  parties.  C  made  an  abso- 
lute deed  to  B,  and  took  from  him 
a  bond  in  a  penalty  of  $32,000, 
made  payable  to  C,  conditioned  to 
pay  him  $16,168,  together  with 
one-half  the  profits  arising  from  a 
sale  of  the  land,  or  otherwise  to 
reconvey  the  land  to  C,  within  one 
year  from  date.  Held,  that  upon 
breach  by  B,  C  could  not  recover 
$16,168  as  liquidated  damages,  but 
only  for  damages  sustained  by  the 
breach,  as  in  other  cases  of  con- 
tract. Eicketson  v.  Richardson,  19 
Cal.  330.  Where  an  agreement 
contains  several  stipulations  on 
both  sides,  some  of  them  of  such  a 
character,  that  the  damages  result- 
ing from  a  breach  thereof  could  be 
easily  estimated,  and  others  such 
that  breaches  of  them  would  be  at- 
tended with  losses  difficult  to  be 
estimated,  the  sum  specified  in  the 
agreement  to  be  paid  for  the  breach 
of  any  stipulation  will  be  construed 
to  be  a  penalty,  and  not  liquidated 
damages.  There  was  a  stipulation 
in  a  contract,  that  "  whosoever  of 
the  two  contracting  parties  breaks 
this  contract  without  sufficient 
cause,  and  which  is  contained  in 
such  contract,  has  to  pay  to  the 


1  Dimich  v.  Corlett,  12  Moore,  P. 
C.  C.  199. 


CHAP.  XLi.]         Liquidated  Damages. 


1053 


the  breach  of  any  particular  covenant   or  stipulation. 


other  party  the  Stun  of  five  hun- 
dred dollars  in  cash."  Held,  that 
the  sum  thus  stipulated  to  be  paid 
should  be  construed  to  be  a  penal- 
ty, and  not  as  liquidated  damages. 
Hammer  v.  Breidenbach,  31  Miss. 
49.  Where,  iu  a  contract  for  the 
performance  of  divers  matters  of 
very  different  values,  a  certain 
sum  is  fixed  as  "liquidated  dam- 
ages "  for  failure  to  perform  any 
one  of  them  alike,  it  will  be  con- 
strued in  law  to  a  penalty,  not- 
withstanding the  words  of  the  con- 
tract. Daily  V.  Litchfield,  19  Mich. 
29.  The  lawful  intention  of  the 
parties,  in  a  case  free  from  fraud, 
will  have  a  decisive  infiuence  in 
determiuing  the  question,  but  the 
intention  must  be  gathered  from 
the  whole  contract,  and  in  refer- 
ence to  the  nature  of  the  transac- 
tion. Gowan  V.  Garrish,  15  Me. 
373.  This  was  well  illustrated  in  a 
New  York  case  where  the  contract 
stipulated  that  certain  engines 
were  to  be  completed  on  or  before 
a  certain  day,  under  a  forfeiture 
of  one  hundred  dollars  a  day  until 
they  were  completed — which  was 
four  months  after  the  day  named 
— ^tho  court  taking  into  considera- 
tion the  intention  of  the  parties, 
particularly  as  shown  in  the  use  of 
the  word  "forfeiture;"  the  im- 
probability that  such  an  extrava- 
gant sum  should  be  fixed  as  liqui- 
dated damages  for  a  possibly  short 
delay,  or  unimportant  breach  of 
the  contract,  and  the  hardship 
that  would  follow  the  rigid  en- 
forcement of  the  condition,  held 
that  the  amount  stipulated  should 
be  treated  as  a  penalty,  and  not  as 
liquidated  darfiages.  ColweU  v. 
Lawrence,  38  N.  Y.  71.  If  a  con- 
tract is  procured  by  fraud,  the 
measure  of  damages  for  its  breach 
fixed  thereon  will  not  be  allowed  to 
prevail.  Wambaugh  v.  Binner, 
25  Ind.  368.  The  best  test  or  cri- 
terion by  which  to  determine  the 
question  is  the  uncertainty  as  to 
the  extent  of  the  damage  ;  Powell 
V.  Burroughs,  53  Penn.  St.  339 ; 
and,  in  cases  where  the  injury  can- 
not be  estimated  with  approximate 
certainty,  the  sum  agreed  upon 
will  be  tareated  as  liquidated  dam- 
ages ;  otherwise  as  a  penalty.  In 
Watts  V.  Shepherd,  1  Ala.  435,  the 


court  expresses  the  rule  substan- 
tially as  follows  :  where  damages 
resulting  from  the  non-perform- 
ance of  a  contract  are  certain, 
and  the  sum  expressed  in  one 
event  would  be  too  small,  and  in 
another  too  large,  it  cannot  be 
considered  as  liquidated  damages, 
but  where  the  damages  are  uncer- 
tain and  cannot  be  admeasured 
with  any  degree  of  accuracy,  the 
sum  fixed  upon  wiU  be  treated  as 
liquidated  damages.  See  also 
Bright  V.  Rowland,  4  Miss. 
398;  Mundy  v.  Culver,  18  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  336 ;  Niver  v.  Eossman,  18 
id.  50.  For  this  reason  the  doc- 
trine of  liquidated  damages  is  not 
applicable  to  contracts  for  the  pay- 
ment of  money.  Fitzpatrick  v. 
Cottingham,  14  Wis.  219 ;  Gower 
V.  Carter,  3  Iowa,  344.  In  Cotheal 
V.  Talmadge,  9  N.  Y.  551,  it  was 
held  that,  when  the  damages  re- 
sulting from  a  breach  of  the  con- 
tract are  very  uncertain,  and  evi- 
dence of  their  amount  is  very 
difficult  to  obtain,  and  the  fair 
import  of  the  agreement  is,  that 
the  amount  named  in  it  is  speci- 
fied and  agreed  on  to  save  the  ex- 
pense and  avoid  the  difficulty  of 
proving  the  actual  damage,  and 
is  not  out  of  proportion  to  the 
probable  actual  damage,  it  will  be 
regarded  as  liquidated  damage. 
In  an  agreement  consisting  of  sev- 
eral stipulations,  the  damages  for 
a  breach  of  which  cannot  be  well 
ascertained  and  valued,  a  certain 
simi,  stipulated  to  be  paid  for  a 
breach  of  any  stipulation,  is  to  be 
regarded  as  hquidated  damages. 
Thus,  the  owners  and  occupants 
of  real  estate  in  a  certain  part  of 
the  city  subscribed  $11,000  to  aid 
A  in  building  a  hotel  there,  and 
the  agreement  between  A  and  the 
subscribers  was  deposited  with  C, 
for  the  benefit  of  all  parties ;  and 
A,  upon  receiving  payment  of  the 
amount  of  this  subscription, 
agreed,  in  case  he  should  fail  to 
build  the  hotel  within  a  certain 
time,  and  in  a  certain  manner,  to 
refund  the  money  with  interest, 
and  pay  "  full  damages  to  the  sub- 
scribers for  their  trouble  and  dis- 
appointment ; "  and  afterward, 
upon  receiving  notes  of  some  of 
the  same  persons  and  of  others  for 


1054  Rent.  [§  453.' 

Thus,  where  a  tenant  covenants  or  agrees  not  to  plough 

an  additional  like  subscription  of 
$9,000,  gave  a  bond  to  C,  condi- 
tioned, in  case  of  failure  to  fulfill 
his  agreement,  to  pay  to  C  on  de- 
mand, for  the  benefit  of  the  origi- 
nal subscribers,  $11,000  with  in- 
terest, to  discharge  the  subscribers 
of  the  second  agreement  from  all 
liability  thereon,  and  to  "  further 
pay  to  B,  for  the  benefit  of  all  the 
subscribers  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  their  subscriptions,  the 
additional  sum  of  $20,000,  not  as  a 
penalty,  but  as  fixed  and  liqui- 
dated damages,  and  subject  to  no 
deduction."  It  was  held  that  this 
sum  of  $80,000  was  liquidated 
damages,  and  not  a  penalty  ;  and 
that,  upon  A's  breach  of  the  agree- 
ment, C  might  maintain  an  action 
against  him  for  a  portion  thereof 
equal  to  the  subscriptions  of  all 
those  who  had  waived  any  rights 
under  the  first  agreement,  and 
had  not  settled  and  released  their 
claims  upon  A.  Chase  v.  Allen, 
13  Gray  (Mass.)  42.  A  and  B 
made  an  agreement  in  writing,  by 
which  A  agi-eed,  on  or  before  a 
certain  time,  to  sell  and  deliver 
up  all  his  stock  and  trade,  and 
tools  used  in  manufacturing  tin- 
ware, to  B,  at  specified  rates, 
which  B  agreed  to  pay  therefor. 
The  agreement  further  contained 
the  following  clause:  "It  is  also 
hereby  agreed  between  the  parties, 
that  in  case  either  party  shall  fail 
to  comply  with  the  terms  of  this 
agreement,  the  party  so  faiUng 
shall  forfeit  to  the  other  party  the 
sum  of  three  hundred  dollars, 
which  shall  be  paid  in  full,  on  or 
before  the  forfeiture  as  above." 
Held,  that  on  a  failure  by  B  to 

Eerform  the  contract,  he  was  ha- 
le for  the  full  sum  of  $300,  as 
liquidated  damages.  Lynde  v. 
Thompson,  2  Allen  (Mass.)  456. 
A  contract  for  the  sale  of  land,  at 
about  $5,000,  stipulated  that  the 
party  failing  to  perform  should 
pay  $200  as  fixed  and  settled  dam- 
ages;" and  it  was  held  that  this 
sum  was  liqmdated  damages,  and 
not  a  penalty.  Brinkerhoof  v.  Olf , 
35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  27.  For  instances 
in  which  the  sum  fixed  upon  will 
be  treated  as  liquidated  damages, 
see  Grassell  v.  Lowden,  11  Ohio 
St.  349,  where  a  sum  agreed  upon 


as  damages,  in  case  the  defend- 
ant failed  to  discontinue  an  ob- 
noxious business,  was  held  to  be 
liquidated  damages ;  also,  Pettis 
V.  Bloomer,  21  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.) 
817 ;  also,  Watts  v.  Shepherd,  12 
Ala.  425 ;  where  the  same  rule 
was  adopted  as  to  a  sum  agreed 
upon  fox  a  failure  to  perform  cer- 
tain work,  by  a  certain  time. 
Myers  v.  Hays,  3  Mo.  98 ;  where 
the  rule  was  apphed  as  to  agreed 
damages  for  a  breach  of  warranty ; 
Duffy  V.  Shackey,  11  Ind.  70; 
where  the  parties  agreed  upon  a 
certain  sum  as  a  penalty,  if  the  de- 
fendant should  violate  his  agree- 
ment, not  to  set  up  his  trade  in  a 
certain  place;  ako,  Miller  v. 
Elliott,  1  Ind.  484 ;  see,  also,  Dun- 
lop  V.  Gregory,  10  N.  Y.  241; 
Brahan  v.  Pope,  1  Stew.  (Ala.) 
135 ;  Alexander  v.  Troutman,  1 
Ga.  469 ;  Corley  v.  Carter,  23  Ala. 
612.  A  stipulation  by  a  tenant  to 
pay  double  rent  if  he  holds  over, 
&c.,  is  treated  as  liquidated  dam- 
ages. Walker  v.  Engler,  30  Mo. 
130.  Where  a  person  contracts  to 
deliver  a  certain  quantity  of  corn 
at  a  certain  time,  "  said  corn  esti- 
mated at  $100,"  if  he  fails  to  de- 
liver the  corn,  the  sum  agreed  up- 
on becomes  due  without  any  ref- 
erence to  the  actual  value  of 
the  corn  on  the  day  when 
it  should  have  been  deliv- 
ered, Hise  V.  Foster,  17  Iowa, 
23 ;  liquidated  damages  are  treated 
as  a  positive  debt,  and  as  such  they 
exclude  the  consideration  and  proof 
of  actual  damage  ;  Beal  v.  Hayes, 
5  Sandf.  (N.  Y.)  640 ;  see  Brown  v. 
Maulsby,  17  Ind.  10;  Harder  v. 
Howard,  33  Ga.  583 ;  Sessions  v. 
Richmond,  1  R.  I.  298 ;  Spring- 
dale,  &c.,  Assn.  V.  Smith,  24  lU. 
480 ;  Zachary  V.  Swanyer,  1  Oregon, 
92.  Where  several  things  are 
agreed  to  be  done,  of  different 
degrees  of  importance,  and  a  cer- 
tain sum  is  agreed  upon  as  damages 
for  a  failure  as  to  either,  the  value 
of  which  is  readily  ascertainable, 
the  sum  specified  will  be  treated  as 
a  penalty.  Thoroughgood  v. 
Walker,  3  Jones'  (N.  C.)  Law,  15  ; 
Carpenter  v.  Lockhart,  1  Ind.  434  ; 
Mundy  v.  Culver,  18  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
336  ;  Jackson  v.  Baker,  2  Edw.  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  471 ;    Nash  v.   Hodges,  i 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


Liquidated  Damages. 


1055 


up  any  of  the  ancient  meadow  or  pasture  ground,  and  if 
he  does,  to  pay  a  certain  additional  yearly  rent  per  acre  ; 
or  that  he  will  pay  an  additional  specified  rent  per  acre, 
and  so  in  proportion,  for  every  acre  had  in  tillage  beyond  a 


McMuU.  (S.  C.)  106  ;  Beal  v.  Hayes, 
5  Sandf.  (N.  Y.)  192  ;  Hammer  v. 
Brundenbach,  31  Mo.  49  ;  Daily  v- 
Litchfield,  10  Mich.  29  ;  Boyse  v. 
Ambrose,  28  Mo.  39 ;  Bayley  v. 
Peddie,  5  Sandf.  (N.  Y.)  192.  In 
Nash  V.  Hermasella,  9  Cal.  584,  the 
defendant  agreed  to  build  a  brick 
building  and  to  occupy  such  por- 
tion of  the  lot  as  should  be  sat- 
isfactory to  the  plaintiflf,  and  give 
him  possession  in  three  weeks,  and 
a  lease  for  six  months  with  the 
privilege  of  twelve  months,  and 
faiMng  to  do  so  to  pay  a  certain 
sum  as  damages.  The  court  held 
that  the  sum  fixed  upon  must  be 
treated  as  a  penalty  to  secure  the 
performance  of  the  contract.  See, 
also,  Goldsborough  v.  Baker,  3  Or.' 
(U.  S.  C.  C.)  48,  where,  in  a  con- 
tract to  deUver  a  lot  of  stone,  the 
parties  bound  themselves,  each  to 
the  other,  "to  pay  in  case  of  fail- 
ure by  either,  the  sum  of  $2,000  as 
stipulated  damages,  without  abate- 
ment or  diminution,"  and  it  was 
held  that  this  was  merely  a  penalty. 
So  Haldeman  v.  Jennings,  14  Ark. 
329  ;  where  the  defendant  entei-ed 
into  a  contract  to  ,  deliver  to  the 
plaintiff  a  lot  of  staves,  for  which 
the  plaintiff  was  to  pay  him  $400, 
and  make  certain  advances,  and 
upon  failure  of  either  party  to 
perform,  it  was  agreed  that  the 
party  failing  should  pay  the  other 
$500,  the  sum  agreed  upon  was 
held  to  be  a  penalty,  because  it 
was  unreasonable  and  out  of  all 
proportion  with  the  probable  actual 
damage.  In  Smith  v.  Wainwright, 
24  Vt.  97,  A  and  others  bought  of 
B,  his  interest  in  and  good-will  of 
the  manufacturing  and  sale  of 
certain  articles,  within  a  certain 
district,  and  gave  notes  to  the 
amount  of  $8,000  therefor,  and  B, 
at  the  same  time,  executed  to  A 
and  the  others  a  bond  "in  the 
penal  sum  of  $10,000,"  conditioned 
to  be  void  "  if  the  said  B,  shall 
hereafter  wholly  refrain  from 
manufacturing  and  vending,"  &c., 
and  a  breach  of  said  condition  by 
B  was  proved.  It  was  held  that 
under  the    circumstances   of  the 


case,  the  sum  so  named  in  the 
bond  was  a  penalty,  and  not  liqui- 
dated damages.  For  other  in- 
stances in  which  the  sum  named 
in  a  contract  has  been  treated  as  a 
penalty  merely,  see  ShieU  v.  Mc- 
Nitt,  9  Paige's  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  101  ; 
Lampman  v.  Cochran,  16  N.  Y. 
275 ;  Laubenhimer  v.  Mann,  19 
Wis.  519 ;  Taylor  v.  Sandiford,  7 
Wheat.  (U.  S.)  18 ;  Buren  v.  Digges, 
11  How.  (U.  S.)  461 ;  Rickertson  v. 
Richardson,  19  Cal.  330  ;  Long  v. 
Towl,  43  Mo.  545  ;  Jaquithv.  Hud- 
son,  5  Mich.  123 ;  Stevens  v. 
Barrett,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  443; 
Bearden  v.  Rich,  (S.  C.)  L.  554  ;  ' 
Brown  v.  Bellow.s,  4  Pick.  (Mass.) 
178  ;  Shreve  v.  Brereton,  51  Penn. 
St.  175  ;  Hughes  v.  Fisher.  1  Miss. 
516 ;  Merrill  v.  Merrill,  15  Mass. 
488;  Moore  v.  Platte  Co.,  8  Mo. 
467  ;  Berry  v.  Wisdom,  3  Ohio  St. 
231  ;  Burr  v.  Todd,  41  Penu.  St. 
206  ;  Higginson  v.  Weld,  14  Gray 
(Mass.)  175  ;  Burrage  v.  Crump,  3 
Jones'  (N.  C.)  Law,  330 ;  Lane  v. 
Wingate,  3  Ired.  (N.  C.)  Law,  826. 
To  summarize,  it  may  be  said  that 
where  the  damages  are  uncertain, 
and  not  susceptible  of  ready  ascer- 
tainment, and  the  sum  fixed  upon 
as  damages  is  not  unreasonable  or 
unconscionable  in  view  of  the 
probable  damage,  and,  from  the 
whole  contract,  and  the  surround- 
ing circumstances,  such  appears  to 
have  been  the  intention  of  the 
parties,  such  sum  will  be  treated 
as  hquidated  damages,  but,  where 
the  damages  are  certain,  and 
susceptible  of  ready  ascertainment, 
or  where  the  sum  fixed  upon  is  out 
of  all  proportion  with  the  probable 
damages,  it  will  be  treated  as  a 
penalty.  If  a  different  rule  was 
adopted,  parties  might  agree  upon 
any  sum  they  chose  as  damages  for 
the  non-payment  of  money,  or  the 
non-performance  of  any  contract, 
and  thus  entail  great  hardship  and 
unreasonable  burdens  upon  those 
who  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  be 
imable  to  perform  their  contracts. 
The  distinctions  made  by  the  law 
in  this  respect  are  not  only  im- 
portant, but  also  necessary  and  just. 


1056  Eent.  L§  453. ' 

certain  quantity  : '  or  that  he  will  not  sow  more  than  a 
certain  number  of  acres  with  clover  in  one  year,  or  if  he 
does  so,  wiU  pay  a  certain  additional  rent  for  every  acre 
above  the  number  specified  for  the  residue  of  the  term, 
the  sum  so  agreed  upon  is  liquidated  damage."  So  where 
a  lease  contained  a  stipulation  that  for  every  acre,  and 
so  in  proportion  for  a  less  quantity,  which  the  lessee 
should  suffer  to  be  occupied  by  any  other  person,  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  landlord,  an  additional  rent  should 
be  paid ; '  so  where  a  tenant  holds  under  a  demise 
(whether  under  seal  or  not),  upon  the  terms  not  to  sell 
any  hay  produced  upon  the  demised  premises,   off  the 

«said  premises,  "  under  a  certain  penalty  for  each  yard  of 
the  said  hay  so  sold  as  aforesaid,  to  be  recovered  by  dis- 

'  tress  as  for  rent  in  arrear  : "  held,  that  although  this 
was  not  strictly  a  rent,  it  was  not  a  penalty  but  an 
agreed  sum  recoverable  by  distress  as  for  rent.* 

The  difference  between  a  penalty  and  liquidated 
damages  is  very  great  in  several  respects,  viz.: 
1.  Although  judgment  may  be  obtained,  execution 
cannot  issue  to  levy  the  amount  of  a  penalty,  but  only 
the  damages  assessed  by  the  jury,  with  costs ;  and  the 
judgment  wiU  stand  as  a  security  for  any  subsequent 
breaches.  But  liquidated  damages  constitute  a  debt  of 
fixed  amount,  which  may  be  recovered  upon  proof  of 
the  contract  and  breach,  without  any  evidence  as  to  the 
amount  of  damages  actually  sustained,"  provided  the 
declaration  be  properly  framed.'  In  such  case  the  jury 
must  give  their  verdict  for  the  whole  sum  stipulated  to 
be  paid  (however  disproportionably  large),  and  not  for 
what  they  find  to  be  the  actual  amount  of  damage 

1  Eolfe  V.  Peterson,  2  Bro.  P.  C.  351;  Rolfe  v.  Peterson,  2  Bro.  P. 

436 ;  Bowers  v.   Nixon,  12  Q.   B.  C.  436 ;  Green  v.  Price,  13  M.  &  W. 

546,  558;  Denton  v.  Eichmond,  1  695;    16   id.   346;    Galsworthy   v. 

Or.  &  M.   734 ;  Birch  v.  Stephen-  Strutt,   1    Exchq.  659 ;  Atkyns  v. 

son,  3  Taunt.  469 ;  Howell  v.  Eich-  Kinnier,  4  Exchq.  776 ;  Sainter  v. 

ards,  11  East,  633 ;  Farrant  v.  01-  Ferguson,  7  C.  B.  716;  Eeynolds  v. 

mius,  3  B.  &  A.  692.  Bridge,  6  E.  &  B.  528 ;  Mercer  v. 

^  Jones  V.  Green,  3  Y.  &  J.  298.  Irving,  E.  B.  &  E.  563. 

3  Greenslade  v.  Tapscott,  1  C.  M.  « Hurst  v.  Hurst,  4  Exchq.  571 ;  5 

&  R.  55.  Exchq.  203 ;  ReindeU  v.  ScheU,  4  C. 

^  PoUitt  V.  Forrest,  11  Q.  B.  949.  B.  N.  S.  97. 

» Astley  V.  Weldon,  3  B.  &  P. 


CHAP.  XLi.]  How  Distinguished.  1057 

sustained  :  otherwise  the  court  will  set  aside  the  verdict, 
and  grant  a  new  trial."  But  the  court  will  not  set  aside 
the  award  of  an  arbitrator  on  this  ground,  unless  the 
mistake- appear  on  the  face  of  his  award."  2.  A  penalty 
cannot  be  set  aside.'  But  hquidated  damages  constitute 
a  debt,  and  may  be  set  off.'  If  a  penalty  is  pleaded  by 
way  of  set-off  as  liquidated  damages,  it  will  fail  on  a 
traverse.  °  8.  An  action  for  unliquidated  damages  may 
be  stayed  or  defeated  by  payment  of  a  sufficient  sum 
into  court  to  cover  the  amount'  of  damages  actually 
sustained .'  But  in  an  action  for  a  penalty,  the  defend- 
ant cannot  pay  money  into  court  unless  the  case  falls 
within  the  provisions  of  some  statute  ;  but  a  remedy 
may  be  obtained  in  a  court  of  equity.'  4.  Although  a 
court  of  equity  wiU  frequently  relieve  against  a  penalty 
or  forfeiture,  yet  it  will  not  restrain  an  action  to  recover 
liquidated  damages  ;  °  nor, .  on  the  other  hand,  will  it 
restrain  a  tenant  from  ploughing,  &c.,  where  it  is 
agreed  that  he  shall  pay  stipulated  damages  for  such 
acts.'  5.  Although  a  court  of  equity  will  not  in  general 
compel  a  person  to  answer  a  bill  of  discovery  in  aid  of 
an  action  for  a  penalty,  yet  it  is  otherwise  where  the 
action  is  brought  to  recover  liquidated  damages.'"  6.  In- 
creased rent,  being  in  the  nature  of  hquidated  damages, 
may  be  distrained  for,  but  a  penalty  cannot." 

Sec.  454.  How  distingtiished.— Notwithstanding  the 
above  important  differences  between  a  penalty  and 
liquidated  damages,  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  disting- 
uish them  :    the   numerous   cases  upon  this  point  are 

1  Farrant  v.  Olmius,  3  B.  &  A.         »  Hancock  v.  Entwistle,  3  T.  R. 

693 ;  Mercer  v.  Irving,  E.  B.  &  E.  435 ;  Homer  v.  Flintofl,  9  M.  &  W. 

563 ;  Fletcher  v.  Dyche,  3  T.  R.  37.  678. 

«  Fuller  V.  Fenwick,  3  C.  B.  705.         «  Betts  v.  Burch,  4  H.  &  N.  506. 

'  Nedrifl  v.  Hogan,  3  Burr.  1034 ;         '  Kepp  v.  Wiggitt,  4  C.  B.  678. 
Hancock  v.  Entwistle,  3  T.  R.  435 ;         <>  Benson  v.  Gibson,  3  Atk.  396 ; 

Horner  v.  Flintoflf ,  9  M.  &  W.  678 ;  Rolfe  v.'  Peterson.  3  Bro.  P.  C.  436  ; 

Williams  v.  Flight,  2  Dowl.  N.  S.  Jones  v.  Green,  3  Y.  &  J,  398. 
11.  9  Woodward  v.  Giles,  2  Vern.  119. 

*  Fletcher  v.  Dyche,  3  T.  R.  33  ;         ""  Richards  v.  Cole,  Mitford  (Ld. 

Duckworth  v.  Alison,  1  M.  &  W.  Redesdale),  Eq.  PI.  196  (4th  ed.) ; 

413 ;  Holme  v.  Guppuy,  3  M.  &  W.  Jones  v.  Green,  3  Y.  &  J.  398. 
387  ;    Macintosh    v.   The   Midland         "  PoUittv.  Forrest,  11  Q.  B.  949  ; 

Counties  R.  Co.,  14  M.  &  W.  548 ;  Bowers  v,  Nison,  13  Q.  B,  546. 
Legge  V.  Horlock,  13  Q.  B,  1015. 


1058  TtEST.  [|  454^ 

somewhat  conflicting.  If  expressly  called  a  "penalty" 
in  the  contract,  that  is  not  conclusive  ; '  but  if  pleaded  as 
a  penalty,  that  is  conclusive  against  the  party  so  pleading." 
On  the  other  hand,  if  expressly  declared  in  the  contract  to 
be  ' '  liquidated  and  ascertained  damages,  and  not  a  penalty 
or  penal  sum  or  in  the  nature  thereof,"  it  may  be  held  to 
be  a  mere  penalty.  °  It  not  unfrequently  happens  that 
the  same  sum  is  called  both  a  penalty  and  liquidated 
damages  in  the  same  sentence ;  or  it  is  stated  to  be  a 
penalty  or  forfeiture  to  be  recovered  as  liquidated  dama- 
ges." There  is  no  magic  in  words.  A  penalty  is  a 
penalty,  although  called  liquidated  damages  ;  "  the  mere 
alteration  of  the  term  cannot  alter  the  nature  of  the 
thing."  '  The  courts  are  therefore  bound,  in  compliance 
with  the  estabhshed  rules  of  construction,  to  collect  the 
meaning  of  a  writing  and  the  real  intention  of  the  parties, 
not  from  any  single  word  or  particular  expression,  but 
from  the  whole  scope  and  tenor  of  the  instrument."  If 
it  contains  various  stipulations  for  the  performance  or 
observance  of  several  things  of  more  or  less  importance 
to  the  parties,  and  the  breach  of  any  one  of  which  gives 
rise  to  a  definite  ajnount  of  damage,  and  one  large  sum  is 
stated  at  the  end  to  be  paid  upon  any  omission,  neglect 
or  default,  such  sum  must  be  considered  as  a  penalty.'' 
But  it  is  otherwise  where  the  damage  sustained  is  of  an 
unliquidated  nature,  and  not  of  definite  amount :  in  such 
cases  the  fuU  stipulated  sum  (however  large  and  dispro- 
portionate may  generally  be  recovered."    The  law  on  the 

'  Sainter  v.   Ferguson,  7  C.  B.  '  Astley  v.   Weldon,  3  B.  &  P. 

716  ;  Hurst  v.  Hurst,  4  Exchq.  571  ;  346  ;  Kemble  v.   Farren,   6  Bing. 

5  id.  303 ;  Legge  v.  Horloch,  13  Q.  141 ;  Boys  v.  Ancell,  5  Bing.  N.  C. 

B.  1015.  390  ;  Beckham  v.  Drake,  8  M.  &  W. 

'  Pollitt  V.  Forrest,  11  Q.  B.  949.  858. 

^  Kemble  v.  Farren,  6  Bing.  141.  » Chase  v.  AUen,  13  Gray  (Mass.) 

*  Davis  V.   Penton,   6    B.  &  C.  43  ;  Lynde  v.  Thompson,  3  Allen 

216  ;  Crisdee  v.  Bolton,  3  C.  &  P.  (Mass.)  456.     Sparrow  v.  Paris,  7 

240 ;    Homer  v.   Graves,  7  Bing.  H.  &  N.  594.     Upon  the  breach  of 

735  ;  Boys  v.  AnoeU,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  a  contract  of  the  owner  of  a  ves- 

390 ;  Legge  v.   Horlock,  13  Q.  B.  sel,  that  it  shaU  be  at  a  foreign 

1015.  port  ready  to  receive  goods  to  be 

'  Davies  v.  Penton,  6  B.  &  C.  there  furnished,  in  which  it  is 
316  ;  Kemble  v.  Farren,  6  Bing.  agreed  that  the  penalty  for  non- 
141  ;  Horner  v.  Flintoff,  9  M.  &  W.  performance  by  either  party  shall 
678.  be  $3,300,  the  measure  of  damages 

'  Dimich  v.  Corlett,  11  Mo.  P.  C.  is  not  the  amount  named  as  a  pen- 

.  199.  alty,  but  the  difference  between 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


How  Distinguished. 


1059 


question  of  penalty  or  liquidated  damages  may  now  be 
considered,  after  a  great  number  of  decisions,  not, 
perhaps,  all  of  them  strictly  reconcilable  with  each  other, 
to  be  at  length  satisfactorily  settled  :  and  the  hinge  on 
which  the  decision  in  every  particular  case  turns  is  the 


the  stipulated  rate  of  freight  and 
the  current  rate  at  the  port  at  the 
time  when  the  vessel  should  have 
been  ready  to  receive  her  cargo, 
and  interest  upon  that  sum,  to  be 
computed  from  such  a  date  as 
would  make  proper  allowance  for 
the  time  for  loading  and  for  ordi- 
nary delay.  Higginson  v.  Weld, 
14  Gray  (Mass.)  165.  It  is  the  ten- 
dency and  preference  of  the  law  to 
regard  a  sum  stated  to  be  payable 
if  a  contract  is  not  fulfilled  as  a 
penalty,  and  not  as  liquidated 
damages.  Wallis  v.  Carpenter,  13 
AUen  (Mass.)  19 ;  Cheddicke  v. 
Marsh,  31  N.  J.  Law,  46S;  Baird 
V.  TolUver.  6  Humph.  (Tenn.)  186. 
PerCHAMBEE,  J.,Astleyv.  Weldon, 
2  B.  &  P.  354 ;  per  CoLEElDaE,  J., 
Reynolds  v.  Bridge.  6  E.  &  B.  538 ; 
36  L.  J.  Q.  B.  13 ;  Thoroughgood  v. 
Walker,  3  Jones'  (N.  C.)  L.  15.  In 
Moore  v.  Platte  Co.,  8  Mo.  467,  A 
agreed  to  do  a  certain  piece  of  work 
for  $758,  and  gave  a  bond  with 
sureties  to  secure  the  performance 
of  the  work  for  $1,570.  It  was 
held  that  the  sum  named  in  the 
bond  was  to  be  treated  as  a  penalty, 
and  only  the  actual  damage  could 
be  i-ecovered.  Lord  v.  Gaddis,  9 
Iowa,  365.  In  Halderman  v.  Jen- 
nings, 14  Ark.  329,  the  defendant 
was  to  deliver  certain  property  for 
$400,  and  if  either  party  failed  to 
perform,  it  was  agreed  that  $500 
should  be  paid  to  the  other  "  with- 
out abatement  or  diminution."  It 
was  held  that  the  sum  agreed  upon 
was  only  a  penalty,  as,  otherwise, 
a  larger  sum  might  become  payable 
on  a  failure  to  pay  a  less.  Bat  this 
rule  seems  to  have  been  ignored  in 
Gushing  v.  Drew,  97  Mass.  445, 
where,  in  an  action  upon  a  con- 
tract, by  which  the  plaintiff  sold 
the  defendant  his  horses,  wagons, 
&c.,  and  good- will  of  an  express 
business  for  $650,  and  the  plaintiff 
agreed  to  pay  the  defendant  $900 
if  he  violated  the  good  will  part  of 
the  contract ;  it  was  held  that  the 
$900  was  to  be  treated  as  liquidated 
damages.    From  this  case  it  would 


seem,  that  where  the  damages 
likely  to  result  from  a  breach  are 
so  uncertain  as  not  to  be  susceptible 
of  approximate  admeasurement,  a 
sum  larger  than  that  which  forms 
the  consideration  of  the  contract 
may  be  recovered  as  liquidated 
damages.  See,  also,  Seavy  v.  Laf- 
flin,  101  Mass.  334.  In  Chase  v. 
Allen,  13  Gray  (Mass.)  143,  the 
owners  and  occupants  of  real  estate 
in  a  cei-tain  part  of  a  city  subscribed 
$11,000  to  aid  A  in  building  a  hotel 
there,  and  the  agreement  between 
A  and  the  subscribers  was  deposited 
with  C,  for  the  benefit  of  all  parties ; 
and  A,  upon  receiving  payment  of 
the  amount  of  this  subscription, 
agreed,  in  case  he  should  fail  to 
build  the  hotel  within  a  certain 
time,  and  in  a  certain  manner,  to 
refund  the  money  with  interest, 
and  pay  "full  damages  to  the  sub- 
scribers for  their  trouble  and  disap- 
pointment ; "  and  afterward,  upon 
receiving  notes  of  some  of1;he  same 
persons,  and  of  others,  for  an 
additional  Uke  subscription  of 
$9,000,  gave  a  bond  to  C,  con- 
ditioned, in  case  of  failure  to  fulfill 
his  agreement,  to  pay  to  C,  on 
demand,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
original  subscribers,  $11,000,  with 
interest,  to  discharge  the  sub- 
scribers of  the  second  agreement 
from  all  liability  thereon,  and  to 
"  further  pay  to  C,  for  the  benefit 
of  all  the  subscribers,  in  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  their  subscrip- 
tions, the  additional  sum  of  $20,000, 
not  as  a  penalty,  but  as  fixed  and 
liquidated  damages,  and  subject  to 
no  deduction."  It  was  held  that 
this  sum  of  $30,000  was  liquidated 
damages,  and  not  a  penalty ;  and 
that,  upon  A's  breach  of  the  agree- 
ment, C  might  maintain  an  action 
against  nim  for  a  portion  thereof 
equal  to  the  subscriptions  of  all 
those  who  had  waived  any  rights 
under  the  first  agreement,  and  had 
not  settled  and  released  their  claims 
upon  A.  See,  also,  Lynde  v. 
Thompson,  3  Allen  (Mass.3  ■iSS. 


1060  Rent.  [§  455. 

intention  of  the  parties,  to  be  collected  from  the  language 
they  have  used.  The  mere  use  of  the  term  "penalty," 
or  the  term  "liquidated  damages,"  does  not  determine 
that  intention  ;  but,  like  any  other  question  of  construc- 
tion, it  is  to  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  provis- 
ions and  the  language  of  the  whole  instrument.  One 
circumstance,  however,  is  of  great  importance  towards  ar- 
riving at  a  conclusion  ;  if  the  instrument  contains  many 
stipulations  of  varying  importance,  or  relating  to  objects 
of  small  value  calculable  in  money,  there  is  the  strongest 
ground  for  supposing  that  a  stipulation,  applying  gen- 
erally to  a  breach  of  all  or  any  of  them,  was  intended  to 
be  a  penalty,  and  not  in  the  way  of  liquidated  damages.' 
Where  there  is  a  reservation  of  a  certain  sum  per  acre 
during  the  last  twenty  years  of  a  term,  for  every  acre  of 
meadow  thereby  demised,  which  the  tenant  shall  plough, 
dig,  ear,  break  up,  or  convert  into  tillage  during  the  said 
last  twenty  years  of  the  term,  and  so  after  that  rate  for 
any  greater  or  less  quantity  that  an  acre,  or  less  time 
than  a  year,  it  is  considered  that  the  rent  is  due  in  the 
last  twenty  years,  if  the  land  is  then  ploughed,  whether  it 
was  first  ploughed  within  the  last  twenty  years,  or  before  ; 
and  that  the  rent  continues  payable  during  the  twenty 
years,  though  the  land  be  again  laid  down  to  permanent 
grass.'  The  right  to  additional  rent  for  over-tillage  is 
not  waived  by  the  acceptance  to  the  reserved  rent  with  a 
knowledge  of  the  breach.'  A  provision  in  a  lease,  that 
the  lessee  shall  take  all  his  beer  from  the  lessor,  or  in 
case  he  did  not  do  so,  that  an  advanced  rent  should  be 
paid,  has  been  much  censured  by  the  courts ;  and,  at  all 
events,  such  a  covenant  is  subject  to  an  implied  condi- 
tion, and  cannot  be  enforced  unless  the  lessee  be  sup- 
phed  with  good  beer.' 

Sec.  455.  Payment  of  rent.— Eent  is  considered  as  of  a 
higher  nature  than  ordinary    debts,    even  though  due 

1  Dimich  v.  Corlett,  13  Moo.  P.  » Denton  v.   Eichmond,  1   C.  & 

C.  C.  199.  M.  734. 

^  Birch  V.  Stephenson,  8  Taunt.  *  Cooper  v.  Twibill,  3  Camp.  386 ; 

469  ;  Howell  v.  Eichards,  11  East,  Holcombe  v.  Hewson,  2  Camp.  391 ; 
633;  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Eent  (F).  Stancliffe,  app.,   Clarke,    resp.,  7 

Exchq.  439. 


CHAP.  XLi.]  Allowances.  1061 

upon  sealed  instruments ;  but  where  the  tenant  dies, 
rent  in  arrear  is  put  upon  the  same  footing  as  other  debts 
under  specialties,  in  the  distribution  of  the  estate.'  Eent 
in  arrear  is  no  part  of  the  reversion.'  A  payment  of 
rent  by  mistake  or  misrepresentation  to  a  person  not 
entitled  to  demand  it,  does  not  preclude  the  tenant  from 
showing  that  the  person  to  whom  it  was  paid  was  not 
entitled  to  it,  but  the  onus  of  proof  is  shifted.'  So  if  A, 
who  is  a  tenant  for  life  subject  to  forfeiture,  with 
remainder  over  to  Bj  leases  to  C  for  a  term,  and  after- 
wards apprehending  that  he  has  forfeited  acquiesces  in 
B's  claiming  and  receiving  the  rent  from  0  ;  his  executor 
may,  on  showing  that  he  acquiesced  under  a  false  appre- 
hension, recover  from  0  the  amount  of  the  rent  erro- 
neously paid  to  B.* 

Sec.  456.  Allowances  by  mistake  of  deductions  from  rent.— 
An  allowance  by  way  of  deduction  from  the  rent,  even 
though  made  by  mistake,  operates  as  payment  of  the 
rent,  pro  tanto :  thus,  where  a  tenant  paid  rent  regularly 
to  the  landlord's  agent,  deducting  a  sewer's  rate,  which 
it  was  afterwards  discovered  that  by  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  under  which  the  tenant  held  he  ought  him- 
self to  have  paid,  it  was  held,  that,  in  an  action  to  recover  « 
the  sums  so  deducted  as  arrears  of  rent,  a  plea  of  pay- 
ment was  supported  by  the  facts." 

Sec.  457.  Where  rent  is  payable.— Rent  reserved,  pay- 
able yearly,  quarterly,  &c.,  unless  otherwise  provided, 
is  to  be  paid  on  the  land,  because  the  land  is  the  debtor, 
and  that  is  the  place  of  demand  appointed  by  law  :  so  if 
a  man  lease,  rendering  rent,  and  the  lessee  binds  him- 
self in  a  sum  to  perform  the  covenants,  this  does  not 
alter  the  place  of  payment  of  the  rent,  for  it  may  be 
tendered  on  the  land  without  seeking  the  obligee,  except 

>  Thompson    v.     Thompson,     9  Bing.  474  ;  Claridge  v.  Mackenzie, 

Price,  471.  4  M.  &  Q.  143  ;  Mayor,  &c. ,  of  Lud- 

2  Sharp  V.  Key,  8  M.  &  W.  379.  low  v.  Charlton,  9  C.  &  P.  342. 

3  Rogers  v.  Pitcher,  6  Taunt.  203 ;  '  Waller  v.  Andrews,,  3  M.  &  W. 
Cole  Eiec.  281.  312  ;  Bramston.  y,  EobinSj  4  Bing. 

*  Williams  v.  Bartholomew,  1  B.     11. 
&  P.   336;  Gregory  v.  Doidge,  3 

IL— 15 


1062  Rent.  [§  458. 

where  the  condition  is  for  the  performance  of  homage 
other  corporeal  service  to  the  person  of  the  lord.'  This, 
however,  which  is  a  rule  of  the  common  law,  applies 
principally"  to  forfeitures  and  conditions  ;  for  a  covenant 
for  the  payment  of  rent,  no  particular  place  of  payment 
being  mentioned,  is  analogous  to  a  covenant  to  pay  a 
sum  of  money  in  gross  on  a  day  certain,  in  which  case  it 
is  incumbent  on  the  covenantor  to  seek  out  the  person 
to  be  paid,  and  pay  or  tender  him  the  money,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  he  has  contracted  so  to  do."  The 
lessee  of  the  king  must  pay  his  rent,  without  demand, 
at  the  exchequer,  wherever  it  may  be  ;  but  if  the  king 
grant  the  reversion,  the  rent  must  be  demanded  on  the 
land  before  the  patentee  can  enter  as  for  a  forfeiture  on 
non-payment.' 

Sec.  458.  How  rent  may  be  paid.— Like  any  other 
species  of  debt  rent  may  be  paid  by  a  remittance  by  the 
post.  If  a  tenant  is  directed  by  his  landlord  to  remit 
money  by  mail,  and  it  is  lost,  the  latter  must  bear  the 
loss.*  Where  a  creditor  in  the  country  directed  his 
debtor  to  pay  money  into  a  certain  banking-house  for 
his  account,  and  he  had  no  account  with  the  house  but 
through  a  country  banker  ;  it  was  held,  that  a  payment 
there  to  the  credit  of  his  account  with  the  country 
banker  was  a  discharge  to  the  debtor."  Generally,  a 
creditor  may  insist  upon  payment  being  made  either  to 
himself  or  his  agent ;  but  having  authorized  payment  to 
his  agent,  he  cannot  revoke  that  authority,  if  the  debtor 
has  given  such  a  pledge  to  pay  pursuant  to  the  authority 
as  would  bind  him  in  a  court  of  law.' 

Sec.  459.  Payment  by  bills  or  notes.— If  the  landlord 
takes  a  security  for  rent  in  arrear — as  if  he  takes  a  bond, 
bin  of  exchange  or  promissory  note — his  so  doing  will 

'  Co.  Litt.  301  b ;  Eowe  v.  Young  »  53,0.  Abr.  tit.  Rent  (I). 

2  Brod.   &  B.   234;  Shep.  Touch.  ^Warwick  v.  Noakes,  Peake,  67. 

378  ;    Crouch   v.   Fastolfe,  Sir   T-  ^  Breed  v.  Green,  Holt,  304. 

Eaym.  418 ;  Com.  Dig.  Pleader  (3-  '  Hodgson  v.  Anderson,  3  B.  &  C. 

W.  49).  843. 

^  Haldano  v.  .Tohnson,  8  Exchq. 
689. 


CHAP.  XU.J  Payment.  1063 

not  amount  to  a  payment  of  the  rent,  or  bar  him  of  his 
remedies  peculiar  to  the  recovery  of  rent,  until  such 
security  is  actually  paid  : '  nor  will  an  agreement  by  the 
landlord  to  accept  interest  on  rent  in  arrear  postpone 
either  an  action  or  distress  for  the  rent  due.°  Where  the 
tenant  gave  a  note  for  rent  in  arrear,  and  took  a  receipt 
for  the  rent,  and  the  landlord  having  afterwards  dis- 
trained for  the  rent,  the  tenant  brought  trespass,  it  was 
held,  that  notwithstanding  the  note  the  landlord  might 
distrain,  for  it  was  no  alteration  of  the  debt  until  pay- 
ment.' A  tenant  being  indebted  for  rent,  his  landlord's 
agent  received  from  the  tenant  a  bill  of  exchange  for 
the  amount  which  he  endorsed  over,  and  paid  the  rent 
to  the  landlord,  crediting  it  in  his  accounts  as  if  the 
tenan^  had  paid  the  money ;  the  landlord  having  dis- 
trained for  rent :  it  was  held  to  be  a  question  for  the 
jury  whether  the  transaction  amounted  to  a  discount  of 
the  bill  by  the  agent  for  the  tenant,  or  a  mere-  advance  of 
rent  by  the  agent  to  the  landlord,  in  which  latter  case  he 
was  entitled  to  distrain.''  Where  to  covenant  for  rent 
against  three  defendants,  it  was  pleaded  that  part  of  the 
rent  was  paid  ;  that  of  the  residue  two  of  the  defendants 
had  paid  their  shares,  and  that  the  other  had  given  the 
plaintiff  a  promissory  note  for  his  share  payable  at  a 
banker's  ;  that  such  note  was  dishonored,  whereupon 
the  plaintiff  sued  him  and  had  judgment  by  default  on 
the  note,  which  judgment  was  still  unsatisfied  :  held,  that 
the  judgment  was  no  merger,  being  obtained  on  a  col- 
lateral security,  and  not  having  produced  actual  satisfac- 
tion.' In  ordinary  cases  where  a  party  has  taken  bills 
in  payment  of  a  debtor,  it  will  be  presumed  that  the 
money  was  received,  unless  the  contrary  is  shown." 

1  Davis  V.  Gyde,  3  Ad.  &  El.  024 ;  *  Parrot  v.  Anderson,  1  Exchq. 

Worthington  v.  Wigley,  3  Bing.  93 ;  Griffiths  v.  Chichester,  id.  95. 

N.   C.  454;  Murray  v.  King,  5  B.  '  Drake  v.  MitoJieU,  3  East,  851. 

&  Aid.   165  ;  Smith,  L.  &  T.  169  « Hebden  v.  Hartsink,  4  Esp.  46. 

(2d  ed.).  A  receipt  for  the  last  year's  rent 

^  Skerry  r.  Preston,    3    Chitty,  warrants  the  presumption  that  all 

245.  previous  rent  has  been  paid.    Jen- 

'  Harris  v.  Shipway,  and  Ewer  kins  v.  Calvert,  8  Cr.  (U.  S.  C.  C.) 

V.  Lady  Clifton,  Bull.  N.  P.  182 ;  216. 
Seven  v.  Mihil,  1  Ld.  Ken.  370 ; 
Davis  v.  G-yde,  3  Ad.  &  El.  638. 


1064  Eent.  [§  460- 

Sec.  460.  What  payments  operate  as  payment  pro  tanto 
of  the  rent.— Although,  generally,  no  payments  or 
damages  made  or  sustained  by  a  tenant  can  be  set  off 
against  a  claim  due  to  the  landlord,  unless  in  pursuance 
of  some  express  agreement  or  stipulation  in  that  behalf,' 
yet  a  payment  of  ground-rent  by  the  tenant,  in  default  of 
payment  by  his  mesne  landlord,  may  operate  as  payment 
pro  tanto  of  the  rent  claimed  by  the  latter  ; '  and  grow- 
ing rent  may  be  discharged  by  such  payments  as  well  as 
rent  actually  due  : '  such  payments  are  not  the  less  com- 
pulsory because  the  ground  landlord,  on  demanding  the 
ground  rent,  allows  the  occupier  time  to  pay.  Where  a 
stranger  received  rent  due  to  the  testator  in  his  lifetime, 
and,  afterwards,  by  desire  of  the  tenant  in  possession, 
paid  the  demand  of  ground-rent  due  at  the  same  time 
for  the  same  premises  ;  it  was  held,  that  he  might  deduct 
such  payment  in  an  action  by  the  executor  for  the  rent, 
but  not  a  payment  of  ground-rent,  arising  after  the 
death  of  the  testator.* 

Sec.  461.  Payment  of  taxes,  rates,  &c.— a  payment  of  a 
tax  upon  the  premises  or  property  operates  as  a  payment 
pro  tanto  of  the  rent,  notwithstanding  any  stipulation  in 
the  lease  to  the  contrary.     So  a  payment  of  land-tax, 

'  Andrew  v.  Hancock,  1  Brod.  the  debt  accrued  respectjng  the 
&  B.  37;  Wilson  v.  Davenport,  5  estate,  as  for  taxes  paid  by  the 
C.  &  P.  531 ;  Duncan  v.  Lyon,  3  tenant  which  should  have  been 
John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  351.  Damages  paid  by  the  landlord.  Fransciscus 
for  neglect  to  repair  cannot  be  set  v.  Riegart,  4  Watts  (Penn.)  98,  476. 
off ;  AUen  v.  Pell,  4  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  But  damages  arising  from  a  breach 
305;  nor  expenses  of  improve-  of  any  of  the  covenants  of  the  lease 
ments ;  Tuttle  v.  Tompkins,  3  are  held  not  to  be  so  pleadable ; 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  407 ;  or  for  not  Sickles  v.  Fort,  13  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
building  according  to  the  covenants  559;  or  from  a  trespass  or  other 
of  the  lease;  Ettured  v.  Osborn,  13  wrongful  act  of  the  landlord;  Drake 
id.  399 ;  nor  indeed  damages  for  v.  Cookroft,  4  E.  D.  Smith  (N.  Y. 
thebreachof  any  covenant,  express  C.  P.)  84;  Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Parker 
or  implied.  It  is  held  in  Connec-  Vein  S.  S.  Co.,  21  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.) 
ticut  that  a  demand  for  goods  sold,  389  ;  but  such  matters  may  be  re- 
Ac,  cannot  be  s^t  off  in  an  ijction  couped.  Lane  v.  Brace,  8  Paige's 
for  rent,  unless  80  agreed  bet\yeen  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  597.  Damages  arising  ' 
the  parties ;  Gunn  v.  Sooville,  5  from  a  trespass  by  the  landlord 
Day  (Conn.)  113 ;  but  generally  it  cannot  be  set  off.  Levy  v.  Beard, 
may  be  said  that  a  debt  due  from  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  169. 
the  landlord  to  the  tenant  may  be  ^  Doe  v.  Hare,  3  C.  &  M.  145. 
so  applied,  unless  excluded  ex-  '  Carter  v.  Carter,  5  Bing.  406. 
pressly  or  by  fair  implication  ;  Sapsford  v.  Fletcher,  4  T.  R.  511. 
Grossman  v.  Lauber,  39  Ind.  618  ;  :  ^Wilkinson  v.  Cawood,  3  Anst. 
and    especially   is  this  so  where  _  505. 


CHAP.  xLi.]  Deductions.  1065 

sewer's  rate,  rent-charge  in  lieu  of  tithes,  and  other  charges 
of  the  like  nature,  may,  in  the  absence  of  any  express 
stipulation  for  their  payment  by  the  tenant,  operate  as  a 
payment  pro  tanto  of  the  rent,  and  be  deducted  accord- 
ingly on  the  next  payment  of  rent.'  Eent,  does  not 
include  taxes ;  unless  the  tenant  covenants  to  pay  them, 
the  landlord  is  bound  to  do  so."  Grain,  stipulated  by  a 
tenant  to  be  delivered  at  a  certain  place  in  payment  of 
rent,  is  at  the  tenant's  risk  until  delivered  or  tendered,' 

Sec.  462.  When  other  payments  may  be  deducted  froxa.  the 
rent.— Wherever  a  tenant  may  be  outsted  from  his  occu- 
pation on  default  made  of  a  payment  by  his  landlord,  he 
may  pay  in  his  discharge  and  for  the  redemption  of  the 
premises,  and  deduct  such  payment  from  his  rent  :*  but 
where  a  tenant  paid  as  rent  a  certain  sum  to  prevent  a 
person  ejecting  him  from  a  portion  of  the  land  to  which 
he  claimed  title  from  the  lessor  prior  to  the  lease,  it  was 
held  not  a  payment  which  could  be  set  up  against  so  much 
of  the  rent.'  In  an  action  for  rent  the  tenant  may  avail 
himself  of  a  part  payment  obtained  from  under  a  distress, 
or  a  judgment  for  the  same  rent."  Where  a  landlord  is 
bound  to  repair,  and  the  tenant  is  obliged  by  sudden 
accident  to  make  repairs,  in  order  to  prevent  further 
mischief,  it  seems  that  the  tenant  may  set  off  the  money 
laid  out  in  such  repairs  against  an  action  brought  against 
him  by  the  landlord  for  rent :  but  it  would  be  far  more 
safe  and  advisable  to  pay  the  rent  and  bring  a  cross-action 
against  the  landlord  for  his  breach  of  contract.' 

Compulsory  payments  made  by  an  under-tenant  of 
arrears  of  rent  due  from  the  original  tenant  to  the  original 
landlord,  for  which  the  goods  of  the  under-tenant  are 
liable  to  be  distrained,  may  be  set  up  in  reduction  of 

'Sweet  V.  Seagar,^  C.  B.  N.  S.  < Smith  v.  Pearce,  MS.,  sittings 

119;  Hurst  V.  Hurst,  4  Exchq.  571;  at  Guildhill,  after   M.  T.  43  Geo. 

Cumming  v.  Bedborough,  15  M.  &  2,  Lord  Ellenborough,  C.  J. 

W.  483 ;  Aadre-w  v.  Hancock,  1  B.  'Boodle  v.  Cambell,  7  M.  &  G. 

&  B.  87.  386 ;  2  D.  &  L.  66.  . 

^Schuricht  v.  BroadweU,  4  Mo.  'Harmer  v.  Bean,  3  C.  &  K.  307. 

App.  160.  '  Waters  v.  Weigall,  3  Anst.  57S. 

^Magill    V.  Hotston,   6    Baxt. 
(Tenn.)  333. 


1066  Eent.  .  [§462. 

the  rent  due  to  the  original  lessee,'  and  a  payment  of  such 
rent  by  the  occupier,  in  default  of  the  original  tenant,  is 
not  the  less  a  compulsory  payment,  because  the  original 
landlord  on  demanding  it  allows  the  occupier  time  to 
pay.'  To  make  the  payment  compulsory,  it  is  not 
essential  that  the  original  landlord  should  have  threatened 
to  distrain  upon  the  occupier ;  it  is  enough  that  he  has 
demanded  payment,  for  a  demand  by  one  who  has  the 
power  to  distrain  is  treated  as  equivalent  to  a  threat  of 
distress.'  A  payment  under  such  circumstances  is  no 
more  voluntary  than  a  donation  to  a  beggar  who 
presents  a  pistol.'  If  premises  are  liable  to  a  distress, 
the  tenant  has  a  right  to  pay  the  charge  to  which  they 
are  liable,  and  to  deduct  from  his  rent  the  sum  so  paid.' 
Payment  by  a  tenant  of  annuity  or  a  legacy  secured  by 
power  of  distress  ;  °  or  of  interest  due  on  .  a  mortgage 
made  before  the  commencement  of  the  tenancy,'  is  con- 
sidered as  equivalent  to  the  payment  of  so  much  rent  to 
the  landlord .  But  in  order  to  operate  as  a  deduction  from 
rent,  the  money  must  have  been  actually  paid  ; '  and  it 
would  seem  that  the  payment  must  have  been  preceded 
by  a  demand,  accompanied  by  a  threat,  in  case  of  non- 
payment, to  distrain,  or  to  object,  or  to  "put  the  law  in 
force."'  The  payment,  moreover,  must  be  made  either 
to  relieve  the  tenant  of  an  incumbrance  on  the  land,  or 
to  discharge  a  debt  due  by  the  landlord."  A  deduction 
permitted,  for  several  years,  by  mistake  by  the  landlord 
or  his  agent,  the  landlord  having  the  means  of  knowing 
all  the  facts,  and  there  being  no  fraud  or  misrepresentation 
on  the  part  of  the  tenant,  wiU  operate  as  a  payment  of 
so  much  rent,  and  the  landlord  cannot  afterwards  dis- 
train for  sums  so  deducted,  or  recover  them  by  action 

'Sapsford  v.    Fletcher,  4  T.   E.  'Johnson  v.  Jones,  9  Ad.'&El. 

511 ;  Carter  v.  Carter,  5  Bing.  406 ;  809,  814 ;  Dyer  v.  Bowley,  3  Bing. 

Sturgess  v.  FaVrington,  4  Taunt.  614.  94. 

''Carter  v.  Carter,  5  Bing.  406.  8  Ryan  v.  Thompson,  L.  R.,  3  C. 

3  Smith,  L.  &  T.  171.  P.  144. 

*Per  Best,  C.   J.,  in   Carter  v.  'WMtmore   v.    WaUier,  3  C.  & 

Carter,  5  Bing.  at  p.  409.  K.  615  ;  Taylor  v.  Zamira,  6  Taunt. 

*  Per  Buerotjgh,  J.,  in  Taylor  v.  534. 

Zamira,  9  Taunt,  at  p.  539.  '"See  judgment  of  Cresswell,J., 

« Taylor  v.  Zamira,  6  Taunt.  524 ;  in  Boodle  v.  Cambell,  7  M.  &  Gr. ; 

Wbitmore  v.   Walker,  3  C.  &  K.  Graham  v.  AUsopp,  3  Ex.  186. 
615. 


CHAP,  xu.]  Deductions,  1067 

as  arrears  of  rent.'  A  tenant  cannot  obtain  an  injunc- 
tion to  restrain  the  landlord  from  proceeding  upon  a 
replevin  bond  on  the  ground  that  he  has  a  valid  off-set 
against  the  rent  distrained  for  ; "  but,  when  the  landlord 
brings  an  action  for  the  rent  such  set-off  may  be  made,  but 
uncertain  damages  that  he  may  be  entitled  to  recover 
cannot  be  set  off ;  but,  where  recoupment  is  permitted, 
they  may  undoubtedly  be  recouped,  especially  where  the 
damages  result  from  a  breach  of  any  of  the  covenants  of 
the  lease,  under  which  rent  is  sought  to  be  recovered." 
Damages  that  arise  out  of  a  breach  of  the  same  contract 
upon  which  the  action  is  predicated,  may  be  set  up  in 
abatement  or  reduction  of  the  claim  sought  to  be  recov- 
ered ;  and  this  applies  to  actions  upon  leases  for  rent,  as 
well  as  to  any  other  class  of  actions. '  This  is  called  recoup- 
ment, from  recoupe,  which  signifies  to  keep  back,  and  as 
a  legal  term  is  construed  as  keeping  back  a  certain  sum 
which  the  plaintiff  in  equity  and  good  conscience  ought 
not  to  have,  because  of  some  act  or  omission  of  his 
which  has  prevented  the  defendant  from  deriving  the 
full  benefit  of  the  contract  sued  upon,  whether  such  dam- 
age resulted  before  or  after  suit  brought. '  It  differs  from 
set-off  in  that  in  that  it  is  confined  to  damages  resulting 
from  ■  the  contract  upon  which  the  action  is  brought, 
that  the  damages  may  be  unliquidated,  and  that  no  balance 
can  be  recovered  of  the  plaintiff,  .even  though  they  large- 
ly exceed  the  plaintiff's  claim,  while  in  set-off  any 
liquidated  claim  may  be  set  up,  and  the  defendant  may 
have  a  judgment  against  the  plaintiff    in  case  the  set- 

1  BramstonY.  Robins,  4  Bing.  11 ;  landlord's  failure  to  repair  as  he 
Waller  v.  Andrews,  3  M.  &  W.  had  covenanted  to  do,  and  that, 
313.  too,  even  though  he  had  not  noti- 

2  Pratt   V.    Keith,  33   L.  J.  Ch.  lied  the  landlord  to  repair. 

528  ;  Townrow  v.  Benson,  3  Madd.         ■*  Depuy  v.  Silver,  1  Clark  (Penn.) 

203.  385 ;  Mayor,  &c. ,  v.  Mabie,  13  N.  Y. 

3  Weigall  V.  Waters,  6  T.  E.  488 ;  151 ;  La  Farge  v.  Halsey,  1  Bosw. 
Gower  v.  Hunt,  1  Barnes,  203.  In  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  171.  Dam- 
Coleman  v.  Bruce,  37  Tex.  171,  ages  for  a  trespass  committed  by 
damages  from  breach  of  a  cove-  ■  the  landlord  cannot  be  set  oflE  in  an 
nant  to  repair  was  held  to  be  a  action  for  rent,  and,  not  arising 
proper  subject  for  recoupment, .  out  of  the  contract,  they  cannot  be 
and  in  Guthman  v.  Castleberry,  49  recouped.  Levy  v.  Bond,  1  B.  D. 
Ga.  272,  it  was  held  that  a  tenant  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  169. 

might  recover  damages  resulting         '  Stillwell  v.  Chappell,   30  Ind. 
from  leakage  consequent  upon  the     72 ;  Martin  v.  Hilli  42  Ala.  375. 


1068 


Rent. 


[§  462. 


off  exceeds  the  claitn  sued  upon.  Thus,  in  an  action 
for  rent  under  a  lease  the  defendant  may  recoup 
damages  that  he  haS  sustained  by  reason  of  the  les- 
sor's neglect  to  build,'  or  to  repair,"  as  he  has  con- 
tracted to  do,  or  that  the  lessor  has  deprived  him  of  the 
beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  premises,  as  by  depriving 
him  of  the  use  of  an  easement ; '  or,  indeed,  damages 
resulting  to  the  tenant  from  the  violation  of  any  of  the  ex- 
press or  implied  covenants  of  the  lease  by  the  lessor. "    But 


'  Coleman  v.  Bruce,  37  Tex.  171 ; 
Lynch  v.  Baldwin,  69  lU.  310 ;  De- 
puy  V.  Silver,  1  Clark  (Penn.)  385 ; 
Leach  v.  Leach,  10  Ind.  371 ;  Block 
v.  Ebner,  54  id.  544;  Fairman  v. 
Fluok,  2  Watts  (Penn.)  516.  In 
Georgia  it  is  held  that  the  tenant 
may,  in  an  action  for  rent,  recoup 
damages  that  he  has  sustained  by 
reason  of  a  leaky  roof,  where  the 
landlord  occupies  a  part  of  the 
building  over  the  tenement  occu- 
pied by  the  tenant,  whether  the 
landlord  has  been  notified  of  the 
defect  or  not.  Guthman  v.  Castle- 
bury,  49  Ga.  373. 

2  Myers  v.  Burns,  33  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  401.  In  an  action  for  rent,  the 
defendant  may,  under  a  covenant 
to  keep  the  premises  in  repair,  set 
up  as  a  counterclaim  an  amount 
expended  by  him  in  the  necessary 
repair  of  the  premises,  and  also 
damages  sustained  by  the  loss  of 
the  use  of  parts  of  the  premises, 
rendered  untenantable  for  waht  of 
repair.  And  he  may  recover  for 
his  actual  expenses  in  repairs,  al- 
though they  exceeded  what  they 
would  have  cost  the  landlord  had 
he  employed  his  own  mechanics. 
The  landlord's  omission  to  repair 
gave  the  tenant  the  right  to  make 
repairs  by  his  mechanics,  and  with 
such  suitable  materials  as  he  should 
select.  He  was  bound  to  be  rea- 
sonable and  judicious  in  his  re- 
pairs; but  he  was  not  compelled 
to  select  precisely  the  same  kind 
of  paper  and  paint,  or  to  be  pre- 
cise that  the  expense  was  not  a 
farthing  greater  than  had  before 
been  expended  upon  the  same  spot. 
He  was  at  liberty  to  repair  accord- 
ing to  the  modern  style,  and  adopt 
modern  improvements.  Myers  v. 
Burns,  34  N.  Y.  269.  In  an  action 
by  a  tenant,  a  municipal  corpora- 


tion, to  annul  an  executory  agree- 
ment for  a  lease  under  which  the 
corporation  have  occupied,  on  the 
ground  that  fraud  was  practised 
in  procuring  them  to  take  it,  the 
landlord  may  set  up  a  counter- 
claim for  rent  accrued  by  such  oc- 
cupancy. The  proposed  lease,  and 
the  resolution  of  the  corporation 
to  accept  it,  are  to  be  regarded  as 
"the  transaction"  constituting  the 
foundation  of  the  plaintiff's  claim. 
"Wood  V.  Mayor,  &c. ,  of  New  York, 
3  id.  467.  The  charges  of  fraud  be- 
ing unsustained,  the  defendant 
may,  upon  such  counter-claim,  re- 
cover rent  down  to  the  time  of  the 
commencement  of  the  action,  and 
the  defendant  may  be  allowed,  at 
his  option,  to  enter  judgment  for 
a  specific  performance  of  the  agree- 
ment to  execute  the  lease.  Mayor, 
&c.,  of  N.  Y.  V.  Wood,  4  Abb.  Pr. 
(N.  S.)  333. 

*  Depuy  V.  Silver,  ante ;  Lynch 
V.  Baldwin,  ante. 

^Holbrook  v.  Young,  108  Massk 
83.  In  Shallies  v.  Wilcox,  4  T.  & 
C.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  591.  the  defendant 
leased  certain  premises  under  an 
agreement  that  he  should  pay  the 
rent  by  boarding  the  lessee's  fam- 
ily. During  the  term  the  lessor  re- 
fused to  board  with  the  lessee. 
The  court  held,  that  the  contract 
for  board  was  a  collateral  agree- 
ment running  with  the  lease,  the 
breach  of  which  would  take  away 
the  right  to  recover  for  rent,  if  the 
lessee  occupied  the  premises ;  but 
would  give  the  lessee  the  right  to 
recoup  the  damages  he  sustained 
by  reason  of  the  lessor's  breach  of 
the  contract,  and  that  this  right 
was  not  affected  by  the  fact  that 
the  lessee's  conduct  was  such  as  to 
justify  the  breach.  The  tenant 
may  recoup  damages,  even  in  a 


CHAP.  XLI.J 


To  Whom  Pah). 


1069 


injuries  resulting  from  a  mere  trespass '  have  been  held 
not  to  be  the  subject  of  recoupment,  because  not  regarded 
as  growing  out  of  the  contract  of  demise  ;  nor  is  any 
matter  which  may  be  plead  in  bar  of  action,'  unless  other- 
wise provided  by  statute.'  But,  where  an  action  for 
rent  is  brought  by  an  assignee  of  the  lessor,  or  where  it  has 
been  made  payable  to  a  third  person,  the  lessee  cannot 
recoup  damages  for  a  breach  of  any  of  the  covenants  of 
the  lease  by  the  lessor ; '  nor  can  a  subtenant  recoup 
damages  resulting  from  a  breach  of  any  of  the  covenants, 
because  there  is  no  privity  of  contract  between  him  and 
the  landlord.' 

Sec.  463.  To  whom  rent  should  be  paid.— Eent  should 
invariably  be  paid  to  the  landlord,  or  some  person  by 
hihi  expressly  authorized  to  receive  it ;  and  if  payment 
is  made  to  a  person  not  entitled  to  receive  it,  the  tenant 
still  remains  liable  to  the  person  entitled."    But  if  rent 


proceeding  for  a  distress,  or  even 
in  replevin,  and  may  show  that 
the  dajnages  are  equal  to  the 
amount  of  rent  due.  Lindley  v. 
MiUer,  67  111.  344.  In  Common- 
wealth V.  Todd,  9  Bush.  (Ky.)  708, 
it  was  held  that  the  lessee  of  a  pen- 
itentiary and  the  convict  labor 
therein,  in  fulfilling  a  contract  for 
making  certain  improvements,  was 
necessarily  disturbed  in  his  posses- 
sion of  the  premises,  and  the  con- 
vict labor  interfered  with,  might 
set  off  the  damages  he  sustained 
thereby  in  an  action  for  the  rent. 

'  Bartlett  v.  Farrington,  120  Mass. 
384  ;  Edgerton  v.  Page,  20  N.  Y. 
381  ;  Witt  V.  Pierson,  112  Mass.  8. 

'  Dunwoody  v.  Raynor,  53  Penn. 
St.  292.  Eviction  under  this  rule 
is  not  pleadable  by  way  of  recoup- 
ment. Nichols  V.  Dusenbury,  3 
N.  y.  283. 

'^  McKesson  v.  Mendenhall,  64  N. 
C.  286. 

''  Andesco  Oil  Co.  v.  North  Amer- 
ican Oil  Co.,  66  Penn.  St.  375. 

'  Slingerly  v.  Fox,  75  Penn.  St. 
132. 

8  WiUiams  v.  Bartholemew,  1  B. 
&  P.  826.  Although  rent  passes  as 
incident  to  a  general  grant  of  the 
reversion,  the  reversion  may  be 
granted  and  the  rent  rfeserved,  or 
the  rent  may  be  assigned,  reserving 


the  reversion,  if  such  is  the  inten- 
tion of  the  parties  as  expressed  in 
words  they  use.  Thus  a  lessor  who. 
in  consideration  of  the  lessee's  as- 
signing him  certain  underleases, 
accepts  a  surrender  of  the  original 
lease,  "  but  without  prejudice  to 
the  leases  of  parts  of  the  premises 
assigned  to  him,"  may  maintain  an 
action  against  a  sublessee  for  rent 
accruing  after  such  assignment. 
Beal  V.  Boston  Car  Spring  Co. ,  125 
Mass.  157.  Where  a  grant  of  the 
reversion  of  an  estate  expectant  on 
the  determination  of  a  lease  for 
years  is  by  way  of  mortgage,  the 
mortgagee,  though  entitled  to  the 
rents  as  incident  to  the  reversion, 
raay  take  them  or  not  at  his  elec- 
tion. If  he  allows  the  mortgagor 
to  receive  them,  and  afterwards 
elects  to  take  therci  himself,  and 
gives  notice  of  his  election  to  the 
tenant,  he  becomes  entitled  to  all 
the  rents  accruing  after  the  execu- 
tion of  the  mortgage  and  in  arrear 
and  unpaid  at  the  time  of  the  no- 
tice, as  well  as  to  those  which  ac- 
crue afterwards.  But  the  rents  in 
arrear  .at  the  time  the  mortgage 
was  executed  Helong  to  the  mort- 
gagor. Thtis  a  railroad  company 
leased  its  road  to  another  com- 
pany for  five  years,  and  after- 
wards mortgaged  the  same  prop- 


1070 


Rent. 


[§  463. 


is  paid  by  mistake,  in  ignorance  of  the  death  of  a  person 
for  whose  hfe  the  premises  are  held,  it  may  be  recovered 
back  ;  but,  where  payment  is  made  to  a  person  who  has 
no  title  in  fact,  but  who  claims  to  be  owner,  the  rent 
cannot  be  recovered  back,  although  the  tenant  is  after- 
wards compelled  to  pay  rent  for  the  same  term  to 
another.'  Where  the  landlord  has  authorized  a  person 
to  receive  the  rent  for  him,  a  tender  to  such  agent  is 
equivalent  to  a  tender  to  the  landlord '  until  such  author- 


erty  to  trustees  for  the  holders  of 
certain  bonds,  the  mortgage  pro- 
viding that  the  mortgagees  on  de- 
fault of  the  payment  of  the  semi- 
annual interest  on  the  bonds  for 
six  months,  might  enter  and  take 
possession  of  the  property  and  re- 
ceive the  rents  and  income.  The 
mortgagees  entered  for  default  of 
payment  of  interest  and  gave  no- 
tice to  the  lessees  to  pay  to  them 
all  the  rents  then  due  or  thereafter 
accruing.  At  this  time  a  large 
sum  was  due  from  the  lessees  for 
rent,  and  a  few  days  after  the  en- 
try a  creditor  of  the  lessors  f  actor- 
ized  the  lessees  as  debtors  of  the 
lessors  for  the  rents  overdue. 
It  was  held,  that  these  rents 
were  not  taken  by  the  attachment, 
but  belonged  to  the  mortga- 
gees. King  V.  Housatonic  R.  R. 
Co.,  5  Corm.  226.  Where  the 
tenant  of  the  land,  on  which 
there  is  a  growing  crop,  is  evicted 
under  an  execution  against  the 
landlord,  and  re-enters  under  the 
purchaser  at  the  execution  sale, 
the  right  to  collect  rent  for  the 
year  passes  to  the  latter.  Fergu- 
son V.  Hardy,  59  Ga.  758.  When 
leased  premises  are  sold,  during 
the  term,  under  a  decree  in  a  chan- 
cery cause  to  which  the  lessor  and 
lessee  are  both  parties,  the  pur- 
chaser is  entitled  to  the  rent  which 
afterwards  falls  due,  and  the  lessor 
cannot  recover  it  by  action  ;  al- 
though the  sale  was  not  confirmed 
until  after  the  expiration  of  the 
lease,  and  the  lessee  remained  in 
the  undisturbed  possession  during 
the  entire  term.  Hand  v.  Liles, 
57  Ala.  143.  The  purchaser,  under 
a  decree  in  chancery  of  the  les- 
sor's lands,  is  entitled  to  the  rent 
afterwards  falling  due,  as  against 
the  obligation  of  the  assignee  of 


the  tenant  to  pay,  whose  interest 
was  acquired  pending  suit,  al- 
though the  claim  of  the  assignee 
would  prevail  against  the  lessor; 
and  attornment  on  the  part  of  the 
tenant  is  not  necessary  to  perfect 
the  right  of  the  purchaser.  Tubb 
V.  Fort,  58  Ala.  277.  If,  before 
the  maturity  of  a  note  given  ior 
th6  rent,  the  reversion  of  the  free- 
hold has  passed  to  another,  the  rent 
also  passed  to  him,  as  an  incident 
of  the  reversion,  notwithstanding 
the  assignment  of  the  note.  West- 
moreland V.  Foster,  60  Ala.  448. 
A  seizure  under  ^i.  fa.  of  property 
bearing  rents  includes  a  seizure  of 
the  rents.  The  fact  that  a  lessee, 
whose  lease  is  not  recorded,  has 
executed  and  delivered  to  the 
debtor  his  negotiable  promissory 
notes  covering  the  rents  to  become 
due  for  the  whole  of  the  unexpired 
term  of  the  lease,  will  not  exoner- 
ate himi  from  liability  to  the  seiz- 
ing creditor  for  the  rents  accruing 
subsequent  to  the  seizure.  Sum- 
mers V.  Clark,  80  La  An.  Part  I. 
436.  Rent  falling  due  before  the 
death  of  the  landlord  is  assets ; 
rent  falling  due  after  his  death 
descends  to  his  heirs  as  incident  to 
the  reversion.  Accordingly,  in  a 
suit  by .  the  heir  to  recover  rents, 
a  declaration  showing  that  some 
accrued  before  and  some  after  the 
ancestor's  death  is  demurrable. 
Rowan  v.  Riley,  6  Baxter  (Tenn.) 
67.  Until  attornment,  the  land- 
lord's grantee  cannot  maintain  a 
suit  at  law  against  the  tenant  for 
rent ;  the  statute  4  Anne,  in  that 
regard,  is  not  in  force  in  Illinois. 
Raymond  v.  Kerker,  2  111.  App.  496. 

'  Barker  v.  Brown,  1  C.  B.  N.  S. 
121. 

*  Goodland  v.  Blewett,  1  Camp. 
477 ;  Hatch  v.  Hale,  15  Q.  B.    Iq; 


CHAP,  xu.]  In  Advance.  lOTl 

ity  is  revoked ; '  and,  even  though  the  landlord  expressly 
appoints  a  person,  in  the  lease,  as  his  agent  to  receive 
the  rent,  yet  he  may,  at  any  time,  revoke  such  authority 
by  notice  to  the  tenant,  either  orally  or  in  writing,"  sub- 
ject to  the  qualification,  of  course,  that  such  agency  is 
not  coupled  with  an  interest.  If  the  landlord  dies  during 
the  term,  rent  that  has  become  due  previous  thereto  goes 
to  the  personal  representative :  those  that  become  due 
after  the  lessor's  death,  go  to  the  heir,'  and  the  tenant 
should  be  governed  accordingly  in  the  payment  of  the 
rent.  He  must  apportion  it,  and  pay  to  each  party  the 
proportion  to  which  he  is  entitled.*  Of  course  if  rent  is 
paid  to  the  wrong  party,  such  payment  affords  no  pro- 
tection to  the  tenant,  and,  if  the  landlord  is  not  the 
owner,  and  had  no  right  to  lease  the  lands,  payment  of 
rent  to  him  does  not  protect  the  tenant  from  an  action 
by  the  true  owner." 

Sec.  464.  Payment  before  the  rent  day.— Unless  rent  is 
expressly  made  payable  in  advance  by  the  terms  of  the 
lease,  it  has  been  held  that  payment  of  rent  before  it 
becomes  due  is  voluntary,  and  does  not  discharge  the 
rent,'  and  that,  if  there  is  a  clause  for  re-entrj'  for  non- 
payment, rent  paid  before  the  day  when  by  the  terms  of 
the  lease  it  becomes  due  will  not  save  the  condition,  if 
proper  steps  have  been  taken  to  enforce  the  forfeiture.' 
But  this  doctrine  can  apply  only  when  a  specific  period 
is  named  in  the  lease  for  payment.  If  the  lease  is  silent 
upon  that  point,  a  lessee,  although  not  obliged  to  do  so, 
may  pay  the  rent  in  advance,  and  having  done  so,  can- 
not be  compelled  to  pay  it  over  again  to  a  grantee  who 

Browne  v.  Powell,   4  Bing.  230  :  (N.  Y.)  295  ;    Kohler  v.  Knapp,  1 

Pilkington  v.  Hastings,  Cro.  Eliz.  Bradf.   (N.   Y.)  241 ;    Fleming  v. 

813.  Chunn,  4  Jones  (N.  C.)  Eq.  423 ; 

'  Browne  v.  Powell,  4  Bing.  330.  Haslage  v.   Kriigh,  35  Penn.   St. 

2  Venniny  v.  Bray,  3  B.  &  S.  502.  97  ;    Robb's    Appeal,    41    id.    45 ; 

8  King  V.  Anderson,  20  Ind.  385  ;  Green  v.  Mussie,  13  111.  363. 

Foltz  V.  Prouse,  17  111.  487;    Fo-  <>  Crosby  v.  Loup,  13  lU.  635. 

teaux    V.  Lepage,  6    Iowa,   133 ;  '  Davenport  v.  Haynie,  30  111. 

Smith  V.  Bland,  7  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  59. 

21 ;    Stinson    v.  Stinson,  38   Me.  « William  Clun'^  Case,  10  Coke, 

593  ;    Mills  v.  Merryman,  49  Me.  137  6. 

65 ;    Gibson  v.  Farley,  16  Mass.  '  Cromwell    v.    Andrews,    Cro, 

380  ;  Sparhawk  v.  AUen,  35  N.  H.  Eliz.  15. 
361 ;    Fay  v.  Holloran,  35  Barb. 


1072 


Eent. 


[§  465. 


took  the  estate  without  notice  of  such  pte-payment ; ' 
and,  even  in  the  case  of  an  advance  payment,  when  the 
lease  fixes  the  time  of  payment,  while  such  payment  is 
not  a  defence  at  law,  yet,  it  furnishes  proper  ground  for 
the  interference  of  a  court  of  equity." 

Sec.  465.  Tenant  holding  over.— A  tenant  for  years, 
holding  over  after  the  expiration  of  his  term,  without 
any  new  agreement  or  lease,  is  liable  for  the  same  rent 
that  he  has  formerly  paid,  and  is  subject  to  the  terms  of 
the  old  lease  in  aL.  respects. '    But  the  law  does  not  imply 


'  Stone  V.  Patterson,  19  Pick. 
(Mass.)  476. 

■^  Rockingham  v.  Penrice,  1 
Swanst.  346.  Where  a  lessee  pays 
a  year's  rent  in  advance,  if  the 
premises  are  destroyed  by  fire  or 
other,  casualty,  and  the  lessor  re- 
builds and,  leases  the  premises  to 
another  person  before  the  year  has 
elapsed,  the  lessee  may  recover  of 
the  lessor  the  rent  paid  by  him  for 
all  that  part  of  the  term  subse- 
quent to  the  second  lease.  Ward 
V.  Bull,  1  Fla.  271. 

3  Shilling  V.  Holmes,  23  Cal.  237  ; 
Baker  v.  Root,  4  McLean  (U.  S.) 
57?  ;  Ames  v.  Schuesler,  14  Ala.  60. 
This  rule,  however,  is  subject  to 
exceptions.  In  order  to  warrant 
the  inference  of  a  continuation  of 
the  former  tenancy,  the  landlord 
must,  in  some  way,  recognize  the 
tenancy,  as,  by  accepting  rent, 
treating  the  occupant  as  a  tenant, 
or  doing  some  act  from  which  it 
may  reasonably  be  inferred  that  he 
regarded  the  occupant  as  his  ten- 
ant. Cairo,  &c.,  !R.  R.  Co.  v. 
Wiggins  Ferry  Co.,  82  lU.  230.  In 
Bandette  v.  Pierce,  50  Vt.  512,  the 
plaintiff  permitted  the  defendant 
to  erect  a  hovel  on  his  premises  to 
keep  a  colt  in  during  the  winter, 
the  plaintiff  to  have  the  manure 
for  rent.  The  next  summer  the 
defendant  enlarged  the  hovel  and 
moved  into  it  with  his  family. 
The  plaintiff  continued  to  receive 
the  manm-e,  and  in  the  following 
spring  requested  him  to  remove, 
without  stating  when.  Subsequent- 
ly, on  July  10th,  he  gave  him  notice 
to  quit,  and  July  14th  brought 
ejectment  against  him.  The  court 
held  that  the  defendant  had  be- 
come a  tenant  from  year  to  year, 


and  was  entitled  to  six  months' 
notice  to  quit.  The  tenant,  by 
holding  over,  and  being  recognized 
as  a  tenant,  becomes  liable  to  pay 
only  the  same  rent  as  before,  unless 
there  has  been  a  new  agreement, 
or  he  has  had  notice  that  if  he  re- 
mains he  must  pay  an  additional 
rent,  to  which  he  has  expressly  or 
impliedly  assented  ;  but  it  seems 
that,  if  the  landlord  has  given  him 
notice  to  quit,  and  he  remains  in 
possession  in  defiance  thereof,  and 
proceedings  are  brought  to  oust 
him,  and  the  .rental  value  of  the 
premises  has  increased,  he  or  the 
obligors  will  be  liable  upon  an 
appeal  bond  for  the  excess,  on  an 
undertaking  to  pay  all  damages 
and  loss  the  landlord  may  sustain. 
Clapp  V.  Noble,  84  El.  62.  But, 
where  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year, 
or  month  to  month,  has  once  be- 
gun, it  can  be  terminated  only  by 
a  sufficient  notice  to  quit,  and  if  no 
such  notice  is  given,  he  cannot  be 
ousted  nor  compelled  to  pa,j  any 
damages  which  the  landlord  may 
have  sustained  by  his  holding  over. 
Thus,  wherea  tenement  was  rented 
from  month  to  month,  as,  from 
December  18th  to  January  18th, 
notice  to  terminate  the  ■  tenancy 
was  given,  and  contained  a  direc- 
tion to  the  tenant  to  quit  "on  or 
before  January  17th."  The  court 
held  that  the  notice  was  not  legal, 
as  it  required  the  tenant  to  quit  be- 
fore his  term  was  ended.  Waters  V. 
Young,  11  R.  1. 1.  Where  a  person 
enters  into  possession  under  a  void 
lease  or  under  an  agreement  for  a 
lease  void  under  the  Statute  of 
Frauds,  as.under  aleaseforthirteen 
months,  he  becomes  a  tenant  from 
month  to  month,  and  cannot  quit 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


Holding  Over. 


1073 


a  promise  to  pay  rent  to  a  vendee  of  the  landlord  who  is 
not  in  possession,  and  has  not  taken  a  deed  of  the  prem- 
ises,' because  in  such  a  case  there  is  nothing  upon  which 
to  predicate  a  promise  to  pay,  as,  in  order  to  enable  a 
person  to  recover  rent  eo  nomine,  it  must  be  shown  that 
the  possession  was  by  virtue  of  some  express  or  implied 
agreement.'    Where  a  tenant  holds  over,  while  the  title 


■without  a  month's  notice  to  qiiit. 
Geiger  v.  Brown,  6  Daly  (N.  Y.  C. 
P.)  506.  Where  a  tenant  holds 
over  involuntarily,  as  where  he  is 
prevented  from  quitting  at  the  end 
of  his  term  by  the  fraud  or  neglect 
of  the  landlord,  he  cannot,  against 
his  will,  be  held  chargeable  as  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year.  Smith 
V.  AUt,  4  Abb.  N.  C.  (N.  Y.)  205. 
As  previously  stated,  a  tenant  hold- 
ing over,  holds  under  the  terms  of 
the  old  lease  unless  new  terms  have 
been  agreed  upon,  and  where  the 
landlord  has  notified  the  tenant 
seasonably  that  if  he  remains  an- 
other year  it  must  be  at  a  certain 
increased  rent,  by  remaining,  the 
tenant  is  treated  as  having  ac- 
quiesced in  such  new  terms. 
Brinkley  v.  Walcott,  10  Heisk. 
(Tenn.)  33.  And  it  has  been  held 
that  where  the  landlord  has  given 
a  notice  to  quit,  and  the  tenant 
notifies  him  that  he  will  continue 
the  tenancy  at  a  certain  increased 
rent,  and,  without  the  landlord 
ever  having  expressed  his  as- 
assent  or  dissent  thereto,  the  ten- 
ant is  permitted  to  remain,  both 
parties  are  bound  by  the  new  terms. 
Huff  V.  Baum,  21  Cal.  130.  Where 
a  party  enters  into  possession  of 
real  estate,  as  tenant  of  the  owner, 
under  an  agreement  which  is  in- 
vahd  by  reason  of  the  Statute  of 
Frauds,  or  fpr  other  cause,  and 
continues  in  such  possession,  pay- 
ing yearly  rent  therefor,  which  is 
received  and  accepted  as  such,  he 
becomes  a  tenant  from  year  to 
year,  and  may  be  considered  as 
holding  according  to  such  agree- 
ment, which,  in  an  action  to  re- 
cover an  unpaid  balance  of  rent, 
may  be  resorted  to  as  evidence  for 
the  purpose  of  calculating  the 
amount  for  which  he  is  liable.  If 
such  tenant  from  year  to  year, 
abandons  the  occupancy  of  the 
demised  premises,  before  the 
expiration  of  a  year,  without  the 


consent  of  the  landlord,  he  will 
not  thereby  exonerate  himself 
from  the  payment  of  the  rent  for 
the  residue  of  the  year ;  nor  will 
he  be  so  exonerated  by  the  neglect 
of  the  landlord  to  make  repairs, 
when  there  was  no  agreement  to 
keep  the  premises  in  repair,  and 
their  condition,  when  left,  was  not 
materially  different  from  what 
it  was  at  the  commencement 
of  the  year ;  nor  by  reason  of 
inconsiderable  injuries  occasioned 
by  fire,  where  np  demand 
is  made  upon  the  landlord  to 
repair  such  injuries.  Lookwood 
V.  Lockwood,  33  Conn.  425.  In 
Reederv.  Sayre,  70  N.  Y.  180,  the 
plaintiffs  entered  upon  premises 
under  a  parol  lease  for  two  years 
from  April  1st,  1871,  with  the 
privilege  of  sowing  a  crop  of 
wheat  in  the  fall  of  1872,  and 
harvesting  the  same.      In  June, 

1872,  the  defendants  entered  into 
a  contract  for  the  purchase  of.  the 
premises  with  notice  of  the  plaint- 
iffs' rights,  and,  after  receiving  a 
deed,  gave  the  plaintiffs  notice  to 
quit  April  -.  st,  1 873.  In  the  fall  of 
1872  the  plaintiffs  sowed  a  crop  of 
wheat,  which  the  defendants 
harvested.  In  an  action  for  its 
conversion,  the  court  held  that  the 
notice  was  not  sufficient  to  termi- 
nate the  tenancy,  and  that  the 
plaintiffs,  under  the  lease,  had  an 
interest  in  the  lands  after  April  1st, 

1873,  which  could  not  be  termi- 
nated except  by  a  notice  from  the 
lessor  when  he  was  owner,  and  that 
no  such  notice  having  been  given, 
the  tenancy  was  not  terminated, 
and  that  the  defendants  were  es- 
topped from  denying  the  plaintiffs' 
right  to  the  crop,  and  were  liable 
for  its  conversion. 

'  Church  V.  McKillar,  83  Ala. 
473. 

2  Ramirez  v.  Murray,  5  Cal.  232. 
A  mere  trespasser  cannot  be  made 
liable  for  rent  as  upon  an  implied 


1074  Eent.  [§  466. 

is  in  dispute,  and  there  is  no  recognized  landlord,  the 
law  implies  a  promise  on  his  part  to  pay  for  the  use  of 
the  premises  the  person  in  whom  the  title  is  finally  held 
to  be,  and  in  such  a  case,  the  amount  paid  under  the 
former  lease  is  not  conclusive  upon  either  party. '  While, 
generally,  a  tenant  by  holding  over  after  his  original 
term  has  expired,  is  treated  as  impliedly  agreeing  to 
hold  upon  the  terms  of  the  former  lease,  yet  there  are 
exceptions  to  this  rule,  principal  of  which  is,  where  the 
holding  over  is  chargeable  either  to  fraud  or  a  neglect  of 
duty  on  the  landlord's  part,"  or  where  the  terms  of  hold- 
ing have  been  expressly  or  impliedly  charged/ 

Sec.  466.  Alternative  provisions.— When  rent  is  reserved 
in  a  lease  "payable  in  quarterly  or  monthly  payments," 
the  alternative  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  landlord,  and  not 
of  the  tenant.  The  landlord  may,  even  though  he  has 
previously  accepted  the  rent  quarterly,  require  it  to  be 
paid  monthly,  and  a  distress  at  the  end  of  a  month,  and 
before  a  quarter  has  expired,  is  good."  But  in  any  event, 
it  would  seem  that  before  he  changes  the  time  of  pay- 
ment he  must  notify  the  tenant  of  such  change,  and 
demand  the  rent  in  accordance  with  such  change,'  and 
the  bringing  of  a  distress  is  not  equivalent  to  a  demand 
and  notice."  If  the  landlord  has  really  made  his  election 
under  such  a  lease,  how  he  wiU  receive  the  rent,  it  is 
doubtful  whether  he  could  change  the  time  of  payment 

contract  to  pay,  by  proof  that  the  statutory       periods.      Miller      v. 
landlord  notified  him  that  he  would  Buchanan,  58  Tenn.  390. 
be  expected  to  pay  rent  at  a  certain  '  "Van  Brunt  v.  Pope,  6  Abb.  Pr. 
specified  rent,  if  he  stayed ;  and  this  U.  S.  (N.  Y.)  217. 
is  so,  even  though  the  owner  ren-  *  Smith  v.  AUt,  ante, 
dered  monthly  bills  of  the  rent,  '  Brinkley    v.    Walcott,    ante  ; 
■vs^hich,  however,  the  occupant  re-  HuflE  v.  Baum,  ante, 
fused   to   pay,    even   though   his  ^Pemberton  v.  Van  Rensselaer, 
refusal  was  put  upon  the  ground  1  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  307. 
that  the  rent  was  too  high,  and  ^MuUamv.  Arden,  10  Bing.  399. 
said  he  would  make  it  right.    Gal-  '  In  Mullam  v.  Arden,  ante,  the 
lagher  v.  Himelbergh,  57  Ind.  63.  defendant  demised  a  house  to  the 
See  also,   Marquette  K.  E.   Co.  v.  plaintiff  "  for  one  year  certain  at  a 
Harlow,  87  Mich.  554 ;  Garvin  v.  rent  of  £21,  the  same  to  be  paid 
Jennerson,   20  Kan.    371.    Where  quarterly,  or  half  quarterly  if  re- 
land  is  sold  or  set  off  under  an  ex-  quired."    During  the  first  year  he 
ecution,  the  debtor,  if  permitted  to  received  the   rent   quarterly,  but 
remain  in  possession  by  the  pur-  when  the  first  half  quarter  of  the 
chaser,  is  liable  for  rent  if  he  fails  second  year  had  elapsed,  he  dis- 
to  redeem   the   land   within   the  trained  for  half  a  quarter's  rent. 


CHAP.  xLi.]         In  Specifio  Articles.  1075 

even  by  notice  and  demand,  but  that  he  cannot  do  so 
without  such  notice  and  demand,  is  settled,  and  a  con- 
trary rule  would  be  obviously  unjust,  and  would  expose 
the  tenant  to  the  mere  caprices  of  his  landlord.  It  is 
proper  to  say,  that,  in  the  case  last  cited,  the  question  as 
to  whether,  by  accepting  the  rent  in  the  manner  stated, 
the  landlord  had  determined  his  election,  was  not 
decided. 

Sec.  467.  Kent  payable  in  specific  articles.— Where  rent 
is  payable  in  specific  articles,  as  in  grain,  horses,  &c., 
the  prices  of  which  are  specified  in  the  lease,  a  tender  of 
the  property  upon  the  day  fixed  for  payment  exting- 
uishes the  rent,  whether  the  price  of  the  property  is 
more  or  less  upon  the  day  of  payment  than  at  the  time 
when  .the  lease  was  made.'  But,  if  the  tenant  fails  to 
pay  in  the  property  named,  or  to  tender  the  same  upon 
the  day  named,  the  landlord  may  recover  the  rent  in 
money,  but  is  restricted  to  the  sum  at  which  the  value 
of  the  property  was  fixed  in  the  lease,  whether  the  real 
value  of  the  property  upon  the  day  of  payment  is  more 
or  less  than  the  price  agreed  upon."  But  where  the  rent 
is  payable  in  property,  as,  where  the  tenant  is  to  pay  as 
rent,  upon  a  certain  day,  fifty  bushels  of  corn,  wheat, 
etc.,  or  so  many  pounds  of  cotton,  etc.,  and  the  value  is 
not  specified,  the  landlord,  upon  the  tenant's  failure  to 
perform,  is  entitled  to  recover  the  market  value  of  such 
property  upon  the  day  fixed  for  payment  .^  Where  rent  is 
payable  in  specific  articles,  as  in  board,  or  in  grain,  iron, 
etc.,  and  the  quantity  and  quality  are  specified,  and  a 
forfeiture  for  non-payment  is  provided,  the  tenant  is 
bound  to  pay  the  rent  in  the  kind  of  property  named, 
and  cannot,  at  his  option,  pay  in  money.     Thus,  where 

without  having  expressly  required  '  Heywood  v.  Heywood,  43  Mo. 

the  plaintiff  to  pay  half  quarterly.  399. 

The  court  held  that  a  distress  would  ^  Heywood   v.   Heywood,   ante; 

not  lie  for  a  half  quarter's  rent,  as,  Livingston  v.  Miller,  11  N.  Y.  283 ; 

said  TiNDAL,  C.  J.,  "it  would  be  Brooks  v.  Wilcox,   11  Gratt.  (Va.) 

unreasonable  to  expose  the  tenant  411. 

suddenljr  to  the  costs  of  a  distress,  '  Id.  ;  Brooks   v.    Cunnitigham, 

and  I  think  a  previous  requisition  49  Miss.  108. 

was  necessary  upon  altering  the 

period  of  payment." 


1076  Rent.  [§  467. 

by  the  lease  the  rent  of  a  hotel  was  payable  monthly,  and 
the  lessor  agreed  to  take  one-half  the  same  "in  board,  as 
the  same  falls  due,"  it  was  held,  that,  under  this  agree- 
ment, it  was  not  optional  with  the  lessee  to  pay  in  money 
or  board,  but  that  4ihe  assent  and  obligation  of  the  lessee 
to  pay  in  board  if  so  required,  as  well  as  of  the  lessor  to 
receive  it,  were  clearly  imphed.  It  was  also  held  that 
the  lessee  was  not  bound  by  this  agreement  to  call  on  the 
lessor  and  demand  that  he  should  send  boarders,  but  the 
lessor  must  call  for  that  portion  of  rent  payable  in  board 
within  the  year,  and  substantially  as  the  same  became 
due.' 

It  is  competent  for  the  parties  to  agree,  subsequent  to 
the  lease,  to  take  a  certain  sum  of  money  in  lieu  of  the 
property,  either  for  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  term  ;  but 
the  mere  fact  that  the  lessor  takes  a  certain  sum  of 
money  in  lieu  of  the  property  does  not  estop  him  from 
afterwards  insisting  upon  having  the  particular  property 
delivered  to  him  as  rent,  instead  of  money,  even  though 
a  forfeiture  is  involved ;  but  in  the  latter  case  reasonable 
notice  of  his  intention  to  insist  upon  payment  in  that 
way  must  be  given  before  he  can  rely  upon  the  forfeit- 
ure. Thus,  where  a  lease  for  a  thousand  years,  made  in 
1817,  reserved  a  yearly  rent,  payable  in  quarterly  instal- 
ments, of  ten  tons  of  "Eussia  old  Sables  Iron,"  and 
gave  a  right  to  the  lessor  to  enter  on  the  tenant's  failure 
to  pay  the  rent  for  fifteen  days  after  demand.  At  the 
time  when  the  lease  was  made  the  parties  agreed  that 
until  1840  a  certain  agreed  sum  in  gold  bullion  should  he 
received  in  lieu  of  iron,  until  1840.  From  1840  until 
1862  the  same  sum  in  gold  was  received  in  lieu  of  iron. 
The  kind  of  iron  named  in  the  lease  had  for  many  years 
ceased  to  be  an  article  of  import.     Dec.  12th,  1862,  the 

'  Evans  V.  Norris,  6  Mich.  369.  to  pay  the  weekly  sum  stipulated 

Where  the  rent  of  a  house  and  to  be  paid  does  not  operate  as  a 

furniture  was  payable  in  board,  rescission  of  the  contract  by  the 

and  the  landlord  agreed  to  pay  a  tenant,  and  if  the  landlord  takes 

certaia  stipulated  sum  weekly  in  the  furniture  away  from  the  house 

addition  to  the  rent  payable  at  the  before  the  term  is  ended  the  tenant  . 

end  of  each  week,  it  was  held  that  naay  maintain  trover  against  him 

a  refusal  of  the  tenant  to  furnish  therefor.     Chamberlain  v.  Neale, 

board  because  the  landlord  refused  9  AUen  (Mass.)  410. 


CHAP.  xLi.]  In  Specific  Articles.  1077 

landlord  notified  the  tenant  that  the  rent  becoming  due 
on  March  1st,  1863,  must  be  paid  in  iron.  The  tenant 
brought  a  bill  in  equity  to  restrain  the  forfeiture  of  the 
lease  for  failure  to  pay  in  iron.  The  court  held  that, 
although  by  accepting  gold  from  1840  to  1862  the  land- 
lord had  not  waived  his  right  to  insist  upon  payment  in 
iron,  yet,  under  the  circumstances,  he  was  bound  to 
give  the  tenant  a  longer  notice  of  his  intention  before  he 
could  insist  upon  a  forfeiture.' 

Where,  in  a  lease  reserving  rent  in  specific  property, 
no  time  is  named  for  payment,  the  rent  does  not  become 
due  untn  the  end  of  the  year.'  But  while  this  may  be 
the  rul^*  as  to  payments  in  specific  property  generally, 
yet,  when  the  rent  is  payable  in  a  share  of  the  crops  pi'o- 
duced  upon  the  land,  it  would  seem  that,  independent  of 
any  express,  there  is  an  imphed  agreement  to  pay  the 
rent  from  time  to  time  within  a  reasonable  time  after 
the  crops  are  gathered ;  and  if  the  rule  intimated  in  the 
case  cited  in  the  last  note  was  to  prevail,  the  landlord 
would  often  be  deprived  of  the  principal  benefits  intended 
to  be  secured  under  the  lease,  as  many  species  of  crops,  as, 
peaches,  plums,  grapes,  apples,  &c.,  &c.,  are  perishable  in 
their  nature,  and  if  the  landlord's  right  to  have  his 
share  of  them  did  not  attach  until  the  end  of  the  year 
he  could  not  have  them  at  all,  for  when  the  year  ter- 
minated, his  share  would  be  gone,  under  the  processes  of 
natural  decay.  Therefore,  in  such  cases  the  better  and 
the  true  rule  seems  to  be,  as  well  expressed  in  a  Georgia 
case,  that  where  rent  is  payable  in  a  share  of  the  crops, 
and  the  lease  is  silent  as  to  the  time  of  payment,  the 
landlord  has  a  right  to  have  his  share  of  the  crops  deliv- 
ered to  him  within  a  reasonable  time  after  they  are 
gathered,  and  as  to  what  is  a  reasonable  time  will  depend 
largely  upon  the  nature  of  the  crop  and  the  circumstances 
of  each  case.'    If  the  lease  provides  that  the  property,  as 

'  LiUey  v.  Fifty  Associates,  101  contrary.    Dixon  v.  Mpolls,  39  lU. 

Mass.  480.  372. 

i'Stowman  v.  Landie,  5  Ind.  430,  ^xaler  v.   Seabrook,  39  Ga.   14, 

and  this  is  the  rule  where  the  rent  and  a  similar  doctrine,  fully  sus- 

is  payable  in  a  share  of  the  crops  taining  the  proposition  stated  in 

raised  upon  the  land  in  the  absence  the  text,  has  been  held  in  Texas, 

of  any  aigreement  or  custom  to  the  Brown  v.  Adams,  35  Tex.  471. 
IL— 16 


1078  Eent.  [§  467. 

rent,  shall  be  delivered  at  such  place  as  the  landlord  shall 
direct,  his  directions  in  that  respect  must  be  complied 
with.'  But,  where  no  place  of  payment  is  named  the 
tenant  may  tender  the  property  upon  the  laud  upon  the 
day  when  it  becomes  due,  and  whether  the  landlord  is 
present  or  not,  if  the  tenant  keeps  the  property  ready  to 
deliver  when  called  for,  such  tender  wiU  defeat  a  for- 
feiture for  non-payment  of  rent.  And,  if  the  tenant 
takes  due  care  of  the  property,  the  fact  that  it  decays  or 
becomes  worthless  from  the  effect  of  time  or  other  causes 
not  attributable  to  the  tenant's  fault,  will  not  change 
the  effect  of  the  tender."  If  the  property,  by  the  terms 
of  the  lease,  is  payable  at  such  place  in  a  maritet  town 
as  the  lessor  shall  appoint,  and  no  place  is  appointed,  it  is 
the  lessee's  duty  to  call  upon  the  landlord  to  appoint  a  place, 
and  if  he  cannot  be  found,  a  delivery  at  any  place  in  the 
market  town  is  sufficient. '  The  rule,  as  statedi^  that  a  tender 
may  be  made  upon  the  land,  applies  only  to  cases  where  a 
forfeiture  is  provided,  or  where  the  landlord  resides  in 
another  State  or  country,*  and  in  order  to  defeat  an 
action  upon  the  covenant  for  the  paynd'ent  of  rent,  the 
tenant  must  seek  out  the  landlord  and  make  a  tender  to 
him ;  and  it  is  no  answer  to  such  an  action  that  the 
tenant  was  upon  the  land  for  some  time  before  and  until 
sundown  ready  to  pay  the  rent.  Such  a  plea  can  only 
avail  to  defeat  a  forfeiture  by  reason  of  non-payment.' 

1  Livingston  v.    Miller,  8   N.  Y.  covenant,  or  an  answer  to  an  ac- 

283.  tion  upon  it  until  demand  and  re- 

'^ Walter  V.  Dewey,. 16  John.  (N.  fusal  of  payment  be  made.    Sev- 

Y.)  222.  eral  passages  were  cited  from  Co. 

'  Lush  V.  Druse,  4  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  Litt.,    beginning     at    page     200. 

313.  They  all,  however,  had  reference 

^Bradstreet  v.    Clark,   21   Pick,  to  conditions.    There  ife  no  doubt 

(Mass.)  389.  that,  at  common  law,  in  order  to 

'  In  Haldane  v.  Johnson,  8  entitle  a  lessor  to  re-enter,  and 
Exchq.  689,  Maktin,  B.  ,  said ;  avoid  the  estate  for  forfeiture  by 
"Several  authorities  were  cited,  breach  of  a  condition  for  the  pay- 
but  none  of  them  support  the  ment  of  rent,  it  is  incumbent  up- 
proposition  which  it  was  neces-  on  the  lessor  to  demand  the  rent 
sary  to  establish  in  order  to  main-  upon  the  land  on  the  day  when  it 
tain  the  plea,  viz.,  that  where  a  becomes  due,  a  sufficient  time  be- 
lessee  covenants  to  pay  rent,  no  fore  sunset  to  enable  the  payment 
particular  place  for  payment  be-  to  be  made.  This  is  distinctly 
ing  mentioned  in  the  deed,  the  laid  down  in  Co.  Litt.,  201  5,  and 
readiness  of  the  lessee  to  pay  on  the  statute  6  Geo.  4,  c.  28,  is 
the  day  on  the  premises  demised  founded  upon  the  ground  that 
is  either   a  performance    of  the  such  was  the  common  law.    We 


CHAP.  XLI.] 


In  Specific  Articles. 


1079 


It  will  be  presumed,  in  the  absence  of  any  provision  or 
agreement  to  the  contrary,  that  the  property  is  to  be  de- 


are,  however,  clearly  of  opinion 
that  a  covenant  for  payment  of 
rent,  such  as  is  averred  in.  the 
present  case,  is  an  obligation  of  a 
character  entirely  different  from, 
and  not  at  all  governed  by,  the 
rules  of  law  applicable  to  condi- 
tions and  forfeitures.  The  case  of 
Crouch  V.  Fastolfe,  Sir^T.  Eaym. 
418,  was  also  cited.  The  plea  now 
in  question  is  the  same  as  the  plea 
in  that  case,  which  was  adjudged 
to  be  good ;  but  the  action  there 
was  debt,  whilst  in  the  present 
case  the  plaintiflf's  demand  is  up- 
on a  covenant  to  pay  at  the  time 
and  in  manner  as  reserved,  no 
place  for  payment  being  men- 
tioned. A  case  of  Buskia  v.  Ed- 
■wards,  twice  mentioned  in  Croke 
Eliz.,  first  in  the  Queen's  Bench, 
at  page  415,  and  again  in  error,  at 
page  535,  was  also  cited.  It  is 
badly  reported ;  and  the  distinc- 
tion between  an  action  for  the 
rent  and  a  right  of  entry  for  con- 
dition broken  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  adverted  to.  It,  how- 
ever, was  also  an  action  of  debt 
for  the  rent,  and  not  upon  a  cove- 
nant for  the  payment  of  it.  But 
two  other  authorities  were  re- 
ferred to  in  the  argument,  viz., 
Eowe  V.  Young,  3  B.  &  B.  165"',  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  and  the  judg- 
ments of  the  judges  there,  and 
Poole  V.  Tumbridge,  2  M.  &  W. 
233,  which,  in  our  opinion,  clearly 
shows  the  plea  to  be  bad.  The 
covenant  (as  has  been  already  ob- 
served) is  a  covenant  to  pay  a  sum 
of  money  to  the  lessor  on  a  partic- 
ular day ;  no  place  is  mentioned 
for  the  payment,  either  expressly 
or  by  inmUcation.  In  such  case 
it  is  clearly  laid  down  in  both  the 
above  cases,  that  it  is  the  duty  of 
the  covenantor  to  seek,  on  the  ap- 
pointed day,  the  person  who  is  to 
be  paid,  and  pay  or  tender  him 
the  money.  And  in  Poole  v. 
Tumbridge,  it  is  stated  by  Parke, 
B.,  as  the  conclusion  fi-om  the  au- 
thorities, "that  nothing  can  dis- 
charge a  covenant  to  pay  on  a 
certain  day  but  actual  payment  or 
tender  on  that  day,  although,  if 
the  party  afterwards  choose  to  re- 
ceive the  money,  such  payment 
may  be  pleaded  by  way  of  accord 


and  satisfaction."  This  is  in  exact 
conformity  with  the  rule  of  law 
laid  down  in  Sheppard's  Touch- 
stone, p.  878,  that  when  an  obliga- 
tion is  to  pay  a  sum  of  money,  or 
do  any  like  transitory  thing  to  the 
obUgee  on  a  day  certain,  but  no 
place  is  set  down  where  it  shall  be 
done,  it  must  be  done  to  the  per- 
son of  the  obUgee  wheresoever  he 
be,  if  he  be  intra  quatuor  marin. 
No  precedent  was  cited  for  such  a 
plealn-an  action  upon  a  covenant, 
and  we  are  satisfied  that  none  ex- 
ists, otherwise  it  would  have  been 
discovered  in  the  investigation 
which  was  made  in  reference  to 
the  case  of  Eowe  v.  Youhg>,  above 
cited.  In  Comyns'  Digest,  title 
"Pleader"  (3  W.  49),  page  403, 
the  plea  seems  to  be  approved  of 
in  the  action  of  debt ;  but  nothing 
of  the  kind  is  to  be  found  in  re- 
gard to  the  action  on  the  covenant 
(3  V.  14,  page  360);  indeed,  on 
the  contrary,  there  is  a  passage 
which  shows  that  even  a  subse- 
quent levy  by  distress  is  not  a 
good  answer  to  an  action  of  cove- 
nant for  the  rent,  for  (as  is  said) 
this  admits  the  rent  not  paid  on 
the  day.  We  are  therefore  of 
opinion,  that  a  covenant  for  the 
payment  of  rent,  at  the  time  and 
in  manner  as  reserved,  when  no 
particular  place  of  payment  is 
mentioned,  if  analogous  to  a  cove- 
nant to  pay  a  sum  of  money  in 
gross  on  a  day  certain,  in  which 
case  it  is  incumbent  upon  the 
covenantor  to  seek  out  the  person 
to  be  paid,  and  pay  or  tender  him 
the  money,  and  for  the  simple 
reason,  that  he  has  contracted  so 
to  do."  Whether  in  the  case  of  a 
covenant,  or  condition,  for  the 
payment  of  a  sum  in  gross,  the 
person  who  is  to  make  the  pay- 
ment must  seek  out  the  person 
who  is  to  receive  it ;  Sheppard's 
Touchstone,  136 ;  Co.  Litt.  210,  a, 
b;  unless  the  latter  reside  in  an- 
other State  or  country,  when  a  de- 
mand by  him  will  be  necessary  to 
constitute  a  breach,  and  give  a 
right  of  entry  or  action.  Brad- 
street  V.  Clark,  £1  Pick.  (Mass.) 
389.  A  condition  for  the  pajTnent 
of  rent  forms  an  exception  to  this 
rule,  because  rent  as  such,  issues 


1080  Rent.  [§  468. 

livered  in  the  usval  manner.  Thus,  where  land  was  leased 
for  the  cultivation  of  sugar,  payable  in  a  portion  of  the 
crop,  it  was  held  that  it  would  be  presumed,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  any  express  stipulation,  that  it  was  intended 
that  the  sugar  should  be  delivered  in  the  usual  manner, 
that  is,  in  hogsheads  or  barrels,  and  that  the  lessee  can- 
not claim  any  allowance  for  the  cost  of  the  hogsheads  or 
barrels,'  but  this  would  be  regulated  entirely  by  the  cus- 
tom, if  there  is  any.  If  there  is  none,  then  the  tenant 
would  be  bound  to  deliver  the  property  put  up  in  the 
usual  way ;  and  according  to  the  case  last  cited,  if  an  or- 
chard is  rented  for  a  share  of  the  cider,  or  a  vineyard  for 
a  share  of  the  wine,  in  the  absence  of  any  stipulation  to 
the  contrary,  the  tenant  would  be  required  to  deliver  the 
same  in  barrels  or  casks,  according  to  the  usual  method 
of  putting  up  either,  and  could  make  no  charge  for  the 
barrels  or  casks. 

Sec.  468.  Incidental  benefits.— If  land  is  let  for  one  pur- 
pose, and  its  use  expressly  or  impliedly  restricted  to 
such  use,  and  in  its  use  for  that  purpose  other  beneficial 
uses  are  developed,  the  tenant  may  avail  himself  thereof, 
and  appropriate  them,  without  rendering  himself  liable 
to  the  landlord  therefor,  unless  by  the  development  of 
such  unexpected  beneficial  use  its  availabilty  for  the  pur- 
poses for  which  it  is  let  are  whoUy  destroyed,  when  the 
benefit  so  arising  is  of  such  a  character  that  it  would  be 
unavailable  to  the  landlord  if  it  was  permitted  to  lie  until 
the  lease  is  terminated.  Thus,  where  lands  were  let  for 
the  piirpose  of  boring  for  salt-weUs  and  manufacturing 
salt,  so  long  as  such  salt- wells  should  be  carried  on  by  the 
tenants,  their  survivor,  or  their  assigns,  under  certain 
provisions  for  forfeiture,  and  reserving  a  rent  of  one 
barrel  of  salt  for  every  twelve  barrels  manufactured,; 
and  in  the  work  of  boring  for  salt,  oil  arose  with  the  salt 
water,  which  was  at  first  permitted  to  run  to  waste,  but 

out  of  the  land,  and  must  be  de-  all  other  personal  obligations,  and 

manded  upon  it.     1  Smith's  L.  C.  must  be  performed  trafer  partes, 

vol.  1,  94,  4th  Am.  ed. ;    but  a  '  WUcoxen  v.  Bowtes,  1  La,  An. 

covenant  for  the  payment  of  rent  230. 
stands  on  the  same  footing  with 


CHAP.  xLi.]         Incidental  Benefits.  1081 

waa  afterwards  collected  and  sold  by  the  tenants,  it  was 
held  that  the  tenants  were  not  liable  to  the  landlord  in 
trover  therefor.  But  in  such  a  case,  the  tenants  would  be 
liable  to  account  to  the  landlord  for  a  proper  proportion 
of  the  profits  resulting  from  such  new  and  unanticipated 
benefit,  which  would  doubtless  be  such  a  share  thereof 
as  would  be  derived  from  the  manufacture  of  salt,  of  a 
value  equal  to  the  sum  realized  from  the  sale  of  the  oil.' 
But,  in  such  a  case,  the  tenant  would  not  be  justifi^  in 
abandoning  the  business  or  purpose  for  which  the  prem- 
ises were  expressly  let  to  him  ;  nor,  if  such  new  develop- 
ment destroyed  the  use  to  which  he  had  covenanted  to 
devote  the  premises,  could  he  prosecute  the  new  business, 
but,  upon  the  premises  becoming  useless  for  the  business 
for  which  he  leased  them,  and  to  which  he  had  contracted 
to  devote  them,  the  lease  terminates,  together  with 
all  his  rights  under  it.  It  is  only  when  the  new  benefits 
are  incidental  to  the  use  of  the  premises  for  which  they 
were  let  that  the  tenant  can  avail  himself  of  them."  But, 
where  premises  are  leased  generally,  although  the  rent  is 
payable  in  a  share  of  minerals  quarried  or  dug  thereon, 
or  by  a  certain  percentage  upon  the  value  of  certain  min- 
erals quarried  or  dug  thereon,  yet,  in  the  absence  of  any 
restrictive  clause,  the  lessee  is  not  restricted  to  the  use  of 
the  premises  for  the  quarrying  or  digging  of  minerals 
alone,  but  may  use  them  for  any  purpose  that  does  not 
conflict  with  their  use  for  the  purpose  of  quarrying  &c., 
or  involve  a  breach  of  any  of  the  covenants  in  the  lease. 
Thus,  where  a  certain  piece  of  land  was  leased,  "  together 
with  the  quarry  or  quarries  thereon,  and  the  privilege  of 
getting  out  stone  in  the  same,  also  the  privilege  of  getting 
out  stone  in  any  part  of  said  tract,  and  to  use  and  occupy 
said  land  in  any  manner  that  the  lessees  may  choose,  and 
for  all  purposes  necessary  and  convenient  for  carrying  on 

'  Kier  v.  Patterson,  41  Penn.  St.  four  years  from  this  date,  this  lease 

357.     A  lease  provided  that  the  shall  be  null  and  void."    The  lessee 

property  "  shall  be  occupied  and  drilled  a  weU  which  produced  nat- 

worked   for   petroleum,   rock  or  ural  gas  only.    It  was  held,  that 

carbon  oil,  and  shall  not  be  ocou-  the  production  was  not  within  the 

pied  or  used  for  any  other  purpose  language  of  the  lease.    Appeal  of 

whatsoever,"    and    "if  no   oil  is  Truby,  Penn.  St. 

found  in  paying  quantities  within  '  Kier  v.  Patterson,  ante. 


1082  Eent.  [§469. 

the  quarrying  business,"  and  the  lease  also  provided  that 
the  lessees  should  have  the  use  of  a  certain  wharf  for  the 
purpose  of  hewing  stones  thereon,  and  of  shipping  them, 
and  that  the  rent  should  be  seven  per  cent,  of  the  value 
of  the  stone  quarried  and  sold,  it  was  held  that  the  lessees 
were  not  restricted  in  the  use  of  the  demised  premises  to 
the  quarrying  of  stone,  and  that  there  was  no  such  ambi- 
guity in  the  language  of  the  lease  as  to  render  admissible 
evidfence  aliunde  of  an  intent  of  the  parties  that  the  use 
should  be  so  restricted,  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  the  court 
in  giving  a  construction  to  the  lease.'  But,  under  such 
a  lease,  the  tenant  can  work  the  quarry  or  not,  at  his 
option,  but  is  bound  to  improve  it  in  a  reasonable  manner, 
according  to  the  evident  intent  of  the  parties,  during  the 
entire  term." 

Sec.  469.  implied  benefits.— When,  in  a  lease  of  a  farm, 
the  tenant  is  in  express  terms  required  to  sow  or  plant  a 
crop  that  cannot  mature  until  after  his  term  has  expired, 
it  is  nevertheless  implied  from  the  lease  that  he  may 
enter  to  harvest  such  crop,  and  the  property  therein 
remains  in  him  ;  and  if  the  landlord,  or  any  person 
claiming  imder  him,  or  otherwise,  appropriates  the  crop, 
they  are  liable  to  the  tenant  who  sowed  the  crop,  for  its 
value.  Thus,  where  a  lease  contained  a  provision  that  the 
tenant  should  sow  certain  parts  of  the  land  with  wheat  and 
timothy  the  last  autumn  of  the  term,  and  at  the  end  of 
this  term,  the  ensuingspring,  the  tenant  quit  the  premises, 
and  the  landlord  let  them  to  another  person  who  went  on 
and  harvested  the  wheat  and  appropriated  it,  it  was  held, 
that  the  tenant  who  sowed  the  wheat  was  entitled  thereto, 
and  could  recover  its  value  of  the  tenant  who  harvested 
it.'  But,  in  order  to  avail  himself  of  this  rule,  the  tenant 
must  conform  strictly  to  the  provisions  of  the  lease. 
Thus,  if  the  lease  in  the  case  last  referred  to  had  provided 
that  the  tenant  should  sow  wheat  and  timothy  the  last 
autumn  of  his  term  upon  such  land  as  had  the  previous 

'  Burr  V.  Spencer,  26  Conn.  159.         ^  Kelly  v.  Todd,  1  W.  Va.  197. 
"  Brainerd  v.   Arnold,  37  Conn. 
617. 


CHAP.  xLi.]  Surety  for  Lessee.  1083 

year  been  planted  to  corn,  and  he  sowed  the  wheat  and 
timothy  upon  land  that  had  been  the  previous  year  devoted 
to  any  other  crop,  he  would  have  had  no  property 
therein,  and  consequently  no  right  of  action  against  the 
person  who  appropriated  it.' 

Sec.  470.  Surety  for  lessee.— It  is  frequently  the  case 
that  the  lessee  is  required  to  furnish  a  surety  for  the 
faithful  performance  of  his  covenants,  more  especially 
for  the  payment  of  the  rent ;  and  it  may  be  said  that  the 
surety  is  discharged  from  liability  in  all  cases  where  the 
tenant  himself  is  discharged.  That  is,  the  tenant  is 
evicted  by  the  landlord,  or  title  paramount,  or  if  he 
surrenders  the  possession,  and  the  landlord  accepts  there- 
of ;  or  if  the  term,  for  any  cause  named  in  the  lease,  is 
determined,  the  surety  is  discharged  from  further  liabil- 
ity, because  the  tenant  is  ;  but,  if  a  tenant  abandons  the 
premises  without  a  sufficient  legal  excuse,  the  surety  is 
not  discharged,  even  though  the  lessor,  at  the  request  of 
the  surety,  lets  them  to  another  party."  Payment  by 
the  tenant  discharges  the  surety  pro  tanto,  of  course,  but 
the  fact  that  the  tenant  gives  his  individual  note  for  the  ^ 
rent  does  not  discharge  the  surety,  unless  the  note  is 
paid  at  maturity,  unless  it  was  agreed  to  be  accepted  as 
payment.'    But  the  surety  being  entitled  to  stand  in  the 

'  Burns  v.  JacJison,  44  lU.  345.  Reg.  (U.  S.)  529 ;  Woodbridge  v. 

'McKenzie  v.  Farrell,  4  Bos.  Richardson,  3  T.  &  C.  (N.  Y.)  418. 
(N.  Y.)  193.  A  lease  reserved  to  In  Atkins  v.  Brynes,  71  111.  336,  the 
the  landlord  the  right  to  relet,  if  giving  of  a  note  by  the  tenant  to 
thepremisesshouldbecomevacant,  pay  the  rent,  and  securing  the 
ajid  apply  the  proceeds  of  the  relet-  same  by  a  chattel  mortgage,  was 
ting  to  the  rent  reserved.  A  held  not  sufficient  to  defeat  a  dis- 
surety,  on  notice  from  the  tenant  tress  for  the  rent.  In  Burnham  v. 
that  he  could  not  pay  the  rent,  Hubbard,  36  Conn.  539,  the  plaint- 
arranged  with  the  landlord's  agent  iflf  leased  certain  premises  to  A, 
that  he  should  let  them.  The  agent  who  covenanted  to  pay  the  rent, 
put  up  a  biU  and  agreed  to  a  let-  and  the  defendant  became  his 
ting ;  the  original  lessee  removed ;  surety.  In  a  suit  on  the  guaranty 
was  succeeded  by  a  new  tenant,  and  against  the  defendant,  he  claimed  . 
he  entered  and  paid  rent  for  a  short  that  the  plaintiff,  by  receiving  an 
time.  Held,  that  this  substituted  order  drawn  by  Aon  P  for  the  rent, 
tenancy  did  not  operate  as  a  sur-  and  accepted  by  the  latter,  dis- 
render,  and  that  the  original  tenant  charged  the  defendant  from -his 
and  the  surety  were  still  Uable.  suretyship.  The  court  below 
Ogden  V.  Rowe,  3  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  found  that  neither  the  plaintifiE 
313.  nor  A  understood  the  receiving  of 

'Kendig    v.    Kendig,  3  Pittsb.  the  orders  as  releasing  A  from  any 

(Penn.)387;  InReBawne,  ISBanks  of  the  obligations   of   his   lease. 


1084: 


Eent. 


[§  4Y0. 


place  of  a  creditor,  as  to  every  remedy  in  favor  of  the 
creditor,  a  surety  for  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  may 
put  an  end  to  his  Habihty  by  giving  notice  to  the  land- 
lord that  he  will  be  no  longer  hable,  provided  the  notice 
is  of  the  same  duration  as  that  which  the  tenant  would 
be  required  to  give  to  put  an  end  to  the  tenancy.'  A 
surety  niay  set  up  an  eviction  of  the  tenant,  or  any 
other  matter  that  goes  to  discharge  the"  tenant  from 
liability  upon  the  lease,  in  defence  to  an  action  against 
him,  but  he  cannot  set  up  matters  that  merely  operate 
by  way  of  set;off,  counter-claim,  or  recoupment,  or 
which  merely  furnish  a  ground  of  action  in  favor  of  the 
tenant  against  the  landlord  for  damages,  unless  the 
tenant  is  shown  to  he  insolvent,  in  which  case  equity 
will  permit  such  defence."    In  order  to  recover  of  a 


Held;  that  A's  obligation  to  pay 
the  rent  was  not  affected,  nor  the 
liability  of  the  defendant  as  his 
surety.  The  express  covenant  of 
A  to  pay  the  rent  could  be  dis- 
charged by  nothing  short  of  a 
mutual  agreement. 

'De  Silver's  Estate,  9  Phil. 
(Penn.)  303. 

« Morgan  v.  Smith,  14  N.^T.  S.  C. 
244.  The  surety  cannot  set  up  to 
defeat  his  liability  the  fact  that 
the  buildings  were  destroyed  by 
fire,  and  that  the  lessor,  although 
he  received  the  insurance  money, 
did  not  rebuild.  Kingsbury  v. 
Westfall,  61  N.  Y.  359.  Upon  a 
trial  of  an  action  to  recover  rent, 
evidence  was  introduced  by  defend- 
ant, tending  to  show  that,  in  con- 
sideration for  her  agreement  to 
pay  $30  per  month  rent  for  prem- 
ises under  a  parol  lease,  the  plaint- 
iff agreed  to  make  certain  improve- 
ments, which  he  failed  to  make ; 
and  that  consequently  the  premises 
had  been  worth  $18  per  month 
only,  and  that  her  damage  was 
more  than  the  rent  due,  she  having 
paid  $30  rent  for  the  first  month  of 
her  occupancy.  The  plaintiff's 
evidence  tended  to  show  that  he 
had  .made  iiU  the  improvements 
agreed  upon.  A  verdict  was 
directed  for  the  plaintiff,  the  jury 
being  instructed  to  estimate  the 
damages  sustained  by  the  defend- 
ant, if  they  shovild  find  the  fact  of 
the    tmfulfilled    agreement,    and 


deduct  the  amount  from  the  rent 
due  at  the  time  of  the  trial.  On 
exceptions,  it  was  held  that  it 
should  have  been  left  to  the  jury 
to  say  whether  any  rent  was  due 
at  the  time  of  action  brought. 
Breese  v.  McCann,  53  Vt.  498. 
■  Where  a  contract  of  rent  provided 
that,  if  the  tenant  is  in  any  way 
ousted  from  the  possession  of 
certain  rooms,  the  tenancy  and  rent 
should  cease,  the  fact  that  the 
•  landlord  entered  and  used  or 
allowed  others  to  enter  and  use 
temporarily,  on  one  or  more  occa- 
sions, the  rooms,  during  theabsence 
of  the  tenant,  does  not  constitute 
such  an  ouster  as  to  relieve  the 
latter  from  the  payment  of  rent. 
Way  V.  MyerSj  64  Ga.  760.  Nor  is 
a  tenant  relieved  from  his  liability 
for  rent  due  under  a  written  lease, 
by  the  fact  that  adjoining  premises 
leased  by  the  same  landlord  to 
another  tenant  are  used  for  a  busi- 
ness incompatible  with  the  con- 
venient occupation  of  the  premises 
leased  by  him ;  and  oral  promises 
made  by  the  landlord  at  the  time 
of  the  execution  of  the  lease,  that 
the  adjoining  premises  should  not 
be  so  used  are  inadmissible  to  sup- 
port a  defence  to  a  suit  for  rent, 
Gray  v.  Gaff,  8  Mo.  App.  339. 
Boreel  v.  Lawton,  N.  Y.  Nor  are 
tortious  acts  of  a  landlord,  in  the 
nature  of  trespass,  but  not  amount- 
ing to  an  eviction,  and  not  pleaded 
as  a  breach  of  the  covenant  for 


cflAP.  Lxi.]  Surety  fob  Lessee.  1085 

surety,  it  is  not  necessai^?-  that  the  landlord  should  either 
demand  the  rent  of  the  tenant  or  proceed  against  him 
therefor.  His  right  of  action  against  the  surety  is  com- 
plete whenever  such  right  is  complete  against  the  tenant.' 
But  guarantors  and  sureties  are  bound  only  by  the  strict 
letter  and  precise  terms  of  the  contract.  In  other  words, 
a  claim  against  either  is  strictissimi  juris;'  and  if, 
subsequently  to  their  assuming  that  relation,  the  terms 
of  the  lease  are  altered  by  the  mutual  agreement  of  the 
landlord  and  tenant,  either  a  surety  or  a  guarantor  is 
discharged,  unless  they  consented  to  such  change, 
because  the  lease  upon  which  they  became  liable  no 
longer  exists,  it  having  been  terminated  by  the  altered 
or  substituted  contract ;  °  but  such  change  or  alteration 
does  not  defeat  their  liability  for  rent,  or  breaches  that 
had  already  accrued  before  such  change  was  made ;  * 
nor  is  he  discharged  from  the  payment  of  accrued  rent 
by  a  surrender  of  the  premises  by  the  lessee  and  a  release 
of  subsequent  rent  by  the  lessor.'  In  order  to  assume 
the  position  of  a  guarantor,  such  an  intention  must  be 
expressed  in  the  writing.  By  indorsing  on  a  lease  :  "  I 
agree  to  be  responsible  for  the  performance  of  the  cove- 
ants  of  this  lease  on  the  part  of ,  to  be  done  and 

performed,"  makes  the  person  a  surety  ;°  but  where  a 
person  endorses  upon  the  lease,  or  executes  another 
instrument,   in  these  words:  "I  hereby  guarantee  the 

performance  of  the  covenant's  of  this  lease  by ,"  he 

is  merely  a  guarantor,  and  is  liable  for  a  breach  of  any 
of  the  covenants  by  the  person  named  therein."    If  the 

quiet  enjoyment,  any  defence  to  an  ^  Durker  v.  Bapp,  41  N.  Y.  Su- 

action  for  rent.    Dimmockv.  Daly,  perior  Ct.  235. 

9  Mo.  App.  354.     Nor  is  a  wrongful  ^  Wright  t.   Johnson.   8  Wend. 

intei'ference  by  a  landlord    with  (N.  Y.)  513. 

the    tenant's    enjoyment    of    the  '  People  v.  Vilas,  36  N.  Y.  457 ; 

leased    premises    any    ground    of  Grant  v.  Smith,  46  id.  93  ;  White 

counter-claim  in  an  action  for  rent,  v.  Walker,  31  111.  422. 

for  a  period  including  that  of  such  *  Kingsbury  v.  Westfall,   61  N. 

interference.     Goebel   v.    Hough,  Y.  361. 

29*  Minn.  252.     If  rent  is  payable  « Id. 

in  advance  on  the  first  day  of  the  '"  Korhn  v.   Hohl,   80  Penn.  St. 

month,  no  demand  of  the  rent  on  333.     If  a  person  signs  a  lease,  and 

the  day  it  falls  due  is  necessary  to  does   not  state   the  character   in 

entitle  the  landlord   to  maintain  which  he  signs,  he  is  treated  as  a 

an    action    therefor.      Clarke    v.  lessee.  Magee  v.  Fisher,  8  Ala.  320. 

Charter,  128  Mass.  483.  '  Clark  v.  Gordon,  121  Mass.  830. 


1086  Eent.  [§4Y0. 

tenant  delivers  certain  property;  to  the  landlord,  to  be 
held  as  security  for  the  payment  of  the  rent  or  the  per- 
formance of  the  covenants  of  the  lease,  the  landlord  is 
entitled  to  the  possession  thereof  and  may  maintain  an 
action  against  any  person  who  distm-bs  such  right.'  A 
surety  is  bound  only  during  the  term  named  in  the  lease. 
If  the  tenant  holds  over,  although  the  lease  contains  a 
clause  "for  one  year,  with  the  privilege  of  the  lessee  to 
retain  the  house  as  long  as  he  may  wish,"  the  surety -is 
not  bound  for  the  rent  beyond  the  first  year."  But,  if 
the  lease  is  for  "  one  year  certain,  and  for  another  year 
if  the  tenant  holds  over,"  the  surety  remains  liable  for 
the  rent  the  second  year  if  the  tenant  holds  over.'  It  is 
not  the  duty  of  the  lessor  to  notify  the  surety  or  guaran- 
tor that  the  lessee  has  abandoned  the  premises,'  nor  is 
the  surety  discharged  because  the  lessor  has  been  negli- 
gent about  recollecting  the  rent.'  The  liability  of  the 
lessee  and  of  the  guarantor  is  distinct,  and  they  cannot 
be  joined  in  an  action  to  recover  the  rent."  Although 
the  lease  is  joint  in  form,  one  surety  may  set  up  a 
distinct  defence  that  is  not  available  to  his  co-surety," 
as  a  parol  release  given  to  him,  by  the  lessor,'  and  as 
judgment  may  be  reserved  as  to  one  and  affirmed  as  to 
the  other  ; "  but  a  lease  of  one,  under  seal,  discharges 
all.'"  Where,  however,  one  surety  is  released  by  the 
lessor,  he  still  remains  liable  to  his  co-surety  for  con- 
tribution, as  the  lessor  cannot,  by  an  act  of  his,  vary 
the  relation  of  the  sureties  to  each  other." 

'  Chamblee  v.  MoKenzie,  31  Ark.  '  Morgan  v.  Smith,  ante. 

155.  >»  PeU  V.  PeU,  20  John.   (N.  Y.) 

2  Brewer  v.  Thorp,  35  Ala.  8.  126 ;  Folger,  in  Morgan  v.  Smith, 

'  Cos  V.  Vodges,  71  Penn.  St.  383.  70  N.  Y.  p.  543. 

*  Ledoux  V.  Jones,  30  La.  An.  539.  "  Morgan  v.  Smith,  ante ;  Boult- 
'  Ehnone  v.   Eobinson,    18    La.  bee  v.  Stubbs,  18  Ves.  20.    In  Mor- 

An.  651.  gan  v.  Smith,  ante,  an  action  was 

*  Vinden  v.  Ellsworth,  15    Ind.      brought  against  two  joint  co-sure- 
144.  ties  for  certain  lessees,  judgment 

'  Morgan  v.   Smith,  70     N.   Y.  was  ordered  against  both,  which 

537  ;   Johnson  v.  Smith,  14  Abb.  was  reversed  as  to  one,  and  a  ne-jv 

Pr.  (N.  Y.)421 ;  Slocum  v.  Hooker,  trial  granted  him  on  the  ground  of 

13  Barb.   (N.   Y.)  536  ;  Denny  v.  failure  of  consideration,  as  to  him. 

Smith,  18  N.  Y.  567.  and  was  affirmed  as  to  the  other. 

"  Harrison  v.  Close,  2  John.   (N.  Held,  that  it  was  no  ground  of  re- 

Y.)   448 ;    De  Zeng   v.   Bailey,   9  versal  on  appeal  to  this  court  by 

Wend.    (N.   Y.)   336  ;    Eowley   v.  the  latter  that,  in  case  his  co-sure- 

Stoddard,  7  John.  (N.  Y.)  209.  ty  succeeded  on  the  new  trial,  he 


CHAP,  xu.]     Liability  op  Undertenant. 


1087 


Sec..  471.  Liability  of  undertenant. -An  undertenant  is 
not  liable  to  the  landlord  upon  any  of  the  covenants  in 
the  original  lease,"  but  he  may  be  evicted  by  the  original 
lessor  for  a  forfeiture  incurred  by  such  breaches,  and,  in 
that  case,  it  would  seem  that,  in  the  absence  of  fraudulent 
misrepresentation  or  concealment,  he  will  have  no  remedy 
against  his  immediate  lessor.'  The  original  lessor  may 
obtain  aninjuction  to  restrain  the  underlessee  from  com- 
mitting breaches  of  the  covenants  in  the  original  lease.' 
It  is  the  duty  of  a  person  contracting  for  an  underlease 
•from  year  to  year,'  or  for  any  longer  term,  to  inform 
himself  of  the  covenants  contained  in  the  original  lease  ; 
and  if  he  enters  and  takes  possession  of  the  property,  he 
will  be  considered  as  having  full  notice  of,  and  will  be 
bound  by  such  covenants.'  Where  a  person  takes  an 
underlease  from  the  assignee  of  a  lease,  the  underlessee, 
without  notice,  is  bound  by  the  covenants  contained  in 
the  assignment.'    Covenants  to  repair  in  a  lease  and  an 


would  lose  his  right  of  contribu- 
tion. As  to  whether  the  right 
would  be  lost  in  such  case,  quaere. 
The  lease  was  of  a  store,  so  con- 
structed as  to  derive  Ught  from  a 
floor-light,  in  a  floor  above,  which 
was  covered  by  the  lessees  of  the 
upper  floor,  and  the  light  excluded 
from  the  room  below.  Held,  that 
this  furnished  no  defence  to  the 
action.  The  lease  contained  a 
clause  that  the  lessees  would  not 
assign  it,  or  let,  or  underlet,  the 
premises  without  the  consent  of 
the  lessor.  The  latter,  subsequent 
to  the  execution  of  the  lease  and 
taking  possession  thereunder  by 
the  lessor,  agreed  with  the  lessee 
to  rent  the  premises  for  them  at 
their  risk,  crediting  to  them  any 
receipts  for  rent,  with  a  condition 
that  the  agreement  should  not  im- 
pai-t  or  alter  the  relations  of  the 
parties,  the  covenants  of  the  lease, 
or  the  security  for  the  rent.  Held, 
that  the  agreement  did  not  operate 
to  discharge  the  sureties,  although 
they  had  no  knowledge  or  notice 
of  it ;  that  the  agreement,  without 
the  condition,  was  no  more  in  ef- 
fect than  a  consent  that  the  lessees 
might  underlet;  and  that,  under 
the  condition,  the  rights  of   the 


sureties,  and  consequently  their 
liability,  were  in  no  wise  affected. 
A  new  agreement  between  a  cred- 
itor and  his  principal  debtor  will 
not  discharge  the  sureties  when,  by 
the  new  agreement,  the  remedies 
of  the  creditor  against  the  sureties 
are  expressly  and  clearly  reserved. 
The  lessees,  upon  making  the  new 
agreement,  delivered  the  key  of  the 
premises  to  the  lessors ;  held,  that 
such  a  deUvery  was  not  a  surren- 
der or  a  taking  possession  of  the 
premises,  but  an  intrusting  of  the 
control  thereof  to  the  lessors,  for 
the  purpose  of  letting  on  behalf  of 
the  lessees. 

'  Bemey  v.  Moore,  3  Ridge.  P. 
C.  333. 

^  See  Spencer  v.  Marriott,  1  B.  & 
C,  457,  459 ;  Hayward  v.  Parke,  16 
C.  B.  395.  But  see  Van  v.  Corpe, 
8  My.  &  K.  369. 

'  See  Clements  v.  Welles,  L.  R. , 
1  Eq.  300. 

*  Wilson  V.  Hart,  L.  R.,  1  Ch.  468. 

^  Cesser  v.  CoUinge,  8  My.  &  K. 
388 ;  Flight  v.  Barton,  id.  383 ; 
Clements  v.  Welles,  L.  R.,  1  Eq. 
300. 

"Clements  v.  Welles,  L.  R.,  1  Eq. 
300. 


1,088  Eent.  [§  471.  ■ 

underlease  granted  at  different  periods,  though  in  terms 
the  same,  are  in  effect  substantially  different,  because  the 
underlessee  is  bound  only  to  put  the  premises  in  the  same 
condition  as  he  found  them  in  at  the  time  of  the  lease  to 
him. '  Where  an  underlease  contains  a  covenant  to  repair, 
identical  in  language  with  a  covenant  contained  in  the 
original  lease,  and  the  original  lessor  has  sued  the  lessee 
on  his  covenant  to  repair,  the  latter  may  recover  from  his 
underlessee  the  damages  obtained  by  the  original  lessor,  but 
not  the  costs  incurred  by  defending  the  action."  Prem- 
ises held  under  a  lease  containing  a  clause  of  re-entry  for 
want  of  repairs,  were  underlet,  and  the  underlessee  under- 
took to  repair  within  three  months  after  notice  ;  the 
original  lessor  having  threatened  to  insist  on  the  forfeit- 
ure if  the  premises  were  not  repaired,  and  the  underlessee 
not  liaving  repaired  at  the  expiration  of  three  months 
after  notice  to  do  so,  the  original  lessee  entered  and  re- 
paired :  it  was  held,  that  he  might  recover  from  the 
underlessee  the  sum  expended  in  such  repairs.  °  An  un- 
dertenant may  deduct  from  his  rent  compulsory  payments 
made  by  him  of  arrears  of  rent  due  from  the  original 
tenant  to  the  original  landlord.  Where  underlessees  hold 
separate  portions  of  premises  at  distinct  rents,  the  whole 
of  the  premises  being  held  under  one  original  lease  at  an 
entire  rent ;  and  one  of  the  underlessees  under  threat  of 
a  distress  by  the  owner  of  the  reversion  on  the  original 
lease  pays  the  whole  rent,  an  action  is  not  maintainable 
by  him  to  recover  from  the  other  underlessee,  as  money 
paid  to  his  use,  the  proportion  of  the  rent  due  from 
him.* 

>  Walker  V.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W.        sCoUey  v.  Streeton,  2  B.  &  C. 
249  273 

!i  Walker  v.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W.        ■'Hunter  v.  Hunt,  1  C.  B.  300. 
249,  257  ;  Penley  v.  Watts,  7  M.  & 
W.  601. 


CHAP.  xLn.]        Whisn  May  be  Made.  1089 


CHAPTER  XLIl. 

APPOETIONMENT  OF  EBNT. 

Sec.  472.  When  may  be  made. 

Sec.  473.  11  Geo.  3,  c.  19,  s.  15. 

Sec.  474.  4  &  5  WiU.  4,  c.  23. 

Sec.  475.  Interest. 

Sec.  476.  How  apportionment  is  made. 

Sec.  472.  When  may  be  made.—"  Apportionment,"  in 
the  language  of  Sir  E.  Coke,  "signifieth  a  division  or 
partition  of  a  rent,  common,  &c.,  or  a  making  of  it  into 
parts  ;  "  but  it  has  been  better  defined  as  denoting  the 
distribution  of  one  subject  in  proportion  to  another 
previously  distributed.'  Apportionment  of  rent,  by  the 
common  law,  takes  place  either  by  operation  of  law  or 
the  act  of  the  parties.  By  act  or  law,  where  lands 
demised  at  an  entire  rent  are  divided  among  different 
parties  ;  thus,  if  freehold  and  leasehold  premises  are  let 
together  at  one  rent,  an  apportionment  takes  place  at 
the  death  of  the  lessor  among  the  real  and  personal 
representatives.  Apportionment,  at  common  law,  may 
also  be  by  act  of  the  parties  :  thus,  if  the  lessee  disposes 
of  the  reversion  in  part  of  the  lands,  either  by  deed  or 
will,  the  rent  is  apportionable,"  but  the  lessee's  concur- 
ence  to  the  apportionment  is  neccessary,  unless  it  be 
settled  by  a  jury.' 

Where  a  lessee  is  evicted  by  title  paramount  in  the 
midcRe  of  a  quarter,  the  rent  for  that  quarter  is  not 
apportionable,  as  there  can  be  no  apportionment  of  rent 
in  respect  of  time.* 

'  Hmitley  v.  Eaper,  1  Aud.  31 ;  » Bliss  v.  CoEings,  5  B.    &  A. 

Exparte  Smythe,  1  Swanst.  338,  n.  876. 

'Westv.  LasceUes,Cro.Eliz.  851;  <C1ub's  Case,  10  Coke,  128  a; 

Collins  V.  Harding's  Case,  13  Coke,  Barwick  v.  Foster,  Cro.  Jac.  237  ; 

57  a ;  Cro.  Eliz,  606.  Yelve.  867  ;  Price  v.  Williams,  Cro. 


1090  Apportionment  op  Rent.  [§  473. 

The  loss  of  land  to  the  lessee  by  the  overflowing  of  the 
sea  appears  to  be  another  case  of  eviction,  in  which  the 
tenant  may  claim  apportionment :  but  the  loss  must  be 
total  i^ro  tanto  for  if  there  be  merely  a  partial  irruption 
of  wliter,  the  exclusive  ri^its^  o£  fiahii^-  whieh  the 
lessee  woald  thereupon  have,  would  be  such  a  percep- 
tion of  the  profits  of  the  land  as  to  annul  his  claim." 
At  the  common  law  when  a  tenant  for  life  gives  a  lease 
for  a  term  and  dies  between  two  rent  days,  the  rent 
cannot  be  apportioned  and  the  tenant  may  quit  free  of 
rent,  but  if  he  remains,  the  reversioner  may  recover  from 
him  for  the  use  of  the  premises  in  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation,"  except  in  those  states  where  the  statute 
Geo.  2,  c.  19,  §  15  has  been  adopted,  which  gives  to 
executors,  &c.,  of  a  life  tenant,  power  to  collect  a  notable 
proportion,  of  the  rent. 

Sec.  473.  ii  Geo.  2,  c.  19,  s.  15.— By  11  Geo.  2,  c.  19,  s. 
15,  after  reciting  "that  where  any  lessor  or  landlord, 
having  only  an  estate  for  life  in  the  lands,  tenements,  or 
hereditaments  demised,  happens  to  die  before  or  on  the 
day  on  which  any  rent  is  reserved  or  made  payable,  such  , 
rent,  or  any  part  thereof,  is  not  by  law  recoverable  by  the 
executors  or  administrators  of  such  lessor  or  landlord ;  nor 
is  the  person  in  reversion  entitled  thereto,  any  other  than 
for  the  use  and  occupation  of  such  lands,  tenements  or  here- 
ditaments, from  the  death  of  the  tenant  for  hf e,  of  which 
advantage  hath  been  often  taken  by  the  undertenants,  who 
thereby  avoid  paying  anything  for  the  same, "  it  is  enacted, 
"  that  where  any  tenant  for  life  shall  happen  to  die  before 
or  on  the  day  on  which  any  rent  was  reserved  or  made 
payable,  upon  any  demise  or  lease  of  any  lands,  tene- 
ments, or  hereditaments,  which,  determined  on  the  death 
of  such  tenant  for  life,  the  executors  or  administratlts  of 
such  tenant  for  life  shall  and  may,  in  an  action  on  the 
case,  recover  of  and  from  such  undertenant  or  under- 
tenants of  such  lands,  &c.,  if  such  tenant  for  life  die  on 

Eliz.  360 ;  Slack  v.  Sharp,  8  Ad.  &         =2  Bl.    Com.    124,   Hoagland  v. 
El.  336.  Cnun,  113  lU.  365;  55  Am.  Rep.427. 

'  1  Roll.  Abr.  236, 1.  40. 


CHAP.  xLn.J        11  Geo.  2,  0. 19,  S.  IS.  1091 

the  day  on  which  the  same  was  made  payable,  the  whole, 
or  if  before  such  day,  then  a  proportion ,  of  such  rent, 
according  to  the  time  such  tenant  for  life  lived,  of  the 
last  year,  or  quarter  of  a  year,  or  other  time  in  which 
the  said  rent  was  growing  due  as  aforesaid,  making  all 
just  allowances  or  a  porportionable  part  thereof  respect- 
ively." A  distinction  has  been  taken  by  the  courts  in 
the  construction  of  this  statute  between,  cases  in  which 
the  rent  would  have  been  lost  before  the  statute  unless 
paid  to  the  personal  representative  of  the  tenant  for  life, 
and  those  in  whichj  being  at  all  events  payable  by  the 
lessee,  the  question  arose  whether  it  should  be  paid  to 
the  heir  or  remainder-man  on  the  one  hand,  or  to  the. 
personal  representatives  or  the  tenant  for  life  on  the 
other :  thus,  if  a  tenant  in  fee  die  intestate  on  the  rent- 
day,  his  heir  is  entitled  to  the  rent.'  No  apportionment 
of  rent  takes  place  as  between  the  heir  and  personal  rep- 
resentatives of  a  tenant  in  fee,  but  the  heir  is  entitled  to 
the  whole  rent."  Where  an  owner  in  fee  oraUy  demised 
to  tenants  from  year  to  year,  and  afterwards  devised  his 
estate  to  A  for  life,  with  remainder  to  B  in  tail,  and  A 
died  on  28th  September,  1858 :  held,  that  A's  executors 
were  not  entitled  to  an  apportioned  part  of  the  rents 
which  becahie  due  on  the  29th  September,  because  the 
tenancy  did  not  determine  on  the  death  of  A,  and  con- 
sequently the  statute  did  not  apply.'  The  grantee  of  a 
rent-charge  for  life,  payable  at  Michaelmas  and  Lady- 
day,  having  died  on  Michaelmas-day,  between  sunset  and 
midnight,  her  administrator  was  declared  entitled  to  the 
rent.'  The  courts,  however,  have  considered  it  as  a  bene- 
ficial statute,  and  have  put  a  liberal  construction  upon  it : 
thus,  the  representatives  of  a  tenant  in  tail,  who  had 
demised  the  entailed  estate  by  a  lease  which  was  a  void 
against  the  remainder- man,  were  held  to  be  entitled  to 
an  apportionment  of  the  rent,  even  when  the  entire 

'  Ld.  Rockingham  v.  Penrice,  1  *  Southern  v.  Ballasis,  1  P.  Wms. 

P.  Wms.  177.  179,  n. ;  Paton  v.  Sheppard,  10 

« Be  Clulow,  3  Kay  &  J.  689.  Sim.  186.    But  see  Noms  v.  Har- 

3  Cattley  v.  Arnold,  1  Johns.  &  rison,  3  Madd.  368. 

H.  651  ;  39  L.  J.  Ch.  353  ;  Booth- 

eroyd  v.  Woolley,  5  Tyr.  532. 


1092  Apportionment  of  Rent.  [§4:74.' 

amount  had  been  previously  paid  to  the  remainder-man." 
Where  a  lease  made  by  tenant  for  life  or  in  tail  does  not 
terminate  with  his  death — as  if  made  in  pursuance  of  a 
power  or  conformably  to  the  statute — the  rent  is  not 
apportioned  ;  but  if  it  terminate  on  that  event,  an  appor- 
tionment takes  place : "  thus,  if  tenant  for  life,  with  a 
leasing  power,  demise,  though  not  comf ormably  to  such 
power,  and  die  before  the  rent  becomes  due,  the  interest 
of  the  lessee  is  determined  with  the  life  of  the  lessor,  and 
the  rent  shall  be  apportioned  under  the  statute.  Where 
the  lessee -of  a  tenant  in  tail,  whose  estate  determined  in 
the  middle  of  a  half-year,  paid  the  entire  rent  to  the 
remainder-man.  Lord  Hardwicke  decided,  that  the  exec- 
utors of  the  tenant  in  tail  were  entitled  to  an  apportion- 
ment ;  grounding  his  opinion  upon  the  fact  of  the  tenant 
having  paid  the  rent,  and  that  therefore  the  persoji 
receiving  it  should  be  accountable  to  those  entitled  to  it 
in  equity  : '  and  on  a  demise  from  year  to  year  by  the 
guardians  of  an  infant  tenant  in  tail,  the  tenant  having 
paid  the  rent  to  the  receiver,  Lord  Thurlow  also  held, 
that  there  should  be  an  apportionment.*  Two  cases  on 
the  subject  of  tithes  have  also  been  decided  in  equity  ;  in 
one,  the  executors  of  a  deceased  rector  were  held  to  be 
entitled  to  an  apportionment  of  rent  on  a  lease  of  the 
glebe,  parsonage  house,  tithes,  &c,,  of  a  rectory,  which 
the  tenant  had  paid  to  the  successor ; ''  and  in  the  other, 
where  the  successor  of  a  rectory  had  received  the  whole 
year's  composition  for  a  tithe  which  his  predecessor  had 
made,  an  apportionment  was  decreed,  with  reference  to 
the  respective  periods  of  enjoyment.' 

Sec.  474.  4  &  5  WiU.  4,  c.  22.— By  4  &  5  Will.  4,  c.  22,  s. 
1,  "rents  reserved  and  made  payable  on  any  demise  or 
lease  of  lands,  tenements,  or  hereditaments,  and  which 
have  been  and  shaU  be  made,  and  which  leases  or  demises 

1  Whitfield  V.  Pindar,  C.  P.  1781,         ^  p^get  v.  Gee,  Amb.  198  ;  9  Mod. 

cited  8  Ves.  311.  483. 

^Symons  t.  Symons,    Madd.  &         ^Vernon  v.  Vernon,  3  Bro.  C.  0. 

Geld.    307;    Clarkson  v.   Earl  of  659. 

Scarborough,  1   Bwanst.   354,  n.  ;        ^  Hawkins  v.  Kelly,  8  Ves.  308. 
Strafford  v.  Wentworth,  Prec.  Ch.         « Ansley  v.  Wadsworth,  .B  &  P. 

555;  easjjarfe  Smyth,  ISwanst.  337.  831. 


CJHAP.  XLn.J        4  &  5  Will  4,  C.  22.  1093 

determined,  or  shall  determine,  on  the  death  of  the 
person  making  the  same  (although  such  person  was  not 
strictly  tenant  for  life  thereof),  or  on  the  death  of  the 
life  or  Uves  for  which  such  person  was  entitled  to  such 
hereditaments,  shall,  so  far  as  respects  the  rents  reserved 
by  such  leases,  and  the  recovery  of  a  proportion  thereof 
by  the  person  granting  the  same,  his  or  her  executors  or 
administrators  (as  the  case  may  be),  be  considered  within 
the  provisions  of  the  said  recited  act "  (11  Geo.  2,  c.  19). 
This  statute  extends  the  doctrine  of  apportionment  to 
rents,  annuities,  dividends  and  other  payments  coming 
due  at  fixed  periods^  It  applies  to  rents  reserved  by 
leases  granted  after  the  passing  of  the  act,  in  pursuance 
of  a  power  created  before  the  act ; '  but  not  to  rents 
reserved  under  oral  demises  ; '  nor  as  between  the  heir- 
at-law  and  personal  representatives  of  a  tenant  in  fee.* 
Where  it  can  be  predicated  that  the  interest  mentioned  in 
sect.  2  has  been  determined,  the  rents  and  other  payments 
there  mentioned  shall  be  apportioned ;  but  where  this 
cannot  be  predicated,  the  interest  being  between  the  heir 
and  the  executor,  the  heir  shall  take  the  whole,  and  there 
shall  be  no  apportionment.*  The  statute  does  not  apply 
where  the  party  entitled  to  the  rent  himself  determines 
the  lease  during  a  current  quarter.'  But  it  would  seem 
to  apply  where  a  lessee  of  mines,  having  power  to  deter- 
mine the  demise  by  a  six  months'  notice  expiring  at  any 
time,  gives  such  notice  to  the  lessor.' 

'  Sutton  V.  Chaplain,  10  Ves.  67  ;  Beav.  313  ;  Wardroper  v.  Outfield, 

Knight  V.   Broughton,    IS   Beav.  33  L.  J.  Ch.  605  ;  Llewellyn  v.  Rous, 

313 ;  Yates  v.  Yates,  38  Beav.  637 ;  L.  R.  1, 3  Eq.  37. 

TyrreU  v.  Clark,  3  Drew.  86  :  Car-  sRe  Markby,  4  Myl.  &  Cr.   484; 

ter  V.  Taggart,  16  Sim.  447  ;  Hart-  Cattley  v.  Arnold,  IJ.  &  H.  651. 

ley  V.  Allen,  37  L.  J.  Ch.  631 ;  Re  "  Browne    v.    Amyott,  8   Hare, 

Maxwell,  1 H.  &  M.  610  ;  St.  Aubyn  163 ;  Beer  v.  Beer,  13  C.  B.  60 ;  Re 

V.  St.  Aubyn,  1  Drew.  &  Sm.  613.  Clulow,   3  Kay  &  J.    689  ;  Lord 

As  to  bonuses  and  extra  dividends,  Rockingham  v.  Pearce,  1  P.  Wms. 

seeBarclayv.  Wain  Wright,  14  Ves.  197;  Re  Rogers'  Trusts,  80  L.  J. 

66 ;  Johnson  v.    Johnson,  15  Jur.  Ch.  158. 

714  ;  Cuming  v.  Boswell,  2  Jur.  N.  'In  Re  Clulow,  supra. 

S.  1005  ;  Plumbe  v.  Neild,  27  L.  J.  ^Oldershaw  v.   Holt,  13  Ad.   & 

Ch.    618 ;    Lock    v.  Venables,  37  El.  590  :  HaU  v.  Burgess,  5  B.  &  C. 

Beav.  598  ;  Hartley  v.  Allen,  36  L.  833. 

J.*Ch.  631  ;  Nicholson  v.  Nichol-  'Bridges  v.  Potts,  17  C.  B.  N.  S. 

son.  30  L.  J.  Ch.  917.  314. 

'  Plummer  v.  Whiteley,  1  Johns. 
585 ;    Knight    v.    Broughton,    13 
II.— 17 


1094:  Apportionment  of  Eent.  [§  476. 

Sec.  475.  interest— Interest  on  a  mortgage,  although 
made  payable  half-yearly,is  considered  as  accruing  de  die 
in  dzem,and  consequently  is  apportionable  without  the  aid 
of  the  statute.'  So  with  respect  to  interest  on  debentures 
of  a  railway  or  other  company  which  are  in  the  nature 
of  mortgages."  If  a  company  is  so  constituted  that  its  divi- 
dends are  to  be  declared,  and  therefore  become  due  at 
fixed  periods,  such  dividends  are  apportionable ;  but  it  is 
otherwise  with  respect  to  railway  and  other  companies 
who  have  no  fixed  period  for  declaring  a  dividend,  and 
are  under  no  obligation  to  declare  a  dividend  at  aU.' 
Dividends  in  a  public  company  earned  before  a  testator's 
death,  but  declared  afterwards,  form  income  and  not 
corpus."  To  save  expense,  and  as  a  matter  of  practical 
convenience,  the  Court  of  Chancery  never  apportions  div- 
idends on  the  proceeds  of  sums  paid  into  court  and  in- 
vested. Stock  or  shares  sold  between  dividend  days  are 
not  to  be  apportioned  between  tenant  for  life  and  remain- 
derman in  respect  of  the  running  dividend." 

Sec.  476.  Howapportionmentismade.— Theproperaction 
in  which  to  apportion  rent  between  a  lessor  and  lessee  is 
an  action  of  debt,"  and  it  cannot  be  apportioned  in  an 
action  of  covenant  by  a  lessor  against  the  lessee,  the  action 
being  personal ;  but  in  covenant  against  an  assignee, 
whose  obligation  arises  from  privity  of  estate,  and  not  of 
contract,  the  case  is  different ;  against  him,  therefore, 
the  rent  may  be  apportioned  in  an  action  of  covenant.' 

'  Edwards  t.  Countess  of  War-  ^  Scholefield  v.  Redfern,  33  L.  J. 

wick,  3  P.  Wms.  176 ;  3  Ves.  673  ;  Ch.   637 ;  Fi-eeman  v.  Whitbread, 

3  Atk.  361,  508.  14  W.-E.  188. 

2  Re  Rogers,  1  Drew.  &  Sm.  338.  « Brownl.  &  Goulds.  33. 

s  In  Re  Maxwell,  1  H.  &  M.  610.  '  Stevenson  v.  Lombard,  3  East, 

^  Bates  V.  Mackinley,  31  Beav.  575;  Holgate  v.  Kay,  1  C.  &  K. 

280.  341. 


CHAP.  XLin.]         What  Constitutes. 


1095 


CHAPTER    XLiri. 


EVICTION. 

Sec.  477.    What  constitutes  an  eviction. 

Sec.  478.    Destruction  of  premises,  or  disrepair. 

Sec.  479.    Eviction.— Effects  of. 


Sec.  4:77.  What  constitutes  an  eviction.— A  mere  tres- 
pass by  the  lessor,  without  an  actual  eviction,  does  not 
operate  to  suspend  the  rent,"  nor  does  a  temporary  entry 


>  ElUott  V.  Aiken,  45  N.  H.  3,  nor 
does  a  mere  interruption  of  the 
tenant's  possession  by  the  landlord 
have  that  effect.  Fuller  v.  Ruby, 
10  Gray  (Mass.)  285.  Nor  any  in- 
terference with  the  tenant's  pos- 
session that  merely  amounts  to  a 
trespass,  Vatel  v.  Hemet,  1  Hilt. 
(N.  Y.)  149,  unless  it  amounts  to 
an  exclusion  of  the  tenant  from 
the  premises  demised.  Randall  v. 
Alburtis,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  285. 
An  entry  by  the  landlord  to  make 
repairs  for  the  benefit  of  the  tenant 
is  not  an  eviction.  Pattei'son  v. 
Edmonson,  5  Harr.  (Del.)  378.  Nor 
do  repeated  entries  upon  the  prem- 
ises made  by  the  landlord,  carry- 
ing away  crops,  cutting  down  a 
fruit  tree,  and  carrying  away  a 
cook  stove,  amount  to  an  eviction. 
Such  acts  are  simply  trespasses, 
for  which  the  tenant  can  only  seek 
his  remedy  by  an  action  for  the 
damages.  Bartlett  v.  Farrington, 
130  Mass.  284.  But  see  Briggs  v. 
Hull,  4  Leigh  (Va.)  484,  where  the 
entry  of  the  landlord  upon  a 
meadow,  a  part  of  the  demised 
premises,  and  cutting  and  carrying 
away  the  hay  thereon  was  held  to 
amount  to  an  eviction  that  dis- 
charged the  tenant  from  the  entire 
rent,  although  he  still  remained  in 
possession.  The  rule  is  that  an 
entry  of  the  landlord  upon  the 
premises  does  not  discharge  the 
tenant  from  the  payment  of  rent 


unless  he  was  expelled  or  evicted, 
and  the  distinction  between  a  tres- 
pass and  an  eviction  is  to  be  found 
in  the  fact  whether  the  act  of  the 
landlord  is  of  such  a  character  as 
to  deprive  the  tenant  of  the  bene- 
ficial use  of  the  premises  for  any 
considerable  time,  or  is  merely 
temporary.  Wilson  v.  Smith,  5 
Yerg.  (Term.)  379.  An  eviction  is 
defined  to  be  an  act  of  a  perma- 
nent character  done  by  the  land- 
lord in  order  to  deprive,  and  which 
has  the  effect  of  depriving,  the 
tenant  of  the  use  of  the  whole  or  a 
part  of  the  thing  demised.  Upton 
V.  Townend,  17  C.  B.  30 ;  Dobbins 
V.  Duguid,  65  111.  464 ;  Royce  v. 
Guggenheim,  106  Mass.  301 ;  Lynch 
V.  Baldwin,  69  lU.  210.  A  tortious 
entry  suspends  the  rent  during  the 
time  he  is  kept  out  of  possession, 
but  if  lie  is  not  put  out  of  posses- 
sion at  all,  the  act  is  a  mere  tres- 
pass, and  even  if  he  is  expelled  the 
rent  is  revived  when  he  regains 
possession  again.  Mackerbin  v. 
Whitcroft,  4  H.  &  McH.  (Md.)  135. 
There  must  be  an  entry  and  expul- 
sion of  the  tenant  by  the  landlord, 
or  some  deliberate  disturbance  of" 
the  possession,  depriving  him  of 
the  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the 
demised  premises,  and  of  the  pos- 
session, to  operate  as  a  suspension 
or  extinguishment  of  rent.  That 
a  tenant  can  prevent  the  disturb- 
ance of  his  possession  does  not,  in 


1096 


Eviction. 


[§  m. 


by  the  landlord  to  repair  or  rebuild  the  premises  have 
that  effect,'  unless  the  work  is  unnecessarily  prolonged." 
But  any  actual  expulsion  of  the  tenant,  or  intentional 
disturbance  by  the  landlord,  or  by  any  other  person 
acting  by  his  authority,  or  by  virtue  of  a  legal  right 
vested  in  them  in  any  manner,  which  so  seriously  dis- 
turbs the  tenant's  possession  as  to  compel  an  abandon- 
ment of  the  premises  by  him,  or  which  deprives  him  of 
their  beneficial  enjoyment,  amounts  to  an  eviction,  and 
the  rent  is  suspended  from  the  time  of  such  disturbance!' 


the  absence  of  an  obligation  to  do 
so,  destroy  the  legal  effect  of  an 
eviction  ;  the  landlord  who  creates 
a  nuisance  or  disturbance  to  the 
tenant  is  bound  to  abate  the  one 
or  arrest  or  remove  the  other. 
Edgerton  v.  Page,  20  N.  Y.  284. 
There  must  be  an  expulsion  or 
eviction  from  some  part  of  the 
premises,  or  some  act  done  that 
deprives  the  tenant  of  his  full 
rights  as  such.  In  other  words,  he 
must  be  put  out  of  possession.  Co. 
Litt.  148  b;  Hob.  190;  Salmon  v. 
Smith,  1  Saund.  202  ;  Bro.  Appor- 
tionment, 7  ;  Hodgkins  v.  Eobson, 
1  Vent.  2771 ;  Harrison's  Case, 
Clayt.  34;  Tunbrell  v.  Bullock, 
Sty.  446.  And  the  plea  must  set 
forth  an  eviction  or  expulsion  by 
the  lessor  which  continues  until 
after  the  rent  becomes  due.  Reyn- 
old V.  Buckle,  Hob.  326 ;  Page  v. 
PaiT,  Sty.  432  ;  Bushell  v.  Lech- 
more,  1  Ld.  Rayd.  870.  And  a 
plea  that  merely  sets  forth  a  tres- 
pass by  the  landlord  is  bad.  Eoper 
V.  Lloyd,  T.  Jones,  148 ;  Hunt  v. 
Cope,  Cowp.  242.  In  debt  for 
rent,  the  tenant  may  give  the  evic- 
tion in  evidence  under  the  general 
issue  or  plead  it  in  his  election. 
Anonymous,  1  Mod.  35  ;  Browne's 
Case,  1  Mod.  118 ;  Drake  v.  Beere, 
1  Vent.  258.  In  Lounsbury  v. 
Snyder,  31  N.  Y.  614,  the  landlord 
piled  wood  on  a  part  of  the  demised 
lands,  and  it  was  held  to  be  a  tres- 
pass rather  than  an  eviction. 
Hippie  V.  De  Price,  51  lU.  528; 
Nowlan  V.  Trevor,  2  Sweeney  (N. 
Y.  Superior  a.)  67;  Bai-ttell  v. 
Farrington,  120  Mass.  384 ;  Walker 
V.  Shoemaker,  11  N.  Y.  S.  C.  576  ; 
Gushing  V.  Adams,  18  Pick.  (Mass.) 
110 ;  Jarvis  v.  Gunning,  13  N.  Y. 
Leg,  Obs.  96  ;  Nichols  v.  Dusen- 


bury,  2  N.  Y.  Where  a  landlord 
commanded  the  tearing  down  of  a 
partition  wall  in  the  demised 
house,  Harrison's  Case,  Clayt.  34, 
and  pulled  down  the  roof  of  a  sum- 
mer house,  it  was  held  not  to 
amount  to  a  re-entry  and  eviction. 
Hunt  V.  Cope,  Cowp.  242.  See  also 
Reynolds  v.  Buckle,  Hob.  326. 

'  Kellenberger  v.  Foresham,  13 
Ind.  475.  An  entry  by  the  landlord 
to  repair  the  damages  to  the  premi- 
ses caused  by  fire,  when  the  premi- 
ses can  be  restored  without  rebuild- 
ing, does  not  operate  as  an  evic- 
tion of  the  tenant,  although  tem- 
porarily the  premises  are  rendered 
uninhabitable.  Mu.  Life  Ins.  Co. 
V.  United  States,  21  Ct.  of  CI.  195, 
and  if,  the  landlord  proceeds  dili- 
gently with  the  repairs,  this  is  the 
rule,  although  several  weeks  are 
required  to  complete  them.  No 
damages  can  be  recovered  by  a 
tenant  for  an  injury  to  his  business, 
inconvenience,  vexation,  and  an- 
noyance, caused  by  the  lessor  in 
necessary  repairs  upon  the  leased 
premises.  Bonnecoze  v.  Beer,  37 
La.  An.  531. 

^Id. 

'  The  consequence  of  an  eviction 
by  a  landlord  of  his  tenant  from 
the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  demised 
premises  is,  that  there  is  a  suspen- 
sion of  the  entire  rent  during  the 
continuance  of  the  eviction  :  the 
tenancy  is  not  thereby  ended  for 
all  purposes,  but  the  rent  and  all 
remedy  for  its  collection  are  sus- 
pended. Morrison  v.  Chadwick,  7 
C.  B.  266;  Sabnon  v.  Smith,  1 
Saund.  204  ;  Pendleton  v.   Dyete, 

4  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  581  ;  Ogilvie  v.  Hall, 

5  Hill.  (N.  Y.)  53  ;  Bennett  v.  Bit- 
tie,  4  Rawle  (Penn.)  339.  But  the 
eviction,  to  have  the  effect  of  sus- 


CHAP.   XLm.] 


"What  Constitutes. 


1097 


And,  not  only  is  the  rent  suspended,  but  also  the  land- 


pending  the  rent,  must  be  eflEected 
before  the  rent  becomes  due,  for 
the  rent  already  accrued  and  over- 
due is  not  forfeited  by  the  eviction. 
The  rule  is  the  same  although  the 
rent  is  payable  in  advance^nd  the 
eviction  occurs  before  the  expira- 
tion of  the  period  in  respect  to 
which  the  rent  claimed  accrues. 
Giles  V.  Comstock,  4  N.  Y.  370  ; 
Hunter  v.  Reiley,  43  N.  J.  In 
Bentley  v.  Sill,  35  lU.  414,  it  was 
held  that  where  a  landlord  owned 
but  three  walls  of  the  house  leased, 
and  the  owner  of  the  fourth  wall 
raised  the  adjoining  building  of 
which  the  wall  was  a  part,  and 
thereby  necessarily  disturbed  the 
lessee  in  his  possession,  and  obliged 
him  to  abandon  the  premises,  the 
lessee  might  defend  against  an  ac- 
tion for  rent  on  the  ground  of  evic- 
tion. But  in  a  New  York  case, 
Campbell  v.  Shields,  11  How.  Pr. 
565,  it  was  held  that  the  mere  al- 
teration of  the  wall  of  a  house  so 
as  to  make  it  somewhat  narrower, 
in  compliance  with  the  claim  of  an 
adjoining  owner,  the  tenant  still 
remaining  in  possession,  did  not 
constitute  an  eviction.  But  in  an- 
other New  York  case,  Rogers  v. 
Ostrom,  35  Barb.  523,  tearing  down 
a  partition  which  separated  the  en- 
trance to  the  tenant's  rooms  from 
a  grog  shop,  so  as  to  compel  him  to 
pass  through  it  in  order  to  reach 
his  own  roorEi,  was  held  an  evic- 
tion. CrommeUn  v.  Thiess,  3  Ala. 
413 ;  Jackson  v.  Eddy,  13  Mo.  209  ; 
Montague  v.  WuUahan,  84  III.  355. 
In  Pillatt  V.  Boosey,  11  C.  B.  N.  S. 
885,  the  plaintiff  who  had  leased 
premises  to  B  for  a  term  which  was 
unexpired  at  B's  death,  afterwards, 
in  the  beUef  that  no  one  would 
administer  on  B's  estate,  agreed 
with  B's  son  for  him  to  occupy  the 
premises  as  a  yearly  tenant,  at  the 
rent  reserved  by  the  lease  to  B. 
The  son  accordingly  occupied,  and 
paid  rent.  The  plaintiflf  repaired 
the  premises  shortly  before  Mich- 
aelmas, 1861,  and  having  after- 
wards discovered  that  the  defend- 
ant, a  daughter  of  B,  was  admin- 
istratrix to  his  estate,  and,  as  such, 
claimed  to  hold  the  premises  for 
the  remainder  of  the  term  under 
B's  lease,  the  j)laintiflf  sued  her  on 
the  covenant  m  the  lease  to  repair, 


and  also  brought  ejectment  for 
forfeiture  for  non-repair.  In  the 
action  on  the  covenant,  the  defend- 
ant paid  a  sum  of  money  into 
court,  which  the  plaintiff  accepted 
in  satisfaction.  There  was  no 
want  of  repair  to  the  premises 
after  the  plaintiff  had  so  repaired 
them,  and  the  rent  due  up  to 
Michaelmas,  1861,  was  paid  by  B's 
son,  and  received  from  him  by  the 
plaintifif  before  either  action.  Held, 
in  the  action  of  ejectment,  that 
either  the  rent  paid  by  B's  son  was 
to  be  taken  in  satisfaction  of  the 
rent  under  the  lease,  and  so  there 
had  been  a  waiver  of  the  forfeit- 
ure, or  else  there  had  been  an  evic- 
tion of  the  defendant  by  the  plaint- 
iflf, which  would  prevent  his  tak- 
ing advantage  of  a  forfeiture  for 
non-repair  during  such  eviction. 
But  there  must  be  an  actual  ouster. 
The  tenant  must  either  be  expelled 
from  the  premises,  or  must  liave 
abandoned  possession  because  of 
the  disturbance,  and  the  acts  must 
have  been  such  as  to  deprive  him 
■  of  somebenefit,  privilege  or  advan- 
tage belonging  to  the  promises, 
and  must  proceed  from  the  land- 
lord himself  or  some  person  who 
stands  in  his  place,  and  must  be 
wrongful.  So  long  as  the  landlord 
confines  himself  to  mere  acts  of 
trespass,  however  annoying  they 
may  be  to  the  tenant,  an  eviction 
does  not  arise,  and  even  though 
his  acts  are  such  as  might,  if  acted 
upon  by  the  tenant,  amoimt  to  an 
eviction,  yet  if,  notwithstanding 
such  acts,  he  remains  in  possession 
he  must  pay  the  rent.  Edgerton 
V.  Page,  1  HUt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  320 ; 
affl'd  20  N.  Y.  281.  And  a  mere 
disturbance  of  the  tenant's  posses- 
sion, injurious  to  his  quiet  enjoy- 
ment, although  of  such  a  character 
that  the  tenant  might  maintain  an 
action  against  the  landlord  there- 
for, constitutes  no  defence  to  an 
action  for  rent  on  the  ground  of 
eviction.  Drake  v.  Cockroft,  4  E. 
D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  34.  Nor  does  an  in- 
terference by  the  landlord  vrith  the 
person  of  the  tenant,  upon  the 
premises,  constitute  an  eviction. 
The  tenant  has  his  remedy  in  tres- 
pass ;  Vatel  v.  Hernet,  1  Hilt.  '(N. 
Y.  0.  P.)  149  ;  nor  does  a  mere  en- 
try upon  the  premises  by  the  land- 


1098 


Eviction. 


[§•477. 


lord's  right  to  re-enter  for  non-payment  of  rent,  or  to 
dispossess  the  tenant  therefor  in  summary  proceedings.' 
The  act  complained  of  must  proceed  from  the  landlord 
himself,  or  some  person  acting  under  his  authority,  or 
by  or  through  him,"  or  from  the  exercise  of  some  legal 
right  by  State  or  municipal  authorities,"  and  must  be 
such  as  deprives  the  tenant  of  the  beneficial  enjoyment 


lord,  without  any  attempt  on  his 
part  to  exclude  the  tenant  there- 
from, constitute  an  eviction.  Ran- 
dall V.  Albertis,  1  id.  285.  Upon  the 
general  doctrine,  see  Vaughn  v. 
Blanohaid,  4  DaU.  (Penn.)  124; 
Wood  V.  Partridge,  1\  Mass.  448  ; 
Banduns  v.  Fletcher,  11  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)419 ;  Kesslar  v.  McConachy, 
1  Rawle  (Penii.)  435;  Bennett  y.  Bit- 
tie,  4  id.  339.  Where  a  portion  of  the 
demised  premises  are  taken  by  the 
government,  or  under  an  act  of  the 
legislature,  or  by  municipal  authoi-- 
ities,  it  is  an  eviction  from  such 
portion,  and  the  tenant  is  entitled 
to  an  abatement  or  apportionment 
of  the  rent.  Gallup  v.  Albany  R. 
R.  Co.,  65  N.  Y.  1 ;  Patterson  V. 
Boston,  20  Pick.  (Mass.)  159  ;  Gil- 
lespie V.  Thomas,  15  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
464 ;  Parks  v.  City  of  Boston,  15 
Pick.  (Mass.)  198  ;  Foot  v.  Cincin- 
nati, 11  Ohio,  408  ;  Mills  v.  Baehr, 
24  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  254.  As  to  proof 
of  expulsion,  see  Mayor,  &c.,  v. 
Whitt,  15  M.  &  W.  577.  As  to 
what  is  regarded  as  an  eviction, 
see  Briggs  v.  Hall,  4  Leigh  (Va.) 
484  ;  Dyett  v.  Pendleton,  8  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  727 ;  M'Eldemy  v.  Flana- 
gan, 1  H.  &  D.  (Md.)  308. 

'  People  V.  Gedney,  17  N.  Y.  S. 
C.  151. 

^DeWitt  V.  Pierson,  112  Mass.  8  ; 
17  Am.  Rep.  58  ;  Gilhooley  v.  Wash- 
ington, 4  N.  Y.  217.  The  mere  fact 
that  the  premises  become  uninhab- 
itable through  the  act  of  a  third 
person  to  which  the  landlord  has 
not  contributed,  does  not  amount 
to  an  eviction,  Barns  v.  Wilson, 
(Penn.)  8  Cent'l  Rep.  454 ;  Carson 
V.  Godley,  26  Penn.  St.  117  ;  Haz- 
lett  V.  Powell,  30  id.  293  ;  nor  does 
it  amount  to  a  disturbance  of  quiet 
enjoyment.  Moore  v.  Weber,  71 
Penn.  St.  429  ;  Fi'ost  v.  Earnest,  4 
Whart  (Penn.)  86;  Dobbins  v. 
Brown,  12  Penn.  St.  75. 

==  Gallup  V.  Albany  R.  R.  Co.,  65 
N.  Y.  1  ;  R.  R.  Co.  V.  Schmaele, 


57  Penn.  St.  271 ;  Foot  v.  Cincin- 
nati, 11  Ohio,  408.  If  a  portion  of 
the  premises  are  taken  for  the  pur- 
pose of  widening  or  opening  streets 
the  tenant  is  entitled  to  an  abate- 
ment of  the  rent,  even  thoiigh  the 
part  left  is  really  more  valuable 
than  the  premises  were  before. 
The  apportionment  is  between  the 
part  taken  and  the  residue,  accord- 
ing to  the  value  of  the  several  parts, 
and  the  abatement  or  the  right 
thereto  attaches  from  the  time  of 
the  confirmation  of  the  report  of 
the  commissions,  &c. ,  under  which 
the  premises  are  taken,  and  the 
report  estimating  the  damages. 
In  other  words,  from  the  time 
when  the  right  of  the  authorities 
to  enter  and  take  the  same  fully 
attaches.  Gillespie  v.  Thomas,  15 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  464;  Kingsland  v. 
Clarke,  24  Mo.  24 ;  Wiggin  v.  N. 
York,  9  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  16; 
David  V.  Beekman,  5  La.  An.  545. 
In  Barclay  v.  Pickles,  38  Mo.  143, 
the  plaintiff  leased  to  the  defendant 
certain  premises  that  were  subse- 
quently taken  for  certain  munici- 
pal improvements  under  the  author- 
ity of  law.  The  plaintiff  was  a 
party  to  the  proceedings,  and  re- 
ceived the  damages  awarded  for 
such  taking.  The  court  held  that 
the  lease  was  thereby  terminated. 
A  leased  to  B  a  store  in  the  city  of 
Sacramento,  and  certain  stands  for 
the  sale  of  goods  erected  on  the 
sidewalk  of  a  public  street.  Short- 
ly after  the  lease  these  stands  were 
removed  by  the  city  authorities. 
Held,  that  such  removal  was  not 
an  eviction,  B  being  fully  chargea- 
ble with  notice  of  their  character, 
and  taking  them  subject  to  be  re- 
moved at  any  moment  by  the  city, 
and  that  he  was  liable  for  the  rent. 
McLaren  v.  Spalding,  3  Cal.  510. 
The  removal  of  a  party  wall  by  an 
adjoining  owner,  whereby  the 
building  is  made  untenantable, 
does  not  operate  as  an  eviction. 


CHAP.  xLin.J         "What  Constitutes. 


1099 


of  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  demised  premises.'  But  a 
mere  disturbance  of  the  tenant's  possession,  or  even  an 
actual  eviction  by  a  wrong-doer  does  not  discharge  the 
tenant  from  any  part  of  the  rent."    An  eviction  such  as 


which  discharges  the  tenant  from 
the  payment  of  rent.  Barns  t. 
Wilson,  (Penn.)  8  Centl.  Eep.  454. 

'  In  New  York,  the  rule  with  ref- 
erence to  the  interference  by  land- 
lords with  tenants  are :  1.  Where 
the  tenant  is  evicted  without  the 
wilful  or  voluntary  agency  of  the 
landlord,  from  the  whole  or  some 
part  of  the  demised  premises,  if 
the  eviction  is  from  the  whole 
premises,  the  tenant  is  not  charge- 
able with  rent ;  but  if  it  is  from 
part  of  the  premises,  the  law  re- 
quires the  rent  to  be  apportioned 
so  that  the  tenant  shall  be  liable  to 
pay  for  such  portions  of  the  prem- 
ises as  he  retains.  3.  Where  the 
landlord  commits  acts  of  trespass 
which  interfere  more  or  less  with 
the  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the 
premises,  but  which  leave  the  de- 
mised premises  intact,  and  do  not 
deprive  the  tenant  of  any  part  of 
them  BO  that,  though  he  may  be 
injured,  he  is  not  dispossessed,  the 
rule  is,  inasmuch  as  the  wrongful 
act  of  the  landlord  stops  short  of 
depriving  the  tenant  of  any  por- 
tion of  the  premises,  the  act  is 
merely  a  trespass,  and  affords  no 
defence  to  an  action  for  the  rent. 
Home,  &c.,  Ins.  Co.  v.  Sherman, 
46  N.  Y.  370.  Shutting  off  the 
water  from  demised  premises  by 
the  landlord,  operates  as  an  evic- 
tion under  the  statute  which  au- 
thorizes a  tenant  to  abandon  pos- 
session when  the  premises ' '  become 
untenantable."  Westside  Savings 
Bank  v.  Newton,  76  N.  Y.  716. 

« Schilling  v.  Hohnes,  23  Cal. 
237  ;  Randall  v.  Albertis,  ante  ; 
Valet  V.  Herner,  ante ;  Barns  v. 
Wilson,  (Penn.)  8  Centl.  Eep.  454. 
This  proposition  is  well  illustrated 
by  an  old  case.  Hill  v.  Hanke,  Hil. 
Term,  14  Hen.  4,  fol.  27,  pi.  35. 
In  that  case,  an  action  for  three 
years'  arrears  of  rent  was  brought 
by  the  landlord,  and  the  tenant 
plead  in  defence  that  Prince  Eu- 
pert,  an  alien,  and  an  enemy  to 
the  king,  invaded  the  realm,  and 
with  divers  armed  men  did  enter 
upon  the    demised  premises  and 


expel  him  therefrom  and  keep 
him  out,  so  that  he  could  not  en- 
joy the  lands  during  the  term. 
The  court,  in  that  case,  took  this 
difference,  that  where  the  law  cre- 
ates a  duty  or  charge,  and  the 
party  is  disabled  to  perform  it 
without  any  default  on  his  part, 
and  he  hath  no  remedy  over,  the 
law  will  excuse  him ;  but,  when 
the  party  charges  himself  with  a 
duty  by  contract,  he  is  bound  to 
make  it  good,  notwithstanding 
any  accident,  inevitable  or  other- 
wise because  he  might  have  pro- 
vided against  it  by  his  contract. 
Another  reason  for  this  latter  rule 
is  found  in  the  fact  that,  as  the 
lessee  is  to  have  the  advantage  of 
casual  profits,  he  must  take  the 
hazard  of  casual  losses,  and  can- 
not throw  the  whole  burden  there- 
of on  the  lessor.  Paradine  v. 
Jane,  AUeyn,  37  ;  Maryon  v.  Car- 
ter, 4  C.  &  P.  395  ;  Barrett  v.  But- 
ton, 4  Camp.  333;  Hills  v. 
Sughrue,  15  M.  &  W.  253 ;  Wei- 
gaU  V.  Waters,  6  T.  R.  488.  The 
principal  doctrine  is  also  illus- 
trated in  a  later  EngUsh  case, 
Harrison  v.  Lord  North,  1  Ch.  Ca. 
84,  in  which,  during  the  civil 
wars,  parUament  took  possession 
of  certain  demised  premises  and 
_  converted  them  into  a  hospital  for 
sick  and  wounded  soldiers,  and  in 
that  manner  for  several  years  pre- 
vented the  tenant  from  enjoying 
the  premises,,  but  the  lessor 
brought  an  action  at  law  against 
the  tenant  for  the  rent  accruing 
during  the  period  that  the  govern- 
ment so  had  possession,  and  even 
a  court  of  equity  refused  to  re- 
lieve the  tenant  against  the  ac- 
tion. See  also  Wagner  v.  White, 
4  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  564.  But,  in  the 
United  States  court,  an  apparently 
different  and  more  equitalile  doc- 
trine has  been  held.  In  that  case, 
certain  premises  that  had  been  de- 
mised for  a  term,  belonging  to  a 
citizen  of  the  State  of  Louisiana, 
and  situated  in  that  State,  who, 
during  the  rebellion,  was  absent 
therefrom,    were    seized    by    the 


1100  Eviction.  [§  477. 

will  suspend  rent  is  an  actual  expulsion  of  the  lessee  out 
of  aU  or  some  parts  of  the  demised  premises :  the  rent 
already  accrued  and  overdue  is  not  forfeited  by  the  evic- 
tion ;  but  in  an  action  for  such  rent,  the  tenant  may  defalk 
the  damages  caused  by  it.  Thus,  where  it  was  a  disputed 
point  as  to  how  much  of  coal-mine  property  was  leased, 
and  the  lessor  had  had  undisputed  possession  of  one 
coal  opening  ;  held,  that  if  one  only  had  been  leased, 
the  entry  of  the  lessors  or  others  under  them  upon  other 
parts  of  the  tract  would  not  be  an  eviction,  and  the 
lessee  would  be  bound  to  pay  for  the  coal  taken  by  him 
from  that  opening.  But  the  court  held  that  if  the  grant 
was  co-extensive  with  the  coal  veins  of  the  whole  tract, 
and  the  lessors,  without  interrupting  the  lessee's  actual 
mining  operations,  entered,  and  took  coal  from  the  tract 
demised,  they  were  guilty  of  a  breach  of  the  imphed 
covenant  for  quiet  possession,  and  the  lessee  could  set 
off  the  damages  resulting  therefrom  against  the  claim  for 
rent  accrued  under  the  lease.  But  such  an  eviction 
would  not  suspend  the  rent,  for  it  was  not  reserved  as 
an  equivalent  for  the  possession  of  the  land,  but  for  the 

United  States  military  authorities  where  it  was  held  that  being  de- 
as  abandoned  property,  and  the  prived  of  the  benefit  of  the  en- 
lessee  was  compelled  by  them  to  joyment  of  premises  by  the  cas- 
enter  into  a  new  lease  with,  and  ualties  of  war  constituted  no  de- 
pay  rent  to  them.  It  was  held,  fence,  unless  the  tenant  had 
that  during  the  period  that  the  surrendered,  or  offered  to  surren- 
lessee  was  so  compelled  to  pay  der,  the  lease,  especially  if,  after 
rent  to  the  mihtary  authorities,  the  war  is  ended  he  resumes 
the  lessor  could  not  recover  rent  possession.  In  Eobinson  y.  L'En- 
of  the  tenant.  Harrison  v.  Myers,  gle,  13  Ma.  483,  an  offer  to  per- 
93  U.  S.  111.  In  Louisiana  a  simi-  form  in  part  a  covenant  to  pay 
lar  doctrine  has  been  held,  and  rent,  on  condition  that  the  les- 
where  the  military  authorities  took  sor  will  abate  the  rent  accrued 
possession  of  demised  premises,  while  the  tenant  was  deprived 
and  deprived  the  tenant  of  the  of  the  use  of  the  premises  by 
use  thereof,  it  was  held  that  he  the  violence  of  war,  was  held 
was  entitled  to  a  deduction  of  the  neither  a  legal  or  equitable  de- 
whole  rent  druing  the  time  that  fence  to  an  action  to  recover' 
the  military  had  possession,  the  rent  for  the  whole  term, 
Foucher  v.  Chappen,  17  La.  An.  either  at  common  law,  or  under 
331.  In  Bayley  v.  Lawrence,  1  the  statutes  of  Florida.  In  Gary 
Bay.  (S.  C.)  499,  it  was  held  that,  v.  Dawine,  14  Fla.  544,  it  was 
while  a  tenant  must  pay  rent  also  expressly  held,  that  the 
for  the  period  that  he  peaceably  loss  of  the  beneficial  use  of  prem- 
enjoys  them,  yet  he  cannot  be  ises  by  the  casualties  of  war  con- 
required  to  pay  rent  for  the  period  stituted  no  defence  to  an  action 
that  he  is  deprived  of  their  use  for  rent, 
by  the  casuafties  •  of  war.  But, 
Coogan  V.  Parker,  3  So.  Car.  255, 


CHAP.  xLnr.]        What  Constitutes. 


1101 


coal  actually  taken  from  it.'  In  order  to  consti- 
tute an  eviction  by  the  landlord  which  wiU  operate  as  a 
suspension  of  rent,  it  is  not  necessary  that  there  should 
be  an  actual  physical  expulsion  from  any  part  of  the 
premises.  Any  act  of  a  permanent  character  done  by 
the  landlord,  or  with  his  authority,  with  the  intention 
of  depriving  the  tenant  of  the  full  enjoyment  of 
the  premises,  as  demised,  or  of  any  part  thereof, 
operates    as    a    constructive     eviction ; "  or,    in    fact. 


'  Tiley  v,  Moyere,  43  Penn.  St. 
404.  In  "Williams  v.  Hayward,  1 
E.  &  E.  1040,  a  lessee  of  certain 
imines  for  thirty  years  from  March, 
1S39,  demised  them  to  B  for 
twenty-three  years  from  Nov.  1846, 
reserving  a  royalty  on  their  yield, 
or  an  annual  sum  of  £100  in  any  . 
year,  when  the  royalty  should  be 
less  than  that  sum,  with  power  to 
distrain  therefor  ;  with  liberty  to 
B  during  his  term,  to  use  jointly 
with  A  a  certain  railroad  then 
on  the  premises,  which  B  was 
himself,  or  jointly  with  others  who 
might  use  it,  to  keep  in  repair,  and 
which,  at  his  own  expense,  he 
might  divert  if  he  saw  fit.  It 
was  held  that  A's  deed  to  B  created 
a  rent,  and  not  a  mere  covenant  in 
gross;  that  the  rent  was  assigna- 
ble, and  could  be  recovered  by  A's 
assignee  in  suit  against  B ;  and 
that  the  fact  that  such  assignee  had 
prevented  B  from  using  the  rail- 
way was  not  such  an  eviction  as 
to  deprive  him  of  his  right  to  re- 
cover rent,  such  use  being  an  ease- 
ment, and  not  a  part  of  the  de- 
mise. But,  that  an  interference  by 
the  landlord,  with  an  easementin- 
cident  to  the  tenant's  estate,  is 
regarded  as  an  eviction,  see  post, 
p. 

2  In  Upton  V.  Townsend,  17  C.  B. 
N.  S.  30,  where,  after  a  fire  on 
premises  let  to  two  dififerent  ten- 
ants by  A,  who  was  entitled  to 
have  the  premises  restored  by  the 
superior  landlord,  out  of  certain 
insurance  moneys,  A  approved  of 
a  new  plan  submitted  to  him  by 
the  superior  landlord  without  the 
consent  of  the  tenants,  and  the 
premises,  when  rebuilt  on  that 
plan,  were,  in  the  one  case  a  little 
smaller,  and  in  the  other  a  little 
larger  than  before j  and  there  was 


evidence  of  an  intention  to  oust 
the  tenants,  it  was  held  in  an  ac- 
tion by  A  for  use  and  occupation, 
for  rent  accruing  after  the  premises 
were  so  far  advanced  in  re-build- 
ing as  to  be  permanently  altered, 
that  there  was  an  eviction,  to 
which  A  was  a  party,  and  conse- 
quently that  the  rent  was  sus- 
pended. McNainy  v.  Hicks,  59 
Tenn.  878.  The  intention  is 
material;  "acts  of  a  landlord," 
says  the, court  in  Morris  v.  Tilson, 
81111.  607,  "in  interference  with  the 
tenant'-s  possession  to  constitute  an 
eviction,  Tmist  dearly  indicate  an 
intention  on  the  part  of  the  land- 
lord that  the  tenant  shall  no  longer 
continue  to  hold  the  premises." 
Upton  V.  Townsend,  17  C.  B.  30. 
Where  there  is  no  disturbance  of 
the  actual  jJossession  of  demised 
premises,  and  where  the  holding 
over  by  the  landlord  of  a  small 
portion  of  the  demised  premises 
for  a  single  day,  takes  place  with- 
out any  intention  of  keeping  the 
tenant  out  of  possession  of  such 
part  after  the  tenant  has  become 
entitled  to  it,  there  can  be  no 
pretence  of  an  eviction ;  and 
though  the  tenant  vacates  the 
premises  under  a  claim  that  there 
has  been  an  eviction,  he  will  not 
be  excused  from  payinsj  the  rent 
during  the  term.  Vanderpool  v. 
Smith,  1  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  311. 
The  question  as  to  whether  or  not 
such  an  intention  existed,  is  for 
the  jury.  Upton  v.  Townsend  ante ; 
Wheeler  v.  Stevenson,  6  H.  &  N. 
155 ;  Henderson  v.  Mears,  1  F.  & 
F.  636.  Of  course,  it  is  not  neces- 
sary that  there  should  be  an  ex- 
pressed intention  to  oust  the  ten- 
ant, or  that  there  should  be  any 
such  real  intention  on  the  land- 
lord's part,   but    the  question  is. 


1102 


Eviction. 


[§  477. 


any  act  so  done  which  has  the  effect  of  essentially  in- 
terfering with  the  tenant's  beneflcal  enjoyment  of  the 
premises,  or  any  part  thereof.  Thus,  where  the  lower 
rooms  of  a  building  were  leased  to  a  tenant,  and  the 
landlord  retained  a  room  over  the  leased  portion,  and 
occupied  it  himself  as  a  grocery  store,  and  the  drip- 
pings from  some  of  the  articles  kept  by  him  leaked 
through  the  floor  into  the  rooms  occupied  by  the  tenant 
and  rendered  them  unfit  for  occupancy,  it  was  held  to 

windowsill,  &c. ,  to  drip  upon  the 
carpet.  On  one  occasion,  a  placard 
was  put  on  the  stairway,  to  call 
attention,  by  his  name,  to  the 
filthy  condition  of  the  tenant's 
stairs ;  such  condition  being  in 
spite  of  great  efforts  on  his  part  to 
^keep  it  clean.  It  also  appeared 
'that  impertinent  and  insulting 
language  was  addressed  by  the 
plaintiff's  family  to  persons  visit- 
ing the  tenant  on  business.  From 
these  facts,  the  jury  found  an 
eviction,  and  the  verdict  was  sus- 
tained. But  see  Edwards  v.  Coady , 
14  Hun  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  596.  In 
Bellamy  v.  Smith,  4  Houst.  (Del.) 
113,  it  was  held,  that  evidence,  that 
after  the  tenant  left  the  premises 
the  lessor  advertised  them  for  sale 
or  rent,  and  took  possession  and 
exercised  acts  of  ownership  before 
the  expiration  of  the  term,  was  not 
sufficietit  proof  of  aiT  eviction. 
Where,  however,  the  landlord 
takes  possession  and  lets  the  prem- 
ises to  another  person,  this  is  an 
eviction  ;  and  if  it  is  wrongful  he 
is  liable  to  the  tenant  evicted  for 
the  difference  between  the  rent 
which  the  tenant  was  to  pay,  and 
that  which  the  new  tenant  pays, 
and  such  loss  to  the  tenant's  busi- 
ness as  he  can  show  that  he  sus- 
tained because  of  the  eviction. 
Dobbins  v.  Duquid,  65  111.  464.  In 
Lamott  V.  Sterett,  1  H.  &  J.  (Md.) 
42,  a  brewery  was  leased  for  aterm. 
During  the  term  it  was  destroyed 
by  fire.  The  lessor  immediately 
after  the  fire,  took  possession  of 
some  of  the  brewing  utensils  that 
escaped  the  fire,  and  entered  upon 
and  made  various  uses  of  the 
premises.  The  court  held  that  the 
landlord  was,  nevertheless,  entitled 
to  recover  the  rent  for  the  whole 
term.  See,  also,  Austin  v.  Field,  1 
Buffalo  Supr.  Ct.  (N.  Y.)  208. 


whether  such  is  the  legal  effect  of 
the  landlord's  acts,  so  as  to  war- 
rant the  jury  in  finding  an  im- 
plied intention.  Thus,  the  erection 
of  a  wall  under  the  eaves  of  a 
building  demised  has  been  held  an 
eviction.  Sherman  v.  Wilkins, 
113  Mass.  481.  In  Cohen  v.  Dupont, 
1.  Sandf.  (N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  260,  it 
appeared  that  the  tena,nt,  occupy- 
ing the  second  floor  of  the  house, 
had  reserved  to  himself  in  the  lease 
the  privilege  of  exercising  his 
vocation  as  a  dentist.  His  business 
necessarily  led  to  many  visits  to 
his  apartments,  and  to  the  more  in 
proportion  to  his  prosperity.  The 
calls  made  upon  him  were 
numerous  ;  and  some  of  the  plaint- 
iff's family  resorted  to  the  ex- 
pedient of  muffling  the  door  bell. 
This  was  done  frequently,  and  was 
continued  after  the  tenant  remon- 
strated with  the  plaintiff  against  it, 
and  after  the  latter,  by  exercise  of 
his  authority,  should  have  stopped 
it  effectually.  The  consequenco  of 
this  conduct  was,  that  persons 
coming  to  visit  the  tenant  as  a 
dentist,  would  pull  at  the  bell  and 
wait  from  fifteen  to  twenty  min- 
utes and  a  half  an  hour  before 
effecting  an  entrance,  and  some- 
times were  compelled  to  leave 
without  succeeding  in  getting  in- 
to the  house,  and  if  persisted  in, 
the  inevitable  effect  of  such  con- 
duct would  be  seriously  to  impair, 
if  not  to  destroy,  the  tenant's  pro- 
fessional business.  In  addition  to 
this,  and  calculated  to  effect  the 
tenant  in  the  same  way,  there  were 
a  variety  of  minor  offences  com- 
mitted by  the  plaintiff's  family. 
They  littered  the  stair-carpet  with 
nut-sheUs,  dirt,  and  other  filth, 
with  the  sweepings  from  the  story 
above,  and  with  water  spilled  upon 
it,  and  placed   snow   balls  in  the 


CHAP.  xLm.]        What  Constitutes.  1108 

amount  to  an  eviction  that  released  the  tenant  from  his 
liability  for  rent.'  But  a  constructive  eviction  may 
arise  from  any  act  of  the  landlord  or  his  agent,  or  any 
person  acting  under,  by  or  through  him,  that  deprives 
the  tenant  of  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  leased  prem- 
ises ;  as,  if  he  or  his  agent  forbids  an  undertenant 
to  pay  the  rent  to  the  real  tenant."  The  erection  of  a 
fence  in  front  of  premises,  cutting  off  the  tenant's  access 
thereto,  is  an  eviction,  but  it  cannot  be  set  up  as  such  in 
an  action  upon  the  lease  for  rent,  if  the  tenant  continues 
to  occupy  the  premises  to  the  end  of  the  term  ;  but,  in  an 
action  for  use  and  occupation,  such  fact  is  shown  to 
reduce  the  amount  of  recovery. '  An  assignment  of  dower 
in  leased  premises,  in  rents,  issues  and  profits,  is  an 
eviction  to  the  extent  of  the  dower  interest.*  So  where 
the  landlord  gives  an  undertenant  notice  to  quit  upon 
which  the  undertenant  does  quit, "  or  refuses  to  permit 
him  to  occupy  the  premises  where  there  is  no  covenant 
against  underletting,  °  or  where  he  refuses  to  give  a  lease 
as  he  has  agreed  to  do,'  or  where  he  refuses  to  an  act 
indispensably  necessary  in  order  to  entitle  the  tenant 
to  carry  on  the  business  for  which  the  premises  were  let ; 
as,  where  a  landlord  lets  premises  to  be  used  as  a  grog- 
shop, if  he  refuses  to  sign  the  necessary  certificates 
required  by  statute  in  order  to  entitle  the  tenant  to 
obtain  a  license  to  keep  such  a  shop,  or  where  he  lets 
premises  to  be  used  as  a  distillery,  if  he  refuses  to  give 
such  a  certificate  as  is  required  by  law  in  order  to  enable 
the  tenant  to  commence  business  as  a  distiller.'    In  all 

'  Jackson  v.  Eddy,  13  Mo.  209.         "  Leadbeater    v.    Roth,    25    111. 

Upon  the  general  proposition  that  587. 

any  interference  by  the  landlord         '  Boston  &  Worcester  E.  R.  Co. 

with  the  tenant's  right  to  the  en-  v.  Ripley,  9  Allen  (Mass.)  431. 
joyment  of  the  premises  to  the  full         ■•  McAlpin  v.  Woodruff,  14  Ohio 

extent  secured  bythe  lease,  author-  St.  120. 

•izes  the  tenant   to  .abandon   the         '  Levitzky  v.   Canning,   33  Cal'. ' 

premises,  and  exonerates  him  from  299  ;  Bums  v.  Phelps,   1  Starkie, 

payment  of  the  I'ent,  see  Cromme-  94. 

lin  V.  Thiess,  81  Ala.  412.    In  Hil-         «  Randall  v.  Albertis,  1  Hill  (N. 

liard  v.  N.  Y.  &  Cfeveland  Gas  Coal  Y. )  28. 

Co.,  41  Ohio  St.  662,  it  was  held  ■"  Greton  v.  Smith,  33  N.  Y.  245. 
that  cutting  off  the  light  from  a         »  Grabenborn  v.  Nioodemus,  43 

building,    does    not    constitute    a  Md.  236. 
constructive  eviction. 


1104 


Eviction. 


[§'477. 


these  cases  the  acts  of  the  landlord  have  been  held  to 
amount  to  a  constructive  eviction.  The  question  as  to 
whether  an  eviction  arises  from  the  expulsion  by  the 
landlord  of  an  offensive,  disreputable  tenant,  put  into 
possession  of  the  premises  by  the  tenant  on  his  behalf, 
depends  upon  the  finding  of  the  jury  as  to  whether  the 
landlord  thereby  intended  to  evict  the  tenant  himself.' 
In  one  case "  it  was  held  that  the  fact  that  the  landlord 
resisted  the  admission  of  a  negro  family  to  the  premises, 
to  whom  a  portion  of  the  premises  had  been  sublet  by 
a  tenant,  did  not  amount  to  an  eviction.  But,  in  order 
to  operate  as  an  eviction,  the  act  must  not  only  be  such 
as  to  warrant,  but  also  such  as  was  within  a  reasonable 
time  followed  by  the  tenant's  giving  up  possession,'  and 


>  Henderson  v.  Mears,  1  F.  &  F. 
636. 

^Heam  v.  McCleUan,  9  Pitts- 
burg, L.  J.  823. 

3  In  De  Witt  v.  Pierson,  113 
Mass.  8 ;  17  Am.  Eep.  58,  an  action 
was  brought  to  recjover  eleven 
weeks'  rent  for  the  use  and  occu- 
pation of  a  tenement  hired  of  the 
plaintiff  by  the  defendant,  and  by 
him  actually  occupied  from  the  3d 
of  March,  1870,  to  May,  1870,  at 
six  dollars  a  week.  At  the  trial  in 
the  superior  court,  there  was  no 
denial  by  the  defendant  that  he 
occupied  the  premises  during  all 
the  time  sued  for.  For  the  defence, 
it  was  shown  that  the  premises, 
for  the  use  of  which  rent  was 
claimed,  were  two  rooms  situated 
in  a  house  on  Harrison  Avenue,  in 
the  city  of  Boston ;  that  during  the 
entire  portion  of  the  term  declared 
for,  other  rooms  in  the  same  house, 
directly  beneath  those  occupied  by 
the  defendant,  were  leased  by  the 
plaintiff  to  one  Mrs.  Fletcher, 
whom  one  of  the  witnesses  for  the 
defence,  formerly  a  policeman, 
testified  was  a  person  of  notoriously 
bad  character ;  that  this  woman 
introduced  into  the  apartments 
hired  by  her,  two  other  women  as 
lodgers,  whom  the  same  witness 
testified  were  notoriously  of  lewd 
character.  One  of  the  witnesses 
for  the  defence  thought  the  apart- 
ments let  to  this  person  were  used 
for  the  purpose  of  prostitution,  and 
he  testified  that,  on  two  occasions, 


drunken  men  were  seen  in  their 
rooms ;  that  the  policeman  on 
duty  in  that  section  of  the  city,  on 
several  occasions,  drove  away  a 
crowd  of  boys  who  were  attracted 
to  the  spot  by  the  noise  and  riot 
proceeding  from  the  rooms  occu- 
pied by  these  women  ;  and  the  de- 
fendant testified  that  the  disturb- 
ance caused  by  the  singing  of 
bawdy  songs,  and  the  loud  talking 
of  the  women  and  their  visitors, 
and  the  frequent  ringing  of  the 
door-bell,  were  a  constant  source 
of  annoyance  to  the  family  of  the 
defendant,  which  consisted  of  him- 
self and  his  wile ;  that  notice  of 
the  fact  that  the  defendant  was 
annoyed  and  disturbed  by  these 
things,  and  of  the  character  of  the 
house  and  of  these  women,  was 
given  on  three  several  occasions 
during  the  term  to  the  plaintiff's 
agent,  who  promised  to  attend  to 
it ;  that  the  defendant,  whenever 
asked  to  pay  his  rent,  refused  to  do 
so,  unless  these  women  were  re- 
moved from  the  house;  that  the 
plaintiff  took  no  notice  of  the  re- 
quest of  the  defendant,  except  to 
promise  by  his  agent  to  get  the, 
women  out,  if  it  could  be  proved 
to  him  that  they  were  of  bad  char- 
acter, which  the  defendant  under- 
took to  do,  if  the  agent  would  call 
at  the  house  any  evening,  and 
named  an  evening ;  but  the  agent 
replied  he  had  other  business  to 
attend  to.  No  other  notice  was 
given  to  the  plaintiff  of  these  facts, 


CHAP.  XLin.] 


What  Constitutes. 


1105 


if  he  does  not  quit,  but  remains  in  possession,  or  does 


but  the  policeman  testified  he  made 
four  attempts  to  find  the  plaintiff 
to  inform  him  of  the  character  of 
the  house,  and  left  word  with  a 
brother  of  the  plaintiff  that  he 
wished  to  see  the  plaintiff  in  regard 
to  it.  The  plaintiff  testified  he 
never  received  the  message.  No- 
tice to  quit  was  served  by  the 
plaintiff  on  the  defendant,  and  the 
defendant  left  the  premises  two 
or  three  days  before  the  notice  ex- 
pired, having,  as  he  alleged,  used 
all  due  dUigence  from  the  time  he 
first  discovered  the  character  of 
the  other  occupants,  to  procure 
other  suitable  lodgings.  The  pre- 
siding judge  ruled  that  the  above 
facts,  though  proved,  constituted 
no  defence  to  the  action.  The  jury 
returned  a  verdict  for  the  plaintiff, 
which  was  sustained.  Endicott,  J. , 
in  passing  upon  the  question,  said : 
"It  is  well  settled,  that  to  consti- 
tute an  eviction  there  must  be 
either  a  physical  ouster  of  the  ten- 
ant by  the  landlord,  or  some  act 
done  by  him  on  the  premises  with 
the  intent  of  depriving  the  tenant 
of  the  enjoyment  and  occupation  of 
the  whole,  or  part  of  the  same,  to 
which  the  tenant  yields  the  posses- 
sion loithin  a  reasonable  time,  and 
in  either  case  the  rent  is  suspended. 
Eoyce  v.  Guggenheim,  106  Mass. 
301 ;  S.  C.  8  Am.  332.  There  was 
no  physical  ouster  in  this  case. 
The  only  question  is,  whether  the 
evidence  offered  shows  such  acts 
on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff  and  the 
defendent  as  will  constitute  an 
eviction  under  the  above  definition. 
It  does  not  appear  on  the  evidence 
that  the  plaintiff  let  the  rooms,  the 
use  of  which  is  complained  of,  with 
the  intent  to  disturb'the  defendant 
in  his  use  and  occupation.  On  the 
contrary,  the  rooms  were  so  occu- 
pied when  the  defendant's  term 
began.  Nor  does  it  appear  that 
the  plaintiff  at  that  time  had  any 
knowledge  of  the  alleged  use  made 
of  the  rooms,  nor  that  any  proof 
of  such  use  was  at  any  time  given 
him.  Even  if  an  intent  to  evict 
may  be  presumed,  as  argued  by 
the  defendant,  from  the  neglect  of 
the  agent  to  ascertain  the  facts, 
when  notice  was  given  him,  it  does 
not  appear  when  notice  was  given, 
except  that  it  was  on  three  several 
occasions  during  the  term,  which 


was  of  eleven  week's  duration. 
The  evidence  also  fails  to  show 
that  the  defendant  was  in  fact  de- 
prived of  the  use  and  occupation 
of  his  demised  premises  ;  he  con- 
tinued in  actual  use  and  occupation 
of  the  whole  during  the  eleven 
weeks,  and  at  last  yielded  to  a  no- 
tice to  quit  for  non-payment  of 
rent.  No  evidence  was  offered  that 
would  justify  the  jury  in  finding 
that  any  act  was  done  by  the  plaint- 
iff with  the  intent  and  effect  of 
depriviag  the  defendant  of  the  use 
and  occupation  of  the  whole  or 
part  of  the  demised  premises.  The 
case  of  Dyett  v.  Pendleton,  8  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  737,  is  relied  upon  by  the 
defendant.  That  has  been  called 
an  extreme  case ;  it  has  been  mod- 
ified, if  not  overruled,  by  later  de- 
cisions in  New  York ;  and  this 
court  decUned  to  rest  its  judgment 
upon  it  in  Royce  v.  Guggenheim. 
But  that  case  was  decided  upon  a 
very  different  state  of  facts,  and 
contained  many  elements  necessary 
to  constitute  an  eviction  which  are 
wanting  in  the  case  at  bar.  The 
defendant  there,  under  a  lease  for 
years,  had  been  in  more  than  a 
year,  when  the  plaintiff,  who  occu- 
pied adjoining  rooms  under  the 
same  roof,  himself  created  the  dis- 
turbances and  nuisances  com- 
plained of,  and  the  defendant  with- 
in a  month  abandoned  his  tene- 
raent.  The  intent  to  evict,  and 
actual  abandonment,  might  well 
have  been  found ;  but  to  hold  there 
was  an  eviction  here  would  be  to 
go  far  beyond  that  decision.  There 
having  been  no  eviction  from  the 
premises,  but  the  defendant  remain- 
ing in  full  occupation,  we  do  not 
thmk  there  was  any  question  for 
the  jury,  as  to  the  beneficial  value 
of  the  premises  to  the  defendant ; 
and  it  was  immaterial  whether  he 
had  used  due  diligence  in  endeav- 
oring to  obtain  other  lodgings. 
The  cases  cited  by  the  defendant 
do  not  sustain  this  position.  In 
one,  the  tenant  was  excluded  from 
the  occupation  of  a  portion  of  his 
demised  premises ;  in  the  other, 
access  to  the  demised  premises  waa 
closed,  and  the  occupation  thereby 
limited.  Cowie  v.  Goodwin,  9  C. 
&  P.  378;  Boston  &  Worcester 
Railroad  v.  Ripley,  13  Allen  (Mass.) 
431." 


1106 


Eviction. 


[§477. 


any  act  inconsistent  with  his  right  to  abandon  the 
premises,  he  will  be  treated  as  having  waived  the  right, 
and  the  doctrine  of  constructive  eviction  will  not  apply,' 
as  such  acts  as  create  a  constructive  eviction  amount 
to  a  right  to  abandon  the  premises  rather  than  a  bar  to 
an  action  for  rent,  because  the  tenant  may  waive  his  rights 
arising  from  such  acts;  and  by  remaining  in  possession 
for  an  unreasonable  time  after  their  existence  he  is 
treated  as  having  done  so,'  and  retaining  possession  for 


'  Jackson  v.  Eddy,  ante  ;  Crom- 
melin  v.  Thiess,  ante.  In  Edgerton 
V.  Page,  1  HUt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  320  ; 
afE'd  20  N.  Y.  320,  in  an  action  for 
rent  against  the  tenant  of  a  lower 
floor,  the  tenant  defended  upon  the 
ground  that  his  stock  of  goods  had 
been  damaged,  and  that  he  was 
compelled  to  forego  a  renewal  of 
his  lease  because  of  the  negligence 
of  the  landlord  in  suffering  leakage 
in  a  waste  pipe.  But  the  tenant 
continued  to  hold  possession,  not- 
withstanding the  acts  of  the  land- 
lord, and  it  was  therefore  held, 
that  he  could  not  set  up  such  acts 
as  an  eviction,  absolving  him  from 
the  payment  of  rent. 

*In  Edgerton  v.  Page,  20  N.  Y. 
281,  the  doctrine  was  held,  that  a 
tenant  who  has  continued  to  oc- 
cupy the  whole  of  the  demised 
premises  during  the  whole  period 
for  which  rent  is  claimed,  is  not 
released  from  payment  of  such  rent 
by  the  landlord's  acts  diminishing 
the  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the 
premises  during  the  period  for 
which  the  rent  is  sought  to  be  re- 
covered. While  the  tenant  re- 
mains in  possession  of  the  entire 
premises  ms  obUgation  to  pay  rent 
continues ;  though  it  is  otherwise  if 
he  is  compelled  to  abandon  posses- 
sion before  the  rent  falls  due.  And 
this  is  the  rule,  however  much 
the  tenant  may  have  been  disturbed 
by  the  landlord  in  his  beneficial 
pnioyment  of  the  premises.  The 
eviction,  in  order  to  be  operative 
as  a  defence,  must  amount  to  a 
deprivation  of  possession.  See  also 
the  same  case  in  18  How.  Pr.  359  ; 
1  Hilt.  320 ;  5  Abb.  Pr.  1 ;  14  How. 
Pr.  116 ;  10  Abb.  Pr.  119 ;  Rogers 
V.  Ostrom,  35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  523. 
That  continual  possession  for  more 
than  a  year  after  a  tortious  dis- 
turbance by  the  landlord,  precludes 


the  tenant  from  claiming  it  to 
have  been  an  eviction  to  defeat  the 
rent.  Cram  v.  Dresser,  2  Sandf. 
(N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  120.  If,  under  a 
lease  granting  land  and  an  ease- 
ment upon  other  land  of  the  grant- 
or, with  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment of  the  whole,  there  is  a  par- 
tial eviction  of  the  tenant  from  the 
easement  under  title  paramount, 
he  is,  in  equity  at  least,  entitled  to 
an  abatement  of  the  rent ;  and 
under  the  Code  of  Proceedure  this 
right  may  be  set  up  as  a  counter- 
claim in  an  action  by  the  landlord 
to  recover  possession  for  non-pay- 
ment of  rent.  Blair  v.  Claxton,  18 
N.  Y.  539.  See  also  to  the  effect 
that,  the  tenant  must  abandon  pos- 
session or  pay  the  rent.  Cram  v. 
Dresser,  ante  ;  Pendleton  v.  Dyatt, 
4  Cow.  581 ;  Cohen  v.  Dupont,  1 
Sandf.  (N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  260; 
Elliott  V.  Aiken.  45  N.  H.  :  Mor- 
timer v.  Brunner,  6  Bos.  (N.  Y.  Sup. 
Ct.)  653 ;  Academy  of  Music  v. 
Hackett,  2  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  317. 
Where  there'  was  a  privy  in  the 
passage-way  leading  to  the  demised 
premises,  which  was  there  at  the 
time  of  hiring,  and  the  landlord 
used  it  so  that  it  became  offensive 
to  the  tenant,  it  was  held,  that  he, 
remaining  in  possession,  could  not 
set  up  such  nuisance  as  an  eviction 
in  bar  of  an  action  for  the  rent. 
Vatel  V.  Herner,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C. 
P.)  149.  In  Cowie  v.  Goodwin,  9 
C.  &  P.  378,  the  wall  of  the  house 
gave  way  because  of  an  inherent 
defect  therein,  and  it  appearing 
that  the  kitchen  was  thereby  filled 
with  filth,  and  rendered  useless, 
and  that  the  tenant  quit  possession 
as  soon  as  he  could  find  other 
apartments,  it  was  held  such  an 
eviction  as  would  defeat  a  recovery 
for  the  use  and  occupation  of 
the  premises. 


CHAP.  xLni.J  What  Constitutes.  1107 

more  than  a  year  after  the  constructive  eviction  arose 
has  been  held  such  an  unreasonable  delay  upon 
the  tenant's  part  to  assert  his  right  to  treat  the  act 
as  an  eviction.'  As  to  whether  the  tenant  has  been 
guilty  of  such  laches  as  defeat  his  right  to  set  up  the  act 
as  an  eviction,  or  has  done  any  act  inconsistent  with  the 
assertion  of  such  right,  is  a  question  for  the  jury,  and  is 
to  be  determined  in  view  of  all  the  circumstances.  But, 
while  the  tenant,  by  remaining  in  possession  for  an 
unreasonable  time  after  the  constructive  eviction  arose, 
is  precluded  from  setting  it  up  as  a  bar  to  the  recovery 
of  rent,  yet  he  is  not  thereby  precluded  from  recovering 
of  the  landlord  such  damages  as  he  may  have  sustained 
by  reason  of  such  acts ; "  and  in  those  States  where  the 
doctrine  of  recoupment  is  recognized,  he  may  recoup 
them  against  the  rent,'  or  may  set  them  up  as  a  counter- 
clainj  where  such  relief  is  given  by  statute.*  But  where 
there  is  an  actual  physical  eviction  from  a  part  of  the 
premises  the  tenant  may  still  retain  possession  of  the 
other  part  and  is  absolved  from  the  paymten  of  any 
rent  during  the  period  of  its  continuance ; '  and  herein 
is  the  important  distinction  between  an  actual  and  a 
constructive  eviction. 

The  tenant  must  not  only  abandon  the  premises,  but  it 
must  also  appear  that  he  abandoned  them  on  account  of 
the  acts  of  the  landlord,  which  are  claimed  to  operate  as 
an  eviction;  and  if  his  abandonment  was  due  to  other 
causes,  in  part  even,  he  cannot  set  up  such  acts  in  defence 
to  an  action  for  the  rent.'    The  question  as  to  whether  a 

'  Cram  v.  Dresser,  3  Sandf .  (N.  Y.  '  See  ante,  p. 

Sup.  Ct.)  120.  '  This  was  illustrated  in  a  case  in 

'Peck  V.  Hiler,  34  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  the  supreme  court  of  New  York, 
178.  And  it  seems  that  he  is  not  Edwards  v.  Candy,  14  Hun  (N.  Y. 
precluded  from  setting  up  such  S.  C.)  576.  In  that  case  the  plaint- 
defence,  even  though  he  has  re-  iff  went  into  possession  of  a  farm 
covered  damages  therefor,  and  that  and  summer  boarding-house,  in 
he  is  not  precluded  from  recovering  March,  1874,  under  a  lease  for  one 
damages  although  he  has  set  up  year,  with  the  option  of  five,  if  the 
such  eviction  in  defence  to  an  ac-  plaintiff  so  elected.  Held,  elect  to 
tion  for  the  rent.  Rogers  v.  Ostrom,  retain  the  premises  for  five  years. 
35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  533.  He  abandoned  the  premises  in  No- 

^  Holbrook  v.  Young,  108  Mass.  vember,  1875.    The  action  was  for 

83 ;  TUey  v.  Mayers,  43  Penn.  St.  404.  damages  resulting  from  such  evic- 

■•  Blair  V.  Claxton,  18  N.  Y.  539;  tion.    The  defendant  denied  that 

Eldred  v.  Leahy,  31  Wis.  546.  there  was  any  eviction,  and  set  up 


1108 


Eviction. 


[§  477. 


nuisance  created  upon  or  in  the  vicinity  of  the  leased 


a  counter-claim  for  the  rent.  The 
acts  rehed  upon  as  an  eviction  were 
mostly  committed  in  1874,  and 
were  stated  in  the  complaint  to  be 
that  the  landlord  "disturbed  the 
boarders  by  brutal  conduct  in  his 
parlor ;  by  ringing  the  beU  on  the 
Sabbath ;  by  ordering  the  plaintiff's 
company  off  the  premises.  Got  in- 
to a  passion  and  threw  the  carving- 
knife  while  eating  with  the  com- 
pany. Disturbed  the  company  by 
thumping  on  the  house  before  the 
bell  was  rung  in  the  morning. 
Often  made  indecent  exposures 
of  his  person  to  the  inmates  of  the 
house.  Often  sat  in  the  privy  with 
his  clothes  down  and  the  door  open. 
Went  about  the  house  with  the 
front  of  his  pants  down,  declaring 
he  would  do  what  he  liked.  Fre- 
quently slandered  the  plaintiff  to 
his  guests.  Told  persons  who  came 
there  to  look  at  rooms  that  he  did 
not  want  them  to  stop  there,  for 
the  plaintiff  was  not  fit  to  keep 
boarders.  He  told  a  gentleman 
that  if  he  came  or  sent  any  one 
there  to  board,  he  would  be  done 
with  him  forever.  Declared  to  the 
plaintiff  that  he  would  do  all  he 
could  to  injure  him.  Also  forbid 
the  plantiff's  laborer  to  repair  the 
fence,  and  ordered  him  off.  Cut 
boughs  from  the  trees  near  the 
milk-house ;  interfered  with  the 
washer-woman ;  abused  the  wife 
of  the  plaintiff,  and  threatened 
violence  towards  her  with  hig  cane. 
Refused  to  furnish  anything  for 
repairs  on  the  farm,  or  to  replace 
anything  worn  out  in  the  house. 
Refused  to  let  the  plaintiff  use  his 
light  spring-wagon,  and  plaintiff 
■was  obliged  to  use  his  own  wagon, 
by  means  of  which  virrongs  and  in- 
juries the  plaintiff  was  obliged  to 
leave  and  did  leave  the  premises  on 
the  6th  day  of  November,  1875,  and 
suffered  great  loss  and  damages 
during  the  time  he  was  there.  The 
court  held  that  these  acts  could  not 
be  set  up  as  an  eviction.  Giibbrt, 
J.,  said:  "It  would  be  a  great 
stretch  of  the  doctrine  of  construct- 
ive eviction  to  give  that  effect  to 
the  acts  committed  by  the  defend- 
ant. We  are  inclined  to  hold  that 
such  an  effect  ought  not  to  be 
given  to  them.  Hunt  v.  Cope, 
Cowp.  243 ;  AUen  v.  PeU,  4  Wend. 
505 ;  Ogilvie  v.  Hull,  5    Hill,  5S. 


Later  cases  have  extended  the  rule 
as  laid  down  in  those  cited.  Dyett 
V.Pendleton,  8  Cow.  737;  Cohen 
V.  Dupont,  1  Sand.  360  ;  Edgerton 
V.  Page,  20  N.  Y.  381 ;  Myers  v. 
Bums,  35  id.  737.  But  a  substan- 
tial deprivation  of  the  beneficial  use 
of  the  demised  premises,  or  a  part 
thereof,  is,  according  to  aU  the 
cases,  essential  to  constitute  an 
eviction.  Injuries  to  the  tenant, 
which  do  not  effect  his  enjoyment 
of  the  premises,  it  would  seem, 
are  not  sufficient  for  that  purpose. 
But  it  is  unnecessary  to  pass  def- 
initely upon  this  question.  For 
the  lease  to  the  plaintiff  was  made 
in  March,  1874,  and  was  for  one 
or  five  years,  at  the  option  of  the 
plaintiff.  Most  of  the  acts  of  the 
defendant,  of  which  the  plaintiff 
complains,  were  committed  in  the 
year  1874.  The  plaintiff  remained 
in  possession  during  the  whole  of 
that  year,  and  shortly  before  the 
expu-ation  thereof  elected  that  the 
term  should  be  extended  four 
years.  Such  election  was  equiva- 
lent to  the  taking  of  a  new  lease  for 
four  years.  The  plaintiff  having 
remained  in  possession  during  the 
whole  of  the  term,  antecedent  to 
the  exercise  of  his  option,  there  was 
no  eviction  actual  or  constructive, 
during  that  period.  It  is  impossi- 
ble that  an  eviction  should  have 
occurred  vsrithout  an  actual  expul- 
sion from,  or  an  abandonment  of 
the  demised  premises.  Edgferton 
V.  Page,  supra.  The  fact,  there- 
fore, that  the  plaintiff  remained  in 
possession  throughout  the  year 
1874,  is  a  conclusive  defence  to  any 
claim  for  damages  which  he  sus- 
tained in  that  year.  It  appears 
that  the.demised  premises  had  been 
long  used  by  the  defendant  as  a 
boarding-house,  andthatthe  plaint- 
iff hired  them  for  the  same  pur- 
pose. The  plaintiff  claims  that  the 
defendant  dissuaded  persons  from 
coming  there  to  board  by  remarks 
made  in  1875,  which  were  dis- 
paraging to  the  plaintiff,  and  that 
in  consequence  his  profits  were 
diminished.  Assuming  this  claim 
to  be  well  founded,  we  think  the 
defendant's  conduct  did  not 
amoimt  to  an  eviction.  The  evi- 
dence fails  to  convince  us  that  the 
plaintiff  abandoned  the  premises 
in  consequence  thereof.    On  the 


CHAP.  XLIII.J         What  Constitutes. 


1109 


premises  subsequent  to  the  lease  amounts  to  an  eviction, 
depends  entirely  upon  the  circumstance  whether  it  was 
created  by  the  landlord  himself,  or  with  his  assent,  express 
or  implied.  If  the  landlord  himself  creates  a  nuisance, 
either  upon  or  near  the  premises,  it  will  amount  to  an 
eviction  ; '  or,  if  he  lets  the  premises  for  a  purpose  that 
will  necessarily  result  in  a  nuisance  ; '  but  if  he  lets  them 

contrary,  he  remained  in  possession 
vmtil  November,  1875,  when  the 
season  for  boarding  has  ended,  and 
we  are  satisfied  that  he  quit  the 
premises  because  his  business  had 
turned  out  to  be  unprofitable.  How 
much,  if  any  part,  of  that  result  is 
attributable  to  the  defendant,  and 
how  much  to  the  plaintiff,  it  is  im- 
possible to  tell.  The  other  improp- 
er acts  imputed  to  the  defendant, 
which  occurred  in  1875,  seem  not 
to  have  been  relied  upon  on  the 
argjiment,  and  were  too  trivial  to 
form  the  basis  of  a  cause  of  action. 
Upon  the  whole,  we  think  that  the 
plaintiff  failed  to  establish  any 
right  of  action." 

'  Cohen  v.  Dupont,  1  Sandf.  (N. 
Y.  Sup.  a.)  366 ;  Royce  v.  Gug- 
genheim, 106  Mass.  201 ;  Pendle- 
ton V.  Dyett,  4  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  581. 
If  the  lajidlord  himself  creates  a 
nuisance  upon  or  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  premises  it  amoimts  to  an 
eviction,  and  this  is  so  whether  the 
nuisance  arises  from  an  act  of 
omission  or  commission.  Thus, 
where  a  landlord  permitted  the 
drains  in  his  cellar  adjoining  the 
leased  premises  to  get  out  of  re- 
pair, so  that  the  adjoining  prem- 
ises became  untenantable,  it  was 
held  sufficient  to  constitute  an 
eviction.  Alger  v.  Kennedy,  49 
Vt.  109.  In  Scott  V.  Simons,  54 
N.  H.  436,  the  court  held  that 
where  the  landlord  negligently 
constructed  his  premises,  or  negli- 
gently suffered  them  to  remain 
defective,  he  is  liable  cither  to  his 
tenant  or  strangers  for  injuries 
resulting  therefrom.  In  Dyett  v. 
Pendleton,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  737,  it 
was  held,  reversing  a  contrary 
decision  of  the  same  case,  as  re- 
ported in  4  id.  581,  that  where 
the  landlord  brought  lewd  women 
near  the  premises,  so  that  the 
tenant  and  his  family  were  broken 
of  their  rest,  and  otherwise  so 
much  annoyed  that  the  tenants 
II.— 18 


were  obliged  to  leave  the  premises, 
constitutes  such  a  nuisance  as 
amounts  to  an  eviction,  and  ex- 
cuses the  tenant  from  the  pay- 
ment of  rent.  But  the  fact  that 
the  building  became  untenantable 
because  the  landlord  neglected  to 
make  repairs,  and  that  the  ten- 
ant's property  was  damaged  there- 
by, the  landlord  having  cove- 
nanted to  repair,  does  not  amoimt 
to  an  eviction,  nor  is  it  a  defence 
to  an  action  for  the  rent,  as  in 
such  a  case  the  tenant  should 
have  made  the  repairs  and  de- 
ducted the  cost  from  the  rent. 
Diggs  V.  Maury,  33  La.  An.  59 ; 
Truesdell  v.  Booth,  4  Hun  (N.  Y. 
S.  C.)  100.  Or  that  the  buUdmg 
was  destroyed  by  fire,  and  that 
the  landlord  refused  to  rebuild, 
although  he  had  received  the 
insurance  money.  Bussman  v. 
Ganster,  73  Penn.  St.  385.  The 
non-supply  of  water  for  the  prem- 
ises, caused  by  a  leak  in  a  pipe 
outside  of  the  demised  premises 
which  the  landlord  after  notice 
and  request  neglected  to  repair, 
whereby  a  water-closet  and  wash- 
basin on  the  demised  premises 
became  useless,  whereupon  the 
tenant  abandoned  the  premises, 
has  been  held  not  to  constitute  an 
eviction,  or  furnish  ground  for  a 
counter-claim  against  the  rent, 
there  being  no  interference  by  the 
lessor  with  the  supply,  and  no 
covenants  in  the  lease  on  his  part 
either  that  he  shall  keep  up  a  sup- 
ply of  water,  or  that  he  shall  keep 
the  premises  in  repair,  or  that  the 
demised  premises  should  remain 
in  the  same  condition  and  state  of 
repair  as  they  were  in  at  the  time 
of  the  execution  of  the  lease. 
Coddington  v.  Dunham,  35  N.  Y. 
Superior  Ct.  413. 

2  In  HalUgan  v.  Wade,  81  lU. 
470,  it  was  held  that  if  the  land- 
lord lets  a  reserved  part  of  the 
premises  for  a  purpose  that  ia  in- 


1110 


Eviction. 


[§  477. 


for  a  purpose  that  will  not  necessarily  result  in  a 
nuisance,  but  which  becomes  so  only  because  of  the  neg- 
ligence or  wrongful  acts  of  the  tenant,  it  is  not  an 
eviction,'  nor   can  an    eviction  be    predicated    because 


consistent  with  the  use  to  which 
the  other  tenant  devotes  the 
premises,  it  is  an  eviction,  and 
that  too  whether  the  new  use  is 
lawful  or  not. 

'  In  Gilhooly  v.  Washington,  3 
Sandf .  330,  aff'd  4  N.  Y.  217,  a  les- 
sor let  paxts  of  a  tenement  to 
dififerent  tenants,  one  of  whom 
(who  received  the  first  demise  in 
point  of  time)  occupied  his  por- 
tion of  the  tenement  as  a  place  of 
debauchery  and  prostitution,  but 
the  lessor  was  ignorant  that  he 
designed  so  to  use  it,  and  did  not 
connive  with  him  thereia.  The 
other  tenant,  in  consequence  of 
such  use,  abandoned  the  premises, 
after  having  first  notified  the 
landlord  to  abate  the  nuisance. 
It  was  held,  in  an  action  of  cove- 
nant for  rent,  that  the  facts  did 
not  amount  to  an  eviction  of  the 
defendant.  But  the  turning  point 
of  the  case  in  the  court  of  appeals 
was  that  the  action  was  covenant 
upon  a  sealed  lease,  "which  does 
does  not  depend  on  the  fact  of  oc- 
cupation or  enjoyment."  Bron- 
SON,  C.  J.,  who  dehvered  the 
opinion  of  the  court,  said:  "In 
the  equitable  action  of  use  and 
occupation,  the  English  courts 
hold  that  the  tenant  is  not  answer- 
able unless  he  has  had  the  bene- 
ficial enjoyment  of  the  property, 
and  they  have  gone  a  great  way 
in  protecting  the  tenant  against 
disturbances  of  all  kinds,"  citing 
Edwards  v.  Hetherington,  7  Dowl. 
&  Ry.  117  ;  Salisbury  v.  Marshall, 
4  C.  &  P.  65 ;  Cowie  v.  Goodwin, 
9  id.  378;  Smith  v.  Marrable,  1 
Car.  &  M.  479 ;  Collins  v.  Barrow, 
1  Moo.  &  R.  113.  In  Cowie  v. 
Goodwin,  supra,  the  tenant 
proved,  in  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation,  that  the  wall  of  the 
privy  gave  way  and  the  filth  from 
it  flowed  into  the  kitchens  so  as  to 
render  them  uninhabitable.  Loed 
Denman  said:  "I  shall  ask  the 
jury  whether  these  premises  were 
unfit  for  proper  and  comfortable 
occupation,  and  if  the  defendant 
had  bona  fide  quitted  the  apart- 


ments as  soon  as  he  could  procure 
others,"  and  the  jury  having 
answered  both  questions  in  the 
affirmative,  the  plaintiff  was  non- 
suited, and  on  motion  for  a  new 
trial  for  misdirection,  the  rule  was 
refused.  In  Smith  v.  Marrable,  1 
Car.  &  M.  479,  where  the  tenant, 
upon  entering  into  a  furnished 
house,  found  it  so  infested  with 
vermin  that  it  was  impossible  to 
dwell  in  it,  and  left  it,  it  was  held 
that  he  was  liable  to  pay  rent  only 
for  the  time  he  occupied  it.  In 
Howard  v.  Doolittle,  3  Duer  (N. 
Y.)  464,  the  court  refused  to  fol- 
low Smith  V.  Marrable,  on  the 
ground  that  it  was  not  only  incon- 
sistent with  other  decisions  of  the 
exchequer,  but  in  general  opposi- 
tion to  the  law.  And  in  Hart  v. 
Windsor,  13  M.  &  W.  84,  the  doc- 
trine of  Smith  V.  Marrable,  was 
virtually  overruled.  It  is  yxn- 
doubtedly  the  general  rule  that, 
in  the  absence  of  fraud  or  express 
agreement,  there  is  no  under- 
taking upon  the  part  of  a  land- 
lord that  the  leased  premises  are 
tenantable  for  the  purpose  for 
which  they  are  leased.  Hart  v. 
Windsor.  A  covenant  for  quiet 
and  peaceable  enjoyment  secures 
the  tenant  from  only  lawful 
interruptions  in  such  enjoyment, 
or  an  interruption  by  the  lessor  or 
those  claiming  under  him,  and 
not  by  a  stranger.  Arch.  Landl. 
and  Ten.  378 ;  Moore  v.  Weber, 
71  Penn.  St.  429;  10  Am.  Rep. 
708.  A  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment is  implied  in  every  mutual 
contract  for  the  leasing  and  de- 
mise of  land  by  whatever  form  of 
words  the  agreement  is  made, 
Mack  V.  Patchin,  43  N.  Y.  167  ;  1 
Am.  Rep.  506.  An  eviction  by  a 
landlord  of  his  tenant  from  a  part 
of  the  demised  premises  creates  a 
suspension  of  the  entire  rent, 
during  a  continuance  of  the  evic- 
tion; but  the  tenarcy  is  not 
thereby  ended,  nor  is  the  tenant 
thereby  discharged  from  the  per- 
formance of  his  covenants  other 
than  the  covenant    to  pay  rent, 


CHAP.  XLin.]         What  Constitutes. 


1111 


of  a  nuisance  created  by  a  stranger — as  an  adjoining 
owner — as  if  an  adjoining  owner  undermines  the 
tenant's  wall,  such  act  does  not  excuse  the  tenant 
from  the  payment  of  rent ; '  nor  if  another  tenant  of 
a  part  of  the  same  building  uses  it  as  a  house  of 
prostitution  can  the  nuisance  thus  created  be  construed 
as  an  eviction.'  In  all  such  cases  the  tenant,  in  order  to 
establish  an  eviction,  must  show  that  the  act  proceeded 
from  the  landlord  himself,  or  exists  by  his  connivance 
or  consent,  or  that  he  let  the  premises  for  a  purpose 
from  which  the  nuisance  necessarily  and  inevitably 
results.'  The  fact  that  frequent  noises  had  been  heard 
in  the  house,  shaking  it  and  annoying  the  inmates, 
which  the  landlord,  when  his  attention  was  directed  to 
it,  first  attributed  to  the  pipes,  and  afterwards  to  the 
acts  of  malicious  persons  at  enmity  with  him,  who  were 
putting  dynamite  down  the  chimneys  to  get  his  tenants 
out,  the  building  being  in  fact  sound  and  safe,  was  held 
not  sufficient  to  constitute  an  eviction,  either  under  the 


Morrison  v.  Chadwick,  7  C.  B. 
266;  6  D.  &  L.  567;  Royce  v. 
Guggenheim,  106  Mass.  301 ;  8 
Am.  Rep.  332;  Christopher  v. 
Austin,  11  N.  Y.  316;  Smith  v. 
Stigleman,  58  lU.  141.  See,  how- 
ever, Tunis  V.  Grandy,  33  Gratt. 
109.  In  Mortimer  v.  Brunner,  6 
Bos.  (N.  Y.)  653,  it  was  held  that 
where  the  owner  of  a  store  leases 
all  of  it  above  the  first  story,  with- 
out any  covenant,  excepting  the 
usual  one  for  quiet  enjoyment, 
and  afterwards  leases  the  lower 
portion  of  the  building  to  another 
tenant  for  a  business  for  which 
such  a  tenement  is  commonly 
used,  his  right  to  recover  rent  of 
the  first  lessee  is  not  prejudiced 
by  the  fact  that  his  busiaess  is  in- 
directly interfered  with  by  that  of 
the  second  lessee.  The  lessor  will 
not,  in  such  case,  be  liable,  nor 
will  he  lose  his  right  to  rent,  in 
consequence  of  any  interference 
by  the  second,  with  the  first  les- 
see's enjoyment  of  the  demised 
premises,  to  which  the  lessor  is 
not  a  party.  In  Do  Witt  v.  Pier- 
son,  113  Mass.  8,  it  was  held  that 
the  fact  that  rooms  beneath  a  ten- 
ant are  occupied  by  another  ten- 


ant of  the  same  landlord  for  pur- 
poses of  prostitution,  the  fre- 
quenters of  which,  by  bawdy 
songs,  attracted  crowds  of  boys  in 
the  street,  did  not  constitute  an 
eviction. 

'  Kramer  v.  Cook,  7  Gray  (Mass.) 
550. 

^  Gilhooley  v.  Washington,  4  N. 
Y.  317  ;  De  Witt  v.  Pierson,  113 
Mass.  8.  In  Townsend  v.  Gilsey, 
7  Ab.  Pr.  N.  S.  (N.  Y.)  59.  a  lessee 
of  a  part  of  a  buUding  quit  posses- 
sion because  the  basement  was  oc- 
cupied for  the  purposes  of  prostitu- 
tion. It  was  held  that,  in  absence 
of  proof  that  the  landlord  let  the 
basement  for  that  purpose,  or 
knew  that  it  was  to  be  so  used 
when  he  let  it,  the  tenant  was  not 
absolved  from  the  payment  of  rent 
for  the  whole  term,  and  that  words 
of  the  landlord  that,  "if  I  could 
let  the  basement  for  a  respectable 
business  I  would  have  done  so  ; 
but  I  had  to  take  what  I  could  get, 
they  were  so  far  up,"  were  not,  of 
themselves,  sufiicient  to  prove  that 
the  landlord  let  the  premises  Icnow- 
ing  that  they  were  to  be  used  for 
such  purposes. 

*  De  Witt  V.  Pierson,  ante. 


1112  Eviction.  [§  477, 

statute  or  at  common  law.'  But  when  the  landlord  had 
contracted  to  furnish  steam  heat  and  elevator  service 
for  the  tenant,  and  the  heat  furnished  was  inadequate  so 
that  additional  heat  became  necessary,  and  the  chimneys 
and  flues  were  in  such  a  condition  that  the  apartments 
were  often  filled  with  a  dense  smoke,  and  the  elevator 
service  was  insufficient  so  as  to  injure  the  beneficial 
enjoyment  of  the  premises,  it  was  held  that  these  facts 
constituted  a  constructive  eviction."  If  the  landlord  lets 
only  a  part  of  a  building,  and  permits  the  part  retained 
by  him  to  fall  into  such  a  state  of  disrepair  as  to  render 
the  part  occupied  by  the  tenant  untenantable,  either  by 
dilapidation,  or  because  the  premises  are  thereby 
rendered  unhealthy — as,  if  he  permits  a  drain  to  remain 
stopped  up  so  as  to  emit  unwholesome  gases,  or  unpleas- 
ant stenches — this  act  of  omission  amounts  to  an 
eviction,  and  the  tenant  may  give  up  possession."  So, 
too,  if  the  landlord  fraudulently  conceals  the  fact  that  a 
building  is  unfit  for  habitation,  because  of  a  deleterious 
stench  proceeding  from  an  unknown  cause,  it  has  been 
held  equivalent  to  an  eviction.'  But  a  distinction  is 
made  in  this  respect,  between  the  letting  of  a  building 
that  is  unfit  for  occupation  by  reason  of  a  cause  affect- 
ing the  health  of  the  occupants,  and  one  that  merely  pro- 
duces annoyance  and  discomfort ;  and  where  a  landlord 
fraudulently  conceals  the  fact  that  the  premises  had 
formerly  been  used  as  a  house  of  prostitution,  which  the 
tenant  quit  because  of  the  annoyance  to  which  his 
family  was  subjected  by  reason  of  the  frequent  calls  of 
lewd  men,  it  was  held  that  the  tenant  could  not  defeat 
a  recovery  of  the  rent  upon  that  ground.'  Any  inter- 
ference with  an  easement  belonging  to  the  premises,  or 

'  Talman  t.  Goshineler,  (N.  Y.  C.  rent,  the  tenant  may  show  how  the 

P.)  1  State  Eep.  270.  building  became  untenantable,  and 

2  Lawrence  v.   BurreU,  17  Abb.  all  the  facts  relied  upon  to  prove  it 

N.  C.  (N.  Y.)  313.  so,  St.  Michaels,  &c.,  v.  Behrens.  13 

8  Alger  V.  Kennedy,  49  Vt.  109  ;  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  548.     Defective 

24  Am.  Rep.  117.  plumbing  makes  a  building  unten- 

*  Wallace  v.  Lent,  1  Daly  (N.  Y.  antable,  Vann  v.  Rouse,  84  N.  Y. 

C.   P.)  481.      Where  a  tenant  re-  401;  Butler  v.  Kidder,  87  N.  Y.  98. 

moves  from  premises  under  a  claim  'Meeks  v.  Bowerman,  1    Daly 

that  they  had  become  untenanta-  (N.  Y,  C,  P.)  99, 
ble,  in  an  action  to  recover  the 


CHAP.  XLIII.] 


What  Constitutes. 


lllS 


any  use  by  the  landlord  of  privileges  not  reserved  in  the 
lease,  amounts  to  an  eviction ; '  as  the  shutting  up  of 
windows  essential  to  the  demised  premises,  by  the  erec- 


'  Vaughan  v.  Blanchard,  1  Yeates 
(Penn.)  175.  In  a  New  York  case 
where  a  part  of  the  premises  were 
leased  for  the  purposes  of  a  store, 
and  there  was  a  yard  in  the  rear, 
attached  to,  and  exclusively  appro- 
priated by  the  tenants,  and  to 
which  they  had  access  through  a 
haU  running  from  the  front  to  the 
rear  of  the  building,  and  as  the 
building  was  occupied  when  the 
plaintiffs  leased,  no  tenant  could 
dispense  with  it,  and  the  rear  of 
the  store  received  light  necessary 
for  the  transaction  of  business 
therein  from  windows  opening 
into  the  yard,  and  a  door  opened 
from  the  store  into  the  yard,  and 
one  into  the  hall,  the  lessor  con- 
sented that  plaintiffs  might  close 
up  these  two  doors  at  his  own  ex- 
pense to  make  shelf  room.  The 
defendants,  having  leased  the 
whole  premises,  subject  to  plaint- 
iff's lease,  began  to  excavate  in 
the  yard  for  the  purpose  of  build- 
ing thereon.  In  an  action  to  re- 
strain such  building,  it  was  held 
that  plaintiffs  by  their  lease  ac- 
quired an  easment  in  the  yard,  of 
which  they  were  not  deprived  by 
the  agreement  as  to  closing  the 
doors  ;  that  even  if  it  should  be 
held,  from  the  fact  of  closing  the 
doors,  that  it  was  not  the  intention 
by  the  lease  to  give  them  access  to 
the  yard,  yet  they  were  entitled  to 
enjoy  an  easement  therein  for  the 
purpose  of  light  and  air.  and  that 
the  defendants  could  not  change  it 
to  their  disadvantage.  Doyle  v. 
Lord,  64  N.  Y.  433.  The  question, 
however,  as  to  whether  the  erec- 
tion of  a  building  upon  adjoining 
lands  so  as  to  shut  out  the  light 
from  that  direction,  by  the  land- 
lord, constitutes  an  eviction,  de- 
pends upon  the  circumstance, 
whether  the  windows  so  obstructed 
were  necessary  for  the  beneficial 
enjoyment  of  the  premises  for  the 
purpose  for  which  they  were  let. 
By  necessary  is  not  meant  conven- 
ient, but  were  the  windows  in- 
dispensable, and  were  the  circum- 
stances such  that  an  implied  grant 
of  such  an  easement  would  be  in- 
ferred.   If  not,  the  obstruction  of 


the  windows  would  not  bean  evic- 
tion, and  it  was  so  held  in  Palmer 
V.  Wetmore,  3  Sandf.  (N.  Y.  Sup. 
Ct.)  316,  where  the  landlord  erect- 
ed a  building  upon  land  adjoining 
the  demised  premises  and  dark- 
ened the  windows  upon  that  side. 
The  erection  of  a  building  upon 
an  adjoining  lot  by  an  adjoining 
owner  will  not  cause  an  eviction. 
Johnson  v.  Oppenheim,  55  N.  Y. 
380:  White  v.  Mealis,  37  N.  Y. 
(Sup.  Ct.)  73 ;  S.  P.  Kramer  v. 
Cook,  7  Gray  (Mass.)  550.  In  Ma- 
ville  V.  Gay,  1  Wis.  350,  it  was 
held  that  the  removal  of  party 
stairs  between  the  demised  and  ad- 
joining premises,  by  a  lawful  re- 
moval of  the  building,  does  not 
constitute  an  eviction.  In  Eogers 
V.  Ostrom,  35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  533, 
tearing  down  a  partition  in  the 
passage-way,  so  as  to  compel  a  ten- 
ant to  pass  through  a  grog  shop  to 
reach  his  tenement,  was  held  an 
eviction.  But  in  one  case  it  was 
held  that  if  the  tenant  did  not 
make  any  use  of  the  easement,  an 
interference  therewith  by  the  land- 
lord did  not  amount  to  an  eviction  ; 
as  where  by  the  terms  of  the  lease 
the  tenant  was  to  have  the  use  of 
a  railroad,  and  the  tenant  using 
only  a  part  of  it,  and  the  landlord 
tore  up  the  rails  of  the  part  not 
used,  it  was  held  not  an  eviction. 
Peck  V.  Hiler,  35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)117. 
But  upon  principle,  it  is  difficult  to 
see  how  this  proposition  is  tenable, 
as,  although  at  the  time  the  ease- 
ment was  destroyed  the  tenant  did 
not  use  the  same,  yet  he  had  the 
right  to  do  so,  and  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  say  that  he  might  not 
at  some  future  time  desire  to  use 
it.  But  in  the  particular  case,  the 
facts  were  such  as  to  warrant  an 
inference  that  the  tenant  had 
abandoned  the  easement,  and  upon 
that  ground  the  decision  is  possibly 
sustainable.  In  Royce  v.  Guggen- 
heim, 106  Mass.  301,  the  landlord 
erected  a  building  in  the  back 
yard ;  the  effect  of  which  was  to 
render  two  rooms  in  the  building 
demised  unfit  for  use,  and  the 
court  held  that  such  act  of  the 
landlord  amounted  to  an  eviction. 


1114 


Eviction. 


[§  4rr. 


tion  of  a  building  by  the  landlord  upon  an  adjoining  lot, 
or  otherwise ; '  but  the  erection  of  a  building  having 
that  effect,  or  any  interference  with  an  easement  by  a 
stranger,  does  not  amount  to  an  eviction." 

But,  in  the  case  of  an  easement,  it  has  been  held  that 
where  the  tenant  has  abandoned  its  use,  and  by  his  own 
acts  rendered  it  incapable  of  use,  an  interference  there- 
with by  the  landlord  cannot  be  set  up  as  an  eviction, 
because  it  does  not  in  such  a  case  interfere  with  the 
tenant's  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  premises,  and  at 
most  amounts  only  to  a  trespass.' 

A  tenant  may  show  an  eviction  by  title  paramount, 
although  the  ouster  was  not  by  virtue  of  a  judgment. 


As  has  already  been  stated,  there 
may  be  a  constructive,  -where  there 
is  in  fact,  no  physical  eviction ; 
as,  where  the  landlord,  or  any  per- 
son acting  by  his  authority,  does 
an  act  which  interferes  essentially 
with  the  tenant's  beneficial  enjoy- 
ment of  the  premises,  or,  in  other 
words,  and  perhaps  ro ore  accurate- 
ly, any  interference  by  the  land- 
lord with  the  tenant's  right  to  the 
enjoyment  of  the  premises  to  the 
full  extent  secured  by  the  lecCse  con- 
stitutes a  constructive  eviction, 
which  authorizes  the  tenant  to 
abandon  the  premises,  and  absolves 
liim  from  the  rent  if  he  avails  him- 
self of  such  right  within  a  reason- 
able time ;  but,  if  he  remains  in  pos- 
session, or  does  any  act  inconsistent 
with  his  right  to  abandon,  he  there- 
by waives  the  right,  and  must  pay 
the  rent.  Crommelin  v.  Thiess,  31 
Ala.  412,  and  this  rule  covers  the 
doctrine  as  stated  ia  the  text. 
Townsend  v.  Nickerson,  Wh.  Co. , 
117  Mass.  501  ;  Hegeman  v.  McAr- 
thur,  1  E.  D.  a  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  147  ; 
Sherman  v.  Wilkins,  113  Mass.  481. 
And  if  the  tenant  sustains  special 
damage  from  such  eviction;  he 
may  recover  it  of  the  landlord. 
Dalton  V.  Baker,  6  Nev.  190  ;  Dob- 
bins v.  Duguid,  65  111.  464. 

'  Doyle  V.  Lord,  ante. 

'Spears  v.  Allison,  20  Penn.  St. 
300. 

»Thus  in  Peck  v.  Hiler,  81  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  117,  by  the  terms  of  a  lease, 
the  tenure  was  to  commence  on  the 
1st  day  of  May,  1852.  The  tenant 
was  to  have  the  use  of  a  certain 


railroad,  in  common  with  others, 
and  was,  "to  put  the  same  in  or- 
der above  the  chemical  works,  if 
he  wished  to  use  it,"  and  the  lessor 
reserved  the  use  of  it  to  himself  al- 
so. The  road  was  entirely  out  of 
repair.  The  tenant  used  a  part  of 
it,  below  the  chemical  works,  for 
the  purposes  of  his  business,  for  a 
short  time,  but  he  never  repaired 
it,  or  in  any  way  used  the  road 
above  those  works.  Nothing  was 
transported  over  any  portion  of  it 
after  July,  1852.  The  lessee  re- 
moved a  portion  of  the  railway,  so 
as  to  prevent  its  use,  before  any 
part  thereof  was  taken  up  by  the 
lessor.  The  lessor  removed  a  part 
of  the  rails  in  April,  1853,  and  the 
lessee,  in  May  thereafter,  with 
knowledge  of  such  removal,  paid 
to  the  lessor  the  rent  which  accrued 
during  that  month.  When  the 
rent  for  the  months  of  June,  July, 
and  August  was  demanded  of  the 
lessee,  he  promised  to  pay  it  in  a 
few  days,  and  subsequently  gave 
his  note  for  the  amount,  without 
making  any  complaint  about  the 
removal  of  the  rails  by  the  lessor. 
It  was  held  that  it  was  fairly  in- 
ferable from  these  facts  that  the 
lessee  did  not  wish  to  use  the  rail- 
road above  the  chemical  works, 
and  had  determined  to  abandon, 
and  had  abandoned,  the  use  of  the 
whole  of  it  previous  to  the  removal 
by  the  lessor,  and  had  by  his  own 
acts  rendered  it  incapable  of  use. 
That  therefore  the  lessor  had  not 
interfered  with  any  beneficial  en- 
joyment of  it,  and  so,  though  his 


CHAP.  XLin.]         What  Constitutes.  1115 

decree,  or  any  legal  process,  the  tenant  taking  the  burden 
of  proof  that  he  acted  in  good  faith,  and  that  such  title 
was  in  fact,  paramount. 

If  the  eviction  or  ouster  is  from  a  part  of  the  demised 
premises,  it  entitles  the  tenant  to  an  apportionment  of 
the  rent,  and  an  abatement  according  to  the  relative 
value  of  the  part  from  which  he  is  evicted.  Thus,  the 
defendant  was  a  tenant  of  a  lot  of  land  and  buildings 
thereon,  under  a  lease  from  the  plaintiff,  for  the  term  of 
three  years.  The  owner  of  the  adjoining  lot  was  in  fact 
the  owner  of  a  strip  of  land  within  and  along  the  side  of 
the  demised  premises,  and  on  which,  in  part,  the  wall  of 
the  buildings  rested  ;  and  he  notified  the  defendant  of 
the  encroachment,  and  that  he  was  about  to  excavate 
under  the  wall,  and  required  him  to  remove  the  wall. 
The  defendant  gave  written  notice  of  this  claim  to  the 
plaintiff,  and  required  him  to  defend  his  rights  as 
he  might  be  advised,  and  notified  him  that  he  should 
hold  him  responsible  for  any  damage  sustained  ;  but  the 
plaintiff,  taking  no  measures  to  protect  the  wall,  or 
prevent  its  removal,  and  the  excavation  being  com- 
menced, the  defendant,  in  view  of  the  danger  caused  by 
the  undermining  of  the  wall,  took  it  down,  and  rebuilt 
it  on  the  hne  of  the  plaintiff's  lot.  In  the  plaintiff's 
action  to  recover  the  rent,  it  was  held,  that  these  facts 
constituted  such  an  eviction,  by  paramount  title,  from  a 
part  of  the  demised  premises,  as  to  suspend  a  portion  of 
the  rent,  and  were  available  as  a  defence  thereto.' 

acts  might  amount  to  a  trespass,  and    an    attornment    under  such 

they  were  not  such  as  amounted  claim,  is  treated  as  equivalent  to 

to  an  eviction.  an  expulsion.     Mayor  v.  White,  15 

iMoffatt  V.  Strong,  9  Bos.  (N.  Y.  M.  &  W.  571 ;  Emery  v.  Barnett, 

Sup.  Ct.)  57 ;  Carter  v.    Burr,   39  4  C.  B.   N.   S.   423.    In   Mayor  v. 

Barb.  (N.  Y.)  59  ;  Wells  v.  Mason,  White,  ante.  Pollock,  C.  B.  ,  says : 

5  lU.   84;  Smith  v.  MaUngs,  Cro.  "Now  if  a  party  having  a  good 

Jac.  160  ;  McLaughlin  v.  Craig,  7  right  to    eject    the    occupier '  of 

Jr.  C.  L.  117 ;  Stevenson  v.  Lorn-,  demised  premises  goes  there  and 

bard,  3  East,   575  ;  Fitchburgh  v.  demands  to   exercise    this    right, 

Melvin,   15  Mass.   368  ;  Boodle  v.  and  the  tenant  says,  '  I  will  change 

Cambell,  7  M.  &  G.  386  ;  Banders  the  title  under  which  I  now  hold, 

V.Fletcher,  11  S.  &E.  (l'enn.)419;  and  will  consent  to   hold    under 

Gilbert  on  Eents,  147  ;  Cuthbertson  you,'  that,  according  to  good  sense, 

V.  Irving,  4  H.  &  N.  473.    A  mere  is  capable  of  being  well  pleaded  as 

claim  of  right  made  upon  the  ten-  an  expulsion ; "  but  in  the    same 

ant  by  one  having  a  paramount  case  it  was  held,  that  a  demand 

title  and  a  right  to  the  possession,  made  by  one  having  no  immediate 


-1116 


Eviction. 


[§  477. 


But  such  an  ouster,  by  title  paramount,  from  a  part  of 
the  premises  only,  is  not  a  bar  to  the  entire  rent  if  the 
tenant  remains  in  possession  of  a  part,  but  only  to  a  pro- 
portionate part  thereof,  because,  in  such  cases,  the  rent 
is  apportionable.' 

But  where  a  tenant  is  evicted  from  a  part  of  demised 
premises  by  paramount  title,  he  may  in  his  discretion 
abandon  the  possession  of  the  other  part,  and  in  that 
event  he  is  absolved  from  the  payment  of  rent.     It  is 


right,  and  an  attornment  to  him. 
does  not  amount  to  an  eviction. 
A  tenant  who  voluntarily  yields  up 
possession  of  a  part  of  demised 
premises  to  another  cannot  claim 
that  he  has  heen  evicted,  and  a 
tenant  having  given  a  note  for  the 
payment  of  rent  in  advance  vras 
held  not  entitled  to  set  up  such  facts 
in  defence.  Lettick  v.  Hounold, 
63  lU.  335.  Nor  does  the  mere  fact 
that  a  landlord,  who  has  reserved 
the  right  to  use  a  part  of  the  prem- 
ises for  a  certain  time,  holds  over, 
no  demand  having  been  made  upon 
him  for  possession  by  the  tenant, 
constitute  an  eviction.  Vander- 
poel  V.  Smith,  4  Abb.  (N.  Y.)  App. 
Dec.  461.  And  in  the  case  last 
cited  it  was  held,  no  demand  for 
possession  having  been  made,  that 
the  tenants,  by  giving  the  landlord 
notice  that  they  intended  to  rescind 
the  lease,  could  not  relieve  them- 
selves from  UabiUty  for  the  rent 
for  the  balance  of  the  time.  An 
entry  by  a  mortgagee  under  a 
mortgage  prior  to  the  lease.  Smith 
V.  Shepard,  15  Pick.  (Mass.)  147, 
or  by  a  judgment  creditor  under 
a  levy  upon  the  landlord's  estate 
in  the  land,  who  threatened  to  put 
the  tenant  out  unless  he  attorns  to 
them,  although  not  technically  an 
eviction,  is  nevertheless  equivalent 
thereto,  and  operates  as  a  bar  to  a 
recovery  of  rent  by  the  landlord. 
George  V.  Putney,  4  Gush.  (Mass.) 
35f. 

'Lansing  v.  Van  Alstyne,  3 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  561,  n.  Nor  is  an 
act  of  the  State  in  appropriating  a 
part  of  demised  premises  for  pub- 
lic purposes,  under  its  right  of  em- 
inent domain,  a  bar  to  rent  accru- 
ing for  the  use  of  the  remaining 
portion.  Folts  v.  Huntley ,  7  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  310.  In  Buffum  v.  Deane, 
4   Gray  (Mass.)   385,  where  mills 


and  machinery  were  leased  for  a 
term,  and  the  real  estate  was  sold 
upon  an  execution  against  the  les- 
sor, but  the  machinery  was  not  sold, 
it  was  held  that  the  lessee  still  re- 
maiaed  liable  to  the  lessor  for  the 
rent  of  the  machinery.    The  reason 
for  this  exception  to  the  rule,  in  the 
case  of  an  eviction  by  title  para- 
mount, is,  that  the  eviction   does 
not  result  from  the  landlord's  own 
wrong  to  such  an  extent  that  he 
should  be  deprived  of  all  the  bene- 
fits that  have  accrued  to  the  tenant 
under  the  lease.    Tomhnson  v.  Day, 
3  Br.  &  B.  680 ;  Lawrence  v.  French, 
35  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  443.    ,The  mere 
fact  that,  in  an  action  in  which  the 
tenant  is  not,  but  the  landlord  is, 
a  party,  a  decree  is  rendered,  di- 
recting the  sheriff   to  let  out  the 
premises,  does  not  operate  as  an 
eviction  unless  the  decree  also  di- 
rects the  sheriff  to  eyict  the  tenant, 
particularly  where  there  is  no  par- 
amount title  under  which  the  ten- 
ant might  be  evicted.    Murray  v. 
Pennington,    3    Gratt.    (Va.)    91. 
And   under    such    circumstances, 
even  though  the  tenant  surrenders 
the  possession,  he  is  not  discharged 
from  his  liability  for  rent.     Id. 
Upon  the  general  proposition  that 
an  eviction  by  a  stranger  by  title 
paramount  extinguishes  the  rent, 
see  Day  v.  Austiu,  Cro.  Eliz.  398  ; 
Boodle  V.  CambeU,  7  M.  &  G.  386  ; 
Boynton  v.  Babbett,  3  Vent.   67 ; 
Simons  v.  Farren,  1  Bing.  N.  C.  373 ; 
Stains  v.  Morris,  IV.  &  B.  8 ;  So- 
prani V.  Skurro,  Yelv.  18 ;  Pope  v. 
Biggs,  9  B.  &  C.  345 ;  Shelbury  v. 
Scotsford,    Yelv.     331 ;    Bum    v. 
Phelps,   1    Stark.   94 ;    Dalston  v. 
Eeeve,  1  Ld.  Rayd.  77  ;  Cooper  v. 
Young,  Fortescue,  360 ;  Jordon  v. 
Twells,  Cas.   Temp.   Hardw.   171 ; 
Hayne  v.  Matby,  3  T.  R.  438. 


CHAP.  XLHi.]        What  Constitutes. 


1117 


only  when  be  elects  to  remain  in  possession  of  the  other 
part  of  the  premises  that  he  is  liable  for  the  rent  thereof.' 
Where  a  tenant  is  evicted  by  title  paramount,  but 
remains  in  possession  under  a  new  agreement  with  the 
person  who  evicted  him,  his  original  landlord  cannot  dis- 
train on  him  for  rent."  If  the  eviction  is  from  the  entire 
premises,  the  tenant  is  absolved  only  from  the  payment 
of  rent  accruing  after  the  eviction.  He  still  remains  lia- 
ble for  that  which  accrued  before,  as  in  such  cases  the 
rent  is  apportionable.'  While  a  tenant  is  not  bound  to 
wait  to  be  evicted  by  action,  yet,  at  his  peril,  he  must  be 
certain  that  the  party  claiming  title  has  in  fact  a  para- 


'  Home  Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  Sherman, 
46  N.  Y.  370  ;  Wells  v.  Mason,  5 
lU.  84.  But  if  he  remains  in  pos- 
session when  evicted  from  a  part 
of  the  premises  by  title  paramount, 
or  by  acts  amounting  only  to  a 
constructive  eviction  he  is  liable 
for  the  rent  of  that  part.  In  order 
to  avail  himself  of  the  eviction  as 
a  bar  to  the  entire  rent,  he  must 
abandon  the  possession.  Edgerton 
V.  Page,  26  N.  Y.  28i:  In  a  late 
Pennsylvania  case  not  yet  reported, 
Seabrook  v.  Mayer,  No.  49,  vol.  20, 
Alb.  Law  Journal,  the  court  said  : 
"  It  is  a  well-settled  rule,  that  if  a 
landlord  wrongfully  dispossesses 
his  tenant  of  any  portion  of  the  de- 
mised premises,  the  rent  for  the 
whole  is  thereby  suspended.  In 
the  present  case  the  plaintiff  com- 
mitted no  act  after  possession  taken 
under  the  lease  by  which  his  tenant 
was  deprived  of  any  part  of  the 
demised  premises.  On  the  contra- 
ry, the  evidence  shows  that  he  tried 
to  prevent  the  eviction.  His  of- 
fense consisted  in  demising  prem- 
ises to  the  defendant,  to  a  portion 
of  which  he  had  no  title  at  the  time. 
The  eviction  of  the  defendant  was 
by  virtue  of  a  title  paramount  to 
the  title  of  his  landlord.  It  mat- 
ters not  that  the  plaintiff  had  pre- 
viously held  it.  At  the  time  the 
lease  was  executed  and  the  relation 
of  landlord  and  tenant  between 
the  parties  was  created,  the  out- 
standing title  of  the  adjoiner  was 
as  superior  to  the  title  of  the  plaint- 
iff as  if  he  had  never  held  it.  If 
the  defendant  had  been  evicted  by 
paramount  title  from  the  whole 
premises,  he  would  have  been  dis- 


charged from  the  payment  of  the 
whole  rent  after  tliat  time.  But 
an  eviction,  by  such  title,  from  a 
part  only  of  the  demised  premises, 
when  the  tenant  continues  iu  pos- 
session of  the  remaining  part,  us- 
ing and,  enjoying  it,  does  not  work 
a  suspension  of  all  subsequent  rent. 
He  remains  Uable  to  the  payment 
of  such  proportion  of  the  rent  as 
the  value  of  the  part  retained  bears 
to  the  whole.  On  having  been 
evicted  from  a  part  he  might  have 
removed  from  the  residue,  and 
thereby  wholly  reUeved  himself 
from  the  payment  of  future  rent ; 
failing  to  do  so,  he  became  liable 
to  a  just  apportionment.  Our  own 
cases  recognize  the  rule  when  the 
landlord  conveys  a  part  of  the  de- 
mised premises  during  the  term 
and  possession  of  the  tenant,  and 
the  vendee  has  entered  and  evicted 
the  tenant  from  the  /part  thus  con- 
veyed. By  retaining  possession  of 
the  remaining  part  he  becomes  lia- 
ble to  pay  for  the  use  of  the  por- 
tion thus  retaiued.  It  is  held  not 
to  be  such  a  wrongful  eviction  by 
the  landlord  as  to  release  the  ten- 
ant from  paying  a  just  compensa- 
tion for  that  which  he  continues 
to  enjoy."  Reed  v.  Ward,  22  Penn. 
St.  144 ;  Lmton  v.  Hart,  25  id.  193. 
When  a  mortgagee  notifies  the 
tenant  that  rent  must  be  paid  to 
him,  and  enters  and  threatens  to 
evict  the  tenant,  it  is  an  eviction. 
Smith  V.  Shepard,  15  Pick.  (Mass.) 
147. 

2  Hopecraft  v.  Keys,  9  Bing.  613. 

2  Blair  v.  Claxton,  18  N.  Y.'539  ; 
Carter  v.  Burr,  39  Barb.  N.  Y.  59. 


1118  Eviction.  [§477. 

mount  title,  and  if  he  yields  possession  to  one  who  has 
no  such  title,  he  cannot  claim  exemption  from  after-ac- 
cruing rent ;'  so  that,  if  the  tenant  prefers  not  to  await 
the  event  of  litigation,  he  must  exercise  great  prudence 
in  investigating  the  claims  of  the  person  seeking  to  obtain 
possession.  Where  the  landlord  in  fact  had  no  title  or 
right  to  lease  the  premises,  and  the  true  owner  refuses 
to  permit  them  to  be  used  for  the  purposes  for  which 
they  were  hired,  the  tenant  may  give  up  possession  and 
is  discharged  from  the  payment  of  rent ;  and  if  he  has 
paid  the  rent  in  advance  he  may  recover  it  back  ;  or,  if 
he  gave  his  note  therefor,  and  the  note  is  still  held  by 
the  lessor,  a  court  of  equity  will  rescind  the  lease  and 
enjoin  the  collection  of  the  note, by  him,  and  compel  the 
lessor  to  surrender  the  note  to  be  cancelled.  °  When  a 
vendor  or  lessor  cannot  make  a  complete  title,  the  lessee 
or  vendee  may  elect  to  proceed  pro  tanto,  or  to  abandon 
the  contract  or  lease  altogether ;  and  if  he  elects  to  do 
the  former,  he  is  entitled  to  an  abatement  from  purchase 
money,  or  a  deduction  from  the  rent  \fy  way  of  compen- 
sation for  the  deficiency  in  the  title.'  In  such  a  case, 
where  the  lease  is  by  parol,  the  inability  of  the  lessor  to 
give  possession  by  reason  of  his  having  given  a  previous 
lease  of  a  part  of  the  premises  is  treated  as  equivalent  to 
an  eviction  by  the  tortious  act  of .  the  lessor,  and  no  rent 

'  Moflatt  V.  Strong,  ante.  courts  of  New  York,  this  question 

^  In  Anderson  V.  Tighe,  10  Heisk.  was  thoroughly    considered,  and 

(Tenn.)  299,  the  court  rescinded  a  the  doctrine  announced  in  the  text, 

lease  of  a  brick  yard  to  which  the  established.      An  action  for  rent 

lessor  had  no  title  or  right  to  lease,  was  brought  against  the  defendant 

the  true  owners  having  refused  to  upon  a  lease  of  certain  premises  in 

permit  the  lessee  to  make  brick  New  York  made  in  February,  1837, 

upon  the  premises,  and,  he  having  for  a  term  to   commence  the  1st 

given  his  note  for  advance  rent,  day  of  May  next  after.    In  order 

the     lessor    was    enjoined    from  to  induce  the  lessee  to  take  a  lease 

collecting  it.  of  the  premises,  the    lessor  rep- 

^Allen, J.,inPeoplev.Stephens,  resented    that   the    premises  em- 

71  N.  Y.  555 ;  Watters  v.  Travel,  9  braced  a  piece  of  land  which,  as  it 

John.  N.  Y.  465  ;  King  v.  Wilson,  afterwards  turned  out,  belonged  to 

6  Beav.  124;    Paton  v.  Rogers,  1  the  city.    The  lessee  discovered  the 

Ves.  &  B.  351 ;     Voorhees  v.  De-  fact  before  the  1st  of  May,  and 

Meyer,  2  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  37 ;  Morse  procured  a  lease  of  such  piece  of 

V.  Elendorf,  11  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  land  from  it,  and  took  possession 

277 ;  Graham  v.  Oliver,   3  Beav.  of  and  occupied  the  whole.     The 

124.    In  Whitney  v.  Allaire,  1  N.  defendant  was  permitted  to  recoup 

Y.  805 ;  S.  C.  1  Hill  (N.  Y.)   484 ;  what  he  was  in  good  faith  com- 

4  Den.  (N.    Y.)    554,  which  was  peUed  to  pay  for  the  corporation 

several  times  before  the  highest  lease. 


CHAP,  xun.]         What  Constitutes.  1119 

is  recoverable  for  the  portion  occupied  by  the  tenant.' 
But  where  the  lease  is  by  deed,  it  operates  as  a  grant  of 
the  reversion  as  to  such  lands  as  are  in  the  possession  of 
a  previous  tenant,  and  a  demise  of  the  residue  of  the 
lands,  and  in  that  case  the  tenant  must  pay  the  rent  for 
such  portion  of  the  premises  as  he  occupies."  Where 
there  is  an  actual  physical  eviction  of  the  tenant  from  a 
part  of  the  premises  by  the  landlord  or  his  agents,  or  by 
any  pereon  acting  under  or  through  him,  in  that  case, 
the  rent  is  entirely  suspended,  whether  the  tenant 
remains  in  possession  or  not,'  unless  the  eviction  was 
lawful,  in  which  case  the  tenant  is  responsible  for  the 
rent  of  the  premises  up  to  the  time  when  he  was  expelled, 
therefrom.' 

Where  a  tenant  who  has  paid  his  rent  in  advance  is 
evicted  before  his  term  has  expired,  he  is  entitled  to 
recover  back  such  a  proportion  of  the  rent  as  the  term 
for  which  he  is  out  of  .possession  bears  to  the  term  for 
which  the  advance  payment  was  made.  Thus :  where 
the  lessee  of  a  store  paid  the  rent  for  the  whole  term  in 
advance,  and  before  the  expiration  of  the  term  the  build- 
ing was  destroyed  by  fire,  and  the  lessors  re-built  the 
same  and  let  it  to  other  parties,  it  was  held  that  the  les- 
see was  entitled  to  recover  back  from  the  lessor,  not  the 
amount  which  he  received  from  the  new  lessee,  but  the 
rent  paid  by  him  for  that  portion  of  the  term  which  was 
subsequent  to  the  second  lease.l 

While  a  tenant  cannot  absolve  himself  from  the  pay- 
ment of  rent  by  quitting  the  possession  of  premises  with- 
out a  legal  excuse,  yet,  if  he  quits  the  possession  and 
leaves  the  key  with  the  landlord,  who  afterwards  lets 
the  premises  to  another  person,  or  puts  another  person 

'  Neale  v.  McKenzie,  1  M.  &  W.  condition  broken.      It  was  held 

747  ;    Watson  v.   Waud,  8  Exchq.  that  this  eviction  determined  the 

335.  lessee's  estate,   and    that  he  was 

^  Comm'rs  of  Ireland  v.  O'Conner,  liable  only  for  the  rent  accruing  up 

9  Ir.  C.  L.  243.  to  the  time  of  eviction. 

'Campbell  V.   Shields,  11  How.  'Wardv.  BuU,  1  Fla.  271.    The 

Pr.  N.  Y.  565.    See  ante,  p.  eviction  in  such  a  case  transpired 

*  In  Hall  V.  Gould,  13  N.  Y.  127,  only  from  the  time  when  the  prem- 

the  lessor  entered  under  a  clause  in  .  ises  were  let,  as  the  entry  by  the 

the  lease  authorizing  an  entry  by  landlord    to  rebuild  was  not  an 

him,  and  evicted  the  tenant  for  a  eviction. 


1120 


Eviction-, 


L§47r. 


into  possession  without  the  tenant's  assent,  this  amounts 
to  an  eviction,  and  absolves  the  tenant  from  liability  for 
the  rent  subsequently  accruing.'  But  the  purpose  and 
intention  of  the  landlord  in  such  a  case  is  material,  and 
if  the  jury  finds  that  he  merely  placed  the  party  in 
possession  to  take  care  of  the  premises,  receiving  no  rent, 
and  that  such  act  was  prudent,  and  not  done  with  the 
intention  of  depriving  the  tenant  of  possession  at  any 
time  when  he  might  desire  to  resume  the  same,  it  does 
not  amount  to  an  eviction."  There  can  be  no  construct- 
ive eviction  without  an  abandonment  of  possession ; 
therefore,  where  by  statute  or  the  provisions  of  the  lease, 
itself,  the  tenant  is  to  be  released  from  liability  for  rent 
in  a  certain  contingency,  he  is  not,  even  though  such 
contingency  occurs,  discharged  from  his  liability  to  pay 
rent,  if  he  continued  in  the  possession  and  use  of  the 
premises."    In  order  to  be  discharged  from  such  liability, 


1  Matthews  v.  Tohener,  39  Mo. 
115.  But  the  landlord  may,  it 
seems,  let  the  premises  without 
being  guilty  of  an  eviction,  if  he 
gives  the  former  tenant  notice  that 
he  lets  them  solely  on  such  tenant's 
account.  Walls  v.  Atchinson,  3 
Bing.  363. 

'  In  Wheeler  v.  Stevenson,  6  H. 
&  N.  158,  four  houses  were  leased 
by  the  plaintiff  to  one  Leavy  for  a 
term  of  21  years,  at  an  annual  rent 
of  £73  10s. ,  payable  quarterly,  with 
a  clause  of  re-entry  in  case  of  non- 
payment of  rent.  In  Jiily,  1358, 
two  of  the  houses  were  deserted, 
and  a  year's  rent  was  in  arrear. 
A  pohce  constable  entered  upon 
and  kept  possession  of  them  for 
some  time.  He  did  so  to  prevent 
any  nuisance  which  might  arise 
from  their  unoccupied  and  deserted 
state.  He  afterwards  by  the  di- 
rectioii  of  the  plaintiffs'  agent,  and 
by  authority  of  one  of  the  plaint- 
iffs, gave  possession  of  these  two 
houses  'o  one  Tempany,  to  take 
care  of  them  for  the  plaintiff,  but 
upon  a  verbal  understanding  that 
if  the  plaintiff  could  get  possession 
of  the  other  two  houses  he  would 
rent  all  of  them  to  him.  Tempany 
had  no  interest  in  the  premises 
except  such  as  might  arise  under 
this  verbal  agreement.  The  court 
held  that  this  did  not  amount  to 


an  eviction.  Pollock,  C.  B.  ,  said : 
"  We  think  there  was  no  evidence 
on  which  the  jury  ought  to  have 
found,  certainly  none  upon  which 
they  were  bound  to  find  the  fact  of 
an  eviction. "  See  also,  to  the  same 
effect.  Bird  v.  Defonville,  3  C.  & 
K.  415 ;  also,  Redpath  v.  Roberts,  3 
Esp.  325,  where  an  entry  by  the 
landlord  and  putting  up  a  "  to  let " 
in  the  window  was  held  not  an 
eviction,  and  Griffith  V.  Hodges,  1 
C.  &  P.  419,  where  the  lightmg 
of  fires,  &c.,  was  held  not  an  evic- 
tion. Lamott  V.  Stevett,  1  H.  &  J. 
(Md.)  42 ;  Austin  v.  Field,  1  Buff. 
m.  Y.)  Sup.  Ct.  208.  But  if,  after 
such  abandonment,  the  lessor 
enters  and  occupies  the  premises  in 
a  manner  that  is  inconsistent  with 
the  possessory  right  of  the  tenant, 
his  acts  constitute  an  eviction  and 
precludes  the  recovery  of  rent  so 
long  as  it  continues.  Day  v.  Wat- 
son, 8  Mich.  535.  And  putting  in 
another  tenant,  or  making  any 
profitable  use  of  the  premises,  is 
such  an  act.  Matthews  v.  Tohener, 
39  Mo.  115. 

^Edgerton  v.  Page  20  N.  Y.  381 ; 
Boreal  v.  Lawton,  90  N.  Y.  298. 
The  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment 
extends  to  the  possession  and  not 
to  the  title,  and  is  broken  only  by 
an  entry  and  expulsion  from,  or 
some   actual    disturbance  of   the 


CHAP.  XLm.j 


What  Constitutes. 


1121 


he  must  give  up  possession.  If  the  statute  provides  that 
if  the  premises  shall  be  destroyed  or  from  any  cause  be 
rendered  unfit  for  occupation,  the  tenant  is  not  justified 
in  abandoning  the  possession,  nor  is  he  discharged  from 
rent,  unless  the  premises  are  rendered  wholly  unfit  for  use. 
Under  such  a  statute  it  was  held  that  the  erection  of  a 
building  on  an  adjoining  lot  so  as  to  hide  the  light  and 
ventilation  of  the  leased  building,  does  not  justify  the 
tenant  in  giving  up  possession.'    If  the  premises  are  out 


possessioil,  Whitbeck  v.  Cook,  15 
John.  (N.  Y.)  483  ;  or  circumstances 
which  may  be  said  to  amount 
thereto.  Dyett  v,  Pendleton,  8 
Cow.  <N.  Y.)  738. 

'In  Hillard  v.  N.  Y.  &  Cleveland 
Gas  Co.,  41  Ohio  St.  663 ;  Dickman, 
J.,  said :  "  If  the  demised  premises 
had  been  destroyed  during  the 
term  of  the  lease,  the  lessee — the 
Gas  Coal  Company — would  doubt- 
less have  been  discharged  from  the 
payment  of  rent.  It  was  one  of 
the  covenants  in  the  lease  itself, 
that  it  ehould  become  void  and  de- 
termine, and  all  rent  thereon  should 
cease  in  the  event  of  a  destruction 
of  the  premises.  And  independ- 
ently of  the  written  contract  be- 
tween the  parties,  as  only  two 
rooms  in  the  building  passed  to  the 
lessee,  and  no  interest  in  the  land, 
the  subject  of  the  demise  would 
have  been  extinguished  by  the  de- 
struction of  the  building,  and  the 
liability  to  pay  rent  would  thereby 
have  terminated.  There  would 
have  remained  nothing  upon  which 
the  demise  could  operate.  Winton 
V.  Cornish,  5  Ohio  477 ;  Womak 
V.  McQuarry,  28  Ind.  103 ;  Kew  v. 
Merchants'  Exchange  Co. ,  3  Ed.  Ch. 
<N.  Y.)  315 ;  Graves  v.  Berdan,  26 
N.  Y.  498.  In  the  case  at  bar, 
although  the  demised  premises 
were  not  destroyed,  it  is  contended 
that  they  were  eo  injured  as  to  be- 
come unfit  for  occupancy,  and 
that  therefore  there  was  no  longer 
any  obligation  to  pay  rent  to  the 
lessors.  There  was  no  covenant 
by  the  lessors  to  repair,  but  the  les- 
see covenanted  to  keep  the  prem- 
ises in  good  and  constant  repair  at 
its  own  expense,  and  at  the  expira- 
tion of  the  tei'm,  to  surrender  them, 
to  the  lessors  in  as  good  condition 
as  the  same  were  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  lease,  the  natural  decay 


and  wear  and  loss  by  fire  only  ex- 
cepted. It  is  to  be  presumed  that 
the  parties  made  their  contract  in 
contemplation  of  the  ordinary 
action  of  the  elements,  and  of 
the  situation  and  condition  of  the 
demised  premises  as  patent  to  the 
ordinary  observer.  It  would  nat- 
urally be  expected  that  a  building 
might  be  erected  at  any  time  upon 
the  adjoining  vacant  lot,  fronting 
on  a  prominent  business  street  and 
thus  cut  off  hght  and  ventilation 
from  that  side.  But  obvious  as 
the  contingency  was,  the  lessee  did 
not  see  fit  to  make  provision  for 
an  abatement  of  rent  or  termina- 
tion of  the  lease,  in  case  the  owner 
of  the  vacant  lot  should  construct 
a  bmlding  thereon.  The  exclusion 
of  light  and  air  must  have  been 
foreseen  as  not  improbable,  and 
the  lessee  covenanted  to  pay  rent, 
in  fuU  view  of  the  existing  and 
prospective  state  of  things.  Hav- 
ing thus  covenanted  to  pay  rent, 
except  only  in  the  event  of  the  de- 
struction of  the  premises,  the  les- 
see was  bound  by  its  agreement 
notwithstanding  the  subsequent 
change  in  the  condition  of  the  leased 
premises  by  the  erection  of  the  ad- 
joining building.  Linn  v.  Eoss, 
10  Ohio,  412.  It  was  well  said  by 
the  court  in  Brown  v.  Curran,  53 
How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  303:  "Building 
is  not  necessarily  a  cause  of  damage 
to  an  adjoining  owner.  And  ten- 
ants themselves  should  take  notice 
and  be  prepared  for  such  contin- 
gencies of  constant  occurrence,  and 
make  their  arrangements  accord- 
ingly." If  the  lessors  had  conveyed 
to  the  lessee  a  right  to  the  unob- 
structed enjoyment  of  light  and  air 
over  the  vacant  lot,  for  and  during 
its  term,  they  would  have  been 
answerable  for  that  right  in  case  of 
disturbance.    But  there    was   no 


1122 


Eviction. 


[§477. 


of  repair,  and  the  landlord,  having  covenanted  to  repair, 


such  grant.  And  the  vacant  lo* 
not  belonging  to  the  lessors  at  the 
time  of  leasing,  it  cannot  be  urged 
with  any  force  of  reason,  that  an 
easement  by  implication  in  the  pas- 
sage of  light  and  air  followed  a 
demise  of  the  premises  to  the  les- 
see. It  is  true,  as  said  by  Judge 
Story,  inU.  S.  v.  Appleton,l  Sumn. 
(U  .S.)  249,  that "  the  general  rule  of 
law  is,  that  when  a  house  or  store 
is  conveyed  by  the  owner  thereof, 
every  thing  then  belonging  to,  and 
in  use  for  the  house  or  store,  as  an 
incident  or  appurtenance,  passes 
by  the  grant."  But  it  was  never 
incident  or  appurtenant  to  the  les- 
sors' building,  that  the  adjoining 
lot  should  always  remain  vacant, 
for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  light 
and  ventilation  to  the  lessors'  ten- 
ants. There  is  no  evidence  that 
the  lessors,  at  the  time  of  the  de- 
mise, had  any  more  knowledge 
than  the  lessee,  of  the  intention  of 
the  owner  of  the  adjoining  land  to 
put  a  building  thereon.  It  is  not 
claimed  that  there  was  ever  any 
act  amounting  to  an  eviction  on 
the  part  of  the  lessors ;  nor  are 
they  chargeable  with  any  wrongful 
act  which  precluded  the  tenant 
from  the  beneficial  enjoyment  of 
the  leasehold.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  leased  apartments,  instead  of 
being  rendered  permanently  unfit 
for  occupancy  by  the  proximity  of 
the  waUs  of  the  adjoining  building, 
were  made  tenantable  by  repairs, 
and  were  occupied  by  other  ten- 
ants after  their  abandonment  by 
the  lessee.  Among  numerous  ad- 
judged cases  in  the  same  class  with 
the  case  at  bar,  it  was  held  in 
Johnson  v.  Oppenheim,  55  N.  Y. 
380,  that  the  mere  building  upon 
or  other  improvement  of  the  ad- 
joining lot,  by  which  the  demised 
premises  were  rendered  less  com- 
modious of  occupation  or  less  suit- 
able to  the  use  of  the  tenant,  did 
not  affect  the  right  of  the  landlord 
to  Ills  rent,  or  authorize  the  tenant 
to  terminate  the  lease  and  abandon 
the  premises.  And  in  Hazlett  v. 
Powell,  30  Penn.  St.  293,  it  was 
held,  that  where  a  lessor  demised  a 
building  in  which  were  sundry 
windows  opening  on  the  ground 
of  an  adjoining  owner,  the  erec- 
tion of  a  party   wall  by  such  ad- 


joining owner,  by  which  the  win- 
dows were  closed  up,  is  not  ah 
eviction  by  the  lessor,  nor  any  de- 
fence to  the  payment  of  the  accru- 
ing rent.  See  also  Palmer  v.  Wet- 
more,  3  Sandf .  (N.  Y.)  816 ;  Myers 
V.  Gemmel,  10  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  537. 
It  is  contended  however,  in  behalf 
of  the  defendant  in  error,  that  the 
lessee  was  released  from  liability 
to  pay  rent,  and  was  authorized  to 
surrender  the  possession  of  the 
premises,  by  virtue  of  the  act  of 
March  30,  1868  (65  Ohio  Laws,  35). 
That  act,  which  is  the  same  as 
section  4118  of  the  Revised  Stat- 
utes, reads  as  follows :  "That  the 
lessee  of  any  building  which  shall, 
without  any  fault  or  neglect  on  his 
part,  be  destroyed,  or  be  so  injured 
by  the  elements,  or  other  cause,  as 
to  be  unfit  for  occupancy,  shall  not 
be  liable  to  pay  rent  to  the  lessor 
or  owner  thereof,  after  such  de- 
struction or  injury,  unless  other- 
wise expressly  provided  by  written 
agreement  or  covenant,  and  the 
lessee  shall  thereupon  surrender 
possession  of  the  premises  so 
leased."  The  act  is  subsljantially 
a  transcript  of  the  New  York  stat- 
ute in  pari  materia,  and  the  ad- 
judged cases  in  that  State  serve  as 
reliable  aids  in  its  interpretation. 
Without  determining  whether  the 
Gas  Coal  Company,  as  lessee  of 
only  two  rooms  instead  of  the  en- 
tire building,  would  come  within 
the  classification  of  persons  entitled 
to  the  benefit  of  the  statute,  we  are 
of  opinion  that  the  lessee  was  not  in- 
jured to  the  extent,  nor  was  its  in- 
jury of  the  kind  contemplated  by 
the  statute.  The  evident  design  of 
the  act  was  to  relieve  the  ignorant 
and  inadvertent  who  mighb  fail  to 
protect  themselves  by  special  pro- 
vision in  their  lease  against  the 
evil  and  mischief  of  the  common 
law,  which  held  the  tenant  liable 
for  rent  although  the  demised 
premises  were  destroyed  by  fire, 
flood,  tempest  or  otherwise,  unless 
he  was  exempt  from  liability  by 
some  express  covenant  in  his  lease. 
The  destruction  or  injury  within 
the  purview  of  the  statute  is  not 
that  gradual  decay  which  results 
from  the  ordinarj'  action  of  the 
elements  nor  injury  resulting  from 
the    ordinary    action    of    human 


CHAP.  XLin.]         What  Constitutes.  1123 

neglects  to  do  so,  or  if  the  landlord  lets  a  part  of  the 
building  for  a  noisy  trade,  or  other  purpose  which 
created  a  nuisance,  the  tenant  cannot  continue  in 
possession,  and  set  off  as  counter-claim  the  damages 
which  he  has  sustained  therefrom,  in  an  action  for  the 
rent.  Thus,  in  a  New  York  case,'  in  an  action  upon  a 
lease  under  seal  of  rooms  for  an  office,  to  recover  rent 
accruing  for  the  last  half  year  of  the  term,  the  complaint 
alleged  an  occupation  by  the  defendant  during  the  whole 
term.  The  answer  did  not  deny  this,  but  set  up  as  a 
counter-claim  that  the  lessor  permitted  the  rooms  above 
those  leased  to  defendant  to  be  used  and  occupied  by 
persons  who  carried  on  a  noisy  mechanical  business, 
using  printing  presses,  and  also  weights  which  were 
thrown  down  upon  the  floor,  causing  great  noise,  and 
thereby  interfering  with  defendant's  use  and  occupation 
of  his  rooms,  and  preventing  him  from  carrying  on  his 
professional  business  therein  ;  that  defendant  by  reason 
thereof  was  compelled  on  divers  occasions  to  leave  his 
rooms,  and  that  thereby  the  ceilings  were  broken  and 
water  leaked  through,  damaging  his  books  and  furni- 
ture. It  was  held  that  a  demurrer  to  the  answer  was 
properly  sustained  ;  that  conceding  the  facts  stated  con- 
agencies  ,  which  a  lessee  is  supposed  way.  If  the  legislature  had  intend- 
to  have  in  view  when  he  enters  into  ed  to  provide  that  the  tenant  should 
his  contract.  The  statute  is  de-  cease  to  he  liable  for  rent  when 
signed  rather  to  protect  the  lessee  the  premises  from'  any  cause  be- 
against  an  unexpected  and  unusual  came  so  damaged  or  out  of  repair 
action  of  the  elements  or  of  human  as  to  be  untenantable,  it  would 
forces,  causing  a  total  destruction  have  been  easy  to  have  expressed 
of  the  demised  premises  or  an  in-  the  intent  in  apt  and  proper  Ian- 
jury  thereto  only  short  of  a  total  guage."  The  alleged  damage  to 
destruction,,  which  the  parties  the  apartments  leased  to  the  de- 
ignorantly  or  inadvertently  failed  f endant  in  error  was  such  as  might 
to  anticipate  and  provide  against  have  been  expected  to  result  nat- 
when  the  demise  was  made.  In  urally  and  ordinarily  from  the 
construing  the  New  York  statute,  construction  of  the  building  upon 
the  court,  in  Suydam  v.  Jackson,  the  adjoining  vacant  lot.  And 
54N.Y.  450,  say :  "The  statute  pro-  the  structure  itself  must  have  been 
vides  for  two  alternatives,  when  anticipated  as  one  of  the  probabU- 
the  premises  are  '  destroyed '  or  ities  of  the  future.  Its  walls  nec- 
'  injured.'  The  first  alternative,  ev-  essarily  excluded  light  and  air,  and 
idently,  has  reference  to  a  sudden  caused  more  or  less  dampness  in 
and  total  destruction  by  the  ele-  the  lessee's  apartments,  but  the 
ments,  acting  with  unusual  power,  consequential  damage  was  not  the 
or  by  human  agency.  The  latter  same  as  that  contemplated  by  the 
has  reference  to  a  case  of  injury  to  statute  under  consideration, 
the  premises,  short  of  a  total  de-  '  Boreelv.  Lawton,  90N.  Y.  293; 
struction,  occasioned  in  the  same     Vann  v.  Rouse,  94  N.  Y.  401.  ■ 


1124  Eviction.  [§  477, 

stituted  a  cause  of  action  against  plaintiff,  they  did  not 
constitute  a  counter-claim.  In  another  case  before  thef 
New  York  City  Court '  which  is  a  well  considered  case 
and  one  whose  doctrines  are  weU  sustained,  it  was  held 
that  the  lessee,  in  an  action  for  rent,  cannot  counter- 
claim damages  for  the  sickness  of  himself  and  family, 
resulting  from  the  escape  of  sewer  gas  because  of  defect- 
ive plumbing,  if  the  lessor  was  not  guilty  of  any  wrong- 
ful concealment  of  the  facts,  for  there  is  no  implied 
covenant  on  the  part  of  a  lessor  as  to  the  plumbing. 
The  court  said  :  "  That  there  may  exist  such  a  deception, 
either  by  suppression  of  the  truth  or  a  suggestion  of 
falsehood,  is  not  questioned,  as  when  a  landlord  lets 
premises  which  are  infected  by  a  contagious  disease,"  or 
the  presence  of  a  stench,  proceeding  from  an  unknown 
cause,  which  makes  the  premises  untenantable  °  or  the 
fact  that  the  house  had  been  previously  used  as  a  house 
of  prostitution  *  but  in  view  of  the  pleadings  and  the 
proof,  and  the  express  disclaimer  of  any  blameable  or 
wrongful  concealment,  it  cannot  be  claimed  that  the 
case  at  bar  could  be  brought  within  this  category.  He 
hired  the  premises  with  full  knowledge  of  these  connec- 
tions, and  the  landlord  is  not  chargeable  with  such  con- 
sequential injuries  as  may  arise  from  any  defect  that 
time  and  use  produce.  Under  such  circumstances 
smells  and  even  sickness  are  not  only  not  extraordinary 
but  are  inevitable,  and  I  fail  to  see  how  this  furnishes 
any  ground  of  action  against  the  landlord.  The  party 
who  hires  has  an  opportunity  to  examine  the  house, 
and  he  can  examine  the  plumbing,  as  well  as  the  walls, 
in  so  far  as  it  can  be  examined  at  all,  and  he  has  possibly 
as  much  knowledge  as  the  lessor,  for  there  is  no  implied 
covenant  as  to  plumbing  any  more  than  of  plastering  or 
painting  or  tinning.  In  one  sense  it  may  be  said  that  it 
is  concealed,  and  the  tenant  could  not  tell  what  he  was 
hiring,  but  the  same  may  be  said  of  nearly  all  the  car- 

•  Chad  wick    v.    Woodward,    13  ^  Wallace  v.  Lent,  1  Daly  (N.  Y. 

Abb.  N.  C.  (N.  Y.)  441.  C.  P. )  4811. 

"  Minor  v.  gtjaron,  113  Mass.  477  ;  *  Ehiiielaiider    t.     Seaman,    13 

17  Am.  Hep,  1^2  ;  Cesar  v.  Karutz,  Abb.  N.  C.  (N.  Y.)  455. 
60  N.  Y.  339 ;  Ift  Am.  Rep.  164. 


CHAP.  xLin.]         What  Constitutes.  1125 

penter  work,  the  brick  work,  and  nearly  every  portion 
of  a  building  of  a  substantial  character.  The  charge  of 
concealment  and  deception  in  this  class  of  cases  is 
undoubtedly  an  outgrowth  of  anger  which  has  its  source 
from  the  painful  results  of  such  defects,  but  the  law  in 
its  present  state  furnishes  no  remedy  to  the  tenant  that 
I  know  of,  and  it  rests  with  the  Legislature  to  make 
landlords  and  builders  liable  in  such  cases ;  for  the 
common  law  throws  the  responsibility  upon  the  tenant, 
and  I  know  of  no  provision  which  exempts  the  plumb- 
ing or  the  sewer  fixtures  from  these  well  settled  provis- 
ions. In  a  Massachusetts  case '  where  the  lease  declared 
that  the  house  was  in  perfect  order,  and  a  defective  drain 
which  produced  a  disagreeable  stench  was  subsequently 
discovered,  it  was  held  that  the  lease  had  reference  only 
to  the  condition  of  the  house  as  an  edifice,  and  not  to 
the  present  and  future  purity  of  the  air  within  it.  As 
matter  of  fact,  the  condition  of  pipes  and  of  plumbing 
in  a  house  is  easily  determined,  and  it  is  not  claimed  in 
the  case  at  bar  that  there  existed  any  secret  of  hidden 
source  of  danger  to  the  health,  except  such  as  would 
naturally  arise  from  unrepaired  pipes.  The  mere  fact 
that  these  pipes  are  connected  with  an  unhealthy  sewer 
that  causes  fetid  odors,  in  no  sense  creates  greater  liabil- 
ity on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff  than  if  there  were  no 
such  connections  and  no  such  odors.  Neitheir  does  that 
fact  establish  higher  rights  in  favor  of  the  tenant  in 
cases  like  the  present,  where  the  party  hires  with  fuU 
opportunity  to  examine  the  premises,  and  with  knowl- 
edge that  the  connecting  pipes  opened  into  the  sewer. 
That  there  exists  any  implied  warranty  on  the  part  of  a 
landlord  in  renting  a  house  that  sewer  gas  shall  not 
escape  and  make  the  house  unhealthy,  is  wljoUy  want- 
ing in  precedent  and  analogy,  and  as  stated  above,  there 
is  no  implied  warranty  in  any  lease  that  it  is  fit  for  the 
use  to  which  it  is  designed  by  the  tenant,  or  even  that  a 
dwelling-house  is  habitable."    The  rule  is  that,  where, 

'Foster  v.  Peyser,  63  Mass.  343.  Heard  v.  Chapman,  15  L.  T.  E^. 

2  Hart  V.  Windsor,  13  M.  &  W.  437;     Cleaves    v.    Willoughby,  7 

68 ;   Sutton  v.  Temple,    id.    53  ;  Hill  (N.  Y.)  88  ;  Surplice  v.  Farns- 
II.— 19. 


1126  Eviction.  [§  477. 

at  the  leasing  of  the  premises,  both  parties  were  equally 
ignorant  of  the  existence  of  any  defects  in  the  premises, 
or  premises  contiguous  thereto  which  detract  essentially 
from  its  comfortable  enjoyment,  the  tenant  cannot,  in 
an  action  for  the  rent,  counter-claim  damages  for  illness 
and  expenses  occasioned  by  noxious  vapors  or  noisesome 
smells  which  proceed  from  adjoining  premises.'  So  long 
as  the  premises  are  tenantable  the  liability  of  the  lessee 
remains  for  the  rent,  unless  there  is  some  provision  in 
the  lease  which  discharges  him  from  Uability  therefor, 
and  such  a  qualification  will  not  be  implied."  In  a  New 
York  case  °  a  lease  of  a  basement  room  in  a  building 
provided  that  the  lessor  should  not  be  liable  for  any 
injury  or  damage  that  might  be  done  to  the  demised 
premises  or  to  goods  therein,  from  water  leaking  or 
flowing  from  any  part  of  the  building,  or  from  any 
pipes  or  plumbing,  etc.,  that  the  lessor  would  "not 
allow  any  deductions  in  rent  on  account  of  the  premises 
not  being  in  good  or  tenantable  order  during  the  time  of 
making  any  alterations  or  repairs  *  *  *  during  the  term 
of  this  lease,  except  shall  be  made  necessary  by  iire. 
In  case  of  injury  by  fire,  the  rent  was  to  be  suspended, 
if  the  premises  were  rendered  wholly  untenantable, 
until  the  damage  was  repaired ;  if  rendered  partially 
untenantable,  a  reasonable  deduction  was  to  be  made, 
the  lessor  binding  himself  to  make  such  repairs,  unless 
he  elected  to  remodel  or  rebuUd,  in  which  case  the  lease 
was  to  terminate.  The  lessees  covenanted  to  make  all 
other  needful  or  required  repairs.  During  the  term,  the 
room  so  leased  was  inundated  by  water  from  a  room 
over  it,  not  connected  therewith,  whereby,  as  the  lessees 

worth,  8  Scott,  N.  E.  307  ;  Francis  100  ;  Nemelty  v.  Naylor,   18  Alb. 

V.  CockeriU,  L.  E.,  5  Q.  B.  501 ;  L.  J.  498 ;  Laughlin  v.  Kief,  15  id. 

Jones  V.  Just,  37  L.  J.,  Q.  B.  89  ;  255  ;  Krueger  v.  Farrant,  29  Minn. 

Searle  v.  Laverick,  9  L.  E.,  Q.  B.  385  ;  43  Am.  Eep.  228 ;  Wilkinson 

43 ;     Westlake   v.    De  Graw,    25  v.  Clausen,   29  Minn.  91 ;  Allege- 

Wend.    (N.    Y.)   669  ;    Button  v.  ant  v.  Smart,  11  Eep.  784. 

Gerrish,    9   Cush.   89  ;    Foster   v,  » Franklin  v.  Brown,  53   N.   Y. 

Peyser,    id.   242  ;     McGlashan  v.  Superior  Ct.  474. 

Tallmadge,   37  Barb.  (N.  Y.)313;  =  Johnson  v..  Oppenheimer,  55  N. 

Sutphen     v.     Seebass,     Common  Y.  280  ;  Walton  v.  Waterhouse,  3 

Pleas,  General  Term,  May  18, 1883  ;  Sandf .  (N.  Y.)  422  n. 

Truesdell  V.  Booth,  4  Hun  (N.  Y.)  « Butler  v.  Kidder,  87  N.  Y.  98. 


CHAP,  xLinJ     Premises  Untenantable.  1127 

claimed,  without  their  fault  or  negligence,  the  room 
became  untenantable  ;  and  after  due  notice  thereof,  they 
quit  the  premises.  In  an  action  to  recover  rent  accruing 
after  such  abandonment,  held  that  the  plain  import  of 
the  lease  was  that  if  repairs  were  rendered  necessary  to 
make  the  premises  tenantable,  by  other  causes  than  fire, 
there  should  be  no  deduction  of  rent  during  the  time 
occupied  in  making  them,  and  in  any  case  there  should 
be  no  right  to  surrender  ;  and,  therefore,  that  plaintiff 
was  entitled  to  recover. 

Of  course,  the  tenant  takes  the  burden  of  establishing 
•an  eviction  by  showing  such  facts  as  establish  either  an 
actual  physical,  eviction  or  an  essential  interference 
with  his  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  premises.'  If  a 
tenant  who  has  been  wilfully  evicted  from  a  part  of  the 
premises  by  the  landlord  subsequently  gives  his  note  for 
the  entire  rent,  he  is  treated  as  having  waived  his  rights 
under  the  eviction,  and  cannot  set  up  such  eviction  in 
defence  to  the  note  ;  °  nor  can  such  defence  avail  when 
■  the  note  was  given  for  an  advance  rent,  and  before  the 
term  for  the  rent  of  which  the  note  was  given  has  , 
elapsed,  the  tenant  is  evicted,  especially  when  the  note  is 
in  the  hands  of  a  honafide  holder  for  value.  ° 

An  entry  by  the  landlord,  under  a  clause  in  the  lease 
providing  for  a  forfeiture,  puts  an  end  to  the  term  from 
the  time  of  such  entry,  and  the  tenant's  term,  as  weU  as 
his  liability  for  rent,  ceases  from  that  time ;  *  and  such 
also  is  the  effect  when  the  landlord  brings  an  action  of 
ejectment  or  other  proceedings  to  oust  the  tenant." 

Sec.  478.  Destniction  of  premises,  or  disrepair.— In  New 
York  under  the  statute, °  when  the  premises  are  destroyed 
by  fire  or  otherwise  rendered  untenantable,  the  tenant  may 
abandon  the  possession,  because  of  such  destruction, 
disrepair  or  other  condition  rendering  the  premises  unten- 

'  Mayor,  &c.,  v.  "White,  15  M.  &  CorneU  r.  Lamb,  20  John.  (N.  Y. 

W.  577.  407 

*  Sanderson  v.  Chicago,  &c.,  Ins.  '  Brooks  v.  Christopher,  5  Duer 

Co.,  31  111.  601.    A  note  of  hand  (N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  216. 

given  for  rent  does  not  operate  as  ■*  Hall  v.  Gould,  13  N.  Y.  127. 

payment   thereof,  unloss    it    was  ' v. . 

agreed  to  be  accepted  in  payment.  '  Chap.  345,  Laws  of  1860. 


1128  Eviction.  [§478. 

antable,  and  thereafter  is  absolved  from  the  payment  of 
rent ;  in  other  words,  such  a  condition  operates  as  an 
eviction  under  the  statute.  But,  in  order  to  operate  as  an 
extinguishment  of  rent,  the  tenant  must  in  fact  abandon 
the  possession  of  the  entire  demised  premises,'  and  must 
have  entered  into  no  covenant  inconsistent  with  the  exer- 
cise of  this  statutory  right,  because  the  statute  is  intended 
only  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  have  neglected  to 
protect  their  rights  in  this  respect,  by  contract,  and 
does  not  protect  a  tenant  from  liability  under  an  express 
covenant  to  rebuild  in  case  of  a  destruction  of  the  build- 
ing by  fire  or  other  casualty,  or  to  put  and  keep  the 
premises  in  repair  ;  nor  does  the  statute  extend  to  a 
destruction  of  the  premises,  or  an  untenantable  condition 
of  the  premises  resulting  from  the  tenant's  own  wrong- 
ful or  negligent  acts.  It  would  be  prepostiveness  to 
suppose  that  the  legislature  intended  to  put  it  within 
the  power  of  a  tenant  to  terminate  a  lease  because  of  an 
injury  to  the  premises  that  resulted  from  his  own  wrong, 
and  the  Supreme  Court  of  that  State  in  a  recent  case 
before  it  has  negatived  such  a  construction.  In  that  case, 
*  the  plaintiff  leased  a  building  to  the  defendant,  who 
agreed  "to  do  all  repairs  which  may  be  required  in  and 
upon  said  premises  at  his  own  cost  and  expense."  The 
building  was  an  old  one  and  the  defendant,  having 
partly  fitted  it  up,   stored  goods  of  so  much  weight 

'  In  Walker  v.  Gilbert,  3  Robt.  pay  the  difference  between  the 
(N.  y.  Sup.  Ct.)  214,  the  plaintiff  amount  they  sold  for  and  the  in- 
leased  to  the  defendant  the  lower  voice  price.  The  goods  were,  in 
rooms  of  a  building  owned  by  him,  complianoe  with  such  suggestion, 
but  the  lease  contained  no  cove-  sold  at  auction,  but  the  plaintiff 
nant  requiring  him  to  make  subsequently  refused  to  perform 
repairs.  During  the  defendant's  his  promise.  There  was  evidence 
occupancy,  a  leak  was  discovered  tending  to  show  that  the  plaintiff 
in  his  ceiling,  and  the  plaintiff,  was  at  the  time  of  the  injury  in 
being  notified,  promised  that  he  occupation  of  the  building,  except- 
would  immediately  have  it  re-  ing  the  rooms  leased.  On  the  trial 
paired,  but  failed  to  do  eo  before  of  an  action  to  recover  rent,  the 
the  occurrence  of  a  storm,  shortly  presiding  judge  ruled  that  these 
afterwards  upon  the  same  day,  facts  constituted  no  defence,  and 
which  did  great  injury  to  the  de-  directed  a  verdict  for  the  plaintiff, 
fendant's  goods.  The  plaintiff,  excluding  evidence  offered  by  the 
upon  hearing  from  the  defendant  defendant  to  show  that  the  injury 
of  the  injury,  suggested  that  the  to  his  goods  was  caused  by  the 
best  way  to  ascertain  the  amount  plaintiffs  neglect  to  make  repairs 
of  damage  would  be  to  send  the  as  promised,  and  the  ruling  was 
goods  to  auction,  and  he  would  sustained. 


CHAP.  xLni.J     Premises  Untenaktable. 


1129 


therein  that  the  floors  settled,  and  subsequently  the  floors 
and  roof  settled  still  more  in  consequence  of  the  accumula- 
tion of  snow  on  the  roof.  The  plaintiff  at  the  defendant's 
request,  had  the  roof  made  secure  and  in  doing  so,  removed 
a  portion  of  the  flooring,  the  material  of  which  was  unfit  to 
be  relaid.  The  plaintiff  refused  to  relay  the  floor,  and  the 
defendant  abandoned  the  premises  ;  and  in  an  action 
for  the  rent  the  defendant  set  up  these  matters  in 
defence,  claiming  that  the  landlord's  conduct  constituted 
an  eviction,  but  the  court  held  that  they  did  not,  and 
that  neither  at  common  law  nor  under  the  statute  was 
the  defendant  absolved  from  the  payment  of  rent.' 

A  judgment  having  been  given  for  the  defendant  in 
the  court  below,  it  was  reversed  and  a  new  trial  given. 
Dykeman,  J.   dissented,  but  we  think  that  the  judgment 


'  McMann  v.  Autenreith,  24  N. 
Y.  S.  C.  163.  "I  think,"  said 
Babnard,  p.  J.,  "there  was  no 
eviction  proven  upon  the  trial. 
The  defendant  agreed  'to  do  all 
repairs,  &c.'  The  building  was 
old  when  rented,  and  the  defendant 
fitted  it  up  in  some  respects  for  the 
purposes  of  his  occupancy.  Very- 
soon  after  he  entered  into  posses- 
sion the  defendant  placed  goods 
of  great  weight  within  the  build- 
ing. By  reason  of  this  weight,  and 
of  the  condition  of  the  building 
itself,  the  floors  settled.  In  the 
following  spring  the  roof  and  floors 
settled  still  more  in  consequence  of 
a  snow  storm.  The  defendant  then 
applied  to  the  plaintiff  to  fix  up 
the  building.  The  plaintiff  em- 
ployed a  carpenter  and  made  the 
roof  secure.  To  do  this  it  was 
necessary  to  remove  a  strip  of 
flooring  about  six  feet  wide  and 
fifty  feet  long.  The  defendant 
requested  the  plaintiff  to  leave  this 
strip  of  flooring  open  until  he  had 
disposed  of  his  refrigerators  stored 
there.  After  the  expiration  of  six 
months  or  thereabouts,  the  de- 
fendant requested  the  plaintiff  to 
lay  down  such  strip_  of  flooring. 
The  refusal  to  do  this  is  the  eviction 
found  by  the  referee.  The  cove- 
nant in  the  lease  covered  this  de- 
fect. The  covenant  was  to  do  all 
repairs.  The  clause  in  the  lease 
requiring  the   defendant   to  sur- 


render in  as  good  ^condition  as 
reasonable  use  would  permit,  dam- 
ages by  the  elements  excepted,  does 
not  relieve  defendant  of  the  obliga- 
tion to  do  the  repairs  in  question. 
It  was  the  defective  building  which 
permitted  the  injury.  This  was  in 
part  occasioned  by  the  great  weight 
which  defendant  placed  in  it.  If 
the  covenant  to  repair  covered  this 
repair  to  the  roof  and  buUding,  the^ 
case  would  not  fall  within  the 
provision  of  chapter  345,  Laws  of 
1860.  It  was  not  the  design  of  that 
law  to  relieve  a  tenant  from  the 
performance  of  his  covenants,  even 
if  the  destruction  was  caused  by  • 
sudden  cause.  It  was  not  a  per- 
formance of  a  covenant  to  repair, 
to  tax  the  strength  of  an  old  build- 
ing to  its  utmost  by  the  weight  of 
goods  placed  in  it,  and  when  the 
floor  settled  and  became  danger- 
ous by  the  additional  weight  of  a 
fall  of  snow  on  the  roof  thereon, 
to  avoid  responsibility  by  averring 
the  injmry  to  have  been  caused  by 
the  elements.  If  the  defendant 
was  bound  to  repair,  then  the  part 
performance  of  the  work  of  restora- 
tion by  plaintiff  would  not  be  an 
eviction.  What  he  did,  he  did  by 
defendant's  consent.  If  he  was 
not  legally  bound  to  repair  his 
premises,  to  do  so  was  without 
consideration.  The  strip  of  floor- 
ing taken  up  was  not  fit  to  go 
back." 


1130 


Eviction. 


[§4rs. 


of  the  court  is  tenable,  and  a  correct  interpretation  of  the 
application  of  the  statute. 

At  the  common  law,  in  the  absence  of  a  provision  to 
that  effect  in  the  lease,  the  destruction  of  the  premises 
from  any  causes,  whether  by  fire,  floods,  tempest  or  the 
processes  of  decay,'  or  the  demolition  of  the  buildings  by 
the  casualties  of  war,"  or  civil  commotion,'  does  not 
discharge  the  tenant  from  his  liability  for  rent  for  the 
full  term  ;  nor  does  the  fact  that  the  buildings  have 
fallen  into  disrepair  so  as  to  render  their  use  practically, 
worthless,  release  the  tenant  from  his  obligation  in  this 
respect,  even  though  the  landlord  has  covenanted  to 
repair,  but  neglects  or  refuses  to  do  so. '    The  only  remedy 


'  Ely  T.  Ely,  80  111.  532  ;>Gates  v. 
Green,  4  Price,  355  ;  Proctor  v. 
Keith,  12  Ky.  252  ;  Davis  v.  Smith, 
15  Mo.  467.  If  a  tenant  agrees  ex- 
pressly, whether  under  seal  or  not, 
to  pay  rent,  and  makes  no  reserva- 
tion on  account  of  unavaidable  lac- 
cidents,  he  is  bound  to  pay  the 
rent  for  the  whole  term,  notwith- 
standing the  premises,  in  the 
meantime,  are  destroyed  by  Are, 
Linn  v.  Ross,  10  Ohio,  413.  Where 
a  lease  was  executed  of  three 
rooms  in  a  building,  and  of  a  land- 
ing on  a  canalj  for  which  the  les- 
see agreed  to  pay  a  certain  annual 
rent  so  long  as  he  should  be  per- 
mitted to  occupy  the  premises,  it 
was  held,  that  the  destruction  of 
the  rooms  by  fire  was  not  within 
tne  qualification  in  the  covenant, 
and  that,  to  be  discharged  of  the 
rent,  the  defendant  must  show  a 
surrender  of  the  residue  of  the  de- 
mised premises ;  and  that,  while 
he  was  in  possession  of  any  part 
of  the  premises,  he  could  claim  only 
a  pro  rata  abatement  of  the  rent. 
Willard  v.  TiUman,  19  Wend  (N. 
Y.)  358.  But,  where  such  a  provis- 
ion in  a  lease  was  intended  to  be, 
but  by  mistake  was  not  inserted 
in  the  lease,  a  court  of  equity  will 
either  reform  the  lease  or  order  its 
surrender,  and  will  enjoin  the  les- 
sor from  proceeding  at  law  to  re- 
cover the  rent.  Wood  v.  HubbeU, 
10  N.  Y.  479 ;  Gates  v.  Green,  4 
Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  355.  There  is  an 
exception  to  the  rule  that  the  de- 
struction of  a  building  does  not 
discharge  the  tenant  from  his  lia- 


bility for  rent,  and  that  is,  where 
the  lease  is  simply  of  an  upper 
story  of  a  building,  because  in  such 
a  case,  there  is  nothing  upon  which 
the  demise  can  operate  and  the 
lease  falls  with  the  estate.  Wo- 
mak  V.  McQuarry,  28  Ind.  103  ; 
Graves  v.  Berdan,  26  N.  Y.  498  ; 
Austin  V.  Field,  7  Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y.) 
N.  S.  29. 


4  In  Davis  v.  Smith,  15  Mo.  467, 
the  lessee  of  a  grist  and  saw  mill 
was  held  bound  to  pay  rent,  al- 
though the  building,  by  the  pro- 
cesses of  decay,  fell  down  and  de- 
stroyed all  the  machinery  in  the 
mill.  When  a  tenant  takes  a  lease 
he  should  be  careful  to  provide 
against  the  payment  of  rent  in  case 
of  the  destruction  of  the  premises 
by  fire  &c.,  or  in  case  they  become 
untenantable  from  any  cause,  as 
otherwise  he  must  pay  the  rent. 
Cross  V.  Button,  4  Wis.  468 ;  Gates 
V.  Green,  4  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  355  ; 
Ely  V.  Ely,  80  lU.  532  ;  Gibson  v. 
Perry,  29  Mo.  245  ;  Austin  v.  Field, 
1  Buff.  (N.  Y.)  Superior  Ct.  208 ; 
Willis  V.  Castle,  3  Gray  (Mass.) 
333  ;  Lamott  v.  Steritt,  1  H.  &  J. 
(Md.)43  ;  Procter  v.  Keith,  13  Key, 
252  ;  Leeds  v.  Cheetham,  1  Sim. 
146  ;  Phillips  v.  Stevens,  16  Mass. 
240  ;  Howard  v.  Doolittle,  3  Duer 
(N.  Y.)  464 ;  Hallett  v.  Wylie,  3 
Johnson  (N.  Y.)44 ;  Doupe  v.  Ger- 
rin,  45  N.  Y.  119.  And  so  far  as 
repairs  are  concerned,  the  landlord 
is  under  no  sort  of  obligation  to 
make  any  unless  he  has  expressly 


CHAP.  XLin.]      Premises  Untenantable. 


1131 


open  to  the  tenant  in  such  a  case  is  to  notify  the  landlord, 
and  upon  his  failure,  to  repair  the  premises  himself  and 
deduct  the  expense  from  the  rent,'  or  to  sue  the  landlord 
for  a  breach  of  the  covenant.  He  cannot,  on  account  of 
such  breach,  abandon  the  possession-,  and  thus  relieve 
himself  from  hability  for  the  rent  subsequently  accruing." 


covenanted  to  do  so.  White  v. 
MeaUo,  5  J.  &  S.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  73  ;  Corey  v.  Maun,  6  Duer  (N. 
Y.)  679  ;  Moffat  v.  Smith,  4  N.  Y. 
126  ;  Mumford  v.  Brown,  6  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  475 ;  MoCarty  v.  Ely,  4  E. 
D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  375.  And  this  is  so 
even  though  the  building  is  let  for 
a  special  purpose,  and  it  is  wholly 
unfit  for  such  purpose  unless  fixed. 
Howard  v.  Doolittle,  ante.  Thus 
a  landlord  is  not  bound  to  repair 
the  water  pipes,  so  as  to  keep  up  a 
supply  of  water.  Caddington  v. 
Dunham,  3  J.  &  S.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  413.  Nof  is  he  bound  to  pro- 
tect the  premises  from  the  conse- 
quence of  acts  done  by  an  adjoin- 
ing owner,  as  in  making  an  exca- 
vation. Sherwood  v.  Seaman,  3 
Bos.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  127; 
White  V.  Mealio,  ante.  And  an 
agreement  on  his  part  to  repair, 
made  after  the  lease  has  been  en- 
tered into,  does  not  bind  him  to  re- 
pair, Spreckles  v.  Sax,  1  E.  D.  S. 
(N.  Y.)  250  ;  Flynn  v.  Hatton,  4 
Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  553  ;  Davis  v. 
Banks,  3  Sweeney  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  184  ;  Gottsberger  v.  Rodway, 
3  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  342,  unless  a 
new  and  sufficient  consideration 
for  such  agreement  is  shown,  Ot- 
tinger  v.  Levy,  4  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.) 
388  ;  Post  V.  Vitter,  2  id.  248,  A 
covenant  to  rebuild  or  repair 
should  be  broad  enough  to  cover 
all  exigencies,  as  it  will  never  be 
extended  or  enlarged  by  construc- 
tion. Witty  V.  Matthews,  53  N. 
Y.  513.  But  while,  after  a  ten- 
ant's term  under  a  lease  has  com- 
menced, a  destruction  of  the  prem- 
ises will  not  relieve  him  from  lia- 
bility for  rent,  yet  if  a  lease  is 
made  to  commence  in  futuro,  and 
before  the  time  arrives  the  build- 
ings are  burned  or  destroyed,  he  is 
not  liable  for  rent,  for  delivery  of 
possession  is  necessary  to  establish 
the  landlord's  right  to  collect  rent. 
Wood  V.  Hubbell,  10  N.  Y.  479. 
And  where  the  landlord  covenants 


to  rebuild,  there  may  exist  a  state 
of  fact  that  will  relieve  the  tenant 
from  rent  \inless  his  covenant  is 
performed  ;  as,  where  the  tenant 
procured  the  premises  to  be  insured 
and  gives  the  landlord  the  insur- 
ance money  to  rebuDd  with.  Bey- 
er V.  Dickmson,  7  Phila.  (Penn.) 
190.  In  Allen  v.  Pell,  4  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  506,  the  landlord  let  an  unfin- 
ished house  to  the  tenant  and  agreed 
to  finish  it  by  a  certain  day,  but 
failed  to  do  so.  The  court  held 
that  the  tenant  was  not  bound  to 
occupy,  and  not  having  done  so, 
was  not  liable  for  the  rent.  If,  un- 
der such  circumstances,  the  ten- 
ant goes  into  possession,  he  waives 
the  condition  precedent  and  is 
bound  for  the  rent,  and  must  seek 
redress  in  an  action  for  a  breach  of 
Che  covenant.  Wright  v.  Lattin, 
38  III.  293. 

'  Hexter  v.  Knox,  63  N.  Y.  561 ; 
Makin  v.  Wilkinson,  L.  E.,  6 
Exchq.  35;  Walker  v.  GUbert,  3 
Rob.  (N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  214 ;  Cooke 
V.  England,  37  Md.  14. 

«  Loader  v.  Kemp,  3  C.  &  P.  375  ; 
Bucks  V.  Rogers,  39  Ind.  333 ;  Black 
V.  Ebner,  54  id.  544;  Myers  v. 
Burns,  35  N.  Y.  269;  Hurger  v. 
Edmonds,  4  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  256.  In 
New  York,  under  the  statute  per- 
mitting the  tenant  to  abandon 
premises  rendered  untenantable, 
the  statute  has  no  operation,  un- 
less the  premises  are  rendered 
wholly  untenantable.  Thus,  where 
the  roof  and  upper  story  of  a  build- 
ing was  destroyed,  but  tho  lower 
story,  which  was  occupied  by  a 
tenant,  was  left  intact,  it  was  held 
that,  in  the  absence  of  a  covenant 
by  the  landlord  to  I'epair,  he  could 
not  be  compelled  to  do  so  for  the 
benefit  of  the  tenant  of  the  lower 
rooms.  Doupe  v.  Gerrin,  45  N.  Y. 
119.  And  where  the  injury  to  the 
premises  is  only  such  as  can  be  re- 
paired without  rebuilding,  a  par- 
tial injury  by  fire,  or  other  casual- 
ty, is  within  a  covenant  to  rebuild, 


1132 


Eviction. 


[§  478.' 


But,  although  the  covenant  to  pay  rent  and  to  repair  are 
independent  covenants,  and  at  the  common  law  the  breach 
of  one  is  not  a  defence  to  an  action  upon  the  other,'  yet, 
latterly,  particularly  in  this  country,  the  tenant  is  not 
driven  to  his  cross-action,  except  when  he  claims  damages 
in  excess  of  the  rent,  and  may  recoup  them  in  an  action 
for  the  rent." 


and  if  the  landlord  has  not  cove- 
nanted to  repair,  he  is  not  bound 
to  repair  such  an  injury.  Vander- 
poel  V.  Smith,  3  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
135.  And  the  statute  does  not  re- 
lieve the  tenant  from  making  or- 
dinary repairs,  but  applies  only  to 
injuries  resulting,  from  some  sud- 
den and  unexpected  action  of  tjie 
elements  or  other  cause.  Suydam 
V.  Jackson,  54  N.  Y.  450.  Mere 
fears  of  the  destruction  of  or  in- 
jury to  the  building,  caused  by 
noises  and  shaking  of  the  building 
or  in  fact  statements  of  the  lessor 
that  he  supposed  some  one  at  en- 
mity with  him  was  putting  dyna- 
mite down  the  chimneys  to  get  his 
tenants  out,  does  not  justify  the 
tenant  in  abandoning  the  building, 
the  building  being  sound,  safe  and 
otherwise  tenantable.  Talbnan  v. 
Gashwaller,  13  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
555. 

'  Hare  v.  Graves,  3  Anst.  607 ; 
Balfour  v.  Wiston,  1  T.  E.  310; 
Hurger  v.  Edmonds,  4  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  456.  If  the  lease  contains  a 
covenant  on  the  landlord's  part  to 
rebuUd  or  repair,  and  also  provides 
that  the  rent  shall  cease  from  the 
time  of  the  destruction  of  the  build- 
ings, or  their  disrepair,  the  tenant 
is  absolved  from  rent  for  the  bal- 
ance of  the  term,  though  he  re- 
mains in  possession,  if  the  landlord 
fails  to  rebuild  or  repair.  Patter- 
son V.  Ackeraon,  1  Edw.  Ch.  (N. 
Y.)  96. 

^  Westlake  v.  De  Graw,  35 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  669;  Hurger  v. 
Edmonds,  4  Barb.  (N.  ,Y.)  356; 
Black  V.  Ebner,  •  54  Ind.  544 ; 
Wright  V.  Lattin,  38  111.  293.  It  is 
now  generally  held  that  the  ten- 
ent  may,  by  way  of  recoupment 
or  counter-claim,  where  the  latter 
remedy  is  given  by  statute,  set  up 
any  damages  that  he  sustained 
from  a  breach  of  any  of  the  land- 
lord's covenants,  express  or  im- 
plied, in  reduction  of  the  rent,  as 


where  the  landlord  deprives  the 
tenant  of  the  use  of  an  easement ; 
Lynch  v.  Baldwin,  69  111.  210; 
Depuy  V.  Silver,  1  Clark  (Penn.) 
385  ;  or  damages  arising  from  any 
interference  with  the  tenant's 
quiet  or  beneficial  enjoyment  of 
the  premises  short  of  an  eviction. 
Dunwoody  v.  Raynor,  52  Penn. 
St.  392  ;  Nichols  v.  Dusenbury,  2 
N.  Y.  288.  Of  course,  where 
there  has  been  an  actual  eviction 
of  the  tenant  the  damages  cannot 
be  recouped;  but  the  eviction 
operates  as  a  compleljp  bar  to  rent 
not  due.  In  Holbrook  v.  Young, 
108  Mass.  83,  the  court  say.  "  He 
(the  tenant)  may  set  up  by  way  6t 
recoupment,  damages  suffered  by 
reason  of  a  breach  of  any  cove- 
nant in  the  same  instrument  on 
the  part  of  the  lessor,"  and  this 
covers  implied,  as  weU  as  express, 
covenants.  The  tenant  may  re- 
coup damages  that  he  sustains 
from  any  of  the  acts  or  defaults  of 
the  landlord  that  diminish  the 
beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  prem- 
ises, where  such  acts  or  defaults 
are  a  breach  either  of  an  implied 
or  express  covenant.  Lynch  v. 
Baldwin,  ante ;  Depuy  v.  Silver, 
ante.  Damages  arising  from  a 
breach  of  a  covenant  to  repair,  or, 
indeed,  any  express  covenant  in 
the  lease,  may  be  recouped. 
Green  v.  Bell,  3  Mo.  App.  391 ; 
Black  V.  Ebner,  ante ;  Leach  v. 
Leach,  10  Ind.  371 ;  Fairman  v. 
Fluok,  5  Watts  (Penn.)  516.  But 
mere  acts  of  trespass,  not  operat- 
ing as  a  breach  of  any  of  the  cove- 
nants of  the  lease,  are  not  the  sub- 
ject of  recoupment,  no  matter 
what  may  be  the  form  of  action. 
De  Witt  V.  Pierson,  112  Mass.  8 ; 
Bartlett  v.  Farrington,  130  id. 
284 ;  Edgerton  v.  Page,  381.  Nor 
can  damages  arising  from  any 
cause  be  recouped  when  the  rent 
has  been  assigned  and  the  dam- 
ages arose  siibsequent  to  the  as- 


CHAP.  xLm.]     Premises  Untenantable.  1133 

If  a  landlord  covenants  to  put  premises  in  repair,  and 
the  lease  is  to  commence  in  the  future^  the  performance 
of  the  covenant  by  the  landlord  is  treated  as  a  condition 
precedent  to  the  payment  of  rent ;  and  if  the  premises 
are  not  repaired  at  the  time  when  the  term  begins,  the 
tenant  need  not  enter  under  the  lease,  but  is  discharged 
therefrom.'  But  if,  under  such  circumstances,  the 
tenant  goes  into  possession,  he  is  treated  as  waiving  the 
condition  precedent,  and  must  pay  the  rent  whether  the 
repairs  are  made  or  not : "  but,  when  the  landlord  agrees 
to  repair  before  a  certain  day,  which  does  not  arrive 
until  after  the  term  begins,  an  entry  by  the  tenant  does 
not  operate  as  a  waiver ;  and  if  the  repairs  are  not 
made  at  the  time  agreed  upon,  the  tenant  may  abandon 
the  premises,  and  is  not  chargeable  with  rent  for  the  time 
he  actually  occupied, °  but  he  must  avail  himself  of  the 
right  to  abandon  at  once,  and  if  he  remains  in 
possession  under  the  lease  for  any  length  of  time  he 
cannot  abandon  the  possession  because  of  such  breach.' 
So,  it  has  been  held  that,  if  the  landlord,  before  the  term 
commences,  interferes  with  the  premises  in  such  a  way 
as  so  deprive  the  tenant  of  .the  full  beneficial  enjoyment 
of  the  premises  as  they  were  when  the  lease  Was  made, 
the  tenant  is  absolved  from  the  covenant  to  pay  rent ; ' 
as,  if  the  landlord  removes  any  fixtures  therefrom  essen- 
tial to  the  convenient  enjoyment  of  the  premises."  The 
fact  that  premises  are  not  fit  for  the  purposes  for  which 
they  were  rented  is  no  defence  to  an  action  for  the  rent,' 

signment,  nor  when,  in  fact,  the  *  Lunn  v.  Gage,  37  111.  19  ; 
rent  belongs  to  a  third  person  Wright  v.  Lattin,  ante.  Where  a 
who  is  a  stranger  to  the  lease,  term  is  to  commence  from  the  time 
SUngerly  v.  Fox,  75  Penn.  St.  112 ;  when  the  premises  shall  be  finished, 
Andesco  Oil  Co.  v.  N.  N.Oil  Co.,  and  they  never  are  finished,  the 
66  id.  375.  As  to  the  right  to  re-  tenant  may  show  such  facts  in  de- 
coup,  see  Dorwin  v.  Potter,  5  Den.  fence  to  an  action  for  the  rent, 
(N.  Y.)  306 ;  Kelsey  v.  Ward,  16  although  he  entered  and  actually 
Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  98.  occupied  for  a  time,  and  this,  even 
'  Allen  V.  Pell,  4  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  though  when  he  entered  he  ex- 
405.  pressed  himself  as  satisfied.     Clark 

2  Wright  V.  Lattin,  38  lU.  293.  v.  Spaulding,  20  N.  H.  313. 

3  Gibson  v.  Perry,  29  Mo.  245;  ^  (Aleves  v.  Willoughby,  7  Hill  (N. 
Gates  V.  Green,  4  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  83. 

Y.)    355;  Womak   v.   McQuarry,  « Id. 

38  Ind.  108  ;  Barnes  v.  Strohecker,  ■"  Academy  of  Music  v.  Haokett, 

21    Ga.   430-    Wright    v.   Lattin,  ante. 

ante. 


1134  EviCTioir.  [§478. 

unless  the  lease  was  induced  by  the  fraud  of  the  lessor, 
in  which  case  the  defendant  should,  at  once,  upon  discov- 
ery of  the  fraud,  quit  possession.  If  he  remains  in  posses- 
sion, he  must  respond  to  his  covenant  for  the  payment  of 
rent.'  As  previously  stated,  if  premises  are  in  a  state  of 
disrepair  when  they  are  leased,  or  if  they  are  let  for  a 
particular  purpose  which  requires  that  certain  repairs  or 
changes  should  be  made,  and  the  landlord  covenants  to 
make  such  repairs  or  changes,  and  the  tenent  at '  once 
enters  into  possession,  if  he  fails  to  do  so  within  a  reasonable 
time  it  would  seem  to  be  the  rule  in  this  country  that  the 
tenant  may  quit  the  possession,  and  thus  absolve  himself 
from  past  or  future  rent ;  as,  in  such  a  case,  the  landlord 
is  treated  as  having  covenanted  to  give  possession  of  t^ie 
premises  in  a  particular  condition,  and  failing  to  do  so, 
he  has  failed  to  perform  a  condition  precedent  to  the  pay- 
ment of  rent."  And  such  a  rule  has  been  intimated  by 
some  of  the  courts  in  this  country,  where  the  landlord 
covenants  to  rebuild  in  case  the  premises  are  destroyed, 
and  neglects  or  refuses  to  do  so,  such  omission  on  the 
landlord's  part  being  regarded  as  amounting  to  a  quasi 
eviction. '  But  the  strict  rule jof  the  common  law  is  other- 
wise, and  does  not  justify  the  doctrine  intimated  in  the 
cases  last  cited.  At  the  common  law,  unless  the  tenant 
has  protected  himself  in  the  lease  against  the  payment  of 
rent  in  case  of  a  destruction  of  the  premises,  the  mere 
fact  that  the  landlord  has  covenanted  to  rebuild  does  not 
discharge  the  tenant  from  the  payment  of  rent,  and  the 
tenant's  only  remedy  is  by  an  action  upon  the  covenant. 

'  McCarty  v.  Ely,  4  E.  D.  S.  (N.  the  time  of  leasing,  the  false  rep- 

Y.  C.  P.)  375.    In  Staples  v.  An-  resentation       and       concealment 

derson,   3  Eobt.   (N.   Y.   Superior  should  have  been  submitted  to  the 

Ct. )  327,  the  lessee  set  up  in  defence  jury. 

to  an  action  for  the  rent  the  bad  =  Clark  v.  Spaulding,  30  N.  H.  313. 

characterof  the  house,  arising  from.  "  Gibson  v.   Perry,  39  Mo.  345. 

the  fact  that  it  had  formerly  been  in    Boyer    v.    Dickson,  7    Phila. 

used  as  a  house  of  prostitution,  in  (Penn.)  190,  it  was  held  that  where 

consequence  of  which  the  tenant  a  lessee  insures  a  building,  and 

had  been  compelled  to  abandon  it.  covenants  to  rebuild,  but  the  lessor 

The  lessor  was  shown  to  have  been  induces  him  to  give  him  the  money, 

aware  of  the  facts ;  yet  he  repre-  he  agreeing  to  repair,  it  was  held 

sented  that  the  house  was  a  "  good  ,  that  the  lessor  must  rebuild,  or  he 

place"  to  let  out  furnished  rooms  can  claim  no  rent.    Gates  v.  Green, 

to  gentlemen.     The  court  held  that,  4  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)355;  Womak 

as  the  lessor  knew  these  facts  at  v.  McQuarry,  38  Ind.  103. 


CH4P.  XLin.J     Premises  Untenantable.  1135 

A  contary  doctrine  does  violence  to  the  rules  of  construc- 
tion, and  imports  into  contracts  provisions  that  a  court 
has  no  right  to  presume  that  the  parties  intended.  In  one 
case,'  it  appeared  that  the  lessee  covenanted  generally  to 
pay  the  rent  during  the  term,  and  to  ];epair  the  inside  of 
the  premises ;  and  the  lessor  to  maintain  the  outside  in 
good,  substantial  and  tenantable  repair.  The  latter  in- 
sured the  premises,  and,  on  their  destruction  by  fire, 
received  the  amount  of  his  policy.  Sir  John  Leach, 
V.  C,  after  noticing  the  legal  rights  of  the  parties,  pro- 
ceeded thus :  "  It  appears  tome  that  in  this  respect  equity 
must  follow  the  law.  The  plaintiff  might  have  provided 
in  the  lease  for  a  suspension  of  the  rent  in  the  case  of 
accident  by  fire,  but  not  having  done  so,  a  court  of  equity 
cannot  supply  that  provision  which  he  had  omitted  to 
make  for  himself,  and  it  must  be  intended  that  the 
purpose  of  the  parties  was  according  to  the  legal  effect  of 
the  contract.  With  respect  to  the  equity  which  the  plaint- 
iff alleges  to  arise  from  the  defendant's  receipt  of  the 
insurance  money,  there  is  no  satisfactory  principle  to 
support  it.  The  defendant  having  so  contracted  with 
the  plaintiff  as  to  render  himself  liable  to  rebuild  the 
outer  work  of  the  factory,  in  case  of  accident  by  fire,  has 
very  prudently  protected  himself  by  insurance  from  the 
loss  he  would  otherwise  have  sustained  by  such  an  acci- 
dent. But  upon  what  principle  can  it  be  that  the  plaint- 
iff's situation  is  to  be  changed  by  that  precaution  on  the 
part  of  the  defendant  with  which  the  plaintiff  had  noth- 
ing whatever  to  do  ?  The  plaintiff  has  sought  his  protec- 
tion in  the  contract  by  the  covenant  which  he  has  required 
from  the  defendant,  and  to  those  covenants  must  he  alone 
resort."    The  question,  therefore,  is  now  at  rest. 

The  motion  at  one  time  entertained,  that  an  offer  by 
the  tenant  to  surrender  the  premises  to  the  lessor  formed 
a  ground  for  the  interposition  of  equity  in  favor  of  the 
former,  is  exploded." 

'In  Leeds  v.  Cheetham,  1  Sim.  the  premises  had  been  destroyed 

146,  the  interposition  olf  a  court  of  by  fire,  but  the  relief  was  denied, 

equity  was  sought  to  relieve  a  party  ''Brown  v.  Quilter,  3  Amb.  619  ; 

from  the  payment  of  rent  where  Cutter  t.  PoweU,  6  T.    R.  333 ; 


1136 


Eviction. 


[§  479. 


Sec.  479.  Eviction.— EflFect  of.— Where  a  landlord  wrong- 
fully enters  into  any  part  of  the  demised  premises  which 
are  let  for  an  entire  rent,  and  expels  his  lessee  therefrom, 
there  is  a  total  suspension  of  the  rent  until  the  tenant  is 
restored  to  the  whole  possession ; '  and  this  is  the  rule 
even  though  the  tenant  continues  to  occupy  a  portion  of 
the  premises,  and  he  cannot  be  made  liable  for  the  use 


Baker  v.  Holtzapffell,  4  Taunt.  46 ; 
HoltzapflEel  v.  Baker,  18  Ves.  115 ; 
Pindar  v.  Ainsley,  1  T.  R.  313,  even 
though  the  tenant  has  covenanted 
to  repair  except  in  case  of  fire. 
Hare  v.  Graves,  3  Anst.  696  ;  Wie- 
gaU  V.  Waters,  6  T.  R.  488.  The 
rule  generally  is,  that  a  breach  of 
covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessor 
does  not  operate  a  suspension  of 
the  rent.  Thus,  where  land  veas 
leased  in  fee,  and  the  grantee  cove- 
nanted to  pay  rent,  and  the  grantor 
covenanted  that  the  grantee  should 
have  common  of  estovers  out  of 
other  lands  of  the  grantor,  and  he 
improves  the  land  and  prevent- 
ed the  grantee  from  enjoying 
the  common,  it  was  held  not 
to  absolve  the  grantee  from  the 
payment  of  rent,  but  that  he  must 
seek  his  remedy  upon  the  covenant. 
Watts  V.  CoflBn,  11  John.  (N.  Y.) 
495.  In  such  cases,  where  the  cove- 
nants are  independent,  it  cannot  be 
presumed  that  the  parties  intended 
either  as  conditions  precedent,  but 
from  the  fact  that  the  lesise  is 
silent  upon  the  question  of  a  sus- 
pension of  rent,  if  any  such  thing 
was  necessary,  it  might  be  pre- 
sumed that  the  parties  relied 
rather  upon  the  damages  recover- 
able for  a  breach  than  a  suspension 
of  rent. 

'  Lewis  V.  Payne,  4  Wend.  (N. 
y.)  423  ;  Christopher  v.  Austin,  11 
N.  Y.  216 ;  Peck  v.  HUw.,  31  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  117  ;  Chatterton  v.  Fox,  5 
Duer  (N.  Y.  Superior^  U.)  64; 
Comyn's  L.  &  T.  524 ;  Co.  Litt. 
148  h  ;  Leishman  v.  White,  1  Allen 
(Mass.)  485;  Wolf  v.  Weiner,  3 
Brewster  (Penn.)  524  ;  S.  C.  7  Phil. 
(Penn.)  274 ;  Montanye  v.  Wal- 
lahan,  84  111.  355  ;  Mortimer  v. 
Brunner,  6  Bos.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  653 ;  Moffatt  v.  Strong,  9  id. 
57  ;  Campbell  v.  Shields,  11  How. 
(N.  Y.  S.  C.)565  ;  Tunis  v.  Grandy, 
22  Gratt.  (Va.)  109;  Griffith  v. 
Hodjes,  1  C.  &  P.  419  ;  Hegeman 


V.  McArthur,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C. 
P.)  147;  McClung  v.  Price,  59- 
Perm.  St.  420  ;  Holmes  v.  Guion, 
44  Mo.  164 ;  Read  v.  Lauderb,  & 
Bush.  (Ky.)  21.  An  eviction  by  a. 
landlord  of  his  tenant  from  a  part 
of  the  demised  premises  creates  a 
suspension  of  the  entire  rent  dur- 
ing the  continuance  of  the  eviction, 
but  the  tenancy  is  not  thereby  put 
an  end  to,  nor  is  the  tenant  there- 
by discharged  from  the  perform- 
ance of  his  covenants  other  than 
the  covenant  for  the  payment  of 
the  rent.  Where,  therefore,  in. 
assumpsit  by  a  landlord  against 
his  tenant  for  breach  of  a  prcranise 
to  use  the  premises  in  a  tenant-like 
manner  during  the  continuance  of 
the  tenancy,  and  before  any  breach, 
the  former  entered  upon  ;gart  of 
the  premises  and  evicted  him  there- 
from, and  that  he  thereupon 
relinquished  and  gave  up,  and  the 
landlord  had  and  thence  hitherto 
retained,  the  possession  of  the  resi- 
due of  the  premises,  it 'was  held 
that  the  plea  was  bad,  inflsmuch  as 
it  did  not  show  dissolution  of  the 
tenancy  by  mutual  consejit.  Mor- 
rison V.  Chadwick,  7  ©.  B.  266 ; 
FuUer  v.  Ruby,  10  Gray  (Mass.) 
285  ;  Christopher  v.  Austin,  UN. 
Y.  316 ;  Russell  v.  Fabyan,  28  N. 
H.  543 ;  Wright  v.  Lattm,  38  111. 
393  ;  Colburn  v.  Morrell,  117  Mass. 
363 ;  Tunis  v.  Grandy,  23  Gratt. 
(Va.)109,;  Johnson  v.  Oppenheim, 
43  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  433 ;  Home, 
&c.,  Ins.  Co.  V.  Sherman,,  46  N.  Y. 
370 ;  Shumway  v.  Collins,  6  Gray 
(Mass.)  237 ;  Graham  v.  Anderson, 
3  Harr.  (Del.)  364 ;  Lounsberry  v. 
Snyder,  31  N.  Y.  514 ;  Randall  v. 
Albertis,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  288  ; 
Academy  of  Music  v.  Hackett,  3 
Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  217 ;  Barker  v. 
FletweU,  Godb.  69  ;  Hodgkins  v. 
Robson,  1  Vent.  376;  Cibel  v. 
HiU,  1  Leon,  110;  Timbrell  v. 
Bullock,  Sty.  446  ;  Dorrell  v.  An- 
drews.  Hob.  190. 


CHAP.  XLin.] 


Effect  of. 


1137 


of  such  portion,  either  upon  the  loase  or  in  an  action  for 
use  and  occupation ; '  and  the  reason  for  this  rule  is,  that 
the  landlord  cannot  be  permitted  to  apportion  his  own 
wrong,'  as,  in  that  event,  it  would  tend  to  encourage 
landlords  to  evict  their  tenants  when  such  eviction  would 
inure  to  their  pecuniary  advantage."  There  can  be  no 
recovery  upon  the  lease  because  of  the  eviction,  and  none 
in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation  because  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  lease,  which  still  remains  in  force.*  But  this 
rule  as  to  the  suspension  of  rent  does  not  apply  to  rent 
that  has  already  become  due  and  payable  at  the  time  of 
eviction,^  nor  to  a  lawful  entry  or  eviction  before  the  rent 


'IChristopher  v.  Austin,  ante ; 
Lewis  V.  Payne,  ante  ;  Morrison  v. 
Chadwick,  7  C.  B.  266 ;  Grundin  v. 
Carter,  99  Mass.  15 ;  Salmon  v. 
Smith,  1  Saund.  303-204  n.;  Sher- 
man V.  Wilkins,  113  Mass.  481 ; 
Graham  v.  Anderson,  3  Harr.  (Del.) 
364 ;  Skaggs  y.  Emerson,  50  Cal.  3  ; 
People  V.  Gedney,  17  N.  Y.  8.  C. 
151  ;  Fitchburgh  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Mc- 
Lain,  15  Mass.  268 ;  Hayner  v. 
Smith,  63  111.  430;  Colburn  v. 
Merrill,  117  Mass.  363 ;  Lloyd  v. 
Tompkins,  1  T.  R.  671  ;  Burnett  t. 
Little,  4  Bowie  (Penn.)  339 ;  Wal- 
kia's  Case,  3  Coke,  33  a  ;  Neale  v. 
McKenzie,  1  M.  &  W.  84 ;  S.  C.  3 
Cr.  M.  &  R.  84 ;  Rawlyn's  Case,  4 
Coke,  53  a ;  Harrison's  Case,  Clayt. 
34  ;  Ascough's  Case,  9  Coke,  185  a  ; 
Burhell  V.  Lechmere,  1  Ld.  Eayd. 
369  ;  Page  v.  Parr,  Sty.  433  ;  Hope 
V.  Eddington,  Lalor.  (N,  Y.)  43  ; 
Hodgkins  v.  Eobson,  1  Vent.  276  ; 
Dalston  v.  Reeve,  1  Ld.  Eayd.  77, 
and  equity  will  not  lend  any  aid  to 
the  landlord  in  such  cases,  Staines 
V.  Morris,  1  V.  &  B.  14 ;  Vincent 
T.  Beverley,  Noy.  83 ;  Smith  v. 
Steigleman,  58  lU.  141 ;  Smith  v. 
Raleigh,  3  Camp.  513 ;  Morrison  v. 
Chadwick,  7  C.  B.  366.  But  in 
Stokes  V.  Cowper,  3  Camp.  514  n., 
it  was  held  that  where  the  lease  is 
not  by  deed,  and  the  tenant  retains 
possession  of  a  part  of  the  premises, 
a  recovery  may  be  had  upon  a 
quantum  valebat. 

'  Hodgkins  v.  Eobson,  ante. 

»  Gilbert  on  rents,  179. 

^Leishman  v.  White,  Co.  Litt. 
148  b ;  1  Allen  (Mass.)  489.  But  it 
has  been  held  by  the  English  coiurts 


that  where  the  demise  is  not  by 
deed,  and  after  an  eviction  from 
part,  the  tenant  retains  possession 
of  the  residue  of  the  premises,  that 
he  will  be  Uable  to  pay  for  the  use 
and  occupation  of  such  residue 
quantum  valebat.  Stokes  v.  Coop- 
er, 3  Cam|>.  514  n.  But  contra, 
and  sustaining-  the  doctrine  of  the 
text,  see  Lewis  v.  Payne,  ante ; 
Grandin  v.  Carter,  99  Mass.  15 ; 
Etheridge  v.  Osborn,  13  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  539. 

5  Giles  V.  Comstock,  4  N.  Y. 
270  ;  Pepper  v.  Rowley,  73  lU.  363  ; 
Edgerton  v.  Page,  30  N.  Y.  381 ; 
Kesslar  v.  McConachy,  1  Eowle 
(Penn.)  435  ;  La  Farge  v.  Halsey,  1 
Bos.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  171; 
Neale  v.  McKenzie,  1  M.  &  W. 
747  ;  McKeon  v.  Whitney,  3  Den. 
(N.  Y.)  453 ;  Selby  v.  Brown,  7  Q. 

B.  620.  Thus,  where  rent  is  due  by 
instalments,  if  a  tenant  is  evicted, 
while  he  is  absolved  from  the  pay- 
ment of  any  rent  that  may  have 
accrued  since  the  last  instalment 
became  due,  yet  he  is  Uable  for 
that  which  had  previously  become 
due.  Pepper  ,  v.  Rawley,  73  111. 
363.  In  May  v.  Diaz,  42  Ala.  383, 
it  was  held  that  the  fact  that  the 
landlord  entered  upon  and  took 
possession  of  rented  premises  after 
the  accrual  of  weekly  instalments, 
would  not  defeat  a  recovery  of 
such  instalments.  Academy  of 
Music  V.  Hackett,  3  HUt.   (N.  Y. 

C.  P.)  317  ;  Brooks  v.  Christopher, 
5  Duer  (N.  Y.)  316 ;  Whitney  v. 
Myers,  1  id,  266 ;  Christopher  v. 
Austin,  11  N.  Y.  216. 


1138  Eviction.  [§  479. 

has  become  due ; '  as,  where  the  landlord  evicts  the  tenant 
as  sheriff,  upon  a  legal  process,"  or  in  the  performance  of 
any  duty  as  a  public  officer,  or  which  is  expressly  con- 
ferred upon  him  by  statute.  Thus,  where,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  change  in  the  grade  of  a  street  in  a  city, 
access  to  the  demised  premises  was  rendered  inconven- 
ient, and  the  tenant  was  incommoded  and  injured,  it  was 
held  not  to  afford  any  defence  to  an  action  for  the  rent, 
even  though  the  change  of  grade  was  made  by  the  land- 
lord himself  under  the  lawful  authority  of  the  municipal 
corporation,  and  in  pursuance  of  a  power  conferred  upon 
the  owner  of  an  estate,  under  such  circumstances,  to  do 
the  work  himself,'  Neither  is  the  rent  suspended,  where 
the  landlord  enters  for  a  forfeiture,"  or  in  pursuance  of  a 
special  provision  in  the  lease,  authorizing  a  re-entry  into 
the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  premises  upon  a  certain  con- 
tingency ; '  or  where  the  landlord  enters  under  a  writ  of 
possession,  or  in  summary  proceedings/  or  under  a  sur- 
render by  the  tenant,'  or  to  make  a  distress, °  or  in  any 
lawful  way.  Eviction  suspends  the  rent  only  during  the 
period  that  the  tenant  is  deprived  of  the  beneficial  enjoy- 

'  Vochell  T.  Doncastell,  Moore,  '  Bushell  v.  Lechmere,  1  Ld- 
891 ;  Salmon  v.  Smith,  i  Saund.  Eaymd.  369  ;  see  cases  in  last  3 
204 ;  Eawlyn's  Case,  4  Coke,  53  a ;  notes ;  May  v.  Rice,  108  Mass.  150. 
Gallup  V.  Albany  E.  R.  Co.,  65  N.  «  Co.  Litt.  48  a. 
Y.  1,  Thus,  where  rent  is  payable  '  Swinnerton  v.  Miller,  Hob.  339. 
qiiarterly  in  advance,  and  the  ten-  '  In  Noble  v.  Warren,  38  Penn. 
ant  is  ousted  for  non-payment  of  St.  840,  in  an  action  of  covenant 
the  rent,  such  ouster  is  no  bar  to  for  a  quarter's  rent,  due  May  8, 
a  recovery  of  such  rent  as  had  1858,  the  defendant  set  up  an  al- 
accrued  up  to  the  time  of  eviction,  leged  eviction,  November  7,  1837, 
Whitney  v.  Meyer,  1  Duer  (N.  Y.  and  a  continued  deforcement  there- 
Superior  Ct.)  366.  But  in  an  ac-  after,  the  plaintiffs  having  at  that 
tion  for  the  rent  due,  if  the  eviction  time  entered  on  the  demised  prem- 
was  wrongful,  the  tenant  may  ises  to  distrain  for  rent  in  arrear, 
recoup  the  damages  he  sustained  and  having  procured  the  arrest  of 
by  it.  liley  v.  Mayers,  43  Penn.  one  of  the  defendants  for  fraudu- 
St.  404.  lently   removing    the   goods  and 

^  Vochell  V.  Doncastell,  ante.  interfering  with  the  distress.    It  ' 

'  Gallup  V.  Albany  R.  R.  Co.,  65  was  held  that  these  acts  on  the  part 

N.  Y.   1.    If,  in  pursuing  such  a  of  the  plaintiffs  did  not  amount  to 

power,  the   landlord  negligently,  an  eviction  and  deforcement,  and 

or  unskilfully,  performs  the  work,  that  the  court  were  right  in  refus- 

the  tenant  has  his  remedy  by  an  ingso  to  charge,  especially  when  it' 

action  against  them  for  the  dam-  appeared  that   judgment  for  the 

ages.     Id.  delivery  of   possession   had   been 

*  Walker's  Case,  ante,  Co.  Litt.  obtained  before  two  magistrates, 

148, a,-  Smith V.  Malines,Cro.  Jac.  July  7,  1858,  against  the  tenants 

160 ;  Collins  v.  Harding,  13  Coke,  then  in  possession,  and  refusing  to 

57 ;  Neale  v.  McKehzie,  ante.  yield  up  the  premises. 


CHAP.  xLHi.]  Effect  op.  1139 

ment  of  the  premises  ;  whenever  he  is  restored  to  his  full 
rights  in  that  respect  he  becomes  liable  to  pay  vent  from 
that  time.'  Nor  does  eviction  from  a  part  of  the  premises 
discharge  the  tenant  from  the  performance  of  any  other 
covenant  in  the  lease."  Thus,  where  a  tenant  covenanted 
to  repair,  to  use  the  premises  in  a  certain  way,  and  not 
to  assign,  in  an  action  for  a  breach  of  one  of  these  cove- 
nants, it  was  held  that  a  plea  setting  up  an  eviction  from 
part  of  the  premises  did  not  constitute  a  defence. '  ' '  The 
defendant,"  said  Lord  Denman  in  the  last  case,  "could 
not  at  the  same  time  exercise  the  rights  of  a  tenant,  and 
yet  contend  that  he  was  not  tenant."  But  when  the 
tenant  is  evicted  from  the  entire  premises  the  rule  is  oth- 
erwise, because,  in  the  latter  ease  he  ceases  to  be  tenant 
so  long  as  the  eviction  continues.'  Eviction  must  be 
specially  plead  in  covenant,  and  cannot  be  set  up  as  a 
defence  under  the  general  issue ; "  and  if  the  eviction  is 
by  a  stranger,  the  defendant  must  not  only  show  an  evic- 
tion by  him,  but  also  that  he  had  a  right  to  evict  him.' 
In  an  action  of  debt  for  rent,  or  in  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation,  the  defendant  may,  under  the  general  issue, 
show  an  eviction  either  from  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the 
premises,  in  defence.'  A  person  who  has  been  wrong- 
fully evicted '  from  premises,  may  recover  of  the  landlord 

'  Morrison  v.  Chadwick,  7  C.  B.  Bum  by  way  of  rent  for  the  prem- 

266 ;  Newton  v.  AUin,  1  Q.  B.  518  ;  ises  from  wWch  he  has  been  evict- 

Mackhem  v.   Whitcroft,  4  H.  &  ed,  waive  his  right  of  action  for 

McH.  (Va.)  135  ;  Croger  v.  McLan-  damages  for  the  eviction,  and  on 

ny,  41   N.  Y.  218,  Ogden  v.  Sand-  the  trial  of  an  action  for  damages 

erson,  3  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  166.  for  an  eviction  it  must  appear  what 

*  Id.  was  the  situation,  convenience  and 
"  Newton  v.  AlUn,  ante.  equaUty  of  accommodation  of  the 
'  Andrews    v.    Needham,    Cro.  premises  removed  to  as  compared 

Eliz.  656.  with  the  demised  premises,  and  in 

'  Bullen  L.  PI.  589.  case  the  eviction  was  not  forcible 

'  Simons  v.  Farren,  1  Bing.  N.  nor  sudden,  that  the  plaintiff  had 

C.  126;  Jordan  V.  Twells,  1  Saund.  made  dihgent  efforts  to  get  suitable 

304,  n.  4 ;  Hill  v.  Saunders,  4  B.  &  premises  of  as  good  class,  at  the 

C.  529 ;  Herbert  v.  Kennan,  7  Ir.  same  rent,  and  failed,  before  evi- 

Jur.  43.  dence  as  to  the  difference  between 

'  Smith  V.  Raleigh,  3  Camp.  513 ;  the  rent  of  the  demised  premises 

Prentice  v.  Elliott,  5  M.  &  W.  606 ;  and  those  to  which  the   plaintiff 

Hall  V.  Burgess,  1  B.  &  C.   882;  removed,  can beadmitted.    Druck- 

Selby  V.  Browne,  7  Q.  B.  620.  er  v.  Simon,  4  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 

*  A  tenant  who  has  been  evicted  53.  Where  a  tenant  was  evicted 
from  a  part  of  the  demised  prem-  by  title  paramount,  if  he  has  erect- 
ises,  does  not,  by  the  mere  fact  of  ed  a  building  upon  the  firemises, 
his  demanding  of  his  landlord  a  which,  by  reason  of  the  eviction  he 


1140 


Eviction. 


[§  479. 


therefor  such  damages  as  he  has  sustained  as  a  proxi- 
mate consequence  of  such  eviction. 


was  compelled  to  remove,  it  was 
held  that  he  could  recover  only  the 
reasonable  expenses  of  such  re- 
moval, and  the  rent  of  a  lot  suni- 
larly  situated  whereon  to  place  the 
building  for  the  balance  of  the 
term.  Wilson  v.  Raybould,  56  111. 
417.  A  tenant  who  has  unlawfully 
been  evicted  from  a  bam  which  he 
occupied  as  a  livery  and  boarding 
stable,  by  his  landlord,  who  de- 
stroyed  the   bam,  may   recover 


damages  for  the  proper  length  of 
time,  for  the  loss  of  profits  from 
boarding  the  horses  of  others,  as 
weU  as  for  the  difference  in  cost  of 
keeping  his  own  horses  and  of 
hiring  them  boarded,  where  the 
evidence  tends  to  show  that  such 
damages  were  the  natural^ and 
proximate  consequence  of  the  tres- 
pass, Shaw  V,  Hoffman,  35  Mich. 
163. 


CHAP.  xuv.J        By  Efflux  of  Time.  1141 


fJHAPTEE  XLlY. 

DETBEMZNATION  6f'  TENANCY. 

Sec.  4^0.  By  efflux- of  timei.   _  ; 

;;,§HC.  481.  iRights  of  lessor; T^hen  term  is  ended. 

Sec.  483.  Double  rent. 

_  SiEO,  483.  Who  imay  recover  double  rent. 

Sec.  480.  By  efflux  of  time.— When  a  lease  , is  expressly 
made  determinable  at  a  particular  time  it  is  at  an  end 
when  that  period  arrives,  without  anynptice  from  either 
party.'  If,  towever,  it  is  made  determinable  at  cert3.in 
specified  periods,  as  if  the  lease  is  for  "seven  or  fourteen 
years,"  and  nothing  is  said  as  to  who  shall  exercise  the 
option  thus  impliedly  given,;  the  option  rests  solely  witll 
the  lessee,  upon  the  principle  th^t  every  doubtful  grant 
will  be  construed  in  favor  of  the  graritee  ;'.l)ut  if  the  lease 
provides  that  it  may  be  determined  "if  the  parties  see 
^t,"  neither  pajty  can  putanen^  to  it  withoatthe  consent 
of  the :  other,  as  the  language  imports  Only  a  determina- 
tion by  the  mutual  consent  of  all  the  parties  to  the  lease, 
although  it  may,  have  been  their  intention  to  make  it  de- 
terminable at  the  option  of  either  party  j"  but  where  the 
lease  is  niade  determinable  at,  the  option  of  either  party, 
*'his  executors  and  administrators,"  the  option  exists  in 
favor  of  the  heirs  or  devisees,  or  any  person  into  whose 
hands  the  estate  legally  passes."  But  if  the  lease  provides 
that  "notice  in  writing"  shall  be  given  of  such  election 

■Cobb  V.   Stokes,   8  East,   358;  Hariey  v.  King,  3  C,  M.  &  K,  18; 

Fish  V.  Stratton,  4  Bing.  446  ;  Flow-  Hortshorne  v,  Watson,  4  Blag.  N. 

er  T.  Darby,  1  T.  R.  159 ;  Mesaen-  C.  178;  Walker's  Case,  8  Coke,  33,  h. 

ger  V.  Armstrong,  1  id.  S3  ;  Brom-  'Webb  v,    Dixon,  9   Fast,  15; 

field  v:  Smith,  6'  B^st,  530.    Each,  Dinn  v..  Spurrier,  3  B,  &  P.  399  ; 

hcswevdi^,  still  remains  hable  for  Pribe  V.' Dyeer,  17  Ves,  363. 


asaf  breach  of  the  covenants  of  the      '  "  F'o well  v.  Trauter,  3  Bt.  ^  C.  458, 
icaiia     Pennant's  CasA  3  Hnlre  fi."?         *T,nT!Ti  F.T.i.TBWBnRnnoTT;  C  .T    iii 

V.  Landoi 

11.-^0 


lease.    Pennant's  Case,  3  Coke,  65.        *Loed  Ellenboeough,  C.  J.,ia 
a';  James  v.  Landoh,  Gro.  Eliz,  36  ;      Bamford  v.  Hayley,  13  East,  469. 


1142  Deteemikation  of  Tenancy.  [§  480. 

to  determine  it,  of  a  certain  duration — as,  twelve 
months — a  verbal  notice  merely,  or  one  for  a  less  period 
than  that  named  in  the  lease,  will  not  be  good.'  Such  a 
covenant  can  be  satisfied  only  by  a  notice  consistent  with 
the  terms  of  the  lease,  however  inconsistent  such  terms 
may  be,"  and  the  question  as  to  Whether  or  not  the  land- 
lord, in  fact,  understood  the  notice  to  refer  to  the  true 
time  when  the  term  could  be  ended,  is  wholly  immaterial." 
But,  where  the  lease  provides  that  the  notice  shall  be 
given  in  writing,  no  particular  form  is  necessary,  and  any, 
notice  that  clearly  informs  the  other  party  of  the  election 
to  determine  it,  will  be  good,  whether  it  be  given  in  the 
form  of  a  notice  to  quit,  or  otherwise.  But,  unless  the 
lease  otherwise  provides,  the  election  must  extend  to, 
and  the  notice  also,  the  whole  of  the  demised  premises.' 
It  cannot  be  determined  as  to  a  part  only,"  but  if  the 
lease  provides  that  it  may  be  determined  as  "to  all  or 
any  part "  of  the  premises  demised,  in  that  event  it  may 
be  determined  as  to  a  part  only.'  If  the  lease  provides 
that  the  tenant  may  put  an  end  to  the  lease  by  giving  a 
certain  notice,  and  paying  all  the  rent,  and  performing  all 
his  covenants,  the  conditions  must  be  fully  complied  with, 
or  the  term  continues  until  it  expires  by  efflux  of  time ; ' 

1  Scott  V.  Benion,  Willes,  43.  In  ^  Spicer  v.  Lea,  11  East,  313.  If 
Cadby  v.  Martinez,  11  Ad.  &  El.  a  lease  to  two  or  more  provides 
720,  a  lease  was  made  for  twenty-  that  it  may  be  terminated  by  a  no- 
one  years,  with  a  covenant  that,  if  tice  in  writing  under  "his  or  their 
the  tenant  should  desire  to  deter-  respective  hands,"  a  notice  signed 
mine  the  lease  at  the  end  of  the  by  one  of  twolessors,  or  one  of  two 
first  fourteen  years,  and  should  lessees,  will  not  end  the  tenancy, 
leave,  or  give  sis  calendar  months'  Fisher  v.  CutheU,  5  East,  491.  And 
notice  immediately  preceding  the  this  does  not  militate  against  the 
expiration  of  the  first  fourteen  rule  that  where  there  is  no  mode 
years,  of  his  intention  to  leave,  the  pointed  out  in  the  lease,  one  of  two 
lease  should  determine.  The  ten-  or  more  joint  tenants  may  give  a 
ant,  on  November  1st,  six  months  notice  to  quit  that  will  be  oper- 
bef  ore  the  expirarion  of  the  first  ative  as  to  all.  Aslin  v.  Summer- 
fourteen  years  of  the  term,  gave  sett,  1  B.  &  Ad.  135 ;  Turner  v. 
the  landlord  notice  tUat  he  should  Hardy,  9  M.  &  W.  770. 
quit  on  the  24th  of  the  succeeding  ^  Lohd  Denman,  C.  J.,  ia  Cadby 
June,  when  in  reality  the  term  v.  Martinez,  ante, 
did  not  expire  untU  the  29th  of  ^  Gidden  v.  Dodd,  3  Drew.  485. 
September  of  that  year.  Thecourt  "  Eodd  v.  Archer,  14  East,  245, 
held  that  the  tenancy  was  not  de-  ^  Wilson  v.  Abeel,  2  M.  &  S.  541. 
termined  by  the  notice.  See  also,  ■■  Jervis  v.  Tomkinson,  1  H.  &  N. 
Bird  V.  Baker,  1  E.  &  E.  12 ;  Sharp  195 ;  Friar  v.  Gray,  5  Exchq.  584 ; 
V.  MiUigan,  32  Beav.  612 ;  Jones  S.  C.  15  Q.  B.  891 ;  Porter  v.  Shep- 
v.  Nixon,  1  H.  &  0.  48.  herd,  6  T.  E.  665.     A  lease  con- 


GHAP.  XLrV.j 


Eights  of  Lessor. 


1143 


because,  the  right  to  put  an  end  to  the  lease  being 
conditional,  it  can  be  exercised  only  when  the  conditions 
are  fully  and  strictly  performed . '  W  here  a  lease  provides 
that  the  tenant  may  quit  at  a  certain  time  if  he  elects  to 
do  so,  and  that  the  landlord  may  take  the  fixtures  at  a 
valuation,  or  the  tenant  may  let  the  house,  it  is  optional 
with  the  tenant  to  quit  or  to  let  the  premises  for  the 
balance  of  the  term,  and  the  fact  that  he  lets  the  premises 
until  the  day  when  he  may  quit  is  not  an  exercise  of  his 
option." 

Sec.  481.  Eights  of  lessor  when  term  is  ended.— After  the 
determination  of  the  term  the  lessor  may  peaceably 
re-enter  on  the  premises,  without  resorting  to  legal  pro- 
cess to  recover  possession  ; '  nor  can  the  tenant  maintain 
trespass  against  him  for  such  entry;'  nor  distrain  his 


tained  the  following  clause :  At 
the  end  of  the  term,  aU  rents  and 
covenants  being  complied  with  on 
the  part  of  the  said  lessee,  he,  the 
said  lessee,  shall  have  the  right  to 
remove  any  buildings  he  may  have 
erected  on  the  premises  during  the 
term."  Held,  that  performance  of 
the  covenants  was  a  condition  pre- 
cedent to  the  removal  of  the  build- 
ings, and  that  a  tender  of  perform- 
ance on  condition  that  the  lessor 
■would  permit  the  removal,  was 
not  enough.  Clemens  v.  Murphy, 
40  Mo.  121.  A  lease  for  two  years 
contained  a  provision  that  "the 
tenancy  of  said  M  under  this  lease 
shall  cease  on  the  1st  of  March, 
1867,  unless  he  shall  have  notified 
said  8  of  his  election  to  continue 
three  years,  on  or  before  October 
1,  1866,  and  unless  he  shall  on  or 
before  that  day  secure  to  the  par- 
ties having  a  right  to  the  rent,  to 
their  satisfaction,  the  rent  to  ac- 
crue from  the  first  day  of  March 
following."  Held,  that  both  the 
notice  and  the  giving  security 
were  conditions  precedent  to  the 
renewal  or  continuance  of  the 
lease,  and  unless  both  were  per- 
formed the  instrument  ceased  to 
operate  for  a  future  term,  and  no 
demand  by  the  lessor  was  neces- 
sary in  order  to  defeat  the  lease 
upon  the  failure  of  the  lessee  to 
perform  the  conditions.    McFad- 


den  V.  McCann,  25  Iowa,  253 ; 
Eenaul  v.  Daskon,  35  Conn.  513. 

1  Cole  on  Ejectment,  397. 

^  Cotton  V.  SJngham,  1  Stark.  39. 
A  lease  of  lands  by  indenture  for 
twenty-one  years,  with  proviso 
that  it  should  be  determinable  by 
the  lessee  or  lessor  at  the  end  of 
the  first  seven  or  fourteen  years, 
and  a  memorandum  endorsed  sis 
years  after  the  execution  of  the 
lease,  "  of  its  being  agreed  between 
the  parties,  previously  to  the  execu- 
tion, that  the  lessor  shall  not  dis- 
possess, nor  cause  the  lessee  to  be 
dispossessed,  of  the  said  estate,  but 
to  have  it  for  the  term  of  twenty- 
one  years  from  this  present  time ; " 
which  memorandum  was  signed 
by  the  parties,  and  stamped  with  a 
lease  stamp,  but  not  sealed.  It 
was  held  that  the  lessor  might,  not- 
withstanding, determine  the  lease 
at  the  end  of  the  first  fourteen 
years ;  for  the  memorandum  did 
not  operate  as  a  new  lease  and  sur- 
render of  the  first  lease.  NichoU^ 
V.  Mark,  4  M.  &  S.  30. 

'  Taunton  v.  Costar,  7  T.  R.  431  ; 
Turner  v.  Meymott,  1  Bing.  158 ; 
Lacey  v.  Pear,  Leak's  Add.  Cases, 
310. 

*  Turner  v.  Meymott,  sup. ;  New- 
ton V.  Harland,  1  M.  &  G.  644 ; 
Lacey  v.  Lear,  ante ;  Wildbor  v. 
Eainforth,  8  B.  &  C.  4, 


1144  ,  Determination  OF  Tenancy.  :;[§'481.. 

cattle  put  into  the  premises,  by  way  of;  resuming  posses- 
sion/ The  lessor  may  even  break  open  the  house  to  get 
possession  after  the  expiration,of;his  tenant's: term, ipror 
vided  no  one  be  in  possession."  But  he  is  not  justified,  in 
forcibly  expelUng  the  tenant  himself ,  or  any  of  his  fam- 
ily/ unless  expressly  authorized  to  do  so  by  a  proviso  for 
re-entry  contained  in  the  lease.  A  povper  of  this  descrip- 
tion w^as  conferred  on  the  lessor  in  a  case  before  noticed,,* 
Without ,  re-entering  on  the  premises,  the  lessor  cannot 
maintain  trespass  against  his  lessee  holding  over:  after, 
the  expiration  of  the  term. '  If,  at  the  expiration  of  the 
term,  the  possession  of  the  premises  is  retained  by  an 
undertenant,  the  original  lessee  will  remain  liable  to  the 
lessor ;  for  he  is  entitled  to  receive  the  absolute  posses^ 
sion  at  the  end  of  the  term.  But  it  may  be  proved  that 
he  has  accepted  thfe  undertenant  as  his  tenant,  in  which 
case  the  lessee  will  be  absolved  from  further  liaJbHitj^.' 
On  the  determination  of  agricultural  leases  by  efHuxioh. 
of  time,  the  custom  of  the  country,  in  the  absence  of  an 
express  a,greement  to  the  contrary,  regulates  the  terms 
on  which; the  lessee  may  quit  possession.;'  but  the  ciis,^ 
torn  of  the  country  yields  to  particular  agreement:' 
Accordingly,  where  a  lessee  covenanted  that  lie  would 
not  during  the  term  carry  from  off  the  premises,  any 
hay,  straw,  fodder,  &c.,  but  would  yearly  spend  and  use 
the  same  upon  soine  proper  part  thereof,  upon  pain  of 
forfeiting  3Z.  for  each  load  carried  away ;  and  would  also 
at  all  times  during  the  term  fold  his  flock  oJ  sheep  .which 
he  should  keep  upon  the  premises  upon  such  parts  where 
the  same  had  been  usually  folded,  upon  the  penalty  of  37. 

i.'TaTimtoii  V.  Costar,  sup..  And  see  Sunpkin  v.  Ashurst,  1  C. 

^Hillary  v.  Gay,  6  C.  <fe  P.  2S4 ;  M.  &  E.  361. 

Newton  v.  Harland,  1 M.  &  G.  644  ;  ■•  Webb  v.  PlumMer,  ;3  B.  &:  Aid. 

Laoey  V.  Lear,  ante.      ,,  746;     Wiggles  worth   v.    I)9,jl;Lson, 

*  "Hillary  v.  Gay,  ante  ;  Newton  Dougl.  201  ;   Senior  v.    Armitage^r, 

V.  Harland,  ante.               ,,,,  Holt's  N.  P.   C.    197;  Holdiijg.,^. 

^Kavanagh  v.  Gudge,  1  D,  &  C.  Eiggott,  7Bing.465,474;  Hutton  v. 

93a.          „                     ,  ,  ,         -J  .  Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  465 ;.  Roberts '; 

■^Plowd.  133,  136;  cites  33  E.  4,  y.  Barker;, .  1  C.  &  M.  808.  ■■     '    ,      . 

13,   14,   Bro.    Trepass,  365;    Tre-  « Webb  v.  Plummer,  ante ;  HoWt,  , 

viUian  v.'  Andrew,   5   Mod.   38^;  ing  v.   Pigott,   ante;    Hutton    yii. 

Newton  t.  Harland,  1  Scottjs  N.  B.  Warren,  a,nts  ;,  Senior  v.  L^rmitage,. 

474.                 ,      ,  ewp. ;,  Bpberts  V.  Barker,  ante. ,    [■"/ 

" Harding  V, CertJiom,  i  Esq.  S7,         ,,      ,;•         ,  .  ,  :,  , 


CHTAP,  XLIV . j    •  ElGtoS  OF  LE^OR.  1 14^ 

a  tim6  for  every  time  ibat  the  same  should  be  folded  oflf 
from  the  premises ;  and  would  also  in  the  last  year  of 
the  term,  at  the  usual  time,  carry  all  the  dung  ahd 
manure  arising  on  the  premises  in  the  preceding  y^r 
to  Buch  parts  of  the  fallowed  lands  as  should  be  appoihted 
by  the  lessor,  bis  heirs  or  assigns,  or  the  next  succeeding 
tenant  or  tenants,  and  there  cast  the  same  into  a  mixen 
or  mixens,  be  and  they  paying  for  fallowing  such  land 
and  carrying  out  the  dung,  but  nothing  for  the  dung 
itself,  and  also  j^ass  in  the  ground^  and  for  thrashing 
out  the  corn,  as  was  customary  between  a  tenant  coming 
in  and  a  tenant  going  out  of  a  farm ;  it  was  held,  that, 
as  certain  payments  were  specifically  directed  to  be  made 
by  the  incoming  tenant,  but  payment  for  foldage  Was 
not  mentioned,  the  custom  of  the  country  which  gafe 
the  outgoing  tenant  a  compensation  for  foldage  was 
waived/  So  where  a  tenant  held  under  the  terms  of  an 
expired  lease,  by  which  it  was  stipulated  that  the  lessee 
on  quitting  the  farm  should  not  sell  or  take  away  the 
manure,  but  should  leave  it  to  be  expended  on  the  land 
by  the  landlord,- or  his  succeeding  tenant ;  the  custom  'of 
the  country  requiring  the  tenant  to  leave  the  manure,  oa 
payinent  for  it  by  the  landlord  or  his  succeeding  tenant ; 
it  was  heldy  that 'the  custom  was  controlled  by  the 
express  stipulation,  and  that  the  tenant,  on  quitting, 
was  not  entitled  to  be  paid  for  the  manure.'  But  where 
a  lessee  covenanted  to  spend  and  consume  three  parts  in 
four  ofthe  hay  and'  straw  arising  from  the  glebe  land 
and  tithes  demised,  upon  the  land,  and  tc»  bestow  the 
mailure  arising  therefrom  upon  the  land,  and  to  leave 
such!  part  of  ^uch; manure  as  should  not  be  so  bestowed, 
at  the  determination  of  the  term,  upon  the  premises,  for 
the  use  of  the  lessor,  he  paying  a^reiasonable  price  for 
the  same ;  thexustom  of  the  country,  by  which  the  ten- 
ant was  bouM  to  cultivate  the'  f  anxi  according  to  a  cerw 
tain  cpjirse  of  l^usbandry,,  and  was  entitled,  on  quitting, 
to  a  fair  allowance  for  seeds  and  labor  on  the  arable  land, 
and  was  boiand  to  leaive  the  manure  on  the  land; 'if  the 

'  Webb  V.  Plummer,  3  B.  &  Aid.         =  Eoljerts  v.  Barter,  3  Tryw.  945. 
746.  ,.,■..- 


1146  Determination  of  Tenancy.  [§"481. 

landlord  chose  to  purchase  it,  .was  held  not  to  be 
excluded.'  If  a  lessee  under  a  lease  for  a  definite  term 
of  years,  where  he  must  necessarily  know  the  duration 
and  extent  of  his  interest,  incur  expense  in  planting, 
building,  or  otherwise  improving  the  property,  he  can 
neither  remove  the  trees  nor  building,  except  in  certain 
cases  founded  on  the  law  relating  to  fixtures,  hot  within 
the  scope  of  this  work;  nor  claim  compensation  from 
the  lessor  for  the  expenditure ;  nor  wiU  equity  preclude 
the  reversioner  from  availing  himself  of  his  right, 
although  he  may  have  permitted  the  improvements  to 
proceed  without  notice  or  interruption  to  the  lessee."  It 
might  be  otherwise,  if  the  party  entitled  under  the  lease 
acted  under  a  misapprehension  that  the  estate  was  his 
own,  and  the  reversioner  viewed  their  progress  without 
giving  notice.' 

In  one  case,*  where  the  lessee  of  a  tenant  for  life/ 
apprehending  that  the  lessor  had  power  to  make  a  lease 
for  a  term  certain,  laid  out  great  sums  in  improvements, 
and  the  reversioner  allowed  the  lessee  to  proceed 
vdthout  giving  notice  that  the  lessor  was  tenant  only 
for  hfe;  the  court  of  chancery  decreed  the  lessee  the 
remainder  of  the  term,  after  the  death  of  tenant  for  life. 
But  if  a  party  having  taken  a  lease  from  another  who  has 
no  power  to  grant  it  lay  out  money  in  improvements,  it 
seems  that  the  expenditure  wiU  not  be  a  hen  upon  the 
estate  ;  but  that  the  lessee's  remedy  for  reimbursement,  in 
case  of  disturbance,  would  be  an  action  for  damages  under 
the  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment.'. 

Where,  however,  the  lessee  is  tenant  for  his  own  life, 
or  the  life  of  another,  and  necessarily  incapable  of  fore- 
teUing  the  day  of  the  determination  of  his  lease,  and  he  or 
the  cestui  que  vie  dies,  his  personal  representative,  in  the 
former  case,  and  he,  in  the  latter,  is  entitled  to  the  emble- 
ments, notwithstanding  the  determination  of  his  estate." 

'  Hutton  V.  Warren,  3  Gale,  71.  "  Waring  v.  Mackreth,  Forr.  139> 

2  Attorney-General   v.   Foley,   1      137. 

Dick.  366.  *  Co.  Litt.  55  h ;  Knevett  v.  Pool, 

3  Id.  '  Cro.  Eliz.  463. 
"Anon.,   Bunb.    53.     And    see 

Waring  v.  Mackreth,  Forr.  139. 


CHAP.  XLiv.]  Rights  of  Lessor.  1147 

By  holding  over  after  the  expiration  of  his  term,  the 
lessee  becomes  a  tenant  at  sufferance.'  He  does  not 
thereby  necessarily  become  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  ; " 
though  such  a  holding,  accompanied  with  payment  of 
rent,  or  other  recognition  by  the  lessor  of  a  tenancy, 
may  ripen  into  an  estate  of  that  description  ;  °  the  tenant, 
in  the  absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  being  bound 
by  the  terms  of  the  expired  lease,  so  far  as  they  are 
applicable  to  such  an  estate,*  without  any  new  bargain 
to  that  effect  between  him  and  his  lessor.  °  The  mere 
payment  of  an  advanced  rent  will  make  no  difference." 
And  in  such  case,  the  landlord  may  either  declare  in 
assumpsit  on  the  implied  promise  raised  by  the  continued 
holding,'  or  maintain  an  action  on  the  case,  declaring 
specially  on  the  implied  agreement. °  But  covenant  will 
not  he." 

The  rule  is  applicable  alike  to  the  case  of  a  lease  for 
years  determining  by  effluxion  of  time,  and  of  a  lease 
ending  by  the  decease  of  the  lessor,  being  tenant  for  hfe 
only  ; "  though,  in  the  case  of  an  estate  determinable  on 
lives,  a  party  holding  over  is  by  an  act  of  Queen  Anne  " 
adjudged  to  be  a  trespasser ;  and  the  party  entitled  may 
recover  in  damages  the  fuU  value  of  the  profits  received 
during  the  wrongful  possession.  Whether  both  of  two 
joint  lessees  are  liable,  in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation, 
for  the  holding  over  of  the  one  without  the  assent  of  the 
other,  does  not  appear  to  be  settled  ; "  but  the  prepon- 
deranpe  of  authority  is  against  such  Uability." 

"Plowd.  136;  Howard's  Lessee  v.    Sanders,  3   Bing.  N.  C.    850, 

V.   Sherwood,   Ale.   &  Nap.   317  ;  Johnson  v.  The  Church-wardens, 

Simpkin  v.  Ashurst,  4  Tyrw.  781.  &c.,  of  St.  Peter  (Hereford),  4  Ad. 

2  Waring  v.   King,  8  M.  &  W.  &  El.  520 ;  Thomson  v.  Amey,  12 

571.  Ad.  &  El.  476  ;  Monok  v.  Geekie, 

'Button  V.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  5  Q.  B.  841. 
466 ;  Bishop  v.  Howard,  2  B.  &  C.  '  Torriano  v.  Young,  ante. 

100  ;  Tucker  v.  Morse,  1  B.  &  Ad.  ^  Digby  v.   Atkinson,    4  Camp. 

365 ;  Calvert  v.  Frowd,  4  Bing.  557 ;  271 ;  Monck  v.  Geekie,  5  Q.  B.  841. 
Berrey  v.  Ldndley,  3  M.  &  G.  498.  '  Digby  v.  Atkinson,  ante. 

*  Digby  V.   Atkinson,  4    Camp.  s  Kimpton  v.  Eve,  2  V.  &  B.  349. 

275;  Castleton  v.  Samuel,  5  Esp.         ^Id. 

173 ;  Eiggs  v.  BeU,   5  T.  E.  471 ;  "  Jordan  v.  Ward,  1  H.  Bl.  97. 

Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C.  &  P.  8 ;  "6  Anne,  c.  18,  s.  5. 

Boraston  v.   Green,  16   East,  71  ;  « Tancred  v.  Christy,  12  M.  &  W. 

Beavan  v.   Delahay,  1  H.  Bl.   5 ;  316. 

Berrey  v.   Lindley,  ante  ;  Hutton  '^  Kinsey  v.  Mirmick,  43  Md.  113, 

V.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  466  ;  Beale 


1148  Determination  of  Tenancy.  [§  483, 

Sec.  482.  Double  rent.— The  disadvantageous  position 
of  a  lessor  on  the  determinatidn.cof  the  interest  of  a 
refractory  lessee  haS  repeatedly  heen  the  the  subject  of 
legislative,  consideration,  and  means  less  costly  and  morei 
expeditious  than  the  ordinary  process  of  ejectrnent  have 
been  provided  for  recovering  possession  of  the  ten- 
ements demised^  as  well  as  an  ample  pecuniary  compen- 
sation for  the!  contumacious  holding  over  ;  andi  we  find 
that  it  was  enacted  early  in  the  reign  of  George  the  Second,  *; 
that  in  csise  any  tenant' or  tenants  for  any  term  of  life, 
lives,  or  years,  or  other  person  or  persons  who  should 
come  into  possession  of  any  lands,  tenements,!' or 
hereditaments,  by,  from  or  under,  or  by  collusion  with^ 
such  tenant  or  tehants,  should  wUlfully  hold  over  any 
lands,  tenements  or  hereditaments,  after  tke  determina- 
tion of  such  termor  terms,  and  after  demand  made,  and 
notice  in  writing  given,  for  delivering  the  possession  there- 
of,  by  his  or  their  landlords  or  lessors.  Or  the  person  or  per- 
sons to  whom  the  remainder  or  reversion  of 'Such  lands, 
tenements  or  hereditaments '  should  belong,  his  or  their 
agent  or  agents  thereunto  lawfully  authorized,  then  and 
in  such  case  such  person  or  persons  so  holding  over  should, 
for  and  during  the  time  he,  she,  and  they  should  so  hold 
over,  or  keep  the  person  or  persons  entitled,  out  of 
possession  of  the  said  lands,  tenements,  or  hereditaments, 
as  therein  aforesaid,  pay  to  the  person  or  persons  so  kept 
out  of  possession,  their  executors,  ;  administrators,  or 
assigns,  at  the  rate  of  double  the  yearly  value  of  the  lands; 
tenements,  and  hereditaments  so  detained,  for  so  long  a 
time  as  the  same  should  be  detained,  to  be  recovered  in 
any  court  of  record,  by  action  of  debt,  whereunto 
the  defendant  or  defendants  should  be  obliged  to 
give  special  bail,  against  the  recovering  of  which  said 
penalty  there  should  be  no  rehef  in  equity.  It  has. 
been  held  that  a  weekly  tenancy  is  n6t  within  the  act ; "' 

'  4  Geo.  2,  o.  28,  s.  1,  double  rent,  if  there  is  a  holding 
^  Lloyd  V.  Rosbee,  3  Camp.  453  ;  over,  he  is  liable  for  that.  Kerr  v. 
Sullivan  v.  Bishop,  3  C.  &  P.  359.  Simmons,  8  M.  &  App.  481.'  Asur- 
If  a  tenant  surrenders  to  a  third  render  may  arise  from  express' 
person,  who  holds  over,  he  still  re-  agreement,  or  may  be  implied  from 
mainsiiablefor  the  rent,  and  if  the  the  conduct  of  the  parties.  Day- 
lease  provides  for  the  payment  of  ton  v.'  Craik,  26  Minn.  183. '  'AS'  to 


CHAP.  xLiv.J  Double  RenTj:!    i'  1149 

but  'W^hether  a  quarterly  holding  is,  does  noti  appear  to 
have  i been  determined.  In  the  case  just  cited,'  Loed 
Ellenboeough;  said,  j that  , he  .did  :  not ,  remember  any 
instance  of  a  tenant  for  a  less  time  than  a  year  being 
held  within  it.i  In  a  later  case,"  where  the  point:  was 
incidentally  noticed,  but  did  not  call  for  a  decision,  it 
was  called  a  grave  question.'  , 

If  the  tenant  holds  over  under  a  fair,  though  mistaken, 
claim  of  title,  and  not  contumaciously,  he  is  not  liable  to 
an  action  for  double  yearly  value  under  the  statute.*  The 
notice  in  >Yriting, required  by  the  act  may  be  given  to  the 
.tenant  before  the  expiration  of  his, term,'  or  at  any  time 
afterwards,  unless  the  landlord  has  done  any  act  to 
recognize  the  continuance  of  the  tenancy,'  and  is  in  itself 
a  sufficient  demand  under  the  act.'  If  the  notice  is  given 
to  si  feme  sole,  and  she  afterwards  marries,  no  new  notice 
need  be  given  to  her  husband,  or  demand  made  upon 
him.'  i  A  tenant  for  a  term  of  three  years,  determinable 
at  Whitsuntide,  1784,°  received  a  notice  from  his  lessor  to 
quit  at  time ;  but  holding  o"vrer,  he  received  on  the  3d  of 
June  succeeding  the  expiration  of  his  term,  another  notice 
to  quit  at  the  Martinmas  following,  or  to  pay  double  rent. 
It  was  contended  that  the  secondnotice  was  a  waiver  of  the 
first  and  that  the  landlord  had  no  right  to  double  the  rent 
under  the  first ;  but  the  cpurt  were  of  opinion  that  the 
right  to  double  rent  accrued  from  the  expiration  of 
the  first  notice."  '    ' 

Sec.  483.  Wlio  may  recover  double  rent.— One  tenant  in 
common  may  maintain  an  action,  under  4  Geo.  2,  c.  28, 

what  amounts  to  a  surrender  by  *  Lake  v.  Smith,  1  New  Kep.  174. 

operation  of  law,  see  Smith  v.  Pen-  "In  argument  for  the  defendant, 

dergaat,  36  Minn.  318.  it  was  stated  that  he  had  taken  the 

'  Lloyd  y.  Eosbee,  sup.  '  premises    for    twenty-one    years, 

'  Wilkinson  v.  Hall,  4  Scott,  301  ;  determinable  at  the  end  of  three 

S.  C.  3  Bing.  N.  C.  508.  years,  whicli  made  a  notice  to  quit 

'Per  VAuaHAN,  J.,  4  Scott,  386  ;  necessary    before     an    ejectment 

3  Bing.  N.  0.  533.  could  be  brought,  or  double  rent 

■•  AVright  V.  Smith,  5  Esp.  203.  accrue.    This,  however,  did  not  ap- 

'  Cutting  V.   Derby,  3  W.  Blac.  pear  from  the  judge's  report.    The 

1075.  words  double  rent  are  used  through- 

*Cobb   V.  Stokes,    8  East,    358.  out  the  report,  though  dotiWe^/i^arfj/ 

And  see  Doe  d.  Thomas  v.  Field,  value  was,  no  doubt,  intended. 

3  Dowl.  Pr.  Ca.  542.  '» Messenger  v.  Armstrong,  1  T. 

'Wilkinson    v.  CoUey,  5  Burr.  R.   53  ;    Matthewo   v,  Jackson,  1 

3694.  Dougl.  175. 


1150  Deteemination  of  Tenancy.  [§483. 

against  a  tenant  holding  over,  for  double  yearly  value ;' 
but  unless  there  is  a  joint  demise,  tenants  in  common  of 
the  reversion  cannot  join  in  such  action."  A  receiver 
appointed  by  the  court  of  chancery  in  a  suit  against  an 
executor,  under  whom  a  tenant  held,  was  held  to  be  an 
agent  lawfully  authorized  by  the  landlord,  under  the  act.' 
In  a  later  case/  certain  trustees  entitled  to  the  legal  rever- 
sion of  the  defendent's  term,  and  A  K  and  his  wife,  who 
were  the  beneficial  owners  of  the  reversion,  assigned  that 
reversion  to  the  plaintiffs  by  way  of  mortgage  ;  and,  by 
the  mortgage  deed,  A  K  and  his  wife  with  the  approbation 
of  the  plaintiffs,  appointed  one  G  to  be  the  receiver,  agent,, 
and  attorney  of  the  said  A  K  and  wife,  to  receive  the  rents 
until  satisfaction  of  the  mortgage  ;  to  use  such  lawful  rem- 
edies for  recovering  the  rents  by  action,  suit,  distress,  or 
otherwise,  as  should  be  thought  expedient ;  to  give  notices 
to  tenants  to  quit ;  and  to  bring  ejectment  in  case  of  non- 
compliance, &c.,  as  fully  as  the  said  A  K  and  his  wife 
might  have  done ;  and  it  was  held  on  the  authority  of 
Wilkinson  v.  CoUey,"  that  G  was  an  agent  lawfully 
authorized  to  give  the  notice  required  by  the  statute  of 
4  Geo.  2,  c.  28,  s.  1,  so  as  to  make  the  defendant  liable 
in  double  value  for  holding  over. 

.'Cutting   V.   Derby,   3    W.   Bl.  ■* Wilkinson  v.   CoUey,   5  Burr. 

1075.  2694. 

^  Wilkinson  v.  CoUey,  ante.  '  Poole  v.  Warren,  3  Ad.  &  El, 

2  Wilkinson  v.  Hall,  1  Bing.  N.  538. 
C.  713. 


CHAP.  XLV,]  What  is.  1151 


CHAPTER  XLY. 

BY  SUKEENDER. 

Sec.  484.  What  is,  and  by,  and  to  whom. 

Sec.  485.  How  made. 

Sec.  486.  When  a  surrender  may  be  made  on  condition. 

Sec.  487.  At  what  time  a  surrender  may  be  made- 

Sec.  488.  What  writing  is  sufficient. 

Sec.  489.  By  acceptance  of  a  new  lease. 

Sec.  490.  What  is  a  sufficient  new  lease. 

Sec.  491.  Effect  of  an  invalid  new  lease. 

Sec.  493.  Effect  of  a  new  lease  of  part  only. 

Sec.  493.  By  estoppel. — By  act  and  operation  of  law. 

Sec.  494.  By  consent  and  acceptance  of  possession. 

Sec.  495.  Acceptance  of  another  tenant  in  lieu. 

Sec.  496.  Will  not  prejudice  previous  underlease. 

Sec.  497.  Operation  on  imderleases. 

Sec.  498.  How  a  surrender  must  be  alleged  in  pleading. 

Sec.  499.  When  presumed. 

Sec.  500.  Surrender  may  be  presumed  when. 

Sec.  484.  What  is,  and  by,  and  to  whom.— A  surrender  is 
a  yielding  up  of  the  possession  of  an  estate,  without  any 
purpose  or  intention  of  resuming  possession  again  under 
the  former  title  or  lease,  to  the  person  who  has  the  im- 
mediate reversion  thereof,  so  that  the  term  is  drowned, 
or  terminated  hy  mutual  agreement,^  and  differs  from  a 
release  in  that  it  is  the  falling  of  a  less  estate  into  a 
greater,  while  a  release  operates  by  the  greater  estate  de- 
scending to  the  less.''  In  order  to  constitute  a  vaUd  sur- 
render, the  surrenderor  must  not  only  have  an  estate  in 

1-1  Inst.  337  6;  WoodfaU's  L.  70;  Smith  v.  Mapleback,  1  T.  R. 
&  T.  367,  et  seq.  441 ;  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  267. 

«  WiUiams  v.  Sawyer,  3  B.  &  B. 


1152  By  Surrender.  [§484; 

possession,  but  he  must  also  be  legally  competent  and 
able  to  make  a  surrender  that  will  quiet  all  rights  in  the 
line  of  his  title,  and  it  must  be  made  to  the  owner,  in  his 
own  right,  of  the  immediate  reversion.'  K  there  is  an  in- 
tervening estate,  there  is  no  surrender."  So,  too,  there 
must  be  a  privity^  of  estate  between  the  surrenderor  and 
the  one  to  whom  it  is  surrendered,  ahd  he  must  have  a 
higher  and  greater  estatg  in  the  estate  surrendered  than 
the  surrenderor  had,  and  this  estate  must  exist  in  his  own 
right,  and  not  in  the  right  of  ahother,  or  as  a  joint  tenant.' 
In  obedience  to  this  rule,  if  a  lease  is  made  by  husbalnd 
and  wife,  of  the  wife's  lands,  a  surrendier  should  be  made 
to  her  ;  *  but  where  surrender  is  made  to  an  agent  who  is 
not  shown  to  have  power  to  accept  a  surrender  for  his 
principal,  yet  if  the  landlord  subsequently,  without  re- 
turning the  lease  to  tho  lessee,  accepts  rent  from  a  persdn 
to  whom  the  lessee  had  sublet  the  premises,  it  has  been 
held  a  valid  surrender.^  A  surrender  to  an  infant  is 
good,  unless  the  presumption  of  his  assent  thereto  is 
overcome  by  proof  of  dissent."  And  generally,  it  may  be 
said,  that  a  surrender  may  be  made  to  any  person  who  is 
legally  entitled  to  the  immediate  reversion,  as' to  the 

'  4  Bacon's  Abr.  (S)  1,  313.  In  as  such  by  reason  of  an  interyen- 
conformity  witli  this  rule  it  will  iiig  estate,  it  may  operate  as  a 
be  seen,  and  so  it  has  been  held,  grant  •  of  the  term.  Agar  v. 
that  an  undertenant  cannot  sur-  Brown,  2  B.  &  B.  331. 
render  the  lease  and  estate  to  the  '  *  Shep.  Touch^  303;  5'  Black- 
original  lessor,  because  the  rever-  stone's  Com.  336.  But  see  Shep. 
sionisin  theoviginal  tenant,  and  Touch.  308,  where  a  contrary  dbc- 
the  estate  must  pass  back  to  him,  trine  is  advanced, 
and  from  him  to  the  landlord.  ^  Woodward  V.  Lindley,  43  Ind.' 
Springstein  v.  Schemerhorn,  13  438.  But,  if  the  husband  h^-s.  a 
John.  (N.  Y.)  357.  Prima  facie,  if  lease  or  estate  for  ^ears,  he  alone,' 
a  person  who  is  not  a  party ,  to;,  or  he  and  his  wife  together,  may 
the  lease  is  in  possession,  he  is  surrenderit ;  buit  if  he  has  anes- 
presumed  to  be  in  as  an  assigneei,  tate  for  life,  in  right  of  his  wife, 
but  this  presumption  may  be  oyer-  who  is  tenant  in  dower  or  otherr, 
come  by  showing  that  he  is  in  wise,  a  surrender  thereof  by  the 
merely  as  an  undertenant,  and  i  husband  alone,  the  ■  surrender  '  is' 
this  presumption  may  be  oyer-  good  only  during  his  hfe,  and  ^f, 
come  by  showing  that  the  laiid-  the  wife  suryives  him,'  thfe  estate" 
lord,  prqcpred  the  surrejider,  from  reverts  in  her,  unl^s  she  has 
the  lessee,  in  which  case  such  act  joined  in  the  surrender  in  such  a 
operates  as  an  admission  that  the  manner  that  b^  laW  her  rights  arfe' 
lessee  was  tenant  at  the  time  of  quieted.  Shep.  Touch.  303. 
the  surrender.  Durand  ,  v.  Wy-  *  Amory  y.  Kanoflskv,  117  Ma,ss. 
man,  2  Sandf.  (N.  Y.)  597.  351. 

^  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  289.      But  «  Thompson  y.  Leach.  3  Vent.,  198.' 
where  a  surrender  cannot  operate 


CHAP.  XLV.]  '       How, Made.  1153 

lessor  himself,  or  a  person  authorized,  by,  or  holding 
undei'  him  ;  but  a  surrender  made  to  a  person  who  has 
not  a  greater  estate  than  the  tenant,  is  utterly  inoperative. 
As,  if  A  lets  to  B  for;  ten  years,  who  lets  to  C  for  five 
years,  G  cannot  surrender  to^  A,  because  there  is  an  inter- 
vening I'eversion  or  estate  for  five  years  in  B.  But  if  B 
and  C  both  surrender/  it  is  operative,  because  there  is  no 
intervening  estate  ;  but,  even  in  such  a  ca^e,  ,B  must  sur- 
render firsif.'  It  should  ihe -borne  in  mind  that  a  person 
who  is  disabled  from  any  qause  from  granting  the  entire 
outstanding  estate  is  unable  to  siirrender  such  estate, 
and  that  ,a, person  who  is  disabled  from  taking  by  grant 
is  incapable  of  taking  by  surrende!r  an  estate."  A  tenant 
for  life  cannot  surrender  to  a  tenant  for  years  Who  is 
ousted  of  his  term  before  entry,  for  he  has  but  a  naked 
right ;  nor  to  him  in  remainder  for  years  ;  nbr  can  one 
joint  tenant  surrender  to  another.'  The  surrender  of  a 
life  estate  to  the  owner  pf  jthe  fee  may,  as  between  the 
parties,  be  operative  to  extinguish  the  estate,  yet,  if  there 
^re  othei-  prior  interests  derived  under  it  to  be  upheld,  it 
may  have  a  continuance  to  uphold  such  interests,' 

Sec.  485.  How  made.^  By  the  statue  of  frauds,'  as 
existing  in  most  of  the  States,  while  a  term  for  one,  three, 
or  seven,  years,  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  statute, 
may  be  created  by  parol,  yet  a  surrender  ofsuch  term  must 
unless  otherwise  provided,  jbe^by  deed  or  writing,  signed, 
as  'proyied   by  '  the  statute   or  by  operation  of  law^*_ 

'  4  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (S),  3.  four  years. ,  McKinney  v.  Reader, 

"' Fumivall  V.  Grove,  8  C.  B.  N.  7  Watts  (Penii.)  123.    Evidence  of 

S.  496.  '  a  parol  agreement  entered  into  con- 

'  SheJ).  Tpiiclj.  303.  temporaneously  ■vvith  the.  makiiig 

^Pleasantivi  Benson,  4 East,  234;  of    the  lease  cannot    be'  shov^n. 

Co.  Litt.  338 ;  Doe  v.  Pyke,  5  M.  &  Brady  v.  Peiper,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C. 

S.  1S4.  P.)  61.     In  Delaware  an  agreement 

'29  Car.  2,  c.  3,  s.  3.  to  accept  the  surrfiudei^  of  even  a 

«Lamar  V.  McNamee,  10  G.  &  Jf.  parol  lease  is    required  tp  be  in 

(Md.)  126;    EffWan  v.,  Little,    11  writing.    Logan  v.  Barr,  4  H^arr. 

Weid,    (If;  Y.)  '  616 ;   Peters    v.  (Del.)  546.     In  Kentucky  a  parol 

B^xiies,    16  Ind.    SlO ;    Bailey  V.  surrender  is  good.      McKenziev. , 

Wells,  8  Wis.  141.    In  Pennsylva-  Lexington,  4'  Dana  (Ky;)  129.    Jn^ 

iiia,,itis  held  that  a  surfender  need  Maine  a,  surreiider  must  be  by  deed 

not  in    aH  cases    be  in  writing;  or  writing.     Hesseltine: v.  Sea,yj^r, 

Keister  V.  MUter,  25  Penn.  St.  481 ;  16  Me.  212.    So  in  Vermont,  QeRL, ' 

Qreider's   Appeal,  5  id.    422';   as;  Stat.,  p.  45,0,  §' 21 ;  1  Wms,  Saund. 

where  the  l^e  is  foi:  IfeSs  than  236,  note  ?i.,ari  unexpired  term  of 


1154 


By  Surrender. 


[§  485. 


Where  the  term  could  not  have  been  created  except  by 
deed,  it  cannot  be  surrendered  except  by  deed  or  by  act 
and  operation  of  law.'  A  lease  for  years  cannot  be  sur- 
rendered by  merely  cancelling  the  indenture^  without 
writing.'    Where  a  lease  appeared  to  have  had  the  names 


one  year  may  be  surrendered  by 
parol.  Smith  v.  Devlin,  23  N.  Y. 
363.  At  the  common  law  before 
the  29  Car.  2,  ch.  3,  corporeal  here- 
ditaments might  be  surrendered 
without  either  deed,  writing,  or 
livery.  Lynch  v.  Lynch,  6  Ir.  L. 
E.  131 ;  Lyon  v.  Eeed,  13  M.  &  W. 
285;  Co.  Litt.  336  a;  Perkins  v. 
Perkins,  Cro.  Eliz.  269 ;  Close  v. 
McCuUough,  Gilb.  Eq.  Eep.  235. 
And  the  circumstance  that  a  lessee 
delivered  up  his  lease  to  the  lessor 
was  a  strong  evidence  of  a  surren- 
der in  fact ;  Lyon  v.  Eeed,  13  M. 
&  W.  285 ;  but  a  deed  was  indis- 
pensable to  a  surrender  of  incor- 
poreal hereditaments.  3  Piatt  on 
Leases,  499  ;  Co.  Litt.  338  a ;  Ben- 
nett's Case,  2  Rolle,  20  ;  Lyon  v. 
Eeed,  ante  ;  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T., 
267-283. 

'  1  Wms.  Saund.  336,  c  note  (ra.) ; 
ColeEjec.  225. 

«Co.  Litt.  338,  note  (1);  Earl  of 
Berkeley  v.  Archbp.  of  York,  6 
East,  86 ;  Wootley  v.  Gregory,  2 
Y.  &  J.  536  ;  Ld.  Wai-d  v.  Lumley, 
5  H.  &  N.  87,  656  ;  Stewart  v.  As- 
ten,  8  Ir.  L.  Eep.  N.  S.  35.  A  de- 
struction of  the  lease  does  not  op- 
erate as  a  surrender.  Thus,  where 
A  voluntarily  dehvered  up  and  de- 
stroyed a  lease  of  land,  and  took  a 
new  lease,  and  afterwards  claimed 
under  the  old  lease, — Held,  that  if 
the  old  lease  was  not  duly  surren- 
dered by  writing  within  the  statute 
of  frauds,  yet  that  A  could  recover 
no  more  land  than  what  he  coiild 
prove  with  absolute  certainty  was 
covered  by  the  lease,  especially  af- 
ter the  premises  had  been  in  the 
possession  of  another  for  near  16 
years.  Jackson  v.  Gardner,  8 
Johns.  (N.  Y.)394 ;  Leech  v.  Leech, 
3  Chitt.  100 ;  Courtail  v.  Thomas, 
9  B.  &  C.  288 ;  Close  v.  McCuUough, 
GUb.  Eq.  Cas.  235.  A  recital  in  a 
lease  by  one  party,  that  a  former 
lease  granted  to  another  had  been 
surrendered,  of  itself  affords  any 
evidence  against  strangers  of  the 
fact  of  surrender.  Lyon  v.  Eeed, 
13  M.  &  W.  285.    Nor  would  the 


execution  of  a  counterpart  of  a  new 
lease  taken  by  the  lessee  prior  to 
the  determination  of  ^  his  former 
intei-est,  and  reciting  that  it  was 
granted  in  consideranon  of  the  sur- 
render of  the  former  lease  (unless 
it  were  by  operation  of  law) ;  inas- 
much as  it  did  not  purport  of  itself 
to  be  a  surrender,  having  no  words 
in  it  which  could  denote,  or  amount 
to,  a  yielding  or  rendering  up  of 
the  interest  of  the  lessee.  Earl  of 
Berkeley  v.  The  Archbishop  of 
York,  6  East,  86.  So,  a  surrender 
would  not  be  presumed  from  the 
circumstance  of  the  rent  having 
regularly  been  paid  by  a  third  per- 
son. Copeland  v.  Watts,  1  Stark. 
95.  Nor  would  the  mere  fact  of  a 
lease  being  in  the  custody  of  the 
lessor,  and  in  a  cancelled  state,  fur- 
nish a  presumption  of  there  hav- 
ing been  the  requisite  deed  or  note 
in  writing.  It  might  raise  a  pre- 
sumption of  intention  to  determine 
the  term,  but  no  more. "  And  if  the 
lessor  relied  on  such  a  cancellation 
as  evidence,  it  was  incumbent  on 
him  to  prove  a  surrender ;  not  on 
the  lessee  to  show  how  the  lease 
came  to  be  in  that  condition.  If, 
however,  the  lease  had  been  in  the 
lessor's  possession  for  a  long  series 
of  years — twenty,  for  instance — 
without  any  dispute ;  or  if  there 
had  been  any  destruction  of  liis 
papers,  or  change  of  residence,  or 
any  foundation  for  supposing  that 
there  might  have  been  a  deed  or 
note  in  writing,  and  that  that  deed 
or  note  had  been  destroyed,  that 
might  have  been  a  ground  for 
raising  a  presumption  that  there 
was  a  deed  or  note  in  writing  ac- 
companying the  lease  when  it  got 
into  his  possession.  Courtail  v. 
Thomas,  9  B.  &  C.  288  ;  Bolton  v. 
The  Bishop  of  CarUsle,  2  H.  Blac. 
259.  In  Han-is  v.  Hiscock,  91  N. 
Y.  340,  difficulties  arose  between 
the  parties  to  a  lease,  and  they 
agreed  to  arbitrate  the  matter,  one 
of  the  conditions  being,  that  the 
lease  should  be  surrendered  and 
that  the  arbitrators  should  deter- 


CHAP.  XL  v.] 


On  Condition. 


1155 


of  the  parties  torn  off,  it  was  held  that  it  was  neither  a 
surrender  by  operation  of  law,  nor  prima  facie  evidence 
of  a  surrender  by  deed  or  note  in  writing.' 

Sec.  486.  When  a  surrender  may  be  made  on  condition.— 
A  lessee  may  surrender  upon  condition,  and  if  the  condi- 
tion is  broken,  the  particular  estate  shall  be  revested  ; " 
therefore,  if  a  lessee  for  years  surrender  his  whole 
term  to  the  original  lessor  upon  condition,  he  may 
upon  non-performance  of  the  conditions  re-enter  and  re- 
vive the  term.' 


Sec.  487.  At  what  time  a  surrender  may  be  made.— A  les- 
see for  a  term  of  years  to  begin  presently  cannot  before 


mine  what  compensation  should 
be  paid  for  the  surrender.  The 
lease  was  dehvered  up  to  the  ar- 
bitrators who  made  an  amend 
which  was  set  aside.  In  the  mean- 
time one  of  the  arbitrators  died. 
It  was  held  that  the  lease  was  sur- 
rendered and  that  an  action  upon 
its  covenants  would  not  lie.  In 
Auer  V.  Auer,  99  Penn.  St.  370; 
44  Am.  Eep.  114,  a  lessee  vacated 
the  premises  during  the  term  and 
gave  the  keys  to  the  landlord  who 
took  and  retained  them,  but  noti- 
fied the  lessee  that  he  should  hold 
them  for  the  rent,  and  subsequently 
let  the  premises  to  another,  after 
notifying  the  lessee  of  his  intention 
to  do  so.  It  was  held  that  the  les- 
see was  liable  for  the  diflference  in 
the  rent.  In  Milling  v.  Beeker,  96 
Penn.  St.  183,  the  landlord  declared 
that  the  tenant  had  given  up  his 
lease,  and  made  an  unsuccessful 
attempt  to  lease  the  premises.  He 
also  took  care  of  the  key,  and 
cleaned  the  vrindows  of  the  house 
after  the  tenant  had  left.  It  was 
held  that  these  acts  did  not  amount 
to  an  acceptance  of  a  surrender. 

>  Comtail  v.  Thomas,  9  B.  &  C. 
288. 

Certain  premises  were  let  by  a 
written  lease  "  for  the  term  of  one 
year  for  a  sum  named,"  with  the 
privilege  of  continuing  five  years  " 
at  an  increased  rent.  It  was  held 
that  the  latter  clause  was  not  an 
executory  contract  for  a  lease,  but 
was  siimcient  to  create  a  present 
demise,    the    occupation    of    the 


premises  was  continued  after  the 
expiration  of  the  first  year,  and 
that  if  the  lease  provided  for  an 
increased  rent,  payable  semi-an- 
nually. The  lessee,  after  the  expir- 
ation of  the  first  year,  continued 
to  occupy  the  premises,  with  a 
building  which  had  been  erected 
by  him,  and  paid  rent  subsequently. 
He  afterwards  stated  to  the  lessor 
that  he  did  not  wish  to  keep  the 
premises  longer;  but  the  only 
assent  to  a  sui-render  of  the  prem- 
ises was  on  condition  that  he 
would  remove  his  building,  which 
he  did  not  do.  It  was  held  in  an 
action  for  six  months  rent,  that 
there  was  sufficient  evidence  for 
the  jury  to  find  an  election  to 
continue  in  possession,  after  the 
expiration  of  one  year,  under  the 
lease ;  and  that  there  was  no 
surrender. 

In  an  action  for  rent  due  under 
the  lease  the  lessee  admits  he  has 
executed  evidence  offered  by  the 
lessee  that  he  had  not  seen  it  prop- 
erly excluded,  and  in  an  action 
for  rent  due  under  such  a  lease  the 
lessee  having  failed,  after  the  ex- 
piration of  the  first  year,  to  remove 
a  building  which  had  been  erected 
by  him,  evidence  that  he  had  been 
told  by  others  than  the  lessor  that 
the  building  was  not  on  the  demised 
premises  is  hearsay,  and  inadmis- 
sible, Kimball  v.  Cross,  136  Mass. 
300. 

2Co.  Litt.  318  6. 

8  Lloyd  V.  Langford,  3  Mod,  176 ; 
Bac.  Abr,  tit.  Leases  (S.  3). 


1156  By  Sueeender.  [§  488. 

entry,  merge  or  drown  ithe  term  by;  a  surrender,  because 
until  entry  there  is  no  term  and  no  reversion  in  the  pos- 
session to  drown  ;  but  if  the  lessee  enters  and  assigns  his 
estate  to  another,  such  assignee  haay,  befoi-e  entry,  sur- 
render his  term  to  the  lessor,  because  by  the  entry  of  the 
lessee  the  possession  was  severed  and  divided  from  the  re- 
version, which  possession,  being  by  assignment  trans- 
ferred to  the  assignee,  may  Withouit  other  entry  be  sur- 
rendered and  drowned  in  the  reversion  ; '  but  it  is  not 
necessary  that  the  surrenderor  of  a  lease  to  begin  at  a 
future  day  should  be  in  possession  in  order  to  make  a  sur- 
render before  the  period  of  commencement.*  As  to  sur- 
render of  leases  infuiuro  or  future  interest j  there  is  this 
distinction  to  be  observed,  that  a  lessee  for  years  of  a  term 
to  begin  at  a  day  to  conie  cannot  surrender  it  by  anactual 
surrender  before  the  day  of  the  term  begins,  but  he  may  by 
a  surrender  in  law. '  Whenever  a  deed  purporting  to  be 
a  surrender  cannot  operate  as  such,  it  will  probably  take 
effect  as  an  assignment  or  as  a  release  of  the  right  to  the 
term  ut  re  magi^valeatquam  per  eat.  .  ;.  . 

Sec.  488.  What  writing  is  sufiaciejiti.-r-The  statutei,  of 
frauds  does  not  make  a  deed  essential  tO' a  surrendei",  for 
it  directs  it  to  be  made  either  "by  deed  or  note  in  writing," 
signed,  &c.*  Where  a  deed  is  not  required,  any  instru- 
ment in  writing,  duly  signed,  and  expressing  an  immedi- 
ate purpose  of  giving  up  the  estate  on  the  part  of  the 
tenant,  if  accepted  by  the  landlord^  will  be  sufficient.' 

'  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (S.  2).  As  "  dedi,"  or    "coneessi;"    Co. 

Si Shep.  Touch.  303.  Litt.  301   6;  "the  lessee, dotTidis- 

^Shep.  Touch.  304;  Ives  V.  Sams,  charge    the    premises    from   the, 

Cro.  EUz.  521 ;  Hutchins  v.  Maitin,  terra ; "    Eaxl  r.  Rogers,  ^  Wils. 

Crb.  Eliz.  605.  26;  Mason  y.   Treadway,  1  Lev. 

■* Peters  V.  Barnes,  16  lud.  319.  145;  "the  lessee  is  content  that 

*  Farmer  v.  Rogers,  3  Wils.  36 ;  the  lessor    shall    have  the  land> ; 

Smith  V.  Mapleback,  1  T.  E.  441 ;  Sleigh  v.  Bateman,  Cro.  ]^.  487; 

Weddall  v.  Ca;pes,  1  M.  &  W;  50 ;;  ^mith  y.  Mapleback,  1  T.  E.  441 ; 

Harrison  v.  Blackburn,  17  C.   B.  "the  lessee's  will  is,  that  the  re- 

N.  S.679;  Sbep.  Touch.  306.    No  versioner    shall    enter     into    the 

particular  form  of    words  is   re-  land ;  Penruddooh  v.   Newman,  1 

quired;    any    expres^On    indica-  Leon,  279 ;   "it  is  agreed  that  the 

tive  of  an  intention  to  surrender  lessor  shall  have  the  house  on  the 

will  answer  the  purpose.    3  EoU.  terms  mentioned  in  the  lease,  and 

Abr.  497-8  ;   Chamberlaine*s;  Case,  to  pay  81.  1,0s.  over  arid  above,  thei 

4  Mod.   15i  ;     Shep.   Touch.   306 ;  rent  annually  towards  the'  gbod- 

WeddaJl  v.  Capes,  1  M.  &  W.  50-3.  wiU  already  paid  by  the  lessee.' 


CHAP.  XLV.] 


Writing. 


1157 


But  such  acceptance  is  necessary."  A  parol  agreement 
between  a  landlord  and  tenant  of  a  term  of  six  years, 
that  the  landlord  in  eight  years  shall  make  a  new  lease 
to  a  third  person,  and  the  tenant  surrender,  does  not  op- 
erate as  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law,  unless  the  new 
lease  is  executed  and  passes  an  interest  according  to  the 
intention  of  the  parties,  even  though  the  tenant  quits 
and  such  third  person  takes  possession  and  .occupies  for 
a  time."  A  corporation  aggregate  cannot  surrender 
otherwise  than  by  deed  under  their  common  seal." 

A  written  instrument  in  this  form  :  "  We  hereby 
renounce  and  disclaim,  and  also  surrender  and  yield  up 
all  right,  &c.,"  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  being  in  ex- 
istence, has  been  held  a  surrender  and  not  a  disclaimer." 
A  written  request  by  the  tenant  to  his  landlord  to  relet 
the  premises  to  some  other  person,  or  a  parol  agreement 
for  a  surrender  may,  when  acted  on,  amount  to  a  surren- 
der by  act  and  operation  of  law.°    A  written  notice  given 


Smith  v.  Mapleback,  1  T.  R.  441. 
Indeed,  any  words  which,  before 
the  statute  of  frauds  (39  Car.  2,  c. 
3),  would  have  amounted  to  a  sur- 
render, will  now  do  so  if  con- 
tained in  a  deed ;  or,  in  cases 
where  a  deed  is  not  necessary,  if 
reduced  into  writing  and  signed 
by  the  lessee.  An  interesse  ter- 
mini is  no  impediment  to  a  sur- 
render, Jenk.  Cent.  256,  Case  49 ; 
Anon.,  2  Dy.  112  a,  pi.  49,  though 
a  remainder  is ;  as  if  there  be  a 
lease  for  years  with  remainder  for 
years,  the  remainder  will  prevent 
a  surrender  by  the  lessee  for  years 
to  the  lessor.  Jenk.  Cent.  356, 
Case  49. 

'  Per  Btles,  J.,  in  CoUes  v. 
Evanson,  19  C.  B.  N.  S.  383. 

^  SchiefBin  v.  Carpenter,  15 
"Wend.  (N.  Y.)  400.  In  November, 
1843,  plaintiff  leased  a  house  of  B 
and  C,  for  the  term  of  eight  years, 
to  commence  April  1,  1844.  In 
February,  1844,  the  house  was  de- 
stroyed by  Are,  and  the  plaintiff, 
who  had  been  in  possession,  left 
the  premises,  and  requested  the 
lessors  to  cancel  the  lease,  insist- 
ing that  there  had  been  a  previous 
verbal  agreement  to  cancel  the 
lease  in  case  of  destruction  by 
II.— 21 


fire.  The  lessors  refused  and  the 
premises  were  unoccupied  the 
first  quarter ;  then  the  lessors  en- 
tered. B  conveyed  his  interest  to 
C,  who  built  thereon,  and  leased 
the  same  to  defendants  for  three 
years.  The  plaintiff  made  no 
claim  till  November,  1846,  when 
he  brought  g'ectment  against  the 
defendant.  Held,  that  the  acts  of 
the  lessors  must  be  taken  to  have 
been  with  the  plaintiff's  assent, 
and  were  inconsistent  with  the 
continuance  of  the  plaintifif's  lease, 
which  must  be  considered  as  sur- 
rendered by  operation  of  law. 
Wood  V.  Walbridge,  19  Barb.  (N. 
T.)  136.  A  parol  agreement  to 
surrender,  predicated  on  a  good 
consideration,  is  binding  on  the 
tenant.  Bagert  v.  Dean,  1  Daly 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  250. 

^  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Corporations  (E 
3). 

*  Wyatt  V.  Stagg,  5  Bing.  N.  C. 
564. 

.'  Nickells  v.  Atherstone,  10  Q. 
B.  944.  In  Allen  v.  Devlin,  6  Bos. 
(N.  Y.)  1,  it  was  held,  that  a  parol 
agreement  on  a  good  considera- 
tion made  in  January,  1858,  for 
the  surrender  of  the  last  year  of 
the  term    ending  in    May,  1859, 


1158 


By  Sitreender. 


[§  489. 


by  the  tenant  of  his  intention  to  quit  at  a  time  when  he 
believed  his  tenancy  to  expire,  but  which  is  afterwards 
discovered  not  to  be  the  time,  does  not  operate  as  a  sur- 
render.' 

Sec.  489.  By  acceptance  of  a  new  lease.— Surrenders  by 
act  and  operation  of  law,  or  implied  surrenders,  are 
excepted  in  the  statute  of  frauds."  Of  this  class  are  sur- 
renders created  by  the  acceptance  of  a  new  lease'from  the 
reversioner,  either  to  begin  presently,  or  at  any  time  during 
the  continuance  of  the  first  lease  ;  for  the  acceptance  of 
a  valid  new  lease  implies  a  surrender  of  the  one  exist- 
ing,' and  operates  as  a  surrender  of  it  by  act  and  operation 
of  law,*  but  not  if  the  second  lease  is  void  or  voidable,'  or 
if  there  is  a  mere  agreement  for  a  future  lease."  Where, 
pending  the  unexpired  term  of  one  lease,  a  second  lease 


and  duly  performed  by  the  tenant, 
was  valid  notwithstanding  the 
statute,  and  that  such  an  agree- 
ment executed  was  a  good  de- 
fence to  an  action  for  rent.  In 
Lamar  v.  McNamee,  10  G.  &  J. 
(Md.)  116,  it  was  agreed  by  parol, 
between  landlord  and  tenant, 
that  the  latter  should  give  up  his 
unexpired  term  in  a  lease  and  cer- 
tain claims  which  he  had  for  re- 
pairs done  to  the  demised  prem- 
ises, in  consideration  of  which  the 
landlord  promised  to  pay  the  ten- 
ant a  certain  sum  of  money ;  and 
the  tenant  actually  surrendered 
on  the  same  day,  and  the  landlord 
took  possession.  Held,  that  the 
agreement,  being  immediately  ex- 
ecuted, was  not  void,  and  that  the 
a,ction  by  the  tenant  for  the 
money  was  maintainable.  When 
the  tenant  abandons  the  premises, 
and  the  landlord,  at  the  request  of 
the  surety,  relets  them  on  his  ac- 
count, such  reletting  does  not 
amount  to  a  surrender.  McKen- 
zie  V.  Farrell,  4  Bos.  (N.  Y.)  193. 

1  Lyon  V.  Reed,  13  M.  &  W.  285  ; 
Murrell  v.  MUward,  3  M.  &  W.  328 ; 
BesseU  v.  Landsberg,  7  Q.  B.  638. 

=  Shep.  Touch.  300 ;  Com.  Dig. 
tit.  Surrender  (L.  1) ;  Perk,  c  9. 

'  Bromley  v.  Stanley,  4  Burr. 
2210;  Com.  Dig.  Surrender  (1). 
Accepting  a  new  lease  by  deed  for 
the  same  premises  operates  a  sur- 
render.    Livingston    v.  Potts,   16 


John.  (N.  Y.)  28.  For  the  accept- 
ance admits  the  power  of  the  lessor 
to  lease,  which  he  could  not  liave 
without  a  surrender.  But  this  pre- 
sumption cannot  arise  against  the 
clear  intention  of  the  parties.  Van 
Rensselaer  v.  Pinniman,  6  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  569.  Where  tenants  in 
common,  holding  under  a  lease  in 
fee  given  to  their  ancestor,  entered 
into  an  agreement  with  the  lessor 
for  the  surrender  of  their  lease  and 
the  substitution  of  new  and  several 
leases,  and  new  leases  were  accord- 
ingly accepted,  it  was  held  that  the 
former  lease  was  extinguished,  and 
that  while  the  doctrine  of  surren- 
der could  not  apply  to  a  lease  in 
fee,  because  there  is  no  reversion, 
yet,  that  from  the  new  lease  a  re- 
lease might  be  presumed,  so  that 
each  tenant,  by  the  acceptance  of 
the  new  leases,  was  estopped  from 
claiming  under  the  old.  Spring- 
stein  V.  Schermerhom,  12  John. 
(N.  Y.)  357. 

^  Roll.  Abr.  tit.  Surrender ; 
Crowley  v.  Vitty,  7  Exchq.  319 ; 
FurnivaU  v.  Grove,  8  C.  B.  N.  S. 
496. 

'Biddulph  V.  Poole,  11  Q.  B. 
713. 

*  John  V.  Jenkins,  1  Cr.  &  M. 
237;  Foquet  v.  Moore,  7  Exchq. 
870 ;  Cannan  v.  Hartley,  9  C.  B. 
634,  648 ;  Badeley  v.  Vigurs,  4  E. 
&  B.  71. 


CHAP.  XLv.]  New  Lease.  1159 

is  made  containing  stipulations  inconsistent  with  the 
former  lease,  the  latter  shall  prevail,  the  presumption 
being  that  a  surrender  of  the  old  one  was  intended. 

Thus,  where  the  first  lease  gave  to  the  lessee  the  power 
to  remove  buildings,  and  the  second  lease  provided  for  a 
surrender  of  the  premises  at  the  expiration  of  the  term, 
"reasonable  use,  &c.,  excepted,"  it  was  held  that  the 
stipulations  of  the  two  were  inconsistent.'  But  a  parol 
agreement  between  the  parties  to  a  lease  under  seal,  re- 
ducing the  amount  of  rent,  does  not  amount  to  a  surren- 
der, and,  unless  founded  in  an  independent  consideration, 
is  void."  But  it  has  been  held  that  an  unsealed  agree- 
ment to  relmquish,  upon  a  failure  to  perform  certain 
conditions,  while  inoperative  as  a  defeasance,  is  neverthe- 
less valid  as  a  contingent  surrender,  the  agreement  being 
treated  as  a  conveyance  in  prcesenti,  to  take  effect  in 
futuro.'  A  parol  agreement  to  change  a  lease,  or  for  a 
new  lease,  for  a  period  longer  than  that  provided  by  the 
statute  of  frauds,  is  invalid  and  inoperative  as  a  surrender 
or  as  a  contract.  Thus,  where  tenants  who  were  holding 
under  a  lease  made  in  1S69,  under  seal  for  ten  years,  at  a 
rental  of  $5000  a  year,  claimed  that  prior  to  the  sale  of 
the  premises  by  the  lessor,  in  1873,  they  entered  into  an 
agreement  with  her  by  which  she  agreed  to  reduce  the 
rent  to  $4000  a  year.  Such  agreement  was  not  in  writing, 
nor  was  there  any  valid  consideration  therefor.  The  court 
held  that  there  was  no  surrender  of  the  old  lease,  and  that 
the  agreement  not  being  in  writing,  or  predicated  upon 
a  good  consideration,  was  void."    The  reason  why  such 

'  Jimgerman  v.  Bovee,  19  Cal.  the  lease  was  surrendered  in  1873, 

354.  and  that  from  that  time  the  ocou- 

''Coev.  Hobby,  14  (N.  Y.)  S.  C.  pation    of    the    premises    by    the 

159 ;  afifd  73  N.  Y;  143.  defendants  lias  been  in  jjursuance 

« Alien  T.  Jaquish,  21  Wend.  (N.  of  a  new  contract  of  hiring,  then 

Y.)  628.         '  made,  at  a  dififerent  rent  and  upon 

*Coev.  Hobby,  72  N.Y.  141.  Al-  different  terms.  There  was  no 
LEN,  J.,  in  delivering  the  opinion  written  surrender  or  cancellation 
of  the  coinrt,  said  :  "  The  defend-  of  the  origiaal  lease;  neither  was 
ants  contend  that  they  are  no  there  any  surrender  of  the  posses- 
longer  liable  upon  and  according  eion  of  the  demised  premises,  nor 
to  the,  lease  made  in  1868,  from  was  any  authority  or  dominion 
Mrs.  IngersoU.  the  plaintiffs  grant-  over  the  premises  exercised  by  the 
or  and  assignor,  to  the  defendants,  landlord  inconsistent  with  the 
upon  the  ground  that  by  the  act  of  rights  of  the  tenant  under  that 
the  parties  and  operation  of  law,  premise.    Neither  was  there  at  any 


1160 


By  Surrender. 


[§  489. 


acceptance  of  sl  new  lease  operates  as  a  surrender  of  the 

lessee  accepts  a  second  lease  unex- 
plained, he  admits  the  power  of  the 
lessor  which  he  cannot  legally 
have  without  a  surrender  of  the 
first'.  The  presumption  of  law  is, 
therefore,  that  a  surrender  has 
been  made.  Livingston  v.  Potts, 
16  John.  (N.  Y.)  28;  Schiefflin 
V.  Carpenter,  15  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
400.  It  is  said  in  that  case  by 
Nelson,  J.,  that  unless  such  new 
lease  be  executed  so  as  to  pass 
an  interest  according  to  the  con- 
tract and  intention  of  the  parties, 
it  will  not  operate  as  a  surrender 
of  the  prior  lease  by  operation  of 
law.  And  it  was  so  held  where 
there  was  a  parol  letting  for  a  term 
of  years  to  tiiird  persons,  who  had 
entered  into  possession  and  paid 
rent  to  the  landlord  for  a  portion 
of  the  term  agreed  upon.  The 
conclusion  was  that  a  valid  parol 
lease,  since  the  statute  of  frauds, 
might  produce  a  surrender  in  law 
and  that  the  true  rule  was  as  laid 
down  in  3  Startle's  Ev. ,  343,  that 
the  taking  a  new  lease  by  parol  is 
by  operation  of  law  a  surrender  of 
the  old  one,  although  it  be  by  deed, 
provided  it  be  a  good  one,  and  pass 
an  interest  according  to  the  con- 
tract and  intention  of  the  parties ; 
for  otherwise  the  acceptance  of 
it  is  no  implied  surrender  of  the 
old  one.  See,  also,  Bedford  v. 
Terhune,  30  N.  Y.  453,  approving 
this  case.  See,  also.  Rowan  v. 
Lytle,  11  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  617,  and 
Lawrence  v.  Brown,  5  N.  Y.  394. 
In  England  the  rule  is,  that  if  there 
be  a  tenancy  under  a  lease,  and 
the  parties  make  a  verbal  agree- 
ment for  a  sufficient  consideration, 
that  instead  of  the  existing  term  . 
there  shall  be  a  tenancy  from  year 
to  year,  at  a  diflferent  rent,  that 
would  not  be  a  surrender  of  the 
lease  by  operation  of  law.  Foquet 
V.  Moor,  7  Exchq.  870.  The  farthest 
that  our  courts  have  gone,  is .  to 
hold  that  to  effect  a  surrender  of 
an  existing  lease  by  operation  of 
law,  there  must  be  a  new  lease, 
valid  in  law,  to  pass  an  interest 
according  to  the  contract  and 
intention  of  the  parties.  Within 
this  rule  there  was  no  surrender 
of  the  lease  upon  which  this  action 
is  brought.  There  was  no  new  lease 
which  could  take  effect  according 
to  the  verbal  contract  of  the  parties 


time  any  contract  or  lease,  by  deed 
or  in  writing,  between  the  parties 
other  than  the  indenture  of  1868. 
The  claim  is,  that  there  was  a  new 
letting  of  the  premises  by  the  lessor 
to  the  defendants  at  the  time 
mentioned,  by  parol,  and  that  by 
reason  of  such  parol  letting,  the 
original  lease,  and  the  term  there- 
by created,  were  by  act  and  opera- 
tion of  law  surrendered.  A  sur- 
render is  the  restoring  and  yield- 
up  an  estate  or  interest  in  lands  to 
one  who  has  an  immediate  estate 
in  reversion  or  remainder,  and  by 
the  statute  of  frauds  a  term  exceed- 
ing one  year  cannot  be  surren- 
dered, unless  by  act  or  operation  of 
law,  or  by  a  deed  of  conveyance  in 
writing,  2  R.  S.  134,  §  6.  A  sur- 
render is  imphed  and  so  effected 
by  operation  of  law  within  the 
statute  quoted,  when  another 
estate  is  created  by  the  reversioner 
or  remainder-man,  with  the  assent 
of  the  termor,  incompatible  with 
the  existing  estate  or  term.  In  the 
case  of  a  term  for  years,  or  for  life, 
it  may  be  by  the  acceptance  by  the 
lessee  or  termor  of  an  estate  incom- 
patible with  the  term,  or  by  the 
takujg  of  a  new  lease  by  a  lessee.' 
It  will  not  be  implied  against  the 
intent  of  the  parties,  as  mani- 
fested by  their  acts;  and  when 
such  intention  cannot  be  presumed, 
wdthout  doing  violence  to  common 
sense,  the  persumption  will  not  be 
supported.  Van  Rensselaer's  Heirs 
V.  Penniman,  6  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  569. 
In  the  case  referred  to,  the  devisee 
of  the  lessor  had  made  a  new  lease 
to  the  assignee  of  the  lessee  for  the 
same  time,  and  upon  the  same  con- 
ditions as  the  first  lease,  but  it  was 
held  that  the  original  lease  was  not 
thereby  surrendered,  but  remained 
in  force,  entithng  the  lessee  and 
his  assignees  to  the  benefits  of  its 
provisions,  and  that  under  the  cir- 
cumstances the  new  lease  was  prob- 
ably given  to  confirm  the  prior 
lease,  and  to  give  the  lessee  greater 
security  for  his  improvements  than 
he  had  by  the  first  lease.  There 
is  an  implication  of  intention  to 
surrender  an  existing  lease  upon 
the  giving  of  a  second  lease,  for 
the  reason  that  the  lessor  caimot 
legally  execute  a  second  lease  of 
the  same  premises  during  the  term 
of  a  first  lease ;    and   when  the 


CHAP.  XLV.] 


New  Lease. 


1161 


first  is,  because  the  lessee,  by  accepting  the  new  lease,  has 
been  party  to  an  act,  the  validity  of  which  he  is  afterwards 
estopped  from  disputing,  and  which  would  not  be  valid 
if  the  first  lease  continued  to  exist,  for  he  would  be 
estopped  from  saying  that  the  lessor  had  not  power  to 
make  the  new  lease  ;  and  as  the  lessor  could  not  grant  the 
new  lease  until  the  first  lease  was  surrendered,  the  accept- 
ance of  the  new  lease  is  of  itself  a  surrender  of  the  first.' 
A  parol  lease,  or  a  parol  change  in  the  terms  of  a  lease,  does 


as  stated  by  the  defendant.  The 
claim  is  that  in  1873,  by  the  verbal 
agreement  of  the  parties,  there 
was  in  effect  a  new  lease  for  the 
unexpired  term  of  seven  years;  at- 
a  reduced  rent,  with  liberty  to, 
the  lessee  to  terminate  the  lease 
at  anytime  on  giving  three  months' 
notice.  This  could  operate  as  only 
a  lease  from  year  to  year,  as  long 
as  the  parties  elected  to  continue 
the  relation.  Schuyler  v.  Leggett, 
3  Cow.  (N.  Y.  660;  People  v.. 
Eickert,  8  id.  236  ;  Launsbery  v. . 
Snyder,  31  N.  Y.  514.  This  was  ■ 
not  the  contract  intended  by  the 
parties,  and  there  was  therefore  no 
surrender  of  the  existing  lease 
implied  by  law  as  I'esulting  from 
the  intention  of  the  parties.  But 
there  was  no  new  lease,  or  a  letting 
from  year  to  year,  as  the  legal 
result  of  a  verbal  lease  for  a  term 
of  years.  Assuming  that  the  con- 
tract and  agreement  of  the  parties 
was,  that  from  the  time  of  making 
it,  the  rent  should  be  reduced  to 
$4000  per  annum,  and  that  the 
lessor  should  have  the  right  to 
terminate  the  lease  upon  notice, 
and  that  such  agreement  was  vahd, 
it  was  but  a  modification  of  the 
terms  of  the  original  demise,, 
leaving  all  the  other  covenants  and 
conditions  intact.  There  was  no 
agreement  inconsistent  with  the 
existing  lease,  or  any  assumption, 
of  dominion  over  the  estate  by 
the  lessor  inconsistent  with  the 
term  vested  in  the  lessee.  Each, 
in  dealing  with  the  other,  dealt 
with  matters  over  which  they  had 
control  under  and  by  virtue  of  the 
lease.  The  lessor  assumed  to  re- 
lease his  right  to  a  portion  of  the 
rent,  which  he  might  lawfully  do, 
and  the  lessee  undertook  to  yield 


conditionally,  and  upon  notice  in 
the  future,  a  portion  of  his  term. 
It 'Cannot  be  assumed  or  imphed 
from  such  agreement  that  a  sur- 
render of  the  old  lease  was  com- 
templated  Jby  either  party.  The 
lease  continued  in  full  force,  except 
as  modified  by  the  agreement. 
It  is  preposterous  to  say  that  a 
reduction  of  the  rent  is  a  surrender 
,^^n  existing  lease,  and  the  grant- 
ing of  S.  new  one.  The  new  agree- 
ment in  such  case  is  virtually  in- 
corporated into,  and  made  a  part 
of  the  antecedent  agreement,  and 
the  two  woul4  constitute  the  lease 
for  th©.unexpired  term.  Evans  v. 
Thonippon^  5  East,  193  ;  Hasbrouck 
V.  Tappeij,  15  John.  (N.  Y.)  300. 
There  was  no"  surrender  of  the 
lease  by<,operation  of  law,  for  the 
reason  that  ih^re  was  no  dealing 
with  the  e^atfe  by  the  lessor  in- 
compatible isvitWthe  lease,  and  no 
new  letting.  ef..the  premises  by 
parol  or  otherwise.  The  defend- 
ants, in  their '.ansHver,  and  upon 
the  trial,  rehed  upon  an  alleged 
surrender  of  the.  lease ;  but  upon 
appeal  they  contend  that  there  was 
a  valid  agreement  to  reduce  the 
rent,  and  that  they  are  now  en- 
titled to  the  benefit  of  such  modi- 
fication of  the  terms  of  the  lease. 
At  most,  the  agreement  alleged 
was  executory  and  verbal,  and  it 
is  well  settled  that  before  breach,  a 
covenant  or  contract,  under  seal, 
cannot  be  modified  by  a  parol  exec- 
utory contract.  Delacroix  v. 
Bulkley,  13  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  71; 
Allen  V.  Jaquish,  21  id.  638  ;  Has- 
brouck V.  Tappen,  supra." 

1  Lyon  V.  Reed,  13  M.  &  W.  385 ; 
Bessell  v.  Lansberg,  7  Q.  B.  638  ; 
Cole  Ejec.  335. 


1162 


By  Surrender. 


[§  490. 


not  operate  as  a  surrender  of  the  lease,  and  the  written 
lease  will  control  the  rights  of  the  parties.' 

Sec.  490.  What  is  a  stiffieient  new  lease.— If  a  lessee  for 
twenty  years  takes  a  lease  for  ten  years,  to  begin  at  a 
certain  fixed  period,  the  term  of  twenty  years  is  surren- 
dered or  determined  immediately;  for,  by  the  lessee's 
acceptance  of  the  new  lease,  he  admits  that  the  lessor  is 
in  a  situation  to  lease  to  him,  notwithstanding  the  exist- 
ence of  the  other  lease ;  and  by  such  .acceptance,  the 
lessor  h^  power  to  make  a  new  lease  during  the  former.'' 
But  -vyhere  a  lessee  for  twenty-one  years  took  a  lease  of 
the  saime  lands  for  forty  years,  to  begin  immediately 
after  the  death  of  J  S,  it  was  held  that  this  was  not  any 
present  surrender  of  the  first  term,  because  J  S  might 
wholly  outhve  that  term,  and  then  there  would  be  no 
union  to  work  a  surrender  ;  and  it  was  considered  that 


1  In  Smith  v.  Kerr,  (N.  Y.  Ct.  of 
App.)  10  Centl.  Rep.  322  ;  the  build- 
ing occupied  by  a  tenant  was 
destroyed  by  Are  two  yeais  and  a 
Ihalf  before  the  term  expired  ;  the 
ease  contained  no  covenant  to  re- 
build ;  the  tenant  erected  a  shanty 
on  the  premises  and  continued 
business  there ;  the  landlord,  with 
the  tenant's  consent,  entered  upon 
the  premises  and  erected  a  new 
and  larger  building  ;  duriug  the 
course  of  the  erection  the  land- 
lord told  the  tenant  that  he  intend- 
ed to  increase  the  rent,  to  which 
the  tenant  rephed  that  he  expect- 
ed to  pay  more  ;  before  the  build- 
ing was  completed,  other  conversa- 
tion was  had,  between  landlord 
and  tenant's  agent,  as  to  making 
no  claim  for  rent,  from  the  time  of 
the  fire  to  the  date  of  tenant's  oc- 
cupancy of  the  new  building,  and 
as  to  rent  of  new  building,  and 
allowance  for  fixtures  to  be  put  in 
by  tenant ;  on  completion  of  the 
building  tenant  took  possession 
and  continued  to  occupy.  It  was 
held  that  a  new  agreement  would 
not  operate  as  a  surrender  of  the  old 
term,  unless  the  creation  of  a  new 
term  inconsistent  with  the  existing 
lease  clearly  implied  an  intention 
to  make  such  surrender  ;  and  that 
a  valid  lease  for  the  unexpired 
term  could  not  be  made  by  parol. 


so  as  to  effect  a  surrender  of  the 
existing  lease,  by  operation  of  law ; 
that  the  retention  of  possession  by 
means  of  the  temporary  structure, 
with  an  intimation  of  occupying 
the  new  building  when  finished, 
followed  by  such  occupancy  of  the 
new  building,  was  a  continued 
possession  of  the  premises  by  the 
tenant,  under  his  legal  title,  and 
not  under  permission  of  the  land- 
lord ;  that  the  erection  of  a  new 
buUding  by  the  landlord  at  an  in- 
creased cost,  in  piu:suance  of  his 
determination  made  a  long  time 
prior  to  his  agreement  with  tenant, 
which  structure  was  substantially 
completed  at  the  time,  did  not 
constitute  a  sufficient  consideration 
for  such  new  agreement ;  and  that 
an  imexecuted  parol  agreement  to 
discharge  the  claim  for  rent  under 
the  lease  during  the  time  the  build- 
ing was  being  erected,  was  inopera- 
tive and  void,  and  not  sufficient 
consideration  for  new  agreement, 
and  the  agreement  to  alter  the 
terms  of  the  unexpired  lease,  by 
virtue  of  which  the  claim  for  in- 
creased rent  was  made,  was  exec- 
utory and  without  consideration 
and  void. 

^  Ives  V.  Sams,  Cro.  Eliz.  523 ; 
Hutchins  v.  Martin,  id.  604 ;  Bac. 
Abr.  Leases  (S.  2) ;  2  Smith,  L,  C, 
655  (4th  ed.)  ^      "     ■ 


CHAP,  XLV.] 


New  Lease. 


1163 


being  in  equilibrio  in  the  meantime,  whether  he  would 
survive  it  ornot,  the  first  term  should  not  be  hurt  till 
that  contingency  happened  ;  but  that  if  J  S  died  within 
the  first  term,  then  what  remained  of  it  was  surrendered 
and  gone  by  the  taking  place  of  the  second.'  "Where  the 
lessee  for  years  of  a  house,  accepts  a  grant  of  the  custody 
of  the  same  house,  it  is  a  surrender  ;  for  the  custody  of 
a  thing  which  was  let  before  is  another  interest  in  the 
same  thing  leased,  and  cannot  stand  with  the  first  lease  ;' 


'  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (S.  3.) 
^Gybson  v.  Searl,  Cro.  Jac.  177, 
If  a  lessee  for  years  of  premises 
accepts  a  grant  of  the  custody  of 
the  same,  it  is  a  surrender,  for  the 
custody  of  the  subject  of  a  demise 
is  another  interest,  with  which 
the  lease  is  inconsistent.  Gybson 
V.  Searl,  Cro.  Jac.  84,  176-7  ;  Earl 
of  Arundel  v.  Lord  Gray,  3  Dy. 
200,  b.  And  see  Woodward  v. 
Aston,  1  Vent.  296-7  ;  S.  C.  3  Mod. 
95.  And  the  surrender  will  be 
complete,  though  the  second  lease 
is  by  parol  merely,  Whitley  v. 
Gough,  3  Dy.  140,  6,  pi.  (43) ;  Tim- 
breU  V.  BuUock,  Sty.  446  ;  Thomas 
V.  Cooke,  3  Stark.  408  ;  S.  C.  3  B. 
&  Aid.  119,  in  a  case  where  a  parol 
lease  is  allowed  ;  or  for  a  shorter 
term  than  the  first ;  Ive's  Case,  5 
Coke,  11,  a,  b  ;  Bernardv.  Bonner, 
Al.  58-9  ;  Shep.  Touch.  301 ;  Co. 
Litt.  318,  b ;  or  even  if  it  be  at  wUl ; 
Mellows  V.  May,  Cro.  Eliz.  874  ;  or 
made  to  commence  at  a  future 
specifled  day,  provided  that  day 
f  aU  within  the  term  granted  by  the 
first  lease ;  Ive's  Case,  ante 
Thompson  v.  Trafford,  2  Leon,  188 
Hutchins  v.  Martin,  Cro.  Eliz.  605 
as  if  lessee  for  twenty  yeai'S  take  a 
lease  for  three,  to  begin  ten  years 
after,  this  is  a  present  surrender  of 
the  whole  term ;  for  it  cannot  be  a 
surrender  of  the  last  ten  years,  and 
remain  for  the  first  ten,  so  to  make 
a  fraction  of  the  term.  Nor  can 
he  who  has  a  lease  for  twenty 
years  surrender  the  last  ten  by  an 
express  surrender,  saving  the  first 
ten.  Ive's  case,  ante ;  WeddaU 
V.  Capes,  1  M.  &.  W.  50,  in  effect 
overruling  Aldenburgh  v.  People, 
6  O.  &  P.  313 ;  Murrell  v.  MUward, 
3  M.  &  W.  338.  But  the  law  is 
different  where  the  second 
lease  .  is  made  to  commence 
after  the  expiration  of  the  first ; 


the  second  being  then  reversion- 
ary, and  consistent  with  the  ex- 
isting demise;  Anon.,  Dal.  74,  pi. 
58 ;  Eawhngs  v.  Walker,  5  B.  &  C. 
Ill ;  or  where  it  is  made  to  com- 
mence on  a  contingent  event,  which 
may  not  happen  until  the  deter- 
mination of  the  first ;  as  if  a  lessee 
for  twenty-one  years  take  a  lease 
of  the  same  lands  for  forty,  to  be- 
gin immediately  alter  the  death  of 
J  S;  here,  the  acceptance  of  the 
second  term  will  not  work  a  present 
surrender  of  the  first,  for  J  S  may 
survive  it ;  but  if  J  S  die  within 
the  term,  then  a  surrender  will 
take  place.  Anon.,  4  Leon,  80,  pi. 
83.  So,  the  surrender  will  be  ab- 
solute, though  the  second  lease  be 
afterwards  defeated  by  the  non- 
performance of  a  condition  subse- 
quent. Plowd.  107, 6.  Asurrender 
by  operation  of  law  will  also  be 
effected  if  a  lessee  for  life  accept 
for  life,  or  a  lessee  for  years  accept 
for  years,  an  immediate  grant  of  a 
rent-charge,  or  of  common,  or 
herbage,  issuing  out  of  the  lands 
demised.  Mellows  v.  May,  Cro, 
Eliz.  874;  Gybson  v.  Searl,  Cro. 
Jac.  176-7 :  Lyon  v.  Eeed,  13  M.  & 
W.  285,  806.  The  early  books  are 
not  agreed  as  to  the  principle  on 
which  these  cases  of  impUed  sur- 
renders depend.  Coke  states  it  to 
be,  that,  by  taking  the  new  inter- 
est the  lessee  affirms  the  lessor's 
ability  to  confirm  it ;  an  ability  he 
cannot  possess  if  the  first  lease  is 
to  stand ;  such  new  interest,  there- 
fore, being  regarded  as  inconsistent 
with,  and  destructive  of,  the  lessee's 
former  estate.  Ive's  Case,  5  Coke, 
11,  b.  The  principle  propounded 
in  the  late  case  of  Lyon  v.  Eeed, 
has  already  been  noticed.  But 
there  will  be  no  surrender  if  lessee 
for  years  take  a  grant  of  a  rent- 
charge  out  of  the  same  lands  for 


1164 


By  Surrender. 


[§  490. 


and  if  the  first  lease  is  of  the  land  itself,  and  the  second 


life,  or  without  limiting  the  period 
of  its  commencement ;  or  if  a  les- 
see for  life  take  a  grant  for  years  ; 
for  in  each  case  he  may  have  the 
benefit  of  the  rent  after  the  deter- 
mination of  the  estate  in  the  land. 
Gybson  v.  Searl,  Cro.  Jac.  176-7 ; 
3  Rol.  Ab.  496,  pi.  15.  So,  accord- 
ing to  Tanpieij),  J. ,  if  a  man  pos- 
sessed of  Black  Acre  and  other 
lands  in  D,  let  Black  Acre  for 
twenty-one  years,  and  the  next 
day  let  (to  the  same  person)  "all  his 
lands  in  D  for  ten  years,  it  is  not 
a  surrender  of  Black  Acre ;  but 
amounts  to  a  lease  of  all  the  other 
lands,  which  may  well  stand  with 
the  former  lease.  Id. ;  and  Cro. 
Jac.  84.  So,  acceptance  of  the  equit- 
able interest  in  a  lease  made  to  a 
friend  as  a  trustee  will  not  work  a 
surrender  of  a  former  lease  held  by 
cestui  que  trust.  Gie  v.  Eider,  1 
Sid.  75  ;  Jay  v.  Eider,  1  Keb.  285. 
And,  in  like  manner,  the  lessee's 
acceptance  of  an  office  collateral 
to  the  lands  demised — as  by  a  les- 
see of  a  park,  of  the  office  of  park- 
keeper  ;  or  by  lessee  for  years  of  a 
manor,  of  the  office  of  surveyor, 
bailiff,  or  steward  thereof— will 
not  effect  a  surrender  by  operation 
of  law.  And,  on  the  same  princi- 
ple, if  a  lessor  make  a  feoffment, 
and  appoint  the  lessee  his  attorney 
to  deliver  seizin,  it  is  not  any  sur- 
render, as  the  livery  is  made  by 
the  lessee  in  his  official  capacity. 
1  Dy.  33,  6,  marg.  In  cases  of 
surrender  by  operation  of  law,  it 
must  be  understood  that  the  lessee 
takes  the  actual  interest  contracted 
for  under  the  second  lease  ;  for  it 
is  settled,  in  opposition  to  some 
early  oases,  Whitley  v.  Gough,  3 
Dy.  140  b;  Mellows  v.  May,  Cro. 
Eliz.  873  ;  Corbet's  Case,  3  Dy.  280, 
a.  And  see  Brewster  v.  Parrot, 
Cro.  Eliz.  264,  that  the  acceptance 
of  a  new  lease  which  is  void  will 
not  effect  an  extinguishment  of  the 
one  previously  subsisting.  Baker 
V.  Willoughby,  cited,  Hutt.  105 ; 
lloyde  V.  Gregory,  Cro.  Car.  502 ; 
Watt  V.  MaydeweU,  Hutt.  104^5  ; 
•Wilson  V.  Sewell,  4  Burr.  1975 ; 
Bromley  v.  Stanley,  4  Burr.  3210  ; 
Earl  of  Berkeley  v.  The  Archbishop 
of  York,  6  East,  86 ;  Hamerton  v. 
Stead,  3  B.  &  C.  481  ;  Bishop  of 
Eochester  v.  Bridges,  1  B.  &  Ad. 
847 ;  Lowther  v.  Troy,  1  Ir.  T.  E. 


193.  And,  accordingly,  where  a 
lessee  for  years  under  the  crown 
took  a  new  lease  for  years  of  the 
same  estate,  which  was  void  for 
want  of  a  recital  of  the  former 
lease,  it  was  held  that  the  former 
was  not  surrendered.  Harris  v. 
Wing,  3  Leon,  243  ;  Wing  v.  Har- 
ris, Cro.  Eliz.  231 ;  cited,  Cro.  Car. 
198.  So,  where  one  seized  in  fee 
granted  a  lease  for  ninety-nine 
years,  and  having  in  the  interim 
made  a  settlement,  and  taken  back 
an  estate  for  Ufe  only,  granted, 
previously  to  the  determination  of 
the  former,  a  new  lease  for  ninety- 
nine  years,  to  the  same  lessee,  who 
was  not  informed  of  the  settle- 
ment, and  then  died,  the  court 
held,  that  the  latter  did  not  annul 
the  former  :  as  it  would  be  incon- 
sistent with  the  intention  of  the 
parties  to  the  contract,  that  an  in- 
valid lease  should  be  substituted 
for  a  valid  one.  Bromley  v.  Stan- 
ley, 2  Burr.  2210.  So  a  contract 
by  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  with 
his  landlord  to  purchase  the  fee 
will  not  amount  to  a  surrender  by 
operation  of  law  of  the  existing 
tenancy,  unless  the  tenant's  con- 
tinuance in  possession  be  clearly 
referable  to  an  agreement  for  hold- 
ing as  tenant  at  wiU  under  the 
contract.  If  the  contract  be  con- 
ditional to  purchase  only  provided 
a  good  title  be  made  out,  and  to 
pay  the  purchase  money  when  that 
shall  have  been  done,  and  the  es- 
tate conveyed,  there  is  no  room 
for  implying  any  agreement  as 
tenant  at  will  in  the  mean  time, 
the  effect  of  which  would  be  abso- 
lutely to  surrender  the  existing 
term,  whilst  it  would  be  uncertain 
whether  the  purchase  would  be 
complete  or  not.  Gray  v.  Stanion, 
1  M.  &  W.  695.  So,  an  agreement 
for  a  new  leaee  will  not  put  an  end 
to  a  former  tenancy,  unless  a  new 
tenancy  is  actually  created.  But 
if  a  tenant  from  year  to  year 
agrees  during  a  current  year  to 
take  a  lease  of  the  premises  jointly 
v^ith  another,  and  he  and  his  co- 
tenant  actually  enter  and  enjoy 
the  property,  this  joint  occupation, 
coupled  with  the  agreement,  will 
operate  as  a  surrender  in  law  of 
the  separate  tenancy;  Hamerton 
V.  Stead,  3  B.  &  C.  478 ;  Jay  v. 
Byder,  1  Keb.  385 ;  Gie  v.  Evder. 


CHAP.  XLV.]  New  Lease.  1165 

lease  of  the  vesture  of  the  same  land,  it  is  a  surrender  of 
the  first  lease  :  so  it  is  if  a  lessee  accepts  a  grant  of  any- 
thing covered  by  his  lease  out  of  the  same  land,  to 
commence  at  a  certain  day  within  the  term.'  If  the 
sovereign  makes  a  lease  for  years,  the  acceptance  of  a 
new  lease  is  no  surrender  of  the  first : '  so  if  a  lessee 
accepts  a  grant  of  a  thing  consistent  with  the  lease  of  the 
land,  it  is  no  surrender,  for  the  subsequent  grant  is 
merely  collateral,  and  not  of  the  thing  itself.' 

If  the  lease  itself  provides  that  the  tenant  may  surren- 
der by  doing  certain  things,  or  complying  with  certain 
conditions,  a  surrender  can  be  made  only  in  the  mode 
provided,  however  unreasonable  or  capricious  the  require- 
ments may  be.  If  the  lease  provides  that  the  term 
may  be  surrendered  by  the  tenant  giving  written  notice, 
the  tenant  cannot  support  a  claim  to  have  surrendered 
by  proof  of  an  oral  notice  or  surrender,  and  if  he  relies 
upon  a  waiver  of  a  written  notice  by  the  landlord,  the 
proof  must  be  explicit,  clear  and  direct.^ 

A  recital  in  a  second  lease,  that  it  was  granted  in  con- 
sideration of  the  surrender  of  a  prior  lease  of  the  same 
premises,  is  not  a  surrender  by  deed  or  note  in  writing,  of 
such  prior  lease,  in  not  purporting  to  be  of  itself  a  surren- 
der or  yielding  up  of  the  interest.'  A  mere  agreement  for 
a  new  lease  is  not  sufficient  to  create  an  implied  surrender 
of  the  previous  one  ;  °  nor  is  an  agreement  between  the 
lessor  and  a  stranger  that  the  lessee  shall  have  a  new  lease, 
a  surrender  ; '  nor  if  a  lessee  accepts  a  new  lease  in  trust 
for  another.'  But  it  seems  that  if  a  lessee  redemises  to 
the  lessor  for  his  whole  term,  reserving  a  rent,   that 

1  Sid.  75;  Perryn  v.  AUen,  Cro.  *  Kittle  v.  St.  John,  7  Neb.  73. 

Eliz.  173.    It  is,  however,  to  be  If  the  tenancy  is  at  wUl  and  the 

observed,  that,  with  regard  to  an  tenant  quits  with  the    landlord's 

actual  surrender  by  deed,  a  differ-  consent,  this  consent  and  accept- 

ent  rule  prevails.    The  Bishop  of  ance  of  possession  operates  as  a 

Rochester  v.  Bridges,  1  B.  &  Ad.  waiver  of  notice,  and  is  a  valid 

847.  surrender.     Farson  v.  Goodale,  8 

>  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Surrender  (I.  1) ;  Allen  (Mass.)  202. 

Mellows  V.  May,  Cro.  Eliz.  874.  '  Earl  of  Berkeley  v.  Archbp.  of 

«  Brook  V.  Gering,  Cro.  Car.  197.  York,  6  East,  86  ;  Earl  of  Egre- 

'  Gie  V.  Rider,  1  Sid.  75  ;   Gyb-  mont  v.  Courtnay,  11  Q.  B.  702. 

son  V.   Searl,  Cro.  Jac.  176,  184 ;  '  John  v.  Jenkins,  ante. 

Earl  of  Arundel  v.  Lord  Gray,  3  '  Porris  v.  Allen,  Cro.  Eliz.  173. 

Dyer,  200  h ;  Woodward  v.  Aston,  ^  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Surrender  (H.) 

1  Ventr.  396.  (L.  1). 


1166  By  Suerendee.  [§  491. 

amounts  to  a  surrender.'  A  notice  to  quit  at  a  furture 
day  cannot  operate  as  a  surrender  ; '  but  a  written  request 
by  the  tenant  to  his  landlord  to  relet  the  premises  to  some 
other  person  may,  when  acted  on,  amount  to  a  surrender 
by  act  and  operation  of  law." 

Sec.  491.  Effect  of  an  invalid  new  lease.— No  implied  sur- 
render by  the  grant  of  a  new  lease  wiU  take  effect  if  the 
new  lease  is  absolutely  void : '  or  if  the  new  lease  does 
not  pass  an  interest  according  to  the  contract  and  intention 
of  the  parties,  an  acceptance  of  it  does  not  amount  to  an 
implied  surrender  of  the  old  lease."  The  acceptance  of 
voidable  lease  which  is  afterwards  made  void  contrary  to 
the  intention  of  the  parties,  but  which  has  operated 
to  pass  some  part  of  the  term  contracted  for,  is  not  a 
surrender  of  a  valid  former  lease  inconsistent  therewith  : 
therefore,  where  a  tenant  for  life,  with  a  power  of  leasing, 
made  a  lease  of  part  of  some  land,  which  was  not  a  good 
execution  of  the  power,  in  consideration  of  the  surrender 
of  two  prior  leases  of  the  whole  of  the  land,  and  in  order 
to  effectuate  an  agreement  entered  into  between  the  lessee 
and  another  person  for  the  sale  of  the  remaining  part  of 
the  land,  which  the  lease  recited  that  it  was  intended  to 
lease  to  the  vendee  by  indenture  of  even  date,  and  which 
was  done  ;  it  was  held,  after  the  death  of  the  tenant  for 
life,  that  this  new  lease  as  to  the  premises  thereby  demised 
did  not  operate  as  a  surrender  of  the  two  prior  leases.' 
So  where  a  tenant  for  life,  with  power  of  leasing,  granted 
a  lease  in  ' '  consideration  of  the  surrender  up  "  of  a  former 
lease,  "which  surrender  is  thereby  made  and  accepted," 

1  Lloyd  V.  Langford,  3  Mod.  175 ;  East,  86  ;  Bromley  v.  Stanley,  4 
Smith  V.  Mapleback,  1  T.  R.  441.  Burr.  2310 ;    Earl  of  Egremont  v. 

2  Murrell  v.  Milward,  3  M.  &  W.  Courtnay,  11  Q.  B.  703  ;  Smith, 
338;  Bessell  v.  Landsberg,  7  Q.  L.  &  T.  307  (3d  ed.);  3  Prest. 
B.  638.  Conv.  164,  165. 

8  NickeUs  v.  Atherstone,  10  Q.  «  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Estates  (G.  13) ; 

B.  944,  and  the  same  is  true  when  Whitney  v.  Myers,  1  Duer,  366 ; 

the  premises  are  relet  at  the  re-  Schiefflin  v.  Carpenter,  15  Wend, 

quest  and  for    the    benefit    of  a  (N.  Y.)  400 ;    Eton  v.  Suyster,  60 

surety  on  the  lease.     McKenzie  v.  N.  Y.  253. 

Farrell,  ante.  «  Biddulph    v.   Poole,  11  Q.   B. 

*  Abbott    V.    Parsons,    3    Burr.  713 ;   Eaii  of  Berkeley  v.  Archbp. 

1807  ;  Wilson  t.  Sewell,  4  Burr.  of  York,  6  East,  86 ;  2  Smith,  L.  C. 

1980;    1  W.   Blac.   917;    Earl  of  655  (4th  ed.) ;  Smith,  L,  &  T,  308  (3d 

Berkeley  v.   Archbp.   of  York,  6  ed.). 


CHAP.  XLV.]  New  Lease.  1167 

it  was  held,  the  new  lease  not  being  a  good  execution  of 
the  power,  and  therefor  voidable,  did  not  operate  as  a  sur- 
render of  the  prior  lease.'  Where  a  voidable  lease,  which 
had  been  granted  in  consideration  of  a  surrender  by  deed 
executed  a  few  days  before  of  a  prior  lease,  was  ad  voided, 
it  was  held,  that  the  first  lease  was  not  revived  by  such 
avoidance." 

Sec.  492.  EflFeet  of  a  new  lease  of  part  only.— If  a  lessee 
for  years  accepts  a  new  lease  by  indenture  of  part  of  the 
lands,  it  is  a  surrender  for  that  part  only,  and  not  for 
the  whole  ;  °  and  though  a  contract  for  years  cannot  be 
so  divided  or  severed — as  to  be  avoided  for  part  of  the 
years  and  to  subsist  for  the  residue— either  by  act  of  the 
party  or  act  in  law,  yet  the  land  itself  may  be  divided 
or  severed,  and  he  may  surrender  one  or  two  acres  either 
expressly  or  by  act  of  law,  and  the  Jease  lor  the  residue 
will  stand  good  and  imtoucTied.'  If  there  are  two  lessees 
for  life,  or  years,  and  one  of  them  takes  a  new  lease  for 
years,  it  is  a  surrender  of  his  share  only.' 

•  Earl  of  Egremont  v.  Courtnay,  139  ;  S.  C.  cited  from  the  record, 

11  Q.  B.  703  ;  overruling  Earl  of  5  B.  &  C.  133  ;  Swaine  v.  Holman, 

Egremont    v.   Forwood,  3   Q.  B.  Hob.    303-4;     MeUows    v.    May, 

637.  ante;    Watt  v.   MaydeweU,  Litt. 

'  Murray  v.  Bridges,  1  B.  &  Ad.  379 ;  Johnstone  v.  Huddleston,  4 

847.     A  surrender   is  effected  If  B.  &  C.  933,  934;   Co.  Litt.  318,  6; 

the  tenant  relets  to  his  landlord  Plowd.  107,  6;  Lyon  v.  Eeed,  13 

for  the  entire  term,  reserving  an  M.  &  W.  385.    So,  if  three  persons 

annual  rent ;  Lloyd  v.  Langford,  lease  certain  premises,  and  after- 

2  Mod.  174 ;    Winton  v.  Pinkeney,  wards  two  of  the  same  lessors  let 

3  Lev.  80 ;  WUson  v.  Pig,  3  Keb.  the  same  again  to  the  same  lessee, 
95 ;  Cartwright  v.  Pinkeney,  1  the  second  lease  amounts  to  a  sur- 
Ventr.  271 ;  Smith  v.  Mapleback,  render  of  tlie  first,  as  to  their  two 
IT.  R.  441 ;  though  not  if  he  re-  parts,  and  a  new  demise  pro 
tains  a  reversion.  2  Rol.  Ab.  497,  tanto ;  the  old  lease  continuing, 
pi.  13.  So,  if  the  lessee,  whether  as  to  the  third  part,  the  lease  of 
for  years  or  for  life,  MeUows  v.  him  who  did  not  join  in  the 
May,  Cro.  Eliz.  873;  Lit.  s.  144;  second.  Tubervil  v.  Stokton,  3 
Courtail  v.  Thomas,  9  B.  &  0.  398 ;  Lev.  117.  If  the  new  lease  com- 
Bemard  v.  Bonner,  Al.  58-9  ;  prises  only  part  of  the  lands  origi- 
Shep.  Touch.  301,  accepts  an  es-  nally  demised,  it  will  operate  as  a 
tate  or  interest  in  the  demised  surrender  pro  tanto.  Fish  v. 
premises  incompatible  with  his  Campion,  2  Rol.  Ab.  498  (M.) ; 
tenure  under  the  lease  ;  as  if  he  Williams  v.  Sawyer,  3  B.  &  B.  70. 
accepts  a  second  lease  of  the  same  *Earl  of  Carnarvon  v.  ViUebois, 
lands,  to  commence  during  the  13  M.  &  W.  343  ;  Morrison  v.  Chad- 
continuance  of  the  first.  Close  v.  wick,  7  C.  B.  366  ;  Cole  Ejec.  336. 
MacCuUough,  Gilb.  Eq.  235;  *Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases,  (S.  3). 
Wrottesley  v.  Adams,  3  Dy.  177,  ^  Shep.  Touch.  303  ;  Herryong  v. 
b;  Corbet's  Case,  3  Dy.  280,  a;  Goddand,  1  Dy.  45,  &. 
Colboume    v.  Mixstone,  1  Leon, 


1168  By  Surrender.  .  [§  493. 

An  assignment  of  a  lease  to  the  lessor  for  collateral 
purposes  merely — as,  to  secure  a  loan,  &c. — does  not 
operate  as  a  surrender,  although  such  would  be  the  effect 
of  an  unconditional  assignment.'  If  the  tenant  sur- 
renders the  possession  to  the  landlord,  who  accepts  the 
same,  a  surrender  is  effected  without  any  written  agree- 
ment,"' and  such  is  also  the  result  when  the  tenant  with- 
draws from  the  possession  and  the  landlord  resumes 
possession ; '  but  in  the  latter  case,  the  possession 
must  have  been  resumed  by  the  landlord  in  such  a  man- 
ner as  to  warrant  an  inference  that  his  possession  is 
inconsistent  with  any  outstanding  estate  of  the  tenant.* 

Sec.  493.  By  estoppel.— By  act  and  operation  of  law.— The 
term  "surrender  by  operation  of  law"  is  properly  ap- 
plied to  cases  where  the  owner  of  a  particular  estate  has 
been  party  to  some  act  having  some  other  object  than 
that  of  a  surrender,  but  which  object  cannot  be  effected 
while  the  particular  estate  continues,  and  the  validity  of 
which  act  he  is  by  law  estopped  from  disputing."  Such 
surrender  is  the  act  of  the  law,  and  takes  place  independ- 
ently, and  even  in  spite  of,  the  intention  of  the  parties' 
It  is  presumed  to  have  preceded  the  act  to  which  the 
tenant  is  party.'  The  act  in  pais,  which  bind  parties  by 
way  of  estoppel,  are  acts  of  notoriety,  not  less  formal 
and  solemn  than  the  execution  of  a  deed  :  as,  for  instance, 
Uvery,  entry,  acceptance  of  an  estate,  and  the  like." 

Sec.  494.  By  consent  and  acceptance  of  possession.— A 
tenancy  from  year  to  year  cannot  be  determined  unless 
there  is  either  a  legal  notice  to  quit  or  a  surrender,"  and 

'  Breese  v.  Bangs,  3  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Vin.  Abr.  tit.  Surrender  (F.)  (G.) ; 

Y.)  474.  Cole  Ejec.  235. 

2  Lamar  v.  McNamee,  10  G.  &  J.  « Lyon  v.  Reed,  13  M.  &  W.  385. 

(Md.)  117  :  Dodd  v.  Acklow,  6  M.  '  9  C.  B.  634,  note. 

&  G.  673 ;  Grimman  v.  Legge,  8  B.  « NickeUs  v.  Atherstone,  10  Q.  B. 

&  R.  834  ;  Hanham  v.   Sherman,  944. 

114  Mass.  19.  'Read  v.  Ridout,  5  Taunt.  519. 

2  McKinney  v.  Reader,  7  Watts  In  Rice  v.  Dudley,  65  Ala.  68,  it 

(Pa.)  133.  was  held  that,  iE  the  tenant  aban- 

^McKenzie  v.  FarreU,  4  Bosw.  dons  the  leased  premises  before  the 

(N.  Y.)193,  -expiration  of  the  term,  the  landlord 

^  Lyon  V.  Reed,  11  M.  &  W.  385  ;  may  at  his  election,  at  once  enter 

Bessell  v.  Landsberg,  8  B.  B.  638  ;  and  determine  the  contract  and  re- 

Com.   Dig.  tit.  Surrender,  (I.) ;  30  .  cover  the  rent  due  up  to  the  time 


CHAP.  XLv.]    Acceptance  of  Possession. 


1169 


therefore  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  created  by  parol, 
is  not  determined  by  a  parol  license  from  the  landlord  to 
the  tenant,  to  quit  in  the  middle  of  a  quarter,  and  the 
tenant's  quitting  the  premises  accordingly  ; '  but  where 
upon  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  determinable  at  a 
quarter's  notice,  the  lessor  licensed  the  tenant  to  quit 
in  the  middle  of  a  quarter,  and  the  tenant  quit,  and  the 
lessor  accepted  possession  ;  it  was  held  to  be  a  surrender 
by  operation  of  law,  destroying  the  right  to  rent  for  the 
whole  or  any  part  of  the  current  quarter."  If  a  lease  is 
surrendered  conditionally,  the  surrender  does  not  take ' 
_eff ect  unless  the  condition  is  performed  ;  °  but  an  uncon- 
ditional agreement  to  surrender,  acted  upon  by  both 
parties,  by  the  tenant  by  giving  up  possession,  and  by 
the  landlord  by  reassuming  possession  or  reletting  the 
premises,  is  operative  as  a  surrender.  In  other  words, 
an  executed  agreement  to  surrender  is  operative  as  a 
surrender."  In  pursuance  of  this  rule,  where  the  lessee 
informs  the  landlord  that  if  he  (the  landlord)  continues 

ells  V.  Atherstone,  11  Jur.  778,  the 
Court  of  Queen's  Bench  dissented 
from  the  reasoning  and  observa- 
tions on  the  previous  cases  in  that 
judgment,  and  said  there  veas  no 
estoppel  in  the  case,  although  the 
judgment  was  correct.  In  Bid- 
dulph  v.  Poole,  12  Jur.  450,  is  an 
elaborate  judgment  upon  the  effect 
of  a  surrender  by  acceptance  of  a 
new  lease,  which  is  voidable  and 
afterwards  avoided ;  and  it  was 
there  held,  that,  to  operate  as  a 
surrender,  the  estate  passing  by 
the  new  lease  must  be  such  as  was 
contemplated  by  the  parties  at  the 
time.  See  Lyon  v.  Eeed,  discussed, 
2  Smith's  Leading  Cases,  459  a, 
4591 

2  AUen  V.  Devlin,  6  Bos.  (N.  Y.) 
1 ;  Lamar  v.  McNamee,  10  G.  &  J. 
(Md.)  116  ;  Grimman  v.  Legge,  8 
B.  &  C.  324  ;  Brown  v.  Burtinshaw, 

7  D.  &  E.  603  ;  Furnivall  v.  Grove, 

8  B.  C.  N.  S.  496 ;  Bac.  Abr.  tit. 
Leases  (S.  2) ;  3  Smith,  L.  C.  655. 

sHamerton  v.  Stead,  3  B.  C.  478; 
Coupland  v.  Maynard,  12  East, 
134. 

*  Whitney  v.  Myers,  1  Duer.  (N. 
Y.)  266  ;  Davison  v.  Gent,  1  H.  & 
N.  744. 


of  the  abandonment  ;  or,  he  may 
suffer  the  premises  to  remain  va- 
cant, and  sue  on  the  contract  for 
the  entire  rent ;  but  he  cannot  take 
possession  of  the  premises,  and  af- 
terwards treat  the  contract  as  still 
subsisting.  An  eviction  by  the 
landlord  is  not  a  mere  trespass  ; 
but  something  of  a  grave  and  per- 
manent character,  done  by  him 
with  the  intention  of  depriving  the 
tenant  of  the  possession  of  the 
leased  premises ;  the  question  of 
eviction  vel  non  depending  on  the 
facts,  and  being  a  matter  for  the 
decision  of  the  jury. 

'  MoUett  V.  Brayne,  3  Camp.  103 
Thompson  v.  Wilson,  2  Stark.  379 
Gore  V.  Wright,  6  Ad.  &  El.  118 
Whitehead  v.  Clifford,  5  Taunt 
518  ;  Dodd  v.  Acklom,  6  M.  &  G, 
Stone  V.  Whitney,  2  Stark, 
Reeve  v.  Bird,  4  C.  M.  &  K. 
Thomas  v.  Cooke,  2  B.  &  Aid 
Matthews  v.  Sawell,  8  Taunt, 
Phipps  V.  Sculthorpe,  1  B.  & 
50  ;  Grimman  v.  Legge,  2  B. 


673 
235 
31; 
119 
270 
Aid. 


&  C.  324;  Walls  v.  Atcheson,  3 
Bing.  463 ;  Havland  v.  Bromley,  1 
Stark.  455  ;  Redpath  v.  Roberts,  3 
Esp.  825.  But  the  doctrine  of  these 
cases  has  bften  much  shaken  by 
Lyon  V.  Reed,  ante  ;  but  in  Nich- 


iiro 


By  Surrender. 


[§  494. 


to  accept  rent  from  a  subtenant  of  the  lessee,  he  (the 
lessee)  should  leave,  and  the  landlord  said  he  might 
leave ;  which  the  tenant  did  do,  giving  up  the  key, 
vsrhich  the  landlord  kept.  It  was  held  a  vahd  surrender.' 
If  a  tenant  consents  that  the  lessor  may  grant  a  lease  of 
the  premises  to  another,  and  gives  up  possession  to  the 
new  lessee,  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law  transpires." 
Where  the  tenant  abandons  the  premises,  and  the  land- 
lord enters  to  make  repairs,  it  is  such  an  acceptance  as 
will  establish  a  surrender,"  and  so  is  an  actual  and  con- 
tinued change  of  possession  by  the  mutual  consent  of 
the  landlord  and  tenant,  whether  the  premises  are  in  the. 
possession  of  the  landlord  or  a  third  person  ;  *  and  such 
may  be  the  effect  even  if  the  tenant  himself  retains 
possession,  if  he  does  not  hold  as  tenant.  Thus,  where 
the  tenant  leased  a  ferry  of  the  owner  thereof,  but  after 
going  on  under  the  lease  for  a  short  time  he  entered  into 
an  arrangement  to  run  the   ferry   for  the  owner  at 


'  Amory  v.  Kiinoflsky,  117  Mass. 
357 

«isrickells  V.  Atherstone,  10  Q.  B. 
944 ;  Thomas  v.  Cook,  3  B.  &  Aid. 
119 ;  Davison  v.  Gent,  ante.  Al- 
though the  doctrme  of  Thomas  v. 
Cook  was  impugned  by  Lyon  v. 
Eeed,  13  M.  &  W.  285,  yet  the  lat- 
ter case,  so  far  as  it  affects  the 
main  pi'oposition,  has  been  over- 
ruled by  the  first  and  last  cases 
cited  above ;  and  in  Davison  v. 
Gent,  Pollock,  C.  B.,  says:  "In 
Nickells  v.  Atherstone  the  Court 
of  Queen's  Bench,  after  the  decision 
of  Lyon  v.  Eeed,  in  which  doubt 
was  thrown  upon  Thomas  v.  Cook, 
said  that  they  did  not  assent  to 
the  observations  in  that  case  on 
the  decision  in  Thomas  v.  Cook. 
It  must  therefore  be  taken  to  be 
established  that  where  a  lessee  as- 
sents to  the  lease  being  granted  to 
another,  and  gives  up  his  ovm,  pos- 
session to  the  "new  lessee,  that  it  is 
a  surrender  by  operation  of  law." 
In  Nickells  v.  Atherstone,  ante, 
the  landlord  who  had  let  the  prem- 
ises to  a  new  tenant,  and  put  him 
in  possession  with  the  consent  of 
the  tenant,  afterwards  attempted 
to  recover  rent  of  the  first  tenant, 
LOED  DUEMAN,   C.   J.,  Said:  "As 


far  as  the  plaintiff  is  concerned,  he 
has  created  an  estate  in  the  new 
tenant  which  he  is  estopped  from 
disputing  with  him,  and  which  is 
inconsistent  with  the  continuance 
of  the  defendant's  term.  As  far  as 
the  new  tenant  is  concerned,  the 
same  is  true.  As  far  as  the  defend- 
ant is  concerned,  he  has  been  an 
active  party  in  this  transaction,  not 
merely  by  consenting  to  the  new 
relation  between  the  landlord  and 
the  new  tenant,  but  by  giving  up 
possession,  and  so  enabling  the  new 
tenant  to  enter."  This  is  the  doc- 
trine held  in  this  country.  Murray 
V.  Shave,  2  Duer.  (N.  Y.)  182; 
EandaU  v.  Rich,  11  Mass.  494; 
Smith  V.  Nevins,3  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  180 ; 
Hesseltine  v.  Leary,  16  Me.  212; 
Whitney  v.  Myers,  1  Duer.  (N.  Y.) 
266;  Baker  v.  Pratt,  15  111.  569; 
Creighv.  Blood,  1  J.  &  L.  133; 
Schiefflin  v.  Carpenter,  15  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  400 ;  Gheghan  v.  Young, 
23  Penn.  St.  18. 

^MacKellar  v.  Sigler,  47  How. 
Pr.  (N.  Y.)  20. 

4  Talbot  V.  Whipple,  14  AHen 
(Mass.)  177  ;  Hall  v.  Burgess.  5  B. 
&  C.  333  ;  Wood  v.  Partridge,  11 
Mass.  498. 


CHAP.  XLV.]    Acceptance  of  Possession.  1171 

monthly  wages,  which  was  carried  into  effect  by  the 
payment  of  wages  to  him,  the  court  held  that  this 
amounted  to  a  surrender."  An  agreement  that  the  term 
shall  be  put  an  end  to,  acted  upon  by  the  tenant's  quit- 
ting the  premises,  and  the  landlord  by  some  unequiyocal 
act,  such  as  taking  possession,  amounts  to  a  surrender 
by  operation  of  law."  Where,  therefore,  a  tenant  left 
the  key  at  the  counting-house  of  the  landlord, 
and  the  latter,  though  he  at  first  refused  to  accept 
it,  afterwards  put  up  a  board  to  let  the  premises, 
and  used  the  key  to  show  them,  and  painted  out 
the  tenant's  name  from  the  front,  it  was  held 
sufficient  eridence  of  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law." 
But  the  land]  ord  by  taking  possession,  repairing  and  adver- 
tising the  house  to  let,  cannot  be  regarded  as  accepting 
the  surrender  of  the  tenant's  term.  Such  acts  are  equally 
as  referable  to  the  interest  and  benefit  of  the  tenant  and 
do  not  discharge  him  from  his  covenant  to  pay  rent.* 

The  abandonment  of  the  premises  by  the  tenant,  is  a 
restoration  of  them  to  the  owner,  and  if  another  person 
claiming  title  takes  the  key  from  the  tenant  and  holds 
possession  he  is  a  disseizor.  ° 

The  tenant  of  a  house,  three  cottages,  and  a  stable  and 
yard,  let  at  an  entire  rent  for  a  term  ;  before  the  expira- 
tion of  it,  assigned  all  the  premises,  the  house  and  cot- 
tages being  in  the  possession  of  undertenants  ;  the  landlord 
accepted  a  sum  of  money  as  rent  up  to  the  day  of  the 
assignment,'  which  was  in  the  middle  of  a  quarter ;  the 
assignee  took  possession  of  the  stable  and  yard  only  ;  the 

'  Peter  V.  Kendal,  6  B.  &  C.  703.  discharges  the  lessees.    It  is  a  sur 

^  Phene  v.  Popplewell,   13  C.   B.  render  by  operation  of  law  which 

N.  S.  334  is  excepted  from   the   statute  of 

'Reeve  v.  Bird,  1  C,  M.  &  E.  31.  frauds.    Vandekar  v.   Eeeves,  40 

A  tenant  by  leaving  the  keys  of  Hun  (N.  Y.)  430. 

the  premises  to  the  lessor  andleav-  ^  Brenckmann     v.    Twibill,    89 

ing  them  on  his  table  with  the  Penn.  St.  58.     See  also  Meyer  v. 

statement  that  he  had  abandoned  Smith,  83  Ark.  327 — If,  however, 

the  premises  because  they  were  un-  the  landlord  demands  the  key  to 

tenantable,    does   not  necessarily  the  premises,  and  relets  them,  the 

amount  to  a  surrender.    Lucy  v.  tenant   is   discharged.    Smith  v. 

Wilkins,   33  Minn.  441.    A  parol  Wheeler,  8  Dal.  (Myers)  135.    Seeal- 

agreement  for   the   surrender  of  so  Stewart  v.  Mumford,  91  111.  58. 

premises    under    a   lease    having  Doukensley  v.  Levy,  38  Mich.  .54. 

more  than  a  year  to  run,  the  par-  ^  Krank  v,  Nichols,  6  Mo,  App, 

ties  acting  under  the  surrender,  73. 


1172  By  Surrender.  [§  494. 

occupiers  of  the  cottages  having  left  them  after  the  assign- 
ment, and  before  the  expiration  of  the  term,  the  landlord 
relet  them  ;  the  tenant  paid  no  rent  after  the  assignment, 
but  the  landlord  received  rent  from  the  undertenants, 
and  before  the  expiration  of  the  term,  he  advertised  the 
whole  of  the  premises  to  be  let  or  sold  ;  it  was  held,  that 
this  was  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law  of  all  the  prem- 
ises. But  where  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  orally  agreed 
with  his  landlord's  agent  to  quit  at  the  end  of  the  year, 
which  was  within  half  a  year ;  and  the  premises  were 
relet  by  auction,  at  which  the  tenant  attended  and  bid, 
but  the  new  tenant  was  not  let  into  possession ;  it  was 
held,  that  the  tenancy  was  not  determined,  there  not 
having  been  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law.'  It  is 
sufficient,  if  an  executed  agreement  to  give  up  the  lease 
and  all  rights  under  it  is  established  upon  the  tenant's 
part,  and  an  acceptance  thereof  by  the  person  having  an 
immediate  right  to  the  estate,  upon  the  other.''  If  there 
are  two  lessors,  and  the  lessee,  subsequent  to  the  lease, 
and  before  the  expiration  of  the  term,  conveys  the  estate 

'  Huddlestone   v.    Johnstone,    1  thews  v.  Sawell,  3  Moore,  362.    In 

McClel.  &   Y.   141  ;  Johnstone  v.  another  case,  by  agreement  dated 

Huddlestone,  4  B.  &  C.  923  ;  Mur-  in  May,  to  which  A,  B  and  C  were 

rell  V.  Milward,  3  M.  &  W.  328.  parties,  A  and  B  agreed  to  sell  by 

^  Nelson  v.  Thompson,  38  Minn,  auction  an  estate   to  which  they 

508  ;  Bedford  v.  Terhune,  30  N.  Y.  were  entitled  as  tenants  in  oom- 

453.    But  an   agreement    or  acts  mon.orindefaultof  such  sale,  that 

equivalent  thereto  must  be  shown,  such  parts  of  it  as  should  not  be  sold 

Tlius,  A  demised  a  farm  to  B,  un-  after  the  1st  August  and  before  the 

der  an  agreement   to  hold  from  1st  September  following  should  be 

Michaelmas,  1799,  to  Michaelmas,  divided  into  two  equal   lots   be- 

1816,  at  a  yearly  rent.    A  died,  and  tween  A  and  B;  and  that  1001. 

devised  the  premises  to  C,  who  in  should  be  paid  by  A   to  C,'  the 

1813  put  them  up  to  sale  by  auc-  principal  tenant,  as  a  remunerar 

tlon  ;  D  became  the  purchaser  and  tion  for  his  giving  up  possession  of 

also  agreed  to  buy  B's  outstanding  his  farm  at  Michaelmas  following  ; 

term,  without  C's  knowledge  or  and  C  agreed  to  give  up  his  farm 

assent.    D,  having  let  E  into  pos-  accordingly.    No  part  of  the  estate 

session,  became  bankrupt.   In  1814,  was  sold  by  the  1st  September,  but 

C,  by  letter  to  B,  admitted  that  E  some  portions  were  sold  subse- 
occupied  the  premises,  and  after-  quently,  and  the  remainder  was 
wai-ds  demanded  rent  from  him.  divided  between  A  and  B,  but  such 
C  and  D's  sissignees  afterwards  ex-  division  was  not  completed  till  the 
ecuted  mutual  deeds  of  release,  following  March.  C  continued  in 
and  D's  assignees  released  E  : —  possession,  by  the  desire  of  A  and 
Held,  that  C  was  entitled  to  re-  B,  until  that  time,  and  then  quit- 
cover  the  rent  from  1813  to  1816  ted  :— Held,  that  the  agreeme-it 
from  B,  as  there  had  been  no  sur-  was  not  a  surrender  of  A's  term, 
render  in  writing  of  his  interest  to  Weddall  or  Weddle  v.  Capes,  1  M. 

D,  and  as  C  had  not  assented  to  E's  &  W.  50. 
being   let   into    possession.    Mat- 


CHAP.  XLV.]    Acceptance  op  Possession. 


1173 


in  fee  to  one  of  the  lessees,  such  conveyance  does  not 
operate  as  a  surrender  of  the  lease,  because  the  assent  of 
the  other  lessor  is  essential  to  secure  that  result.'  An  ex- 
press agreement  need  not  be  shown,  but  the  landlord's 
assent  may  be  implied  by  operation  of  law  from  the 
manner  in  which  he  uses  the  property  after  its  abandon- 
ment by  the  tenant,"  and  exists  in  spite  of  the  intention 

'  Sperry  v.  Sperry,  8  N.  H.  477. 

'Ladd  y.  Smith,  6  Greg.  316; 
Jackson  v.  Gardner,  8  John.  (N. 
Y.)  894 ;  Coleman  v.  Maherly,  3  T. 
B.  Men.  (Ky.)  330.  A  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  created  by  pa- 
rol, is  not  determined  by  a  parol 
license  from  the  landlord  to  quit 
in  the  middle  of  a  quarter,  and  the 
tenant  quitting  the  premises  ac- 
cordingly. Botting  V.  Martin,  1 
Camp.  318.  But  contra,  see  Amo- 
ry  V.  Kunoffsky,  117  Mass.  357. 
But  if  in  such  case  both  parties  act 
upon  such  parol  notice  or  license 
to  quit,  that  is,  the  landlord  him- 
self take  possession,  so  as  to  render 
it  impossible  for  the  tenant  to  use 
or  occupy  the  premises,  the  ten- 
ancy is  thereby  legally  determined. 
MoUett  V.  Brayne,  3  Camp.  103; 
Thompson  v.  Wilson,  3  Stark.  379. 
But  a  landlord  putting  up  a  bill  in 
the  window  of  premises,  signify- 
ing that  they  were  to  let,  after  the 
tenant  had  left  without  notice  to 
quit,  will  not  determine  the  ten- 
ancy. Whitehead  v.  Clifford,  5 
Taunt.  518 ;  Grimman  t.  Legge,  8 
B.  &'  C.  334 ;  Brown  v.  Burten- 
shaw,  7  D.  &  R.  603.  It  seems, 
however,  that  the  tenant's  remov- 
al of  his  goods  with  the  landlord's 
assent,  and  the  delivery  of  the  key 
to  the  landlord,  and  his  acceptance 
thereof,  amounts  to  a  surrender  in 
law.  Eedpath  v.  Roberts,  3"Esp. 
235.  But  see  Reeve  v.  Bird,  1  C. 
M.  &  R.  31.  And  if,  during  a  let- 
ting from  year  to  year,  the  land- 
lord, with  the  assent  of  his  tenant, 
who  quits  the  premises,  aocepts 
and  treats  a  third  person  as  his 
(the  landlord's)  tenant,  this 
amounts  to  a  valid  surrender  of 
the  original  tenant's  interest  by 
act  and  operation  of  law.  But  in 
such  case  the  express  consent  of  all 
parties  to  the  change  of  tenancy 
seems  necessary,  Grimman  v. 
Legge,  ante ;  Ackland  v.  Lukey,  1 
P.  &  D.  640 ;  Gore  v.  Wright,  3  N, 
11. -33 


&  P.  343,  though  the  assent  of  the 
old  tenant  may  be  presumed  upon 
the  landlord's  producing  the  old 
lease  cancelled,  and  on  proof  of  a, 
user  in  his  office  to  have  all  old 
leases  sent  to  be  cancelled  before 
renewals  are  granted.  Reeve  v. 
Bird,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  31 ;  Thomas  v. 
Cook,  2  B.  &  Aid.  119;  Phipps  v. 
Sculthorpe,  1  id.  50 ;  Matthews  v. 
Sawell,  8  Taunt.  270;  Stone  v. 
Whiting,  2  Stark.  385;  Hamerton 
V.  Stead,  3  B.  &  C.  478 ;  Walls  v. 
Atcheson,  3  Bing.  463 ;  Bees  v. 
Wilhams,  3  C.  M.  &  R.  581 ;  Rex 
V.  Banbury,  1  Ad.  &  El.  136 ;  Wed- 
dall  V.  Capes,  1  M.  &  W.  50 ;  Walk- 
er V.  Richardson,  3  M.  &  W.  883. 
There  must  be  a  clear  case  of  sub- 
stitution and  acceptance  of  the 
new  tenant;  and  merger  of  the  old 
tenant's  interest ;  and  it  seems  that 
the  merely  taking  rent  from  the 
new  occupier  will  not  suffice.  Gra- 
ham V.  Wichelo,  1  C.  &  M.  188. 
Letting  to  A  and  B  as  partners,  A 
retires,  C  enters;  receipt  for  rent 
from  B  and  C,  A  not  discharged. 
Id.  And  unless  there  is  a  written 
demise  to  the  new  tenant,  or  he 
takes  possession,  it  appears  that  no. 
surrender  of  the  prior  tenancy  is 
effected  by  legal  operation.  Tay- 
lor V.  Chapman,  Peake's  Addl. 
Cas.  19.  Where  a  tenancy  is  thus 
determined  in  the  middle  of  a 
quarter,  while  the  rent  is  current, 
the  tenant,  in  the  absence  of  an  ex- 
press agreement,  is  not  liable  for 
a  proportion  of  the  current  quar- 
ter's rent  from  the  preceding  quar- 
ter day  to  the  day  of  quitting. 
Hall  V.  Burgess,  5  B.  &  C.  332 ; 
Grimman  v.  Legge,  ante  ;  Walls  v. 
Atcheson,  2  C.  &  P.  360 ;  3  Bmg. 
463.  There  cannot,  however,  be  a 
surrender  to  take  place  in  futuro 
and  therefore  where  a  tenant,  be- 
lieving that  his  tenancy  determined 
at  a  certain  time,  gave  a  written 
notice  to  quit  at  that  period,  which 
the  landlord  accepted  and  made  no 


1174 


By  Surrender. 


[§  494. 


of  the  parties ; '  it  is  an  inference  of  law,  from  the  facts, 
and  cannot  be  overcome  by  showing  that  the  landlord 
did  not  intend  his  acts  to  operate  as  an  acceptance  of  the 
surrender."  In  other  words,  a  surrender  may  arise  either 
from  the  express  agreement  of  the  parties,  or  by  opera- 
tion of  law.  And,  whenever  a  surrender  is  imphed  from 
the  acts  of  the  parties,  it  is  a  surrender  by  operation  of 
law.  This  inference  may  be  drawn  from  anything  which 
amounts  to  an  agreement  on  the  part  of  the  tenant  to 
abandon,  and  on  the  part  of  the  landlord  to  resume,  pos- 
session of  the  premises. '    It  has  been  held  that  ah  aban- 


objection  to,  but  the  tenant  having 
afterwards  discovered  that  liis  ten- 
ancy did  not  expire  until  a  later 
period,  and  he  gave  his  landlord 
another  notice  accordingly,  and  on 
possession  being  demanded  at  the 
time  named  in  the  first  notice  re- 
fused to  quit,  it  was  held,  that  the 
first  notice  to  quit  not  being  good 
as  a  notice  did  not  operate  as  such 
to  determine  the  tenancy,  and  that 
it  could  not  be  treated  as  a  surren- 
der by  note  in  writing  within  the 
statute  of  frauds.  Murrell  v.  Mil- 
ward,  3  M.  &  W.  338 ;  Weddall  v. 
Capes,  1  M.  &  W.  50,  overruling 
Aldenburgh  v.  People,  6  C.  &  P. 
213.  And  where  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year  agreed  hj  parol  with 
his  landlord's  agent  to  quit  at  the 
end  of  the  year  ensuing,  which  was 
within  half  a  year,  and  the  prem- 
ises were  relet  by  auction,  at  which 
the  tenant  attended  and  bid ;  but 
the  new  tenant  was  not  let  into 
possession  and  the  old  tenant  re- 
fused to  quit;  it  was  held  that  this 
did  not  amount  to  a  surrender  by 
operation  of  law.  Huddlestone  v. 
Johnstone,  1  M'Clel.  &  Y.  141.  And 
where  a  defective  parol  notice  to 
quit  was  given,  and  the  landlord 
verbally  assented  to  it,  y6t  the  no- 
tice was  holden  inoperative,  it  not 
being  in  writing,  and  there  not  be- 
ing any  sufficient  surrender  by  op- 
eration of  law.  Johnstone  V.  Hud- 
dlestone, 4  B.  &  C.  933,  m  which 
the  avowry  was  for  double  rent, 
and  it  was  held  that  double  rent 
could  not  be  recovered  on  a  defec- 
tive notice,  nor  single  rent  on  an 
avowry  for  double.  The  mere 
cancellation  of  a  lease,  without  a 
written  surrender,  does  not  amount 


to  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law ; 
Berkeley  v.  York,  6  East,  86 ;  Wool- 
ey  V.  Gregory,  3  Y.  &  J.  536 ;  and 
where  a  lease  appeared  to  have  the 
names  and  seal  of  the  parties  torn 
off,  it  was  decided  that  this  was 
neither  a  surrender  by  construc- 
tion of  law,  nor  prima  facie  evi- 
dence of  a  written  surrender. 
Courtail  v.  Thomas,  9  B.  &  C.  288 ; 
"Walker  v.  Richards,  ante,  330. 
The  acceptance  of  a  new  lease  for 
a  term,  to  commence  during  the 
existence  of  a  former  demise,  is  a 
surrender  of  the  first  term ;  Ham- 
erton  v.  Stead,  3  B.  &  C.  478 ;  Liv- 
ingston V.  Potts,  16  Johns.  (N.  Y.) 
28;  and  where  A  during  his  ten- 
ancy agreed  with  his  landlord  that 
he  and  B  should  become  tenants, 
and  B  entered,  this  was  held  to  de- 
termine the  first  tenancy.  Ham- 
erton  v.  Stead,  5  B.  &  C.  478. 

1  Creagh  v.  Blood,  3  J.  &  L.  133. 

^  NicheUs  v.  Atherstone,  11  Jur. 
778. 

8  Phene  v.  PoppleweU,  13  C.  B. 
N.  S.  340.  Where  by  statute  there 
can  be  a  surrender  only  by  deed 
or  writing,  yet  there  may  be  a 
surrender  by  operation  of  law,  al- 
though the  writing  itself  is  in- 
sufficient. McGlynn  v.  Brock, 
111  Mass.  219.  F  rented  certain 
premises  to  S  for  one  year  at  an 
agreed  rent  of  two  hundred  dol- 
lars, and  possession  was  taken  by 
S  under  the  agreement.  S  sent 
word  to  F  that  lie  would  no  longer 
retain  possession  of  the  premises, 
but  intended  to  abandon  them. 
F  directed  a  person,  in  the  event 
of  such  abandonment,  to'  take 
charge  of  the  premises.  After 
this,  S  left  the  premises,  and  the 


CHAP.  XLV.]     Acceptance  op  Possession. 


11Y5 


donment  of  the  premises  and  a  delivery  of  the  keys  to, 
and  an  acceptance  of  them  by  the  landlord,  amounts  to  a 
surrender,  because  from  these  circumstances  a  mutual 
agreement  to  that  end  may  be  presumed  ; '  but  this  is  not 
regarded  as  a  sound  rule,  and  it  is  now  held  that  some- 
thing more  than  an  abandonment  by  the  tenant,  and  a 
delivery  to  and  acceptance  of  the  keys  by  the  landlord, 
must  be  shown.  It  must  also  he  shown  that  he  suhse- 
quently  dealt  with  the  property  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
clearly  indicate  that  he  regarded  the  tenanfs  estate  at  an 
end."    If  a  landlord  in  the  middle  of  a  quarter  accepts 


possession  was  resumed  by  P.  It 
was  held,  that  the  contract  was 
put  an  end  to  by  the  concurreut 
act  of  the  parties,  and  that  the 
right  of  F  to  recover  rent  for  the 
time  S  enjoyed  the  premises  must 
be  decided  by  the  same  rules  as  if 
possession  had  been  originally 
taken  upon  an  understanding  that 
S  should  pay  what  was  reasonable. 
Fitch  V.  Sargeant,  1  Ohio,  353. 

'  Redpath  v.  Roberts,  3  Esp.  325. 

«Ladd  V.  Smith,  6  Oreg.  316. 
Where  the  tenant  moved  away 
from  the  premises  and  sent  the 
key  to  the  landlord  by  mail,  and 
he  did  not  return  it,  it  was  held  to 
furnish  no  evidence  of  a  surrender. 
Thomas  v.  Nelson,  69  N.  Y.  118. 
Where  the  landlord  entered  into 
an  agreement  with  the  tenants  to 
relet  the  premises  for  them,  and 
they  delivered  the  keys  to  the 
landlord,  it  was  held  that  the  de- 
livery to  and  acceptance  of  the 
key  by  the  landlord  under  these 
circumstances  did  not  amount  to 
a  surrender,  or  a  taking  possession 
of  the  premises.  Morgan  v. 
Smyth,  70  N.  Y.  637.  See  also 
Reeve  v.  Bird,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  31. 
In  Griffith  v.  Hodges,  1  0.  &  P. 
419,  the  evidence  of  an  accept- 
ance of  the  surrender  was,  that 
after  the  tenant  had  left,  the  land- 
lord had  ordered  a  fire  to  be  buUt 
and  had  roasted  a  hare  at  it. 
Abbott,  C.  J.  said:  "If  a  land- 
lord, while  his,tenant  is  in  posses- 
sion and  use  of  apartments,  enters 
and  uses  such  premises,  or  any 
part  thereof,  that  will  deprive 
him  of  his  claim  to  rent.  But 
here  the  tenant  had  left  the  apart- 
ments vacant,  and,  as  it  was 
proper  that  fires  should  be  lighted 


in  them,  I  do  not  think  that  the 
plaintiff's  lighting  such  a  flre,  or 
even  making  some  use  of  it  when 
he  had  it  lighted,  is  a  sufficient 
taking  possession  of  the  premises 
to  deprive  him  of  his  right  to  rent. 
Where  the  landlord  accepted  the 
ieys  and  gave  a  receipt  for  them, 
and  also  relet  the  premises,  it  was 
held  a  siurender.  Randel  v.  Rich, 
11  Mass.  494.  A  mere  acceptance 
of  the  key  by  the  landlord  does 
not  of  itseu  establish  a  surrender, 
and  especially  is  this  the  case  if 
the  landlord  at  the  time  of  re- 
ceiving the  key  gives  the  tenant 
to  understand  that  he  does  not  ac- 
cept the  premises.  Townsend  v. 
Albens,  3  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
560.  See  also  Prentiss  v.  Wame, 
10  Mo.  601.  Where  the  landlord 
took  the  key,  and  deals  with  it  as 
though  it  were  his  own,  it  has 
been  held  that  the  jury  might 
from  this  fact  presume  a  surren- 
der, but  the  evidence  must  be 
such  as  to  warrant  a  presumption 
that  the  landlord  intended  to  re- 
sume possession.  Landas  v.  Holl- 
ingshead,  4  Plula.  (Penn.)  57; 
Hegeman  v.  McArthur,  1  E.  D.  S. 
(N,  Y.)  147.  See  also  Bloomer  v. 
MerriU,  1  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  485. 
But  in  Pier  v.  Carr,  69  Penn.  St. 
316,  it  was  held  that  the  fact  that 
the  landlord  accepted  the  key, 
put  up  a  "to  let "  and  had  repairs 
done,  did  not  'establish  a  surren- 
der. Oastler  v.  Henderson,  L.  R. 
1  Q.  B.  Div.  375.  See  Matthews 
V.  Tobenor,  39  Mo.  115 ;  Dodd  v. 
Acklom,  6  M.  &  G.  673 ;  Hunham 
V.  Sherman,  114  Mass.  19 ;  With- 
ers V.  Larrabee,  48  Me.  570 ;  Har- 
land  V.  Brownley,  1  Stark.  455. 
If  the  tenant  abandons  the  prem- 


1176 


By  Surrender. 


[§  494. 


from  his  tenant  the  key  of  the  house  demised,  under  a 
l^arol  agreement  that  upon  her  then  giving  up  the  pos- 
session the  rent  shall  cease,  and  she  never  afterwards  oc- 
cupy the  premises,  he  cannot  recover  in  an  action  for  the 
use  and  occupation  of  the  house  for  the  time  subsequent 
to  his  accepting  the  key.'  But  where  A  was  tenant  to  B 
of  rooms  fora  term  of  years,  and  upon  the  bankruptcy  of 
B,  A  sent  the  key  of  the  rooms  to  the  office  of  the  official 
assignee,  where  it  was  left  with  a  clerk,  who  was  told 
that  it  was  the  key  of  the  rooms  which  A  had  occupied  ; 
and  A  immediately  quitted  possession,  but  no  further 
communication  took  place  ;  it  was  held  not  to  amount  to 
a  surrender  by  act  and  operation  of  law."    The  landlord 


ises,  and  the  landlord  relets  them 
on  his  own  account,  a  surrender 
is  established,  but  not  merely  by 
proof  of  abandonment,  Stobie  v. 
Dills,  63  111.  433,  even  though  the 
landlord  advertises  the  house  to 
let.  Snyder  v.  Middleton,  4  Phila. 
(Penn.)  343.  The  fact  that  the 
landlord  relets  the  premises  does 
not  necessarily  evidence  a  surren- 
der ;  as  if  he  lets  them  for  and 
on  account  of  the  tenant.  Thus 
in  Bloomer  v.  Merrill,  1  Daly  (N. 
Y.  C.  P.)  485,  the  tenant  informed 
the  landlord  that  he  should  leave 
the  premises  on  a  specified  day, 
and  the  landlord  told  him  that  if 
he  did  he  should  let  the  premises 
on  his.  (the  tenant's)  account  and 
hold  him  responsible  for  the  rent, 
and  the  tenant  moved  out  and  the 
landlord  sent  a  person  to  occupy 
the  house,  it  was  held  not  to 
amount  to  a  surrender,  and  that 
the  tenant  still  remained  liable  for 
the  rent.  But  where  a  tenant  in- 
formed the  landlord  of  his  inten- 
tion to  leave  and  the  landlord  said 
that  he  ■was  sorry,  for  then  he 
must  get  someone  else  to  hire  the 
premises,  and  gave  the  tenant  per- 
mission to  leave  some  of  his 
things  on  the  premises,  it  was 
held  that  the  facts  afforded  evi- 
dence from  which  a  surrender 
could  be  implied.  Stanley  v. 
Koehler,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  354. 
If  the  tenant  abandons  and  the 
landlord  relets  the  premises,  giv- 
ing the  tenant  notice  that  he  does 
so  for  and  on  his  (the  tenant's)  ac- 
count, a  surrender  is  not  estab- 


lished. Peter  v.  Kendal,  6  B.  & 
C.  703;  Walls  v.  Atcheson,  3 
Bing.  463.  And  this  is  also  the 
rule  v?here  the  lease  provides  that 
in  case  the  tenant  leaves,  the  land- 
lord may^relet.  Ogden  v.  Rowe,  8 
E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  313. 

>  Whitehead  v.  Clifford,  5  Taunt. 
518  ;  Furnivall  v.  Grove,  8  C.  B. 
N.  S.  496. 

"  Cannan  v.  Hartley,  9  C.  B.  684. 
In  Auer  v.  Penn,  99  Penn.  St.  370  ; 
44  Am.  Rep.  114  ;  the  lessee  vacated 
the  premises  during  the  term  and 
gave  the  keys  to  the  landlord,  who 
took  and  retained  them ,  but  notified 
the  lessee  that  he  shoiild  hold  him 
for  the  rent,  and  subsequently  let 
the  premises  to  another  after 
notifying  the  lessor  of  his  intention 
to  do  so,  and  it  was  held  that  the 
lessee  was  liable  for  the  difference 
in  the  rent  received.  Paxsan,  J., 
said  :  "  one  party  to  a  contract  can- 
not rescind  it  at  pleasure.  And 
the  landlord  may  accept  the  keys, 
take  possession,  put  a  bill  on  the 
house  for  rent,  and  at  the  same 
time  appi'ise  his  tenant  that  he 
still  holds  him  liable  for  the  rent. 
All  this,  as  was  said  by  Mr.  Justice 
Rogers  in  Marseilles  v.  Kerr,  6 
Whart.  (Penn.)  500,  is  for  the 
benefit  of  the  tenant,  and  is  not 
intended,  nor  can  it  have  the  effect, 
to  put  an  end  to  the  contract  and 
discharge  him  from  rent.  A 
surrender,  a  release  or  an  eviction 
will  undoubtedly  relieve  a  tenant, 
and  it  was  said  by  Chief  Justice 
Gibson,  in  Fisher  v.  Milliken,  8 
Penn.   St,   111,  that  nothing  less 


CHAP.  XLv.]     Acceptance  of  Possession. 


iirr 


is  not  justified  in  re-entering  upon  leased  premises  and 
putting  another  tenant  in  possession,  simply  because  the 
tenant  removes  from  the  premises  during  the  term. 
Such  removal  does  not,  of  itself,  necessarily  constitute 
an  abandonment.'  Where  two  persons  let  a  house  by 
lease  in  writing,  one  of  whom,  after  signing  the  lease, 
never  further  interfered,  and  the  other,  before  the  first 
quarter's  rent  became  due,  accepted  the  key  from  the 
tenant's  wife ;  it  was  held,  that  there  was  a  sufficient 
surrender  by  the  tenant  which  bound  both  the  lessors, 


would  do  so.  This  remark  how- 
ever was  without  the  authority  of 
the  couit,  and  must  be  regarded  as 
dictvmi.  The  case  in  hand  does 
not  require  us  to  assert  so  broad 
a  proposition.  There  was  neither 
a  release  nor  an  eviction  here,  but ' 
the  surety  claimed  to  be  discharged 
because  after  the  tenant,  who  was 
his  principal,  sent  the  keys  to  the 
landlord,  the  latter  leased  the 
property  to  another  tenant.  Yet 
there  is  no  pretence  that  the  land- 
lord accepted  a  surrender  ;  on  the 
contrary  the  proof  is  clear  that  he 
declined  to  do  so,  and  notified 
the  defendant  below  that  he  would 
hold  him  for  the  rent.  This  notice 
was  repeated  on  more  than  one 
occasion  when  he  was  about  to 
lease  the  property  to  another  ten- 
ant. Yet  it*  was  urged  by  the  de- 
fendant below  that  such  subsequent 
leasing  by  the  landlord,  and  the 
acceptance  of  rent  from  the  tenant, 
raised  a  presumption  of  a  sur- 
render. A  surrender  of  demised 
premises  by  the  tenant  during  the 
term,  to  be  effectual,  must  be  ac- 
cepted by  the  lessor.  The  burden 
of  proof  is  upon  the  tenant  to  show 
such  acceptance.  He  sets  it  up  to 
relieve  himself  from  his  covenant, 
and  must  prove  it.  When  there- 
fore the  lessor  retains  the  keys,  and 
at  the  same  time  notifies  the  lessee 
that  he  wUl  hold  him  for  the  rent, 
there  is  no  room  for  the  presump- 
tion of  a  surrender.  Nor.  does  the 
renting  of  the  premises  to  another 
tenant  under  such  circumstances 
raise  such  presumption,  for  the 
reason  that  it  is  manifestly  to  the 
lessee's  interest  that  they  should  be 
occupied.  The  landlord  may  allow 
the  property  to  stand  idle,  and 
hold  the  tenant  for  the  entire  rent ; 


or  he  may  lease  it  and  hold  him  for 
the  difference,  if  any.  It  was  said 
in  Breuckmann  v.  Twibill,  89Penn. 
St.  58,  that  "taking  possession, 
repairing,  advertising  the  house 
to  rent,  are  all  acts  in  the  interest 
and  for  the  benefit  of  the  tenant, 
and  do  not  discharge  him  from  his 
covenant  to  pay  rent."  Much 
more  is  to  the  interest  of  the  tenant 
for  the  landlord  to  rent  the  prem- 
ises. If  at  the  same  rent,  the  ten- 
ant is  entirely  relieved ;  if  at  less, 
he  is  liable  only  for  the  difference. 
Upon  the  trial  in  the  court  below, 
the  learned  judge  instructed  the 
jury,  as  set  forth  in  the  second 
assignment  of  error,  as  follows : 
"  If  a  man  refuses  to  continue 
your  tenant,  gives  up  the  bouse 
into  your  hands,  why  then  you 
have  a  right  to  put  a  bill  upon  the 
house  and  try  to  rent  it ;  because 
if  you  rent  it,  it  is  so  much  saved 
to  Mr.  Auer,  so  much  saved  to  the 
surety  of  the  tenant,  because  you 
have  to  give  an  account  of  every 
cent  you  make  out  of  the  house; 
and  certainly  it  is  much  better  for 
the  tenant,  that  the  landlord  should 
rent  the  house  and  get  something 
for  it,  than  to  simply  lock  the  door 
and  lay  by  and  sue  the  tenant  or 
surety  for  the  whole  amount  of 
the  rent  for  the  whole  term  for 
which  he  has  taken  it ;  so  that 
being  for  the  benefit  of  both  parties, 
it  is  no  presumption  that  the  land- 
lord has  accepted  a  surrender,  that 
he  has  taken  and  leased  the  house." 
We  see  no  error  in  this.  It  is  good 
sense  as  well  as  good  law.  The 
doctrine  of  this  case  seems  to  fall 
within  the  rule  clearly  stated  in 
the  text. 

'Chancey  v.  Smith,  35  W.  Va 
404. 


11Y8  By  Surrender.  [§  495. 

the  wife  of  the  tenant  acting  as  his  agent,  and  the  lessor 
who  accepted  the  key  as  the  agent  of  the  other ; '  but  a 
plea  that  three  executors  had  agreed  to  accept  a  third 
person  as  tenant  in  lieu  of  the  defendant,  is  not  proved 
by  evidence  that  one  of  the  plaintiffs  had  made  the  agree- 
ment." Where  a  lessee  quitted  in  the  middle  of  his  term, 
apartments  which  he  had  taken  for  a  year,  and  the  lessor 
let  them  to  another  person,  so  that  the  lessee  could  not 
have  come  back  if  he  had  chosen  ;  it  was  held,  that  by  so 
doing  the  lessor  dispensed  with  the  necessity  of  a  written 
surrender.'  Where  the  owner  of  a  ferry  let  it  for  a  year, 
but  after  a  few  weeks  the  lessee,  finding  it  unprofitable, 
agreed  instead  to  become  servant  to  the  owner,  and  re- 
ceived daily  wages  for  attending  to  the  ferry  for  him,  it 
was  held  to  he  a  surrender  by  act  and  operation  of  law.' 
Where  a  tenant  fromyear  to  year  agreed  to  buy  the  free- 
hold of  the  land,  it  was  held,  that  the  agreement,  not 
being  absolute,  but  conditional  on  a  good  title  being 
found,  did  not  operate  as  a  surrender  of  the  tenancy  by 
operation  of  law." 

Sec.  495.  Acceptance  ofanothertenant  in  lieu.— A  tenancy 
from  year  to  year  cannot  be  surrenderd  by  the  mere 
agreement  of  the  landlord  to  accept  a  third  person  in  the 
place  of  his  tenant,  unless  such  agreement  is  in  writing, 
or  the  third  person  actually  takes  possession ; '  but  an 
oral  agreement  between  a  landlord  and  tenant  from  year 
to  year,  that  another  tenant  shall  be  substituted  in  his 
place,  who  is  accordingly  substituted,  and  thereupon  takes 
possession,  is  a  sufficient  surrender  to  determine  the 
former  tenancy.'    If  a  tenant  who  has  underlet  the 

1  Dodd  V.  Acklom,  6  M.   &  Q.  944:  Walker  v.  Richardson,  2  ,M. 

673.  &  W.  883  ;    Lawrence  v.  Faux   3 

3  Turner  v.  Hardey,  9  M.  &  W.  F.  &  F.  435  ;  Hobsonv.  Cowley,  36 

770.  L.  J.  Exchq.  309,  Watson,  B.;  Cole 

3Wallsv.  Atcheson,  SBing.  463.  Ejec.  325,  336.      A  lease  haying 

••Peter  v.  Kendal,  6  B.  &  C.  703.  been  executed  for  a  year,  to  com- 

'^Gray  v.   Stanion,  1  M.  &  W.  mence  in /m^mto,  the  tenant  wished 

695  ;  Tarte  v.  Darby,  15  M.  &  W.  to  abandon    it,   and    obtained    a 

601.  substitute,  who,  by  agreement  in- 

« Taylor  V.  Chapman,  Peake  Ad.  dorsed   on    the   lease,  agreed  to 

Cas.  19.  assume  the  lease  and  perform  aU 

'  Stone  V.  Whiting,_3  Stark,  335  ;  the  covenants,  but  changing  the 

NickeUs  v.  Atherstone,  10  Q.  B.  mode  of  paying  rent.    It  was  held, 


CHAP.  XLV.] 


Tenants  in  Lieu, 


1179 


premises  surrenders  the  term,  the  fact  that  the  landlord 
subsequently  informs  the  undertenant  that  the  rent  must 
be  paid  to  him,  as  the  original  tenant  has  no  estate  in  the 
premises,  is  sufficient  to  establish  an  acceptance.'  If  the 
lessee  has  been  guilty  of  any  fraud  in  inducing  the 
landlord  to  accept  a  substitute— as,  if  he  knows  that  the 
person  whom  he  seeks  to  have  substituted  is  insolvent  or 
irresponsible,  and  the  landlord  does  not  know  the  fact — 
there  is  no  surrender."  Where  a  landlord  grants  a  new 
lease  to  a  stranger  with  the  assent  of  the  tenant  under 
an  existing  lease,  and  the  latter  gives  up  his  own  posses- 
sion, that  is  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law.'  Where  A, 
being  tenant  from  year  to  year,  underlet  the  premises  to 
B,  and  the  original  landlord,  with  the  assent  of  A, 
accepted  B  as  his  tenant,  but  there  was  no  surrender  in 
writing  of  A's  interest ;  it  was  held,  that  these  circum- 
stances constituted  a  valid  surrender  of  A's  interest  by 
act  and  operation  of  law.'    Where  two  persons  being 


that  the  lessor,  by  aooepting  this, 
released  the  former  lessee,  and  he 
could  not  alter  the  effect  of  the 
surrender  by  expressing,  in  his 
receipts  for  rent,  that  it  was  paid  - 
under  the  original  lease.  Murray 
V.  Shave,  5  Duer.  (N.  Y.)  183; 
Smith  V.  Niver,  2  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
180.  By  consenting  to  a  change  of 
tenancy,  the  original  lessee  is  dis- 
charged. Page  V.  Ellsworth,  44 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  636. 

'  Bailey  v.  Delaplaine,  1  Sandf . 
(N.  Y.)  5. 

2  Bruce  v.  Euler,  3  M.  &  E.  3. 

»  Davison  v.  Gent,  1  H.  &  N.  744  ; 
26  L.  J.  Ex.  123 ;  Lawrence  v.  Faux, 
3  F.  &  F.  435. 

*  Thomas  v.  Cook,  3  B.  &  Ad.  119 ; 
3  Smith,  L.  C.  662,  665  (4th  ed.) ; 
Johnstone  V.  Huddlestone,  4  B.  &C. 
932  ;  Smith,  L.  &  T.  308,  310  ;  Wil- 
son V.  Sewell,  4  Burr.  1975  ;  Hall 
V.  Burgess,  5  B.  &  C.  332 ;  Walla 
V.  Atcheson,  3  Bing.  462;  Wood- 
cook  V.  Nuth,  8  Bing.  170 ;  Law- 
rence V.  Faux,  3  F.  &  F.  435.  In 
Hunt  V.  Gardner,  39  N.  J.  L.  530, 
it  is  held  that  a  .plea  setting  up  that 
a  lessee  assigned  his  lease,  and  that 
the  lessor  accepted  the  assignee  as 
his  tenant,  does  not  show  a  bar  to 
an  action  of  covenant  for  rent  on 
the  lease  against  the  original  ten- 


ant. The  rule  is  weU  established 
that  a  surrender  by  act  of  law  de- 
stroys the  privity  of  contract  be- 
tween the  lessor  and  lessee,  as  well 
as  the  privity  of  estate.  In  Smith 
V.  Niver,  2  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  180^  a  les- 
sor consented  to  a  change  of  ten- 
ancy and  permitted  a  change  of 
occupation,  and  received  rent  from 
the  new  tenant  as  an  original,  and 
not  as  a  subtenant,  and  it  was  held 
that  the  landlord  could  not  after- 
ward charge  the  first  tenant  for 
rent  accruing  during  the  occupa- 
tion of  the  second  one.  See,  a£o, 
Mines  Royal  Societies  v.  Magnay, 
18  Jur.  1028.  But  there  must  be  an 
assent  of  the  landlord  to  the  assign-, 
ment,  and  the  acceptance  of  the 
subtenant  by  tlw  landlord  vnth  the 
intent  to  substitute  him  in  the  place 
of  the  original  lessee.  The  case  of 
Thomas  v.  Cook,  2  B.  &  Aid.  119, 
sanctions  the  rule  that  a  surrender 
in  law  wiU  be  impHed  or  raised  up 
from  the  facts  that  a  tenant  has 
put  a  third  person  in  possession  of 
the  demised  premises,  and  that  such 
third  person  lias  been  accepted  as 
tenant,  with  the  assent  -of  the 
original  tenant ;  but  this  case  was 
criticized  strongly  in  Lyon  v.  Reed, 
13  M.  &  W.  285.  The  court,  in 
the    principal    case,    says:     "To 


1180  By  Surrender.  [§  495. 

tenants  from  year  to  year  of  two  closes  under  different 
lessors,  agreed  verbally  to  exchange  them,  which  they 
did,  and  then  the  arrangement  was  mentioned  to  a  person 
who  was  steward  of  both  the  lessors,  and  who  expressed 
his  assent  to  it,  it  was  held  that  this  was  evidence  of  new 
demises,  and  of  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law  of  the 
previous  interests  of  the  tenants.'  A  tenant  from  year  to 
year  died,  his  widow  remained  in  possession,  and  contin- 
ued paying  the  rent  to  the  landlord,  with  the  knowledge 
of  a  person  who,  above  a  year  after,  took  out  adminstra- 
tion ;  the  widow  still  continued  in  possession  for  a  year, 
paying  the  rent  as  before  ;  it  was  held  that  this  did  not 
amount  to  a  surrender  by  operation  of  law  of  the  tenancy 
from  year  to  year."  A  tenant  quitted  possession  of 
premises,  and  on  being  applied  to  for  rent,  stated  in  a 
letter  to  his  landlord,  that  he  hoped  his  landlord  would 
be  able  to  let  them  to  some  other  person  on  better  terms  ; 
this  the  landlord  did  a  few  days  after,  and  the  new  tenant 
entered  and  paid  rent :  it  was  held  that  these  facts 
amounted  to  a  surrender,  but  the  court  dbclined  to 
consider  the  effect  of  the  letter  as  evidence  of  a  surrender 
by  a  note  in  writing  within  the  statute  of  frauds. '  Where 
W  and  H,  who  were  partners,  by  agreement,  in  March, 

ascribe  the  effect  of  a  surrender  to  the  obligation  on  such  covenant 

the  mere  act  of   the  landlord  ac-  still  continues."    See,  also,  Griffith 

cepting  the  assignee  as  his  tenant,  t.  Hodges,  1  O.  &  P.  419  ;  Talbot, 

and  receiving  rent  from  him,  would  v.  Whipple,  14  Allen  (Mass.)  180 

be  going  beyond  the  precedents.  Stobie  v.  DiUs,  63  lU.  433 ;  Baker 

To  warrant  the  inference  that  the  v.  Pratt,  15  id.  568 ;   Hegeman  v, 

original  lease  has  been  annulled  the  McArthur,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  147 

facts  ought  to   be-  of  an  entirely  Dodd  v.  Acklom,  6  M.  &  G.  673 

conclusive  character."     See,  also,  Grimman  v.  Legge,  8  B.  &  C.  334, 

Mills    V.     Auriol,    1    Smith's    L.  The  mere  receipt  of  rent  by  the 

C.    (Phil.    ed.   Hare  &  Wallace's  landlord  from  an  undertenant  does 

notes)    1239,     where    it    is    said  not  evidence  the  landlord's  assent 

by    Lord    Kenyon    that,    "It    is  to  the  tenant's  abandonment  of  the 

extremely    clear    that    a    person  premises.      Slooum  v.   Branch,  5 

who  enters  into  an  express  cove-  Or.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  315 ;  Copeland  v. 

nant  in  a  lease  continues  hable  on  Watts,  1  Stark.  65  ;  Burnham  v. 

his  covenant,  notwithstanding  the  Hubbard,  36  Conn.  543  ;  Bacon  v. 

lease  be  assigned  over.     If  the  les-  Brown,  9  id.  334 ;  HiU  v.  Robinson, 

see  assign  over  his  lease  and  the  33  Mich.  34. 

lessor  accept  the   assignee  as  his         "  Bees  v.  WiLLiams,  3  C.  M.  &  R. 

lessee,  either  tacitly  or  expressly,  581 ;  Lyon  v.  Reed,  13  M.  &  W. 

it  appears  from  the  authorities  that  385  ;  Smith,  L.  &  T.  310  (3d  ed.). 
the  action  of  debt  wUl  not  be  against         ^  Doe  d.  HuU  v.  Wood,  14  M.  & 

the  original  lessee;  but  all  those  W.  683. 

cases  with  one  voice  declare  that         *  Nickells  v.  Atherstone,  10  Q.  B. 

if  there  be  an  express  covenant,  944 ;  Smith,  L.  &  T.  314  (3d  ed.). 


CHAP.  XLV,]       Previous  Underleases.  1181 

1827,  became  tenants  to  the  plaintiff,  and  in  1828,  W 
retired  from  the  partnership,  and  in  January,  1829,  H 
entered  into  partnership,  with  S ;  and  the  plaintiff  gave 
receipts  for  rent  as  received  from  H  after  W  retired,  and 
as  received  from  H  and  S  after  S  became  a  partner  ;  and 
also  gave  H  a  letter  to  his  attorney,  signifying  that 
a  lease  might  be  made  to  H  and  S,  but  which  was  kept  by 
H  and  not  acted  upon,  and  no  lease  was  prepared  ;  it  was 
held,  that  W  remained  liable  for  the  rent  accruing  at  the 
time  of  H  and  S.'  Where  premises  had  been  let  to  B  for 
a  term  determinable  by  a  notice  to  quit,  and  pending  the 
term,  A,  the  landlord,  agreed  to  let  0  stand  in  B's  place, 
and  0  offered  to  pay  rent ;  it  was  held,  in  an  action  for 
use  and  occupation  against  C,  that  he  could  not  set  up  as 
a  defence  that  B's  term  had  not  been  determined  either  by 
a  notice  to  quit,  or  a  surrender  in  writing."  Where  a 
sole  tenant  from  year  to  year,  before  the  termination  of 
his  tenancy,  entered  into  an  agreement  with  his  landlord 
for  a  lease  to  be  granted  to  him  and  another  jointly,  and 
both  entered  uT^on  and  occupied  the  premises  jointly  ;  it 
was  held,  that  the  first  tenancy  was  determined  though 
the  lease  was  never  executed  pursuant  to  the  agreement.' 

Seo.  496.  Will  not  prejudice  previous  underleases.— The 
surrender  of  a  lease  will  not  affect  or  prejudice  an  under- 
lease previously  granted,*  unless  indeed  the  subtenant 

'  Graham  v.  Wichelo,  1  Cr.  &  M.  Buoh  a  change  of  partners  a  sur- 

188 ;    Woodcock  v.  Nuth,  8  Bing.  render  will  be  presumed. 

170.     See,  also,  with  the  same  e£-  *  Phipps  v.  Sculthorpe,  1  B.  &  A. 

feet,  Beall  v.  White,  94  U.  S.  383.  60.     But  see  Hyde  v.  Moakes,  5  C. 

But  a  contrary  doctrine  has  been  &  P.  43. 

held  in  New  York  in  James  v.  •''  Hamerton  v.  Stead,  3  B.  &  C. 

Pope,  19  N.  Y.  334.    In  that  case  a  478. 

lease  was  made  to  a  firm  for  three  ■•  Beaden  v.  Pyke,  5  M.  &  S.  146  ; 
years,  with  the  privilege  of  renew-  Pleasant  d.  Hayton  v.  Benson,  14 
al ;  during  the  original  term,  two  East,  333  :  Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C. 
of  the  partners  retired,  and  the  &  P.  8 ;  Piggott  v.  Stratton,  1  De 
third  formed  a  new  partnership  G.  F.  &  J.  33;  Cole  Ejec.  336; 
with  another,  and  the  latter  firm  Smith,  L.  &  T.  315.  At  Michael- 
continued  in  possession,  after  the  mas,  1851,  W,  the  owner  of.  two 
expiration  of  the  term,  payingrent  adjoining  houses,  Nos.  4  and  5,  let 
according  to  the  conditions  of  the  No.  5  to  A,  as  a  tenant  from  year 
lease  :  held,  that  this  was  not  are-  to  year.  Defendant  having  be- 
newalof  the  tenancy  ;  and  that  the  come  tenant  to  W  of  No.  4,  A  let 
retiring  partners  were  not  liable,  him  the  cellars  under  No.  5,  from 
after  the  expiration  of  the  original  year  to  year  from  Michaelmas, 
term.  And  in  Kinsey  v.  Minnick,  1861.  There  was  in  the  front  cel- 
44  Md.  113,  it  was  held  that  after  lar  a  gas   meter   communicating 


1182 


By  Surrender. 


[§  497. 


expressly  assents  to  the  surrender  and  in  effect  attorns 
to  the  surrenderee,  to  hold  of  him  on  new  terms,  or  as 
his  agent  or  servant/  Where  a  lessee  mortgaged  ten- 
ant's fixtures,  and  afterwards  surrendered  his  lease  to 
the  lessor,  who  granted  a  fresh  lease  to  a  third  party,  it 
was  held,  that  the  mortgagee  had  a  right  to  enter  and 
sever  the  fixtures,  it  not  being  competent  to  the  tenant 
to  defeat  his  grant  by  the  subsequent  voluntary  act  of 
surrender." 


Sec.  497.  Operation  on  underleases. —Where  a  lessor,  in 
consideration  of  the  payment  of  an  annual  sum  during 
a  term  of  years,  grants  "certain  privileges  to  an  under- 
tenant which  the  mesne  landlord  was  incapable  of  con- 


■with  the  house  No.  5,  and  it  was  a 
term  of  the  letting  that  A  should 
be  allowed  to  go  to  the  meter,  if 
necessary,  whenever  defendant's 
premises  were  open.  In  July,  1871, 
it  was  agreed  between  A,  W  and 
D,  that  A  should  give  up  posses- 
sion of  No.  5  to  W,  and  D  became 
tenant  from  year  to  year  to  W 
from  Michaelmas,  1871.  Defend- 
ant was  aware  that  No.  5  was 
given  up  by  A  and  relet  to  D,  but 
no  notice  to  quit  the  cellars  was 
given  to  defendant.  In  March, 
1873,  D  put  up  in  the  cellars  a 
water  meter  communicating  with 
his  house,  without  either  objection 
or  express  permission  of  the  de- 
fendant. Afterwards  D  surren- 
dered his  interest  in  favor  of  the 
plaintiff,  and  W  let  No.  5,  expressly 
including  the  cellars,  to  the 
plaintiff  for  fourteen  years,  from 
the  S4th  of  June,  1872.  The 
plaintiff  entered  into  occupation, 
the  cellars  remaining  occupied  by 
the  defendant,  and  plaintiff,  with- 
out objection  or  permission  of  the 
defendant,  put  up  more  pipes  and 
some  bell-wires  in  the  cellars.  In 
July,  1873,  plaintiff  demanded  pos- 
session of  the  cellars,  but  defend- 
ant refused  to  give  them  up  with- 
out a  proper  notice  to  quit,  and  he 
retained  possession  till  April,  1873. 
On  the  10th  of  January,  1873,  the 
defendant  cut  off  the  plaintiff's 
water  supply  by  hammering  up 
the  service  pipe  passing  through 
the  cellars,  and  out  the  gas-pipes 
and  bell-wires.    Plaintiff    having 


brought  an  action  for  being  kept 
out  of  the  possession  of  the  cellars 
and  for  the  damages  caused  by 
defendant's  cutting  the  pipes,  etc., 
— Held,  that  defendant  was  entitled 
to  keep  possession  until  a  proper 
notice  to  quit  had  been  given :  for 
that  the  voluntary  surrender  by  A 
could  not  affect  the  interest  of  the 
defendant,  his  sublessee.  Second- 
ly, that  plaintiff  was  entitled  to 
damages  for  the  cutting  of  his  pipes 
and  wires ;  for  that  a  licensee,  un- 
der a  revokable  license,  was  en- 
titled to  notice  of  revocation  and  a 
reasonable  time  afterward  to  re- 
move his  goods.  Cornish  v. 
Stubbs,  L.  R.,  5  C.  P.  334,  followed 
on  the  latter  point.  Mellor  v. 
Watkms,  L.  R.,  9  Q.  B.  400;  Mc- 
Kenzie  v.  Lexington,  4  Dana  (Ky.) 
139.  A  party  seized  of  a  leasehold 
estate  for  hves,  subject  to  a  cove- 
nant against  waste,  cannot  defeat 
the  rights  of  a  mortgagee  under  a 
mortgage  with  which  he  himself 
incumbered  the  estate  by  a  mere 
confession  of  waste  to  the  land- 
lord, and  a  surrender  of  possession 
to  him  for  a  consequent  forfeiture 
of  the  lease.  As  against  such 
mortgagee,  and  even  as  between 
the  landlord  and  tenant,  a  re-entry 
for  the  forfeiture  by  suit  at  law  is 
necessary  to  terminate  the  lease. 
Allen  V.  Brown,  60  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  39. 

'Lambert  v.  McDonnell,  15  Ir. 
C.  L.  R.  136. 

''The  London  and  Westminster 
Loan  and  Discount  Co.  v.  Drake, 
6  C.  B.  N.  S.  798. 


CHAP.  XLv.]  How  Plead.  1183 

ferring,  a  surrender  to  the  latter  will  not  affect  the  ten- 
ant's liability  on  his  contract  with  the  paramount  les- 
see.' 

Formerly,  if  a  lessee  for  years,  who  had  underlet  for  a 
less  term,  surrendered  his  term  to  the  lessor,  whereby 
his  term  for  years  was  extinguished,  it  followed  that  the 
reversion  on  the  underlease  being  gone,  the  incidents 
thereto — as  the  rent  reserved  by  the  underlease  and  the 
covenants  therein — ^were  gone  also.'  But  the  4  Geo.  2, 
c.  28,  s.  6,  enabled  a  lessee  to  surrender  his  lease  for  the 
purpose  of  taking  a  new  one  without  a  surrender  of  an 
underlease,  and  saved  to  the  lessee  all  the  same  remedies 
against  the  underlessee  for  rents,  covenants  and  duties, 
and  to  the  original  lessor  the  same  remedies  for  rents 
and  duties  reserved  by  the  new  lease,  so  far  as  they 
exceed  not  the  rents  and  duties  reserved  in  the  former 
one,  out  of  which  the  underlease  was  derived,  as  if  the 
original  lease  were  stiU  kept  on  foot.' 

Where  a  lease  containing  a  personal  covenant  for  the 
payment  of  rent  is  surrendered,  the  personal  covenant  is 
-independent  of  the  estate  in  the  property,  and  as  to  rent 
previously  due  is  not  affected  by  IheBurrender,  but  the 
lessor  remains  a  specialty  creditor  for  the  rent  which 
accrued  due  before  the  sm-render.*  Eent  reserved  by 
the  lease,  quarterly  or  otherwise,  at  fixed  periods,  which 
is  accruing  when  a  surrender  is  made,  sinks  and  is 
entirely  lost." 

Sec.  498.  Howasiirrenderraust  be  alleged  in  pleading.— If 
a  surrender  is  by  acceptance  of  a  new  lease,  it  is  not  good 
pleading  to  say,  that  the  lessee  being  possessed  of  a  for- 
mer lease,  the  lessor  demised  to  him ;  but  it  should  be 
stated  that  the  lessee  surrendered,  and  then  the  lessor 
demised  ;  or  that  the  lessor  entered  and  demised  ; '  or, 

'  Doscher  v,  Shaw,  52  N.  T.  602.  'Grimman  v.  Legge,  8  B.  &  C. 

"Threr   v.    Barton,    Moor.    94;  334;  Slack  v.  Sharp,  8  Ad.  &  El. 

Webb    v.- Russell,  3   T.   B.    393;  366;  Dodd  v.  Acklom,  6  M.  &  G. 

Shep.  Touch.  301 ;  Burton  v.  Bar-  673 ;  Philips   v.  Benjamin,  9  Ad. 

clay,  7  Bing.  756.  &  El.  644 ;  Fumivall  v.  Grove,  8 

» Palk  V.  Marchetti,  1 B.  &  Ad.  715.  C.  B.  N.  S.  496. 

*  Attorney-General  v.  Obx,  3  H.  ^  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Surrender  (N.). 
L.  Cas.  240. 


1184:  By  StJREEHBER.  [§  499 

that  before  the  rent  claimed  became  due,  or,  before  the 
alleged  breaches,  the  said  demised  premises  and  all  the 
residue  of  the  term  then  to  come  and  unexpired  therein 
were  duly  surrendered  to  the  plaintiff  by  act  and  opera- 
tion of  law,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  defendant  then  giving 
up  to  the  plaintiff,  and  the  plaintiff  then  accepting  from 
the  defendant,  the  possession  of  the  demised  premises 
with  the  intention  of  then  putting  an  end  to  the  said 
term.'  A  lessee  ought  to  plead  that  he  surrendered  the 
estate  and  land ;  but  if  he  pleads  a  surrender  of  a  lease, 
it  is  sufficient  to  say  "the  demise  aforesaid."  Eegularly 
he  ought  to  show  that  the  lessor  assented  to  the  surren- 
der," but  the  omission  will  be  aided  after  verdict.  When 
it  is  alleged  that  the  lessor  agreed  to  the  surrender,  it 
wUl  be  intended  that  he  entered ;  but  it  is  not  unusual 
to  allege  a  re-entry  upon  a  surrender.'  In  debt  for  rent, 
a  plea  of  an  agreement  to  deliver  up  the  premises,  stat- 
ing that  they  were  delivered  up  and  accepted  accord- 
ingly, was  held  good  after  verdict,  not  as  setting  up  a 
surrender  of  the  tenancy,  but  as  a  valid  excuse  for  non- 
payment of  the  rent." 

Sec.  499.  When  presumed.— A  surrender  may  some- 
times be  presumed  where  direct  evidence  of  the  fact  is 
not  to  be  had."  But  such  presumption  must  arise  from 
facts  or  circumstances  independent  of  length  of  time, 
which  are  sufficient  to  warrant  a  jury  in  making  such 
presumption. '  The  court  will  never  presume  a  surrender, 
that  being  a  matter  of  fact  to  be  inferred  and  found  by 
a  jury.'  A  having  granted  a  lease  to  B  for  twenty-one 
years,  before  the  expiration  of  that  term  granted  another 
lease  of  the  same  premises  to  0  j  no  surrender  in  writing 
of  B's  interest  was  shown,  but  the  lease  granted  to  B 
was  produced  from  A's  custody  with  the  seals  torn  off, 
and  it  was  proved  to  be  the  custom  to  send  in  the  old 

1  Smith  V.  Lovell,  10  C.  B.  6.  118 ;  Smith  v.  LoveU,  10  C.  B.  6 ; 

=  CoUes  V.  Evanson,  19  C  B.  N.  1  Wms.  Saund.  236. 

S.  283,  Byles,  J.  '  Bridges  v.  Duke  of  Chandos,  2 

3  Cannan    v.   Hartley,   9   C.   B.  Burr.  1072. 

634 ;   Morrison  v.  Chadwict,  7  C.  *  Harrop  v.  Cooke,  6  Bing.  174. 

B.  266.  '  Cottrell  v.  Hughes,  15  C.  B.  532. 

^  Gore  V.  Wright,  8  Ad.  &  El. 


CHAP.  XLV.J  When  Presumed.  1185 

leases  to  A's  office  before  a  renewal  was  made ;  it  was 
held,  that  this  was  evidence  for  the  jury  to  presume  an 
assent  of  B  to  the  lease  of  0,  and  consequently  a  sur- 
render of  B's  interest  by  act  and  operation  of  law.'  An 
acceptance  of  a  surrender  of  a  lease  is  not  to  be  presumed 
from  the  circumstance  of  the  rent  having  been  paid  by 
a  third  person,  and  not  by  the  original  tenant." 

Sec.  500.  Surrender  may  be  presumed  when.— The  jury 
may  presume  the  surrender  of  a  term,  where  it  clearly 
appears  that  all  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  created 
have  been  fully  satisfied,  and  that  the  term  ought  in 
justice  and  equity  to  have  been  re-assigned  or  surrendered 
to  the  owner  of  the  inheritance,  especially  if  there  has 
been  any  subsequent  dealing  with  the  property  of  such  a 
nature  as  would  not  have  happened  with  reasonable 
men,  supposing  the  term  had  not  been  put  an  end  to,  or 
there  was  other  express  evidence  beyond  the  mere  lapse 
of  time  from  which  such  a  presumption  might  have  been 
made.'  But  mere  lapse  of  time  is  not  sufficient,*  espe- 
cially if  there  has  been  any  dealing  with  the  term,  or 
the  owner  of  the  inheritance  is  interested  in  upholding 
it."  The  presumption  of  a  surrender  can  arise  only 
where  a  title  is  shown  by  the  party  who  caUs  for  the 
presumption,  or  the  possession  is  shown  to  be  consistent 
with  the  execution  of  the  surrender  required  to  be  pre- 
sumed.' Such  presumptions  are  made  in  favor  of  the 
possession,  not  against  it.'  The  jury  may  presume  an 
old  satisfied  term  surrendered  to  the  cestui  que  use,  in 
order  to  substantiate  a  lease  executed  by  him.'    But  no 

1  Walker  v.  Richardson,  3  M.  &  B.  &  C.  305 ;  Blacknell  t.  Plow- 
"W.  882 ;  Davidson  v.  Gent,  1  H.  man,  3  B.  &  Ad.  573  ;  Rees  v. 
&  N.  744.  But  see  Courtail  v.  WiUiams,  3  M.  &  W.  749;  Gar- 
Thomas,  9  B.  &  C.  288 ;  Lyon  v.  rard  v.  Tuck,  8  C.  B.  331 ;  Cole 
Reed,  13  M.  &  W.  385.  Ejeo.  337. 

"  Copeland  v.  Watts,  1  Stark.  R.  ^  Earl  of  Egremont  v.  Langdon, 

96.  13  Q.  B.  811 ;  Fenwick  v.  Read,  5 

3  Hodson  V.  Staples,  3  T.  R.  684  ;  B.  &  Aid.  333. 

Syburn    V.   Slade,  4    T.    R.   683 ;  '  Graham  v.  Scott,  11  East,  478. 

Bowerman  v.  Syboum,  7  T.  R.  3 ;  ^  Harrop  v.  Cooke,  6  Bing.  174. 

Jones  V.  Jones,  7  T.  E.  45  ;  Bur-  '  Rees  v.  WiUiams,  3  M.  &  W. 

dett  V.  Wrighte,  3  B.  &  Aid.  710,  749,   758 ;  Brandon  v.   Calvert,  5 

•  730 ;    Putland  v.  Hilder,  id.  783,  Taunt.  170. 

791 ;  Bartlett  v.  Downes,  8  B.  &  »  Bowerman  v,  Sybourn,  7  T.  R, 

C.  616;  Lloyd  v.   Passingham,   6  3. 


1186  By  Surrender.  [§  500. 

surrender  or  reconveyance  from  trustees  •will  be  pre- 
sumed where  it  will  amount  to  a  breach  of  trust.'  And 
in  no  case  whatever  Can  the  court  presume  the  surrender 
of  an  outstanding  term  :  that  must  be  done,  if  at  all,  by 
the  jury,  as  an  inference  of  fact." 

A  judgment  for  an  instalment  of  rent  due  under  a 
lease,  which  is  rendered  upon  default,  without  release 
pleaded,  is  not,  in  an  action  for  subsequently  accruing 
rent,  evidence  that  the  term  had  not  in  the  mean  time 
been  surrendered,  and  the  tenant  released  from  liability 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  action.'  Where  a 
portion  of  the  demised  premises  has  been  surrendered, 
and  it  does  not  appear  that  the  value  of  the  use  of  them 
is  impaired  by  such  surrender,  the  landlord  may  recover 
the  entire  rent  reserved,  notwithstanding  such  partial 
surrender." 

'  Ld.  Byron  v.  Deardon,  8  East,  '  Hanham     v.     Sherman,     114 

248.                           '  Mass.  19. 

''CottreU  V.  Hughes,  15  C.  B.  •»  Smith  v.  Pcndergast,  26  Minn. 

533.  318. 


CHAP.  xLvi.]  When  it  Occurs.  1187 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

Meboeb. 

Sec.  501.    When  it  occurs. 

Skc.  502.    Merger. — ^Wliat  amounts  to  a  merger  of  a  term. 

Sec.  501.  When  it  occurs.— A  merger  occurs  when  a 
greater  and  a  less  estate  coincide  in  the  same  person,  with- 
out any  intermediate  estate.'  In  such  a  case,  at  law,  the 
less  estate  is  annihilated.  But  in  equity,  when  merges 
are  not  favored,  the  question  as  to  whether  the  estates 
merge  depends  upon  the  intention  of  the  parties"  and  the 
circumstance  whether  justice  requires  that  they  shall 
be  kept  separate.'  Where  there  is  an  intermediate  estate 
there  can  be  no  merge  either  at  law  or  in  equity.*  When 
two  concurrent  estates  meet  and  vest  in  the  same  person, 
only  one  can  exist,  and  consequently  they  are  merged, 
because  inconsistent  and  incompatible  ; '  but,  while  two 

•Eoberts  v.  Jackson,  1  Wend,  a  legal  and  equitable  estate  are 
(N.  Y.)  478  ;  Burton  v.  Barclay,  7  united  has  a  beneficial  interest  in 
Biog.  745  ;  Welsh  v.  PhiUips,  5  keeping  them  separate,  they  wiU 
Ala.  309.  In  Gary  v.  Warner,  63  not  merge.  Lockwood  y.  Sturde- 
Me.  71,  W  conveyed  to  his  two  sons,  vant,  6  Conn.  373  ;  People  v.  Dud- 
J  and  H,  who  simultaneously  gave  ley,  58  N.  Y .  333 ;  James  v.  Mow- 
back  to  Wa  life  lease.  Afterwards  rey,  3  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  346  ;  Fowler  v. 
H  arranged  his  undivided  interest  Foy,  63  lU.  875. 
to  J,  and  W  quit-claimed  to  J  all  ■*  Cook  v.  Brightly,  46  Penn.  St. 
his  interest  ia  the  life  lease.  Held,  439.  Even  though  the  iutervening 
that  the  life  estate  was  merged  in  estate  extends  only  to  a  moiety, 
the  reversion.  Clark  v.  Clark,  56  N.  H.  105  ;  Bell 

*  Eeed  v.  Latson,  15  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  v.  Tenney,  39  Ohio  St.  340  ;  Sahler 

9.   The  courts  will  presume  agaiost  t.  Signer,  44  Barb.   (N.   Y.)  606. 

it,  whenever  its  operation  would  be  And  it  seems  that  where  a  right  is 

disadvantageous.   Andrus  v.  Yree-  acquired  under  a  statute,  as  a  right 

land,  39  N.  J.  Eq.  394  ;    Smith  v.  of  way,  for  the  use.  of  one  or  more 

Holbrook,  1  Bufl.  Sup.  Ct.  (N.  Y.)  persons,  it  is  not  discontinued  by 

474..  the  unity  of  title  in  one  person  of 

'  Earle    v.    Washburn,  7  Allen  aU  the  land  through  which  it  pass- 

(Mass.)  95;   Lewis   v.  Starke,  18  es.    Flagg  v.  Flagg,  16  Gray  (Mass.) 

Miss.  30  ;  Sheldon  v.  Edwards,  35  178. 

N.  Y.  ?79  ;  CUft  v.  White,  15  Barb.  '  Bawlings  v.  Walker,  5  B.  &  0. 

(N.   Y.)  70;    Wilcox  v.   Davis,  4  111. 
Mian.  197.    If  the  person  in  whom 


1188  Merger.  [§  602. 

concurrent  estates  cannot  exist  in  the  same  person,  two 
successive  estates  may.  Ttius,  if  a  tenant  for  years  ob- 
tains the  fee '  or  a  Hfe  estate  jp^^r  autre  vie,  the  two  estates 
being  concurrent  cannot  exist  together,  and  are  merged.' 
But  if  a  tenant  pur  autre  vie  takes  a  lease  for  years,  to 
commence  when  his  hfe  estate  ceases,  he  remains  tenant 
of  the  freehold  so  long  as  the  cestui  que  vie  hves,  amen- 
able to  the  reversioner  for  every  duty  to  which  that  ten- 
ancy is  subject ;  and  upon  the  death  of  the  cestui  que  vie 
he  becomes  tenant  for  years,  and  amenable  to  the  rever- 
sioner for  aU  the  duties  of  that  tenancy.  He  does  not, 
and  never  can  stand  in  the  position  which  the  law  of 
merger  is  intended  to  prevent,  of  reversioner  to  him- 
self. °  Whatever  doubts  may  formerly  have  existed,  it 
seems  now  to  be  well  settled,  that  merger  will  not  take 
place  where  a  term  for  years  and  a  freehold  subsist  in 
the  same  person,  if  held  in  different  rights,  and  the  ten- 
ant did  not  acquire  the  freehold  by  his  own  act* 

Sec.  502.  Merger— What  amounts  to  a  metger  of  a  term. 
— A  lease  for  years  may  be  determined  by  merger  ;  that 
is,  when  there  is  a  union  of  the  term  with  the  immediate 
reversion,  both  being  vested  at  the  same  time  in  one  person 
in  the  same  right.  In  such  a  case  the  reversion  merges 
or  drowns  the  term,  because  they  are  inconsistent  and 
incompatible.'  A  person  cannot  be,  at  the  same  time, 
both  landlord  and  tenant  of  the  same  premises.  It  may 
be  laid  down  as  a  general  rule,  that  whenever  the  particu- 
lar estate  and  that  immediately  in  reversion  are  both  legal  or 
both  equitable,  and  by  any  act  or  event  subsequent  to  the 
creation  of  the  particular  estate  become  for  the  first  time 
vested  in  one  person  in  the  same  right,  their  separate  exist- 
ence will  cease  and  a  merger  will  take  place.  A  particular 
estate  wiU  merge  in  a  reversion  of  a  shorter  duration  than 

'  2  Blackstone's  Com.  177.  Davies,  5  H.  &  N.  766  ;  Clift  v. 

« Rawlings    v.     Walker,     ante ;  White,   13  N.   Y.   519 ;   Angel  v. 

Allen  V.  Anderson,  44  Ind.  395.  Boner,  38  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  435. 

3  Fawcett's  L.  &  T.  378.  '  Bac.  Abr.   tit.   Leases  (R.) ;    3 

■■  Piatt  V.  Sleap,    Cro.   Jac.   375  ;  Blao.  Com.  177  ;  Salmon  v.  Swan, 

Lichden  v.  Winsmore,  3  Roll.  473 ;  Cro.  Jac..  619  ;  Burton  v.  Barclay, 

Young  V.  Bradford,  Hob.  3  ;  Gage  7  Bing.  745  ;  Clift  v.  White,  13  N. 

T.   Acton,  1  Salk.    336  ;  Jones  v.  Y.  536. 


CHAP.  xLvi.]         What  Amounts  to.  1189 

itself ; '  as  if  one  is  lessee  for  twenty  years,  and  the  rever- 
sion expectant  thereon  is  granted  to  another  for  one  year, 
who  grants  it  to  the  lessee,  it  will  operate  as  a  merger  of  the 
twenty  years'  term,  and  the  term  for  one  year  will  begin 
to  run."  So  a  term  for  one  thousand  years  may,  as  to  a 
part  of  the  land,  merge  in  a  mere  estate  for  life  in  such 
part.°  Where  a  lessee  made  an  underlease  for  aU  his 
term,  except  a  few  days,  and  then  granted  the  under- 
lease and  the  rent  thereby  reserved  to  his  lessor  for  the 
term  mentioned  in  the  underlease,  but  not  for  the  few 
days  so  excepted,  it  was  held,  that  the  chattel  interest 
was  not  merged  in  the  fee.*  Where  a  lessee  of  premises 
for  a  term  of  twenty-one  years,  which  would  expirp  at 
a  certain  time  in  1809,  in  December,  1799,  took  a  further 
lease  of  the  same  premises  for  sixty  years,  to  commence 
from  the  time  when  the  former  lease  expired;  and  the 
lessor  died  in  December,  1800,  and  devised  the  premises 
in  question  to  A,  the  lessee,  for  his  life,  who  by  lease 
and  release  in  1806  conveyed  Ms  life  estpite  to  B  : — it  was 
held  that  A's  interest  in  the  lease  of  1799,  which  was  to 
commence  in  1809,  was  nftt  merged  in  his  estate  for  life." 
where  a  fee-farm  rent  is  bought  in  by  the  person  who  is 
seized  in  fee  of  the  lands  out  of  which  it  is.sues,  it  is 
merged  in  the  inheritance. '  Where  an  owner  of  an  estate 
in  fee  simple  becomes  entitled  to  a  charge  on  that  estate, 
prima  facie  the  charge,  in  equity  at  least,  becomes 
merged  in  the  inheritance,  unless  the  owner  of  the  estate 
does  some  act  to  keep  it  alive,  or  it  is  for  his  interest  that 
the  charge  should  continue  to  be  a  subsisting  charge  up- 
on the  estate.'  In  the  case  of  a  merger  of  an  equitable 
interest,  a  court  of  equity  so  regulates  the  rights  that  it 
will  not  allow  of  a  merger  if  it  sees  equitable  reasons  why 
there  should  not  be  one  :  and  on  such  a  question  it  will 
not  permit  the  acts  of  trustees  to  affect  those  beneficially 

'  Hughes     V.    Robotham,    Cro.  "  Rawlings  v.  Walker,  5  B.  &  C. 

Eliz.  302.  Ill ;    Paul   v.    Varmie,    1  '  Clark 

^  Cruise  Dig.  96 ;  Burton,  Conv.  (Penn.)  333. 

287  ;  Stephens  v.  Bridges,  6  Madd.  '  Atoherly  v.  Vernon,  10  Mod. 

66.  525. 

"  White  V.  Greenish,  11  C.  P.  N.  '  Swinfen  v.  Swinfen,  39  Beav. 

S.  209.                                    '  199. 

*  Burton  v.  Barclay,  7  Bing.  745. 

II.-33 


1190  Merger.  L§  502. 

interested.'  §ir  EpwARD  Coke  lays  it  down  as  a  general 
rule  that  a  person  cannot  have  a  term  for  years  in  his 
own  right,  and  a  freehold  in  autre  droit,  but  that  his 
own  term  shall  drown  in  the  freehold  ;  but  a  man  may 
have  a  term  of  years  in  autr&  droit,  and  a  freehold  in 
his  own  right ;"  and  if  a  man  being  possessed  of  a  term  of 
years  in  right  of  his  wife,  purchases  the  inheritance,  the 
term  for  years  though  in  right  of  his  wife,  is  merged  and 
extinct,  because  the  purchase  was  the  express  act  of  the 
husband,  and  therefore  amounts  in  law  to  a  disposition 
of  the  term,  by  reason  of  the  merger  consequent  there- 
upon :  but  a  bare  intermarriage  of  a  woman  who  is  a 
termor  with  the  reversioner  wiQ  not  merge  the  term,  be- 
cause by  the  intermarriage  the  term  is  cast  upon  the 
husband  by  act  of  law,  without  any  concurrence  or 
immediate  act  done  by  him  to  obtain  the  same ;  and 
therefore  in  such  case  the  law  wiU  preserve  the  term  in 
the  same  plight  as  it  gave  it  to  the  husband,  till  he  by 
some  express  act  destroys  it  or  gives  it  away.'  Where 
however,  the  husband  is  himself  a  lessee  for  Hf e,  and  he 
intermarries  with  the  lessor,  this  merges  his  own  term, 
because  he  thereby  draws  to  himself  the  immediate  rever- 
sions, in  the  nature  of  a  purchase  by  Ms  own  voluntary 
act,  and  so  undermines  his  own  term.  Whereas  in  the 
other  case,  the  term  existing  in  the  woman  until  the 
marriage,  is  not  thereby  so  drawn  out  of  her  or  annexed 
to  the  freehold  as  to  merge  therein ;  because  that  attrac- 
tion, which  is  only  by  act  of  law  consequent  upon  the 
marriage,  would,  by  merging  the  term,  do  wrong  to  a 
married  woman,  and  so  take  the  term  out  of  her, 
though  the  husband  did  no  express  act  for  that  purpose 
which  the  law  will  not  allow.  If  a  husband  is  possessed 
of  a  term  of  years,  and  the  owner  of  the  reversion  in 
fee  divises  it  to  the  wife,  who  has  issue,  the  husband, 
who  in  the  lifetime  of  his  wife,  is  tenant  by  the  curtesy 
initiate,  holds  the  two  estates  in  different  rights,  without 

'  Brandon  v.  Brandon,  3  De  Gex  Eadford,  Hob.  3  ;  Jones  v.  Davies, 

&  J.  534.  5  H.  &  N.  766. 

^  Webb  T.  Russell,  3  T.  R.  401  ;  ^  Qq,  xitt.  838,  b;  Lady  Piatt  v. 

Piatt  V,  Sleap,  Cro.  Jac.  375 ;  Gray  Sleap,  Cro.  Jac.  375  ;  Sug.  V.  &  P. 

V.  Acton,  1  Salk.  336 ;  Young  v.  617  a4ih  ed,;. 


CHAP.  xLvi.]         What  Amounts  to.  1191 

having  acquired  the  freehold  by  his  own  act,  and  conse- 
quently there  is  no  merger.' 

If  a  tenant  for  a  term  of  years  leases  for  a  less  term, 
and  assigns  his  reversion,  and  the  assignee  takes  a  con- 
veyance of  the  fee,  by  which  his  former  reversionary  in- 
interest  is  merged,  the  covenants  of  the  underlease  in- 
cidejit  to  that  reversionary  interest  are  thereby  exting- 
uished." 

■  Jones  V.  Davies,  5  N.  &  H.  766 ;  » "Webb  v.  Eussell,  3  T.  E.  393  ; 
7  id.  507 ;  Pool  v.  Morris,  39  Ga.  Thome  v.  Woolcoujbe,  8  B.  &  Ad. 
374.  686. 


1192  Forfeiture.  [§  534. 


CHAPTEE    XLYII. 

FORFEIT  UKE. 

Sec.  503.  How  incurred. 

Sec.  504.  By  record. 

Sec.  505.  By  acknowledgment  of  title  in  a  stranger. 

Sec.  606.  By  statute. 

Sec.  607.  Time  and  place  of  performance  of  condition. 

Sec.  508.  Effect  of  the  statute  of  limitations. 

Sec.  509.  Estate  of  party  entering. 

Sec.  510.  Construction  of  provisos  for  re-entry  in  leases. 

Sec.  511.  Who  may  avail  themselves  of  a  forfeiture. 

Sec.  613.  33  Hen.  8,  c.  34. 

Sec.  513.  Entry  for  a  forfeiture  generally. 

Sec.  514.  Demand  of  rent. — In  what  actions  unnecessary. 

Sec.  515.  Waiver  of  forfeiture,  what  amounts  to. 

Sec.  516.  Lessor  must  have  notice  of  forfeiture. 

Sec.  503.  How  inctirred.— The  lessor,  having  the  jus 
disponendi,  may  annex  any  conditions  he  pleases  to  his 
grant,  so  as  the  same  are  not  illegal,  unreasonable,  or 
repugnant  to  the  grant  itself,  and,  upon  a  breach  of  any 
of  these  conditions,  by  entry  or  ejectment,  he  may  deter- 
mine the  lease ; '  but  for  a  breach  of  covenant  he  cannot, 
unless  the  lease  contains  an  exprees  provision  for  re-entry 
in  case  of  a  breach.''  Generally,  a  foi'feiture  is  incurred 
by  a  breach  of  some  express  stipulation  in  the  lease  ;  but 

'ASHTJEST,  J.,  inHunter  V.  Gal-  17  Q.   B.  605;  Thomas  v.  Parker, 

Hers,  3  T.   R.    188 ;  Mulcarry    v.  1  H.  &  N.   669 :  Hayne  v.  Cum- 

Eyres,  Cro.    Car.    511.    And    the  mings,  16  C.  B.  N.  S.  431. 
same  rule  prevails  in  reference  to         ^  Wilson  v.  Phillips,  3  Bing.  13 ; 

thebreachof  the  terms  of  an  agree-  Rudd  v.    Golding,    6    Moo.    331; 

ment  for  a  lease  under  which  a  Darke  v.  Bowditch,  8  Q.   B.  973 ; 

person  holds  as  tenant  from  year  Rains  v.  Keller,  4  C.  &  P.  3 ;  Van 

to  year.     Thompson  v.  Amev,  13  Rensselaer  v.  Jewett,  3  N.  Y,  147. 
Ad.  &  El.  476  ;  Hyatt  v,  Griffiths, 


CHAP.  xLvn.]  By  Record.  1193 

a  forfeiture  may  be  incurred  by  the  breach  of  implied 
conditions,  either  by  matter  of  record  or  in  pais. 

Sec.  604.  By  record.— A  forfeiture  by  matter  of  record 
is  incurred  where  a  tenant  sues  out  a  writ,  or  resorts  to 
a  remedy  which  claims  or  supposes  a  right  to  the  free- 
hold, or  where,  in  action  in  favor  of  his  lessor  predicated 
upon  the  lease,  he  resists  the  demand  under  the  grant  of 
a  higher  interest  in  the  land,  or  where  he  acknowledges 
the  title  to  be  in  a  stranger.  "'For,"  says  Bacon,"  "  the 
law  tacitly  annexeth  a  condition  that  if  the  lessee  do 
anything  that  may  affect  the  interest  of  his  lessor  the 
lease  shall  be  void,  and  the  lessor  may  re-enter.  Besides, " 
he  adds,  ' '  every  such  act  necessarily  determines  the  re- 
lation of  landlord  and  tenant,  since  to  hold  under  him 
and  at  the  same  time  to  controvert  his  title ;  to  affect  to 
hold  under  a  lease,  and  at  the  same  time  to  destroy  that 
interest  out  of  which  the  lease  ariseth,  would  be  the 
most  palpable  inconsistency."  So  at  the  common  law  a 
forfeiture  by  acts  in  pais  arises  where  the  tenant  conveys 
the  estate  in  fee,"  by  some  mode  of  conveyance  that  dis- 
places or  divests  the  estate  of  the  reversioner,  and  if  it 
does  not  have  this  effect  it  does  not  work  a  forfeiture.' 
Forfeitures  by  acts  in  pais  never  applied  to  conveyances 
under  the  statute  of  uses,*  and  is  repealed  by  statute  in 
most  of  the  States  of  this  country  ;  and  a  conveyance  of 
a  greater  estate  than  that  possessed  by  the  tenant  is  made 
operative  to  the  extent  of  his  title  only.  °  This  rule,  as  to 

'4  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (T.)3.  of  the  landlord,  in  fact  as  well  as 

"Rees  V.    Ervington,  Cro.    Eliz.  in   law;  and  the  effect  of   a  dis- 

333;  Dixeyy.  Spencer,  15  Leon,  220;  claimer,  disseizin,   or  attornment 

Co.  Litt.  351,  a.  to  an  adverse  claimant,  or  collusion 

'4  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (T.)  2  ;  with  him  to  deliver  possession,  as 
Co.  Litt.  351,  &;  Gfoodright  v.  Dav-  between  the  landlord  and  tenant, 
ids,  Cowp.  803 ;  Read  v.  Ervington,  and  those  thus  claiming  under  such 
13  East,  444 ;  Com.  v.  Welcome,  5  tenant  (unless  a  descent  is  cast  by- 
Davis'  Abr.  13.  the  death  of  the  disseizor),  will  be 

■'Grant  v.  Townsend,  3  HiU  (N.  a  forfeiture  of  the  term,  and  the 
Y.)  554 ;  Jackson  v.  Mancius,  3  landlord  may  enter  or  bring  eject- 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  357.  mtot  or   forcible   detainer.    Wall 

« Gen'l  Stat.  Va.  447  ;  Mass.  Gen'l  v.-  Goodenough,  16  111.  41 5  ;  Fortier 

Stat.  Chap.  89,  Sec.  9.    As  to  the  v.  Ballance,  10  111.  41.     But  a  parol 

effect  of  disclaimer,  or  a  convey-  denial  of  the  landlord's  title  does 

ance  of  a  greater  estate  by  a  tenant  not  work  a  forfeiture.   DeLancey  v. 

from  year  to  year,  see  Disclaimer.  Ganong,  9  N.  Y.  9;  Montgomery 

The  poBsession  of  the  tenant  is  that  v.  Craig,  5  Dana  (Ky.)  101. 


1194:  FORFBITUEE.  [§  505. 

forfeitures  by  records,  applies  to  all  species  of  tenancy : 
as  for  life,  by  curtesy,  dower,  elegit,  guardian,  for  years, 
&c.,  as  they  aU  hold  their  estates  subject  to  an  implied 
condition  that  if  they  claim  a  greater  estate  in  a  court  of 
record  than  they  own,  they  forfeit  the  estate,  and  the 
person  entitled  to  the  immediate  reversion  may  enter.' 

Sec.  505.  By  acknowledgment  of  title  in  a  stranger.— A 
forfeiture  is  incurred  if  the  tenant  acknowledge  the  fee  to 
he  in  a  stranger,  and  under  this  rule,  if  the  tenant  dehvers 
up  possession  of  the  premises  to  a  person  claiming  them 
by  a  hostile  title,  with  the  intention  that  he  may  set  up 
such  title  against  the  landlord,  and  not  with  the  inten- 
tion that  he  should  hold  under  the  lease,  he  thereby  for- 
feits his  term."  So,  too,  where  he  denies  the  landlord's 
title,  refuses  to  pay  rent,  and  accepts  a  deed  under  a 
hostile  title."  But  mere  payment  of  rent  by  a  tenant  for 
years  to  a  third  person,*  or  a  verbal  denial  of  the  land- 
lord's title,  does  not  work  a  forfeiture.' 

Sec.  506.  By  statute.— A  lease  may  be  forfeited  by 
statute,  as  where  the  statute  provides  that  any  tenant 
using  premises  for  the  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  the 
lease  shall  be  forfeited;'  but  in  such  cases  it  has  been 
held  that  it  forfeits  only  the  lease  under  which  the  offend- 
ing tenant  holds,  consequently  that  a  breach  of  the 
statute  by  an  underlessee  does  not  effect  the  validity  of 
the  lease  under  which  the  tenant  holds.'  In  New  York 
the  statute  provides  that  a  diversion  of  salt  works,  which 

'  Shep.  Touch.  125.  El.   437,  the  tenant,  upon   a  de- 

5  Ellenbrook  v.  Flynn,  1  C.  M.  &  mand    made  upon    hirn    for  the 

E.  137.    In  Graves  v.  Wells,  10  Ad.  rent,    refused     to     pay    it,    and 

&  El.  435,  Lord  Penman,  ia  com-  claimed  that  he  was  the  owner  of 

menting  upon  the  doctrine  of  this  the  premises  ia  fee.     The  court 

case,  limits  its  application  to  those  held  that  he  did  not  thereby  for- 

instances  where  the  tenant  has  be-  feit  his  lease.      "No  case,"  says 

trayed  his  landlord's  interests  and  Pattbeson,  J.,   "has  been  cited 

placed  him  in  a  worse  position  than  where  a  lease  for  a  definite  term 

he  was  before,  and  he  says  :  "If  has  been  forfeited  by  mere  words." 

the  case  went  further  than  that,  I  «  Gen'l   Stat.    Mass.,  Chap.  87, 

should  not  think  it  maintainable. "  Sec.  8. 

'  Jackson  v.  Vincent,  4  Wend.  ''  Healey    v.    Grant,    15    Gray 

(N.  Y.)  333.  (Mass.)    312 ;     O'ConneU    v.    Mo- 

*  Doe  T.  Parker,  Gow.  180.  Gratb,  14  Allen  (Mass,)  889. 

'  In  Graves  v.  Wells,  10  Ad.  «S; 


CHAP.  xLvn.]  Time  and  Place.  1195 

are  farmed  out  by  the  State,  to  other  purposes,  shall  ■work 
a  forfeiture  of  the  leasehold  estate  ;  but  under  this  statute 
it  is  held  that  the  diversion  must  extend  to  the  whole 
premises  demised,  and  that  building  a  house  onpart  of  the 
premises  is  not  such  a  diversion. '  Even  where  the  statute 
provides  a  forfeiture  for  certain  acts,  it  is  optional  with  the 
lessor  whether  he  will  avail  himself  of  it  or  not,  and  the 
lessee  cannot  set  it  up  ;  °  nor  is  a  surety  upon  the  lease 
discharged  because  the  tenant  has  been  guilty  of  an  act 
which  under  the  statute  enables  the  lessor  to  avoid  the 
lease.' 

Where  a  lessee,  who  has  sometimes  paid  rent  to  a  trustee 
and  sometimes  to  a  cestui  que  trust,  gave  up  possession 
on  the  last  day  of  the  term,  but  before  the  term  was 
ended,  to  a  person  who  had  been  trustee,  and  not 
to  the  party  then  having  the  legal  title  :  it  was  held,  that 
as  the  act  was  equivocal  it  did  not  amount  either  to  a 
surrender  or  a  forfeiture  of  the  term.*  Where  a  forfeiture 
may  be  incurred  by  a  grant  or  deed,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  deed  should  be  a  valid  instrument  and  should  attempt 
to  pass  the  fee,  for  if  by  reason  of  any  defect  it  is  void,  it 
win  not  work  a  forfeiture  of  the  estate  : "  and  granting  a 
lease  of  the  land  for  more  years  than  he  himself  has,  is  no 
forfeiture,  because  it  is  only  a  contract  between  him  and 
his  underlessee,  or  assignee,  which  cannot  possibly  prej- 
udice the  interest  of  the  original  lessor  and  does  not  even 
pretend  to  usurp  or  touch  the  freehold  or  inheritance. 
A  proviso  in  a  lease  for  re-entry  on  a  condition  broken  can 
operate  only  during  the  term.'  But  it  wiU  extend  to  any 
new  implied  tenancy  from  year  to  year  upon  the  like 
terms  and  conditions.' 

Sec.  507.  Time  and  place  of  performance  of  condition.— 
Where  a  time  certain  is  appointed  in  a  proviso  or  condition 

'  Hasbrouok  v.  Paddock,'  1  Barb.  '  Dolman   v.  Dolman,  5   T.  R. 

(N.  Y.)  635.  641 ;  Lloyd  v.  Powell,  5  B.  &  C. 

^Trask    v.    Wheeler,    7    AUen  308. 

(Mass.)  109.  •  Johns  v.  Whitley,  3  Wils.  137  ; 

3  Way  V.  Eeed,  6  AUen  (Mass.)  Grant  v.  Townsend,  3  Hill  (N.  Y.) 

364.  554. 

*  Ackland  v.  Lutley,  9  Ad.  &  '  Thomas  v.  Packer,  1  H.  &  N. 

El.  879.  669. 


1196  FOEFEITUEE.  [§  508. 

for  the  performance  of  anything,  neither  party  is  bound 
to  attend  at  any  other  time  ;  and  if  it  is  provided  that 
any  act  shall  be  done  on  a  day  certain,  but  no  hour  of  the 
day  is  specified  in  which  the  same  shall  be  done,  the  party 
must  attend  such  a  length  of  time  before  and  until  sunset 
as  may  be  convenient  to  do  the  act.  If  a  place  is  agreed 
upon  by  the  parties  where  the  condition  is  to  be 
performed,  the  party  who  is  to  perform  is  not  obliged  to 
seek  the  party  to  whom  it  is  due  elsewhere ;  nor  is  he 
to  whom  it  is  to  be  performed  obliged  to  accept  of  the 
performance  elsewhere  ;  but  he  may  accept  it  at  another 
place,  and  it  will  be  good.* 

Sec.  508.  Effect  of  the  statute  of  limitations.— The  statute 
of  limitations  as  to  real  property "  bars  the  party  who  has 
a  right  to  enter  for  a  forfeiture,  but  who  neglects  to  do  so 
for  more  than  the  statutory  period  after  his  right  accrued.' 
Where  an  ejectment  is  founded  on  a  particular  forfeiture, 
it  must  be  commenced  within  the  statutory  period  after 
such  forfeiture  accrued.'  But  a  lessor  is  not  bound  to 
take  advantage  of  the  fiist  or  any  other  forfeiture  com- 
mitted during  the  term.'  Therefore  it  is  no  defence  to  an 
ejectment  commenced  after  the  expiration  of  the  lease 
that  a  forfeiture  and  right  of  re-entry  thereon  accrued 
under  the  lease  which  was  barred  by  the  statute  before 
the  commencement  of  the  action." 

Sec.  509.  Estate  of  party  entering,— It  may  be  laid  down 
for  a  general  rule  that  he  who  enters  or  recovers  by  eject- 
ment for  a  condition  broken  must  be  seized  or  possessed 
of  that  estate  which  the  lessor  had  at  the  time  of  the 
estate  made  upon  condition  :  and  he  may  avoid  all  mesne 
charges  and  incumbrances.' 

Sec.  510.  Construction  of  provisos  for  re-entry  in  leases. — 
Provisos  for  re-entry  in  leases  are  to  be  construed  hke 

'  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Conditions  (O.  4).  78 ;  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B.  &  Aid. 

5  3  &  4  Will.  4,  c.  27,  ss.  3, 4.  401  ;  Baker  v.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  498. 
3  Terrant  v.  HeUier,  3  T.  R.  162.  « ^Uen  v.  Blakeway,  5  C.  &  P. 

*  Cole  Ejec.  11.  563 ;  Cook  v.  Danvers,  7  East,  299. 
"  Boscawen    v.  Bliss,  4   Taunt.  '  Co.   Litt.   202 ;   Bac.   Abr.  tit. 

735  ;  Sheppard  v.  Allen,  3  Taunt.  Conditions  (O.  4)  j  Cole  Ejec.  68. 


CHAP.  XLvn.]      Pkovisos  for  Ee-bntry, 


1197 


other  contracts,  according  to  the  intent  of  the  parties  to 
be  collected  from  the  words  used,  and  not  with  the 
strictness  of  condition  at  common  law  ;'  therefore,  where 


•Davis  V.  Elsam,  Moo.  &  M.  189  ; 
Muston  V.  Gladwin,  6  Q.  B.  953 ; 
Croft  V.  Lumley,  5  E.  &  B.  667  ; 
Perry  v.  Davis,  3  C.  B.  N.  S.  769  : 
Baylis  v.  LeGros,  4  C.  B.  N.  S. 
537,  589 ;  Cole  Ejec.  407.  A  lessor, 
ordinarily,  will  not  be  allowed  to 
enforce  a  forfeiture  for  non-pay- 
ment of  rent,  where  the  lessee 
makes  speedy  application  for  re- 
lief, tendering  the  amount  due  ; 
and  especially  is  this  so  when  the 
conduct  of  the  lessor  affords  an 
excuse  for  the  lessee's  failure  to 
pay  promptly.  Horton  v.  New 
York  Central,  &c.  E.  E.  Co.,  13 
Abb.  (N.  Y.)  N.  Cas.  30.  In 
Munroe  v.  Armstrong,  96  Penn.  St. 
307,  a  lease  of  land  was  made  ex- 
clusively for  the  purpose  of  pro- 
ducing oil.  The  work  of  boring 
for  oil  was  to  be  commenced  in  ten 
days,  and  continued  with  due 
diligence  until  success  or  abandon- 
ment ;  and  if  lessee's  failed  to  get 
oil  in  paying  quantities  or  ceased 
to  work  for  thirty  days  at  any 
time,  the  lease  was  to  be  forfeited 
and-  void.  It  was  held  that,  if 
lessees  failed  to  get  oil  in  one  well, 
they  had  a  right  to  put  down  an- 
other, and  as  many  more  as  they 
pleased,  so  long  as  they  worked  with 
diligence  to  success  or  abandon- 
ment ;  and  that  a  cessation  of  work 
for  thirty  days  forfeited  the  lease. 
Where  by  the  terms  of  a  lease,  the 
lessor  is  authorized  to  distrain 
either  for  rent  or  taxes  in  arrear, 
and  also  to  forfeit  said  lease  in  case 
of  failure  to  pay  said  rent  or  taxes, 
he  has  the  right  to  distrain  for  rent 
in  arrear,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
proceed  to  forfeit  the  lease  for  un- 
paid taxes.  Where  a  clause  in  a 
lease  prohibits  the  transfer  thereof 
by  the  lessee  under  penalty  of 
forfeiture,  the  mortgaging  of  the 
leasehold  by  him  is  sufficient 
ground  for  forfeiture.  Becker  v. 
Werner,  98  Penn.  St.  555.  A  lease 
of  land  and  a  house  provided  for 
payment  of  money  for  the  house, 
and  for  a  share  of  the  crops  for  the 
land.  It  was  held  that  the  failure 
to  pay  the  money  did  not  justify 
the  landlord  in  dispossessing  the 
tenant  from  the  land  as  well  as 


from  the  house.  Eicketts  v. 
Eichardson,  85  Ind.  508.  In  Price 
V.  Nicholas,  4  Hughes  (U.  S.  C.  C.) 
616,  A  took  a  lease,  for  ninety-nine 
years,  of  the  right  "to  farm"  a 
tract  of  mineral  land  in  an  almost 
inaccessible  mountain  region ;  one- 
fourth  of  the  profits  to  be  paid  to 
the  lessor.  Twenty-flve  years 
passed  without  any  attempt  on  A's 
part  to  develop  the  minerals.  The 
lessor's  assignee  brought  suit  to  set 
aside  the  lease  for  this  reason.  It 
was  held  that  A  should  have  two 
J  ears  within  which  to  begin  oper- 
ations or  to  give  up  the  lease.  In 
Kansas  City  Elevator  Co.  v.  Union 
Pacific  E.  E.  Co.,  3  McAvery  (U. 
S.  C.  C.)  463;  a  railroad  company 
sought  to  have  a  lease  of  elevator 
property  declared  forfeited  ,in  a  suit 
brought  by  the  lessee  to  restrain  the 
company  from  re-entering  and  de- 
molishing the  building.  It  was 
held  that  the  fact  that  rent  and 
taxes  had  not  been  paid  afforded 
no  ground  for  forfeiture,  there 
having  been  no  .demand;  that  a 
right  to  object  to  a  sub-letting  for 
a  short  term  was  waived  by  acqui- 
escence, and  authorized  by  the 
company,  lits  superintendent  hav- 
ing assumed  the  right  to  consent 
thereto,  and  that  the  fact  that  the 
lessee  allowed  theprpmises  to  be 
used  under  a  pooling  arrangement 
afforded  no  ground  for  forfeiture, 
as  such  right  should  be  strictly 
construed,  and  no  intendment 
taken  in  its  favor.  A  lessee,  by 
failing  to  pay  taxes  according  to 
the  terms  of  his  lease,  gave  to  his 
landlord  the  right  of  re-entry  for 
forfeiture.  It  was  held  that  the 
landlord,  by  subsequently  accept- 
ing rent,  waived  the  right  to  enter. 
Conger  v.  Duryee,  90  N.  Y.  594. 
In  N.  Y.  Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  St. 
George's  Church,  64  How.  Pr.  (N. 
Y.)  511,  A  was  entitled  to  de- 
mand the  renewal  of  a  lease. 
By  mistake  he  neglected  to  give 
notice  of  his  intention  to  renew 
for  thirty-six  days  after  the  time 
when  he  should  have  done  so.  He 
had  a  vested  interest  of  $30,000  in 
the  property,  which  he  woul^l  lose 
were  a  forfeiture   enforced,  and 


1198  FORFEmjRE.  [§  510, 

there  is  a  proviso  in  a  lease,  that  on  non-payment  of  rent 
or  non- performance  of  any  of  the  lessee's  covenants  the 
term  shall  cease,  the  lessor,  and  not  the  lessee,  has  the 
option  of  determining  a  lease  for  a  breach.'  Forfeitures 
are  not  favored,  and  clauses  involving  forfeitures  will  be 
restricted  as  far  as  possible,  but  where  the  lease  expressly 
and  explicitly  provides  that  the  landlord  may,  upon  the 
breach  of  a  certain  condition  by  the  tenant, — as,  to  pay 
rent  at  a  certain  time — his  election  to  treat  the  breach  as 
a  forfeiture,  dissolves  the  relation.'  So  where  a  lessee 
mortgaged  his  lease  half  interest,  and  the  lease  contained 
a  clause  providing  for  a  re-entry  in  case  of  non-payment 
of  rent  and  taxes,  and  upon  a  breach  of  such  conditions 
the  landlord  re-entered,  it  was  held  that  the  leasehold 
interest  was  extinguished  by  such  re-entry,  and  the 
mortgagee  was  restrained  from  attempting  to  enforce 
any  rights  under  the  mortgage  °  when  there  is  a  clause 
involving  a  forfeiture,  the  landlord  may  elect  whether  to 
enforce  it  or  not.  Thus,  where  a  proviso  in  a  lease,  after 
stating  that  in  certain  events  the  term  should  cease, 
determine  and  be  utterly  void,  continued,  ' '  and  it  shall 
be  lawful  to  and  for  the  landlord  to  re-enter ; "  it  was 
held  to  give  the  landlord  a  right  to  enter  or  not,  at  his 
election.*  •  A  proviso  that  upon  breach  of  any  of  the  cov- 
enants on  the  part  of  the  lessee,  the  lessor  may  re-enter 
on  the  premises,"  "and  the  same  have  again,  as  if  the 
said  lease  had  never  been  made,"  means  that  the  lease  is 
to  be  void  from  and  after  re-entry  by  the  lessor,  and  does 
not  deprive  him  of  the  right  of  bringing  an  action  of 
covenant  for  rent  which  accrued  previously ;  and  this 
principle  equally  applies  to  a  covenant  for  repairs  or 
other  services  to  be  rendered  by  the  lessee."    Where  an 

the  landlord  received  rent  after  the  Jones  v.  Carter,  15  M.  &  W.  718 ; 

expiration  of  the    time.      It  was  Eemiilgton  t.  Cardale,  3  H.  &  N. 

held  that  the  landlord  would  be  356 ;  BayUs  v.  LeGros,  4  C.  B.  N. 

compelled  to   execute  a  renewal.  S.  537 ;  6  id.  553. 

iReid  V.   Parsons,  2  Chit.   247;  « Miller  v.  Havens,  51  Mich.  482. 

Green  v.    Baker,    8  Taunt.    241 ;  ^ j^^j^ahams  v.  Tappe,  60  Md.  317. 

Rede  v.  Farr,  6  M.  &S.  131 ;  Bryan  *Amsby  v.  Woodward,  6  B.  & 

V.  Bancks,4B.  &Ald.401;  Amsby  C.  519;    Rede  v.  Farr,  6  M.  &  S. 


Woodward,  6  B.  &.  C.  519 
Nash  V.  Birch,  1  M.  &  W.  402 
Roberts  v.  Davey.  4  B.  "'  '  ^  "'"' 


131 ;  Jones  V.  Carter,  15M.  &  W.  718. 
"Hartshome  v.  Watson,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  178 ;  Load  v.  Green,  15  M, 


CHAP.  XLVii.J     Provisos  for  Ee-entry.  1199 

agreement  for  a  lease  contained  a  clause  that  if  the  rent 
should  be  unpaid  for  ten  days,  or  if  the  lessee  should  not 
observe  all  the  conditions,  &c.,  then  it  should  be  lawful 
for  the  lessor  to  enter  upon  and  take  possession  of  the 
premises,  and  to  expel  the  lessee,  without  any  legal  proc- 
ess, and  as  effectually  as  a  sheriff  might  do  on  a  recov- 
ery in  ejectment ;  and  that,  in  case  of  such  entry  and  an 
action  being  brought,  the  defendant  might  plead  leave 
and  hcense  in  bar  ;  it  was  held,  that  the  lessee's  right  to 
possession  as  tenant  continued  until  the  lessor  had  availed 
himself  of  the  license  given.^  Such  a  clause  does  not  dis- 
pense with  a  formal  demand  of  the  rent.'  An  agree- 
ment to  let  a  house  and  for  the  lessee  to  make  certain 
alterations,  and  if  they  were  not  done  that  the  lessor 
might  retake  possession,  and  that  the  agreement  should 
be  null  and  void,  is  voidable  only  at  the  election  of  the 
lessor  if  the  lessee  does  not  make  the  alterations.' 
Where  in  an  agreement  amounting  to  an  actual  lease 
there  was  a  clause  as  follows,  "it  is  stipulated  and  con- 
ditioned that  the  lessee  shall  not  underlet : "  it  was  held, 
that  these  words  created  a  condition,  upon  a  breach  of 
which  the  lessor  might  maintain  ejectment,  without  an 
express  clause  of  re-entry.*  And  a  proviso  that  the  les- 
see shall  pay  a  certain  sum  per  annum  creates  both  a 
covenant  and  a  condition,  for  breach  of  which  an  eject- 
ment may  also  be  maintained  without  any  express  power 
of  re-entry.  °  A  condition  is  indivisible,  consequently  a 
severance  of  occupation,  although  each  occupant  pays 
rent  on  his  separate  portion,  does  not  sever  the  condi- 
tions of  the  lease.  Therefore,  if  a  tenant  underlets  a  por- 
tion of  the  premises  to  different  tenants,  and  either  of 
them  do  an  act  which  creates  a  forfeiture  under  the 

&  W.  316 ;  Selby  v.  Browne,  7  Q.  Hayne  v.  Cummings,  16  C.  B.  N. 

B.  620  ;  Wooloock  v.  Dew,  1  F.  &  S.  421. 

K.  337;    Davies  t.  Underwood,  3  ^Henniker  v.   Watt,  8  B.  &  C. 

H.  &  N.  573  ;  Att-Gen.  v.  Cox,  3  308 ;    Simpson    v.    Titterell,    Cro. 

H.   L.   Cas.   340;  Cole  Ejec.   408.  Eliz.  242,  Marsh  v.  Curteys,  Cro. 

'Kavanagh  v.  Gudge,  7  M.  &  Eliz.  528,  Cole  Ejec.  402. 

G.  316.  =■  Harrington  v.  Wise,  Cro.  Eliz. 

2  Barry  v.   Glover,  10  Ir.  C.  L.  486;    cited  8  B.   &.  C.   316;    Cola 
113 ;  Acocks  v.  PhilUps,  5  H.  &  N.  Ejec.  403. 

183. 

3  Nash  V.  Bircli,  1  M.  &  W.  403  ; 


1200  ,        FOEFEITUEE.  [§  610. 

lease,  the  forfeiture  extends  to  the  whole  estate.'  Thus, 
if  a  lessee  covenants  not  to  cut  wood  or  timber  from  the 
premises,  except  for  use  upon  the  place  for  fire,  or  in 
making  or  repairing  the  buildings,  and  there  is  a  clause 
of  re-entry  in  the  lease  in  case  of  the  breach  of  any  of 
the  covenants,  a  forfeiture  arises  if  wood  or  timber  is 
cut  for  any  purpose  other  than  those  named,  and  the  les- 
see cannot  avoid  it  by  showing  that  he  procured  his  fire- 
wood from  other  premises,  and  that  he  had  not  in  fact 
cut  any  more  wood  than  he  would  have  cut  if  he  had 
cut  his  firewood  from  the  place."  A  forfeiture  for  the 
non-performance  of  a  condition  is  not  saved  because  the 
lessee  is  under  a  legal  disability  as  an  infant,  married 
woman,  &c.°  If  by  a  written  agreement  premises  are 
let  for  a  term,  "at  and  under  the  rent  of  eighty  dollars," 
it  is  an  agreement  by  the  lessee  to  pay  that  rent ;  and 
therefore  if  there  is  a  power  of  re-entry  in  case  of  breach 
ot  "any  of  the  agreements  therein  contained,"  the  lessor 
has  a  right  of  re-entry  on  non-payment  of  rent,  although 
there  is  no  express  agreement  to  pay  rent.  But  in  no 
case  can  there  be  a  re-entry  for  the  non-payment  of  rent, 
unless  there  is  an  express  stipulation  to  that  effect."  A 
proviso  that  if  buildings  should  not  be  completed  on  a 
certain  day  "it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  lessors  into  the 
demised  premises  or  any  part  thereof  in  the  name  of  the 
whole  and  repossess,"  the  words  "to  re-enter"  being 
omitted,  gives  a  right  of  re-entry.'  Where  a  proviso  for 
re-entry  was  insensible,  the  court  refused  to  decide  its 
meaning,  and  non-suited  the  plaintiff  in  an  ejectment 
for  a  forfeiture."  Where  the  lessee  covenanted  to  pay 
the  rent,  and  not  to  assign  without  the  leave  of  the  les- 
sor, and  there  was  a  proviso  for  re-entry  if  the  rent  was 
in  arrear,  or  if  all  or  any  of  the  covenants  thereinafter 
contained  on  the  part  of  the  lessee  should  be  broken ; 
and  there  were  no  covenants  on  the  part  of  the  lessee 

>Eyton  V.  Jones,  21  L.  T.  N.  S.         *  Rains  v.  Kneller,  4  C.  &  P.  3. 
789.  ^  Hunt  v.  Bishop,  8  Exchq.  675. 

^Clarke  v.   Cummings,  5  Barb.         "  Wynham  v.  Carew,  2  Q.  B.  317. 

(N.  Y.)  339.  But  see  Darke  v.  Bowditch   8  Q. 

'  Garrett  v.  Scanter,  3  Den.  (N.  B.  973. 
Y.)  334  ;  Co.  Litt.  246,  b. 


CHAP.  XLvii.]     Provisos  for  Ee-entrt.  1201 

after  the  proviso,  but  only  a  covenant  by  the  lessor  that 
upon  the  lessee  paying  the  rent,  and  performing  all  and 
every  the  covenants  thereinbefore  contained  on  his  part 
to  be  performed,  he  should  quietly  enjoy ;  it  was  held, 
that  the  lessor  could  not  re-enter  for  breach  of  the  cov- 
enant not  to  assign,  for  the  proviso  was  I'estrained  by 
the  word  thereinafter  to  subsequent  covenants,  and 
though  there  were  none,  yet  the  court  could  not  reject 
the  word.'  A  proviso  giving  a  power  of  re-entry  if  the 
lessee  "shall  do  or  cause  to  be  done,  any  act,  matter  or 
thing  contrary  to  and  in  breach  of  any  of  the  cove- 
nants," does  not  apply  to  a  breach  of  the  covenant  tO 
repair,  the  omission  to  repair  not  being  an  act  done 
within  the  proviso."  A  proviso  giving  a  power  of  re-en- 
try if  the  defendant  made  default  in  performance  of  any 
of  the  clauses  by  the  space  of  thirty  days  after  notice, 
does  not  apply  to  the  breach  of  a  negative  covenant  not 
to  allow  alterations  in  or  permit  new  buildings  on  the 
premises  without  permission.'  Where  a  lease  contained 
two  clauses  for  re-entry,  the  one,  in  case  the  yearly  rent 
was  in  arrears  thirty  days  after  it  became  payable,  and 
the  other,  in  case  the  yearly  rent  was  in  arfear,  which 
was  stated  to  be  payable  hal^-yearly,  it  was  held,  that 
the  landlord  had  a  right  to  re-enter  on  non-payment  of 
each  half-year's  rent,  as  the  former  clause  contained  the 
desfcription  of  the  amount  to  be  annually  paid,  and  the 
latter  the  times  for  payment.'  Where  a  lease  contained 
a  proviso  for  re-entry,  if  the  lessee  committed  waste  to 
the  value  of  10s.,!  and  the  lessor  re-entered,  and  brought 
ejectment  in  consequence  Of  the  tenant's  having  pulled 
doWn  some  old  buildings  of  more  than  10s.  value,  and 
substituted  others  of  a  different  description ;  it  was  held, 
that  the  wjaste  contemplated  in  thfe  proviso  was  waste 
producing  an  injury  to  the  reversion,  and  that  it  was  a 
question  for  the  jury  whether,  under  all  the  circum- 
stances, such  waste  to  the  value  of  10s.  had  been  com- 

'  Spencer  v.  Godwin,  4  M.  &  S.  715  ;  Dalton  v.  Jones,  4  B.  &  Ad. 

365.  136  ;  Croft  V.  Lnmley,  6  H.  L.  Cas. 

2  Abdy  V.  Stevens,  3  B.  &  Ad.  672. 

299  ;  Cole  Ejec.  407.  *  Eudd  v.  Golding,  6  Moo.  331. 

8  Palk  V.  Marchetti,  1  B.  &  Ad. 


1202  FOEFEITUEE.  [§  510. 

mitted.'  Where  there  was,  among  others,  a  covenant 
not  to  carry  off  hay  under  a  penalty,  and  a  clause  folr 
lowed  which  enumerated  aU  the  covenants  except  that, 
and  provided  for  re-entry  upon  breach  of  any  of  the  cov- 
enants ;  it  was  held,  that  the  penalty  did  not  prevent 
the  clause  of  re-entry  from  applying  to  the  hay  cov- 
enant, the  words  being  large  enough."  Where  a  lease 
contained  a  clause  of  re-entry,  in  case  the  term  of  years 
thereby  granted  should  be  extended  or  taken  in  execu- 
tion ;  and  before  the  end  of  the  term  the  sheriff  entered 
the  premises  under  a  writ  of  extent  against  the  lessee  at 
the  suit  of  the  crown,  held  an  inquisition,  and  seized  the 
lessee's  interests  into  the  king's  hands ;  it  was  held,  that 
this  proceeding  was  a  taking  in  execution  within  the 
latter  class  of  the  condition,  and  that  the  term  was  deter- 
mined and  forfeited  to  the  lessor  : '  and  where  the  condi- 
tion was,  among  other  things,  to  be  void  "  if  the  lessee 
should  incur  any  debt  on  which  any  judgment  should  be 
signed,  entered  up  or  given  against  him,  and  on  which 
any  writ  ot  fieri  facias,  or  other  writ  of  execution,  should 
be  issued,"  and  the  tenant  gave  a  warrant  of  attorney, 
on  which  judgment  was  entered  up  and  execution  issued 
and  the  tenant's  goods  were  taken,  and  the  lessor  entered ; 
it  was  held,  that  he  was  entitled  to  the  emblements.* 
A  proviso  was,  that  in  case  the  lessee  should  commit  an 
act  of  bankruptcy,  whereon  a  commission  or  fiat  in 
bankruptcy  should  or  might  be  issued,  and  under  which 
he  should  be  duly  found  and  declared  a  bankrupt,  the 
term  should  determine.  The  tenant  became  bankrupt, 
and  was  found  and  declared  a  bankrupt,  but  there  was 
not  a  proper  petitioning  creditor's  debt  on  which  the  flat 
was  founded ;  it  was  held  by  two  judges,  against  the 
opinion  of  Parke,  B.,  that  the  lessee  was  not  duly  found 
and  declared  a  bankrupt  within  the  meaning  of  the  pro- 
viso.' A  proviso  was,  that  if  the  lessee,  his  executors, 
administrators  or  assigns,  should  become  bankrupt  or 

'  Earl  of  Darlington  v.  Bond,  5         '  Rex  v.  Topping,  1  BTClel.  &  Y. 
B.  &  C.  855.  644. 

°  Aatrobus  V.  Jepson,  3  B.  &  Ad.         *  Davis  v.  Eyton,  7  Bing.  154. 
403.  s  Lloyd  V.  ligleby,  15  M.  &  W. 

465. 


CHAP.  XLvn.]     Provisos  foe  Ee-entby.  1203 

insolvent,  or  suffer  any  judgment  to  be  entered  against 
him  by  confession  or  otherwise  or  suffer  any  extent,  proc- 
ess or  proceedings  to  be  had  or  taken  against  him, 
whereby  any  reasonable  probability  might  arise  of  the 
estate  being  extended,  &c.,  the  estate  should  determine, 
and  the  lessor  have  a  power  to  re-enter.  The  tenant 
died  during  the  term,  and  by  his  wiU  devised  the  prem- 
ises to  his  executors  or  trust,  and  the  surviving  executor 
became  a  bankrupt ;  it  was  held,  that  the  lessor's  right 
of  re-entry  thereon  accrued.'  The  non-payment  of  a 
debt  mentioned  in  an  insolvent's  schedule  is  not  a  con- 
tinuing insolvency,  so  as  to  constitute  a  new  forfeiture 
of  a  similar  lease,  the  former  forfeiture  by  the  insolvency 
having  been  waived."  Where  a  lease  of  coal  mines  re- 
served a  royalty  rent  for  every  ton  of  coal  raised,  and 
contained  a  proviso  that  the  lease  should  be  void  alto- 
gether if  the  tenant  should  cease  working  at  any  time 
within  two  years ;  but  after  the  working  had  ceased 
more  than  two  years  the  lesser  received  rent ;  it  was 
held  that  the'  lease  was  not  absolutely  void  by  the  lessee's 
ceasing  to  work,  but  voidable  only  at  the  option  of  the 
lessor ;  and  that  he  might  avoid  the  lease  upon  any  ces- 
sation by  work,  commencing  two  years  before  the  day  of 
the  demise  in  the  ejectment.'  A  lease  contained  a  pro- 
viso, that  if  the  lessee,  his  heirs,  &c.,  should,  during  the 
continuance  of  the  term,  happen  to  become  insolvent, 
and  unable  in  circumstances  to  go  on  with  the  manage- 
ment of  the  farm,  the  demise  should  from  thenceforth 
cease  and  be  absolutely  void  ;  the  court  doubted  whether 
the  attainder  of  the  tenant  for  felony  was  a  forfeiture  of 
the  lease  ;  but  held,  that  if  it  was  a  breach  of  the  condi- 
tion it  was  not  a  continuing  breach,  but  was  contempo- 
raneous with  the  conviction."  In  a  lease  for  years  if  a 
person  should  so  long  live,  there  was  a  covenant  to  pro- 
duce that  person,  or,  if  he  should  be  in  a  foreign  country, 

>  Bridgeman  -v.  David,  1  CM.  401 ;  Boscawen  v.  Bliss,  4  Taunt. 

&  E.  405 ;  Williams  v.  Davies,  6  C,  735 ;  Eoberts  v.  Davey,  4  B.  &  Ad. 

&  P.  614.  664. 

»  Gatehouse  t.  Eees,  4  Biug.  N.  "  Griffith  v.  Pritchard,  5  B.  & 

C.  384  Ad.  765. 

2  Bryan  v.  Bacicks,  4  B.  &  Ad. 


1204  Forfeiture.  [§  511. 

to  make  it  appear  by  a  good  and  sufficient  certificate 
that  he  was  living,  with  a  proviso  for  re-entry  on  default. 
The  person  having  gone  to  Brazil,  an  affidavit  that  the 
deponent  had  three  yea,rs  before  seen  him,  and  had  often 
heard  from  him  since,  and  was  convinced  that  he  was 
alive  nine  months  before  when  the  deponent  left  Brazil, 
was  held  not  to  be  a  sufficient  certificate  within  the 
covenant,  and  that  therefore  a  forfeiture  was  incurred.' 
Under  a  clause  of  forfeiture  in  case  that  no  sufficient 
distress  can  be  found  upon  the  premises,  every  part  of 
the  premises  must  be  searched."  Where  a  lessee  has 
broken  his  covenant  to  pay  rates  and  taxes,  the 
lessor  may  avail  himself  of  the  proviso  for  re-entry  with- 
out proof  of  any  demand  made.' 

Sec.  511.  Who  may  avail  themselves  of  a  forfeiture.— A 
lessee  cannot  avail  himself  of  his  own  act  to  vacate  a 
lease,  on  the  principle  that  no  man  shall  be  permitted  to 
take  advantage  of  his  own  wrong.'  No  one  can  re-enter 
for  a  forfeiture  but  the  person  legally  entitled  to  the  rent 
or  to  the  reversion  : '  but  a  lessor  who  has  demised  his 
whole  interest,  subject  to  a  right  of  re-entry  on  breach 
of  a  condition,  may  enter  on  the  condition  being  broken, 
though  he  have  no  reversion.'  A  right  of  entry  cannot 
.  be  effectually  reserved  to  a  stranger  to  the  legal  estate, 
although  he  joins  in  the  demise  and  has  some  equitable 
or  beneficial  estate  or  interest  in  the  property.'  Thus, 
where  by  lease  a  mortgagee  demised  and  the  executrix 
of  the  mortgagor  demised  and  confirmed,  and  a  power 
of  re-entry  for  breach  of  covenants  was  reserved  to  them 
or  either  of  them  :  held,  that  the  deed  operated  as  a 
demise  by  the  mortgagee,  and  a  confirmation  by  the 
executrix,  and  that  the  proviso  for  re-entry  enured  only 
to  the  mortgagee,  and  not  to  both.'    So  where  trustees 

"  Randlev.  Lory,  6  Ad.  &E1.  318.  «  Freeman  v.  Bateman,  3  B.  & 

2  Powell  V.  King,  3  B.  &  B.  514.  Aid.   168  ;    Baker   v.   Gostling,    3 

8  Davis  V.  Burrell,  10  C.  B.  831.  Blag.  N.  C.  85  ;  ColvUle  v.  Hall,  14 

^  Reid  V.  Parsons,  ante.  Ir.  C.  L.  365,  C.  P. 

'  Hotley  V.  Scott,  Loflft,  319,  a ;  '  Barber  v.  Lawrence,  4  Taunt. 

Barney  v.  Adams,  3  C.  &  J.  233 ;  23  ;  Litt.  s.   347  ;  Co.  Htt.  314,  b  ; 

Barker  v.  Goldsmith,  3  C.   &  J.  Cole  Ejec.  404. 

674.  *  Barney  v.  Adams,  3  C.   &.  J. 


CHAP.  xLvn.J  Who  May  Avail  Themselves.  1205 

and  cestui  que  trust  join  in  a  lease,  reserving  rent  to  the 
cestui  que  trust,  with  a  proviso  for  re-entry  on  non-pay- 
ment, such  power  will  enure  only  to  the  trustees : '  so 
where  tenant  for  life  and  the  reversioner  join  in  a 
demise."  Where  a  power  to  determine  a  lease  is  reserved 
to  the  lessor,  his  heirs,  executors  or  administrators,  it 
wiU  extend  to  his  devisee.'  Where  a  power  of  re-entry 
for  breach  of  covenants  is  reserved,  and  the  reversion 
descends  to  coparceners,  it  seems  that  one  or  more  of 
them  cannot,  without  the  other  or  others,  maintaia 
ejectment  for  a  forfeiture,  the  condition  or  proviso  for. 
re-entry  not  being  divisible.'  A  lease  granted  under  a 
power  contained  in  a  settlement  reserved  a  right  of 
entry  to  the  lessor  and  his  assigns  ;  it  was  held,  that 
" assigns "  meant  assigns  of  the  settlers;  and  that  al- 
though the  right  of  entry  could  not  be  well  reserved  to 
the  lessor,  yet  that  the  owners  of  the  reversion  under 
the  settlement  for  the  time  being  were  entitled  to  the 
advantage  of  it  as  "assigns."'  A  reversioner  who  has 
parted  with  his  reversion,  either  absolutely  or  by  way  of 
mortgage,  cannot  re-enter  or  maintain  ejectment  for  a 
forfeiture : '  nor  after  his  reversion  has  been  merged  and 
extinguished.'  Where  a  lease  was  granted  of  a  piece  of 
land  with  two  partly  erected  messuages  thereon,  and 
the  lessee  covenanted  to  complete  them  within  two 
months,  and  also  to  keep  the  said  messuages  in  repair 
during  the  term,  with  a  proviso  for  forfeiture  for  breach 
of  any  of  the  covenants  :  the  messuages  were  never  com- 
pleted, but  after  the  expiration  of  the  two  months  the 
reversion  was  assigned  to  the  plaintiff,  and  afterwards 
the  messuages  were  much  dilapidated  in  the  roofs  and 
other  parts :  held,  that  whether  the  plaintiff  could  or 
not  maintain  ejectment  for  not  completing  the  messu- 

232 ;  Moore  v.  Earl  of  Plymouth,  =  Greenaway  v.  Hart,  14  C.   B. 

3  B.  &  Aid.  66.  348 ;  23  L.  J.  C.  P.  115. 

'  Barker  v.  Goldsmith,  2  C.  &  J.  « Femi  d.  Matthews  v.  Smart,  12 

674.  feast,  443 ;  Doe  d.  Marriott  v.  Ed- 

^Treport'sCase.  6Coke,  15;  Cole  wards.  5  B.  &  Ad.   1065;  Doe  d. 

Ejec.  404.  Prior  v.  Ongley,  10  C.  B.  25. 

3  Bamford  v.  Hayley,   12  East,  '  Webb  v.  Russell,  3  T.  R.   393, 

464.  402  ;  Trer  v.  Barton,  Moore,  94. 

*  Rutzen  V.  Lewis,  5  Ad.  &  El. 
377. 

II. -34 


1206  ,  ^  ,,         FOEFEITPiaE.  ,^.  [§512. 

ages  witMB.the  two  months,,.yet  he  could  jio  so  for  the 
subsequent  iDon^repair.'  -  ^ 

Sec.  513.  32  Hen.  8,  c.  34.— At  common  law,  no  one 
but  the  grantor  cpuld,  re-enter  for  a  forfeiture ;  and  no 
grantee  or  assignee, of  the  reversion  could  take  the 
benefit  or  advantage  of  a  condition  for  re-entry;"  but 
by  32  Hen.  8,  c.  3i,  a,Il  grantees  of  the  reversion,  their 
heirs,  executors,  successors  and  assigns,  shall  have  like 
advantage  against  the  lessees,  their  executors,  adminis- 
trators and  assigns,  hy  entry  fomon-payment  of  rent,  or 
for  doing  WQ^J^.  or  other  forfeiture;  and  the  same  remedy 
by  action  only  for  not  performing  other  conditions, 
covenants  and  agreements  contained  in  the  said  leases 
as  the  lessors  or  grantors  themselves  had."  This  act 
applies  to  leases  by  deed  only,  because  agreements 
by  parol  cannot  run  with  the  land  :  therefore,  where  a 
lease  is  not  under  seal,  an  assignee  of  the  reversion 
cannot  sue  upon  the  contract."  But  the  lessor  may  sue 
in  like  manner  as  if  he  had  not  assigned  the  reversion.^ 
The  words  "or  other  forfeiture,"  although  general,  do 
not  extend  to  every  breach  of  condition,  but  only  of 
such  conditions  as  either  are  incident  to  the  reversion,  as 
rent,  or  for  the  benefit  of  the  estate,  as  for  not  doing  of 
waste,  for  keeping  the  house  in  reparations,  for  making 
of  fences,  scouring  of  ditches,  for  preserving  of  woods 
or  such  Uke ;  and  not  for  the  payment  of  any  sum  in 
gross,  dehvery  of  corn,  wood,  or  the  like."  In  other 
words,  any  "other  forfeiture"  must  be  ejusdem  generis 
with  those  particularly  mentioned  in  the  statute.''  The 
breach  of  a  condition  not  to  assign  without  license  is 
collateral,  and  not  within  the  statute.'  Where  a  tenant 
forfeits  his  estate  by  becoming  insolvent,  or  by  being 
attainted  of  felony,  it  seems  that  such  forfeiture  is  not 

'  Bennet  v.  Herring,  3  C.  B.  N.  '  Bickford  v.  Parson,  supra. 

S.  370.  «  Co.  Litt.  215,  &;   Shep.  Touch, 

=  Litt.  s.  874 ;  Co.  Litt.  214 ;  Cole  176. 

Ejec.  405.  '  Cole  Ejeo.  406. 

^  Ante,  205.  *  Lucas  v.  How,  Sir  T.   Eaym. 

*  Standen  v.  Chrismas,  10  Q.  B.  250  ;  Collins  v.  Sillye,  Styles,  265  ; 

135  ;  Bickford  v.  Parson,  5  C.  B.  Pennant's  Case,  3  Coke,  64. 
9S0 ;  Brydges  v.  Lewis,  3  Q.  B.  603. 


CHAP.  xLvn.]     Entry  for,  Generally.  120'r 

one  whereof  an  assignee  of    the  reversion  may  take 
advantage  by  the  statute.' 

An  assignee  of  part  of  the  reversion,  as  for  years  or 
life,  in  all  the  lands  demised,  is  an  assignee  within  this 
statute,  and  may  take  advantage  of  a  condition  broken 
in  his  time."  But  an  assignee  of  the  reversion  in. part  of 
the  lands  is  not,  for  the  condition  being  entire  cannot  be 
apportioned  by  the  act  of  the  parties,  but  shall  rather  be 
destroyed.'  An  action  of  covenant  will  lie  by  the 
assignee  of  the  reversion  of  part  of  the  demised  premises 
against  the  lessee  for  not  repairing  that  part.'  So  the 
assignee  of  the  term  in  part  of  the  land  may  maintain 
an  action  for  breach  of  covenant  as  to  that  part.'  The 
distinction  is  between  a  condition  and  a  covenant." 

Sec.  513.  Entry  for  a  forfeiture  generally.— Grenerally 
speaking,  where  a  forfeiture  has  been  incurred  for 
breach  of  any  covenant  or  condition,  the  lessor  must  do 
some  act  evidencing  his  intention  to  enter  for  the 
forfeiture  and  determine  the  lease:'  and  the  lease  wiU 
be  avoided  from  that  time  only. '  A  distinction  is  made  in 
this  respect  between  a  lease  for  lives  and  a  lease  for 
years.'  Perhaps  an  actual  entry  should  be  made  before 
action  to  avoid  a  freehold  lease  :  but  the  action  itself  is 
sufficient  to  avoid  a  lease  for  years." 

A  corporation  aggregate  cannot,  without  deed,  author- 
ize their  servant  or  agent  to  enter  into  land  on  their  be- 
half for  a  condition  broken ;  though  this  does  not  seem 
to  have  been  always  free  from  doubt.  In  one  place  it  is 
said,  that  a  man  cannot  justify  as  a  servant  to  a  corpora- 
tion without  showing  a  deed  of  retainer,  and  it  is  con- 

'  Griffith  V.  Pritchard,  5  B.  &  Ad.  «  Palmer  v.  Edwards,  Doug.  131 ; 

765.    But  see  Hammond  v.  Collis,  3  Wms.  Saund.  181,  d. 

1  C.  B.  916.  n  Smith,  L.  O.  38. 

'  Co.  Litt.  215,  ffl ;  Attoe  v.  Hem-  '  Matthews  v.  Smart,  13  East, 

miags,   3  Bulst.  281 ;  Bad  welly  v.  444,  451  ;  Amsby  v.  Woodward,  6 

Brand,   Plow.  73 ;    Isherwood   v.  B.  &  O.  519 ;    Roberts  v.  Davy,  4 

Oldknow,  3  M.  &  S.  383 ;   Wright  B.  &  Ad.  664  ;  BayUs  v.  Le  Gros, 

V.  Burroughes,  3  0.  B.  685.  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  537 ;  6  id.  553  ;  Walk- 

»  Cole  Ejec.  406.  er  v.  Engler,  80  Mo,  130. 

*  Twynam  v.  Pickard,  2  B.  &  « Cole  Ejec.  408. 

Aid.    105  ;  Simpson  v.  Clayton,  4  »  1  Inst.  214. 

Bing.  N.  C.  758,  786  ;  Badeley  v.  '» Cole  Ejec.  403. 
Vigurs,  4  E.  «&  B.  71. 


1208  Forfeiture  [§"S14.^ 

trasted  with  the  case  of  a  man  avowing  as  bailiff  to  a' 
corporation,  which  may  be  done  without  deed.  In. 
another  place,  where  it  is  reported  to  have  been  said  by 
Littleton,  that  it  was  the  opinion  of  all  the  judges  in  the 
Common  Pleas  and  King's  Bench,  that  an  assignment  of; 
auditors  by  a  commonalty  is  good  without  deed,  it  is; 
added,  ' '  and  so  of  a  justification  by  their  commandment. ", 
In  a  third  place,  it  is  said  to  be  the  better  opinion,  that 
he  who  pleads  the  freehold  of  a  dean  and  chapter,  and. 
that  he  entered  by  their  commandment,  ought  to  show, 
a  command  in  writing  ;  and  the  same  of  a  servant  of  a 
mayor  and  commonalty.  A  distinction  has  been  made, 
between  a  corporation  which  has  a  head,  as  a  mayor 
and  commonalty,  and  a  corporation  without  a  head.  In 
the  first  case  it  is  said,  that  a  man  may  justify  entering 
into  land  by  the  commandment  of  the  mayor  without 
writing  :  in  the  latter,  that  a  command  to  enter  must  be' 
by  writing.  RoUe  lays  it  down  as  clear  law,  "that  a 
corporation  aggregate  cannot  command  their  bailiff  to- 
enter  into  land  of  their  own  leasing  for  years,  for  a  con- 
dition broken,  without  deed  ;  for  such  commandment 
without  deed  is  void  ; "  and  this  is  consonant  to  the  prin- 
ciple, that  where  the  interest  or  title  of  the  corporation 
is  concerned,  their  officer  must  be  appointed  by  deed.' 

Sec.  614.  Demand  of  rent.— In  what  actions  unnecessary. 
No  demand  of  rent  is  necessary  before  the  commence- 
ment of  an  action  on  contract  to  recover  rent,  it  being 
the  duty  of  the  tenant  to  pay  or  tender  his  rent  to  the 
landlord,  and  the  action  itself  amounting  to  a  sufficient 
demand.  No  ejectment  can  be  maintained  for  non-pay- 
ment of  rent  unless  there  is  some  express  condition  or 
proviso  in  the  lease  or  agreement  giving  the  landlord  a, 
right  to  re-enter  and  determine  the  lease  or  tenancy  for 
such  non-payment.''  The  landlord  must  have  a  "right 
by  law  to  re-enter  for  non-payment  thereof."  Such 
condition  or  proviso  may  by  express  words  dispense  with 
the  necessity  of  a  formal  demand  of  the  rent :  as  where 

'  1  Roll.  514.  V.  KempshaU,  id.  975  ;  Cole  Ejec. 

=  Dixon  V.  Eoe,  7  C.  B.  134  ;  Hill      411, 


CHAP.  xLvn.J  Demand  OF  Rent.  1209 

it  says,  "although  not  fdrmar demand  shall  have  been 
mado  thereof,"  or  to  that  effect.' 

Unless  there  are  express  words  in  the  lease  or  agree- 
ment dispensing  with  a  formal  demand  of  the  rent,  or 
the  case  falls  within  the  above  enactment,  no  entry  or 
ejectment  can  be  maintained  for  non-payment  of  rent 
unless  there  has  been  a  formal  demand  thereof  made 
according  to  the  strict  rales  of  the  common  law."  1.  The 
demand  must  be  made  by  the  landlord  or  by  his  agent 
duly  authorized  in  that  behalf."  2.  It  must  be  made  on 
the  very  last  day  to  save  the  forfeiture.  Therefore,  if  the 
proviso  for  re-entry  be  on  non-payment  of  rent  for  thirty 
days  after  it  becomes  due,  the  demand  must  be  made 
on  the  thirtieth  day  after  the  rent  became  due  (exclusive 
of  the  day  on  which  it  became  due),  and  not  on  any  other 
day  before  or  afterwards.*  3.  It  must  be  made  a  con- 
venient time  before  and  at  sunset."  It  must  be  continued 
actively  or  constructively  until  sunset."  4.  it  must  be 
made  at  the  proper  place.  Therefore,  if  the  lease  or 
agreement  specify  the  place  at  which  the  rent  is  to  be 
.paid,  the  demand  must  be  made  there  and  not  elsewhere. ' 
But  if  no  place  be  so  appointed,  the  demand  must  be 

'Harris  v.   Masters,   2  B.  &  C.  Ind.  415  ;  30  Am.  Rep.  239.   InBa- 

,490  ;  Goodright  d.  Hare  v.  Cater,  con  v.  Western  furniture  Co.,  53 

3  Boug.  477,  486  ;  Cole  Ejec.  411,  Ind.  239,  the  demand  was  made  at 

'412.  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  at 

^  Molineux  v.  MolLneux,  Cro.  Jac.  the  place  where,  by  the  terms  of 

144;  Doe  d.  Forster  v.  Wandlass,  the  lease,  it  was  made  payable,  and 

7  T.  E.  117  ;  Acocks  v.  Phillips,  5  it  was  held  inoperative  to  effect  a 

H.  &  N.  183  ;  Barr  v.  Glover,  10  Jr.  forfeiture.   Biddle,  J. ,  said :  "For- 

Com.  Law  E.  113  ;  Cole  Ejec.  413.  feitures   are   not   fevered  in  law. 

'West  V.   Davis,   7    East,    363;  They  must  be  strictly  construed. 

Toms  V.  Wilson,  33  L.  J.  Q.  33.  In  this  case,  in  order  to  entitle  the 

*  Dixon  V.  Roe,  7  C.  B.  134  ;  Fors-  appellant  to  re-enter  and  possess 
ter'  V.  Wandlass,  7  T.  R.  117  ;  the  premises,  he  should  have  de- 
Smith  and  Bustard's  Case,  1  Leon,  manded  the  specific  amount  of 
lil ;  Plow.  70 ;  Co.  Litfc.  203  a ;  1  rent  due,  just  before  sunset  of  the 
Wnas.  Saund.  287 ;  Cole  Ejec.  413.  day  upon  which  it  becomes  due, 
But  the  mere  fact  that  a  tenant  andupon  the premisesleased,.there 
holds  over  after  his  term  has  ex-  being  no  place  of  payment  named 
pired,  no  notice  to  quit  having  in  the  lease.  See,  also,  Meni  v. 
■been  given,  does  not  evidence  a  Rathbone,  21  Ind.  454  ;  Phillips  v. 
waiver  by  the  lessor.  Calderwoo'd  '  Doe,  3  Ind.  133. 
v.  Brooks,  38  Cal.  151.  « Wood  and  Chiver's  Case,  4  Leon', 
•  ^  Co.  Litt.  203  a ;  1  Wms.  Saund.  1-79  ;  Acocks  v.  Phillips,  5  H.  &  N. 
•287  ;  Cole  Ejec.  413.    A  demand,  183. 

although  made  upon  the  premises,  '  Borrough's  Case,  4  Coke,  73  ; 

made  at  1  o'clock  of  the  day  upon  Buskin  v.  Edmunds,  Cro.  Eliz.  415  ; 

which  the  rent  becomes  due,  is  in-  Moore,  408 ,;  Co.  Litt.  203  a ;  1  Wms 

feufficient.    Je&kins  v.  Jenkins,  63  Saund.  387, 


1210  Forfeiture.  [§  515. 

made  upon  the  land,  and  that  the  notorious  place  of  it.' 
Therefore,  if  there  is  a  dwelling-house  upon  the  land  the 
demand  must  be  made  at  the  front  door  of  it ;  but  it  is 
not  necessary  to  enter  the  house,  although  the  door  be 
open."  If  the  premises  consist  of  a  wood  only,  the 
demand  must  be  made  at  the  gate  of  the  wood,  or  at 
some  highway  leading  through  the  wood,  or  other 
most  notorious  place.  If  one  place  be  as  notorious  as 
another,  the  lessor  hath  election  to  demand  it  at  which 
he  ■wiU.'  Such  demand  must  be  actually  made,  although 
there  be  no  person  present  on  behalf  of  the  tenant 
to  answer  it."  Or  it  may  be  made  on  an  undertenant.' 
5.  The  demand  must  be  made  of  the  precise  sum  then 
payable,  and  not  one  penny  more  or  less.  °  If  the  rent  is 
payable  quarterly,  and  more  than  one  quarter  is  due,  only 
the  last  quarter's  rent  should  be  demanded,  and  not  the 
previous  arrears,  otherwise  the  demand  will  be  altogether 
bad,'  because  it  is  only  in  respect  of  the  last  quarter's  rent 
that  the  forfeiture,  if  any,  wiU  accrue,  the  previous 
arrears  not  having  been  duly  demanded  on  the  proper 
day  for  that  purpose.  °  Non-payment  of  rent,  does  not, 
in  the  absence  of  any  provision  therefor,  in  the  lease, 
work  a  forfeiture,"  and,  even  where  there  is  such  a  pro- 
vision, in  order  to  work  a  forfeiture,  the  landlord  must 
make  a  demand  for  the  rent  on  the  very  day  it  becomes 
due,  and  at  the  very  place  where  it  is  made  payable.'" 

Sec.  516.  Waiverofforfeiture,  what  amounts  to.— Courts  of 
law  always  lean  against  forfeitures,  as  courts  of  equity 
relieve  against  them  ;  therefore,  whenever  a  landlord 
means  to  take  advantage  of  any  breach  of  covenant  or 
condition  so  that  it  should  operate  as  a  forfeiture  of 
the  lease,  he  must  take  care  not  to  do  anything  which  may 
be  deemed  an  acknowledgment  of  the  tenancy,  and  so 

'  Cole  Ejeo.  413.  Leon,  05  ;  Fabin  v.  Winston,  Cro. 

2  Co.  Litt.  301,  h ;  1  Wms.  Saund.     Eliz.  209  ;  1  Wms.  Saund.  287. 
287.  ■•  '  Scot  V.  Scot,  Cro.  Eliz.  73  ;  Tom- 

3  Co.  Litt.  303,  a.  kins  v.  Pincent,  7  Mod.  97  ;  1  Salk. 
"Kidwelly  t.  Brand,  Plow.  70  a,      141 ;  Wheeldon  v.  Paul,  3  C.  &  P. 

70,  h;  Co.   Litt.  201,  &  ;  1  Wms.  613. 

Saund.  287.  » Cole  Ejec.  414. 

'Brook  V.  Bridges,  2  B.  &  R.  29.  'Brecknerv.Warren,41ATk.  532. 

« Fabin  and  Windsor's   Case,   1  "  WiUard  v.  Benton,  57  Vt.  286 


CHAP.  XLVn.] 


Waivbr  of. 


1211 


operate  as  a  waiver  of  the  forfeiture. '    If  a  lessor,  or  other 

rights  therein  claimed  by  the 
plaintiff,  a  court  of  equity  would 
grant  relief  by  an  injunction.  That 
as  BrandeU  continued  at  all  times 
to  occupy  the  land,  it  was  not 
necessary  that  he  should  re-enter 
or  give  any  notice  of  his  intention 
to  enforce  the  forfeiture  occasioned 
by  the  neglect  of  the  lessees  to 
commence  operations  within  the 
time  limited.  That  even  if  any 
over  act  or  notice  was  required, 
the  ex«eution  and  deUvery  of  the 
new  lease  to  Marsh  was  a  sufficient 
declaration  of  his  election  to  en- 
force the  forfeiture.  The  defend- 
ant offered  to  show  that  after  the 
execsition  and  .deUvery  of  the  lease 
to^,]^arsh^..Brandell  consented   to 

'  his  entering  upon  the  land.  It 
waa  held  that  the  evidence  was 
properly  rejected  as  immaterial. 
'Mattodli  V.  fflunroe,  21  Hun,  74 ; 

.August  Spth.  1865,  the  board  of 
Canal  c6minis=ion  ers  granted  to  the 
plaintiff  permission  to  construct 
dry  dopks  on  the  west  side  of  a  lock 
on  the  Oiwego  Canal,  and  to  use 
certain  surplus  water  for  filling 
them,  "  reserving  the  power  to  re- 

■  voke  or  annul  the  said  permission, 
either  whoUy  or  in  part,  and  to 
close  such  dock  permanently 
or  temporarily,  for  any  cause 
whatever."  The  plaintiff  in  pur- 
suance of  such  permission,  con- 
structed two  dry  docks,  at  an  ex- 
pense of  from  $5000  to  $6000. 
Thereafter  and  on  July  15,  1871, 
he  leased  to  the  defendants  "the 
two  dry  docks  *  *  *  being 
the  same  docks  built  by  A.  C.  Mat- 
toon,  on  lands  belonging  to  the 
State  of  New  York,  for  canal  pur- 
poses," for  the  term  of  five  years, 
the  lease  providing  that  "in  case 
the  grant  or  sale  to  the  said  Mat- 
toon  shall  be  legally  rescinded  by 
the  proper  authorities  of  the  State, 
during  the  term  of  this  lease,  the 
said  Munroe  and  Judson  shall  pay 
for  such  time  only  as  they  shall  oc- 
cupy said  premises,  up  to  the  time 
they  shall  be  legally  dispossessed, 
and  this  lease  shall  be  void,  with- 
out recourse  by  either  party,  after 
such  legal  dispossession."  The 
lease  further  provided  that  the  said 
Munroe  and  Judson  ' '  do  hereby  re- 
lease, discharge,  and  make  over  to 
the  said  A.  C.  Mattoon,  his  heirs 
and  assigns,  all  right,  title,  and  in- 


'  Dendv  v.  Nicholl,  4  C.  B.  N.  S. 
876  ;  Pellatt  v.  Boosey,  8  Jur.  N.  S. 
1107 ;  Ward  v.  Day^  4  B.  &  S.  337  ; 
5  id.  359.     In  Allegany  Oil  Co.  v. 
Bradford  OU  Co^  21  .Hun,  26,  Oc^ 
tober  29th,  1875,  one  BrandeE  en- 
tered into  a  contract,  under  seal, 
with  one  Stevens,  by  which  it  was 
agreed  that  the  latter  should,  for 
the  term  of  fifteen  j^ears,  have  the 
right  to  enter  upon  .and  use  the 
lands  of  the  former  so  far  as  might 
be  necessary  to  enable  him  to  bore 
for  oil,  reserving  to  Brandell  the 
one  eighth  part  otaU  oil  produced. 
The  contract  als®  pijoviided,  that 
unless  Stevens  should  commence 
to  bore  the  said  well'  ■♦within  the 
period  of  nine  months  from  the  , 
date  thereof,  that  then  the  same 
was  "to  become  void  and  «ease  to 
be  of  any   binding    effect."    The 
contract    was  duly  recorded  and 
subsequently   assigned  to  the  de- 
fendant who  on  February  32d,  1877, 
entered  upon  the  land  and  com- 
menced to  bore  a  well  therein,    On^ 
September  7th,  1876,  Brandell' Who' 
had  remained  in  possession  of  the ,, 
premises  and  in  no  way  waived, 
extended   or  quahfled   the  fulfil-  : 
ment  of  the  said  contract,  executed 
another  and  a  similar  lease  to  one 
Marsh  and  others,  conferring  upon  , 
them  the  exclusive  right   to  dig 
and  bore  for  oil  on  the  farm  for 
the  term    of    twelve    years.    On 
January  17th,  1876,  this  lease  was 
duly    recorded.      Thereafter    the 
same  was  duly    assigned    to  the 
plaintiff  who,  within  the  time  there- 
in specified,  entered  upon  the  land 
and  commenced  to  bore  a    well 
therein.    This  action  was  brought 
by  the  plaintiff  against  the  def end- 
antand  his  assignees,  andBrandell, 
to  procure  a  judgment  declaring 
.  the  Stevens   lease    forfeited    and 
annulled,  and  to  restrain  the  de- 
fandants  from  entering  upon  the 
land  or  boring  for  oil  therein.    It 
was  held  that  even   though    the 
lease  to  Stevens  appeared  upon  its 
face  to  have  become  void  by  reason 
of  the  failure  of  the  lessees  to  com- 
mence operations  within  the  time 
Umited  by  it,  and  though  the  act 
of  the  defendant  in  thereafter  en- 
tering upon  the  land  was  a  mere 
trespass,  yet  as  the  controversy  re- 
lated to  the  sinking  and  boring  of 
oil  wells  in  land,  in  violation  of 


■1212 


FORFEITUEE. 


[§  515.. 


person  legally  entitled  to  the  reversion,  knowing  that  a 
forfeiture  has  been  incurred  by  the  breach  of  any  covenant 
or  condition,  does  any  act  whereby  he  acknowledges  the 
continuance  of  the  tenancy  at  a  later  period,  he  thereby 
waives  such  forfeiture.'  Thus  if  he  distrains  for  or 
accepts  payment  of  rent  which  accrued  due  after  the  for- 
feiture," the  receipt  of  such  rent  operates  as  a  matter  of 
law  to  waive  all  forfeitures  then  known  to  the  lessor  not- 
withstanding any  protest  on  his  part  against  such  waiver.' 
So  an  action  for  subsequent  rent,  with  knowledge  of  the 
f  orfeitui'e,  operates  as  a  waiver,.'  An  unqualified  demand 
of  such  rent  appears  sufficient.  °  But  there  is  a  distinction 
in  this  respect  between  waiver  of  a  forfeiture  and  waiver 
of  a  notice  to  quit,  because  the  former  may  be  waived  by 
the  lessor  only,  whereas  the  latter  cannot  be  waived 
without  the  consent  of  both  parties.'  The  subsequent 
receipt  of  rent  due  prior  to  the  forfeiture  is  no  waiver.' 
A  forfeiture  of  a  lease  by  a  lessee's  insolvency  is  waived 

terest  which  they  now  have,  or 
may  have,  or  at  any  time  claim  to 
have,  in  or  to  said  premises  during 
the  life  of  thisr  lease,  neither  party 
waiving  any  rights  thereafter." 
Subsequently  and  on  February  18, 
1876,  the  canal  board  at  the  solic- 
itation and  request  of  the  said 
Munroe  and  Judson,  revoked  and 
annulled  the  grant  or  permit  given 
to  Mattoon,  and  thereafter,  and  on 
May  23d,  1876,  granted  a  new  per- 
mit to  them  to  use  and  occupy  the 
said  docks  constructed  by  the 
plaintiff.  In  an  action  by  the  lat- 
ter to  recover  the  rent — falling  due 
under  the  lease,  for  the  period  be- 
tween February  15,  1876,  and  July 
15,  1876,  the  defendante  claimed 
that  the  lease  was  terminated  by 
the  revocation  of  the  permit  grant- 
ed to  the  plaintiff,  and  that  they 
were  thereby  relieved  from  all 
further  liability  for  rent  there- 
under. It  was  held  that  the  canal 
board  were  authorized  to  revoke 
and  annul  the  permit  granted  to 
the  plaiutifif  at  any  time,  and  that 
the  court  could  not  inquire  into  the 
motives  which  actuated  them  in 
so  doing.  But  .that,  in  order  to 
reheve  the  defendants  from  liability 
under  the  lease,  they  must  show 
that  they  Tiere  actually  and  in  good 


faith  dispossessed  or  evicted  from 
the  premises ;  and,  as  the  evidence 
failed  to  show  an  actual  dispos- 
session, and  as  the  revocation  of 
the  plaintiff's  permit  was  procured 
by  the  collusion  between  the  State 
officers  and  the  defendants,  no  de- 
fence to  the  action  was  established 
and  that  the  plaintiff  was  entitled 
to  recovery. 

'  Cole  Ejec.  408 ;  Willison  v. 
Watkins,  3  Pet.  (U.  S.)  49.  In 
order  that  the  landlord  may  avaU 
himself  of  a  forfeiture  he  must 
show  that  he  has  done  everything 
necessary  to  perfect  his  right. 
Mem  V.  Rathbone,  31  Ind.  454. 

"Marsh  v.  Curteys,  Cro.  EUz. 
528;  Harvie  v.  Oswel,  Cro.  Eliz. 
572  ;  Gatehouse  v.  Rees,  4  Bing.  N. 
C.  384  :  Grifath  v.  Pritchard,  5  B. 
&  Ad.  765 ;  Cotesworth  v.  Spokes, 
10  C.  B.  N.  S.  103 ;  Pellatt  v. 
Boosey,  8  Jur.  N.  S.  1107  ;  Ward 
V.  Day,  4  B.  &  S.  337  ;  5  id.  259. 

8  Croft  V.  Lumley,  6  H.  L.  Cas. 
672. 

^  Dendy  v.  Nicholl,  4  C.  B.  N.  S. 
376. 

5  Nash  V.  Birch,  1  M.  &  W.  402. 

«  Blyth  V.  Dennett,  13  C.  B.  178. 

'  Marsh  v.  Curteys,  Cro.  Eliz. 
528  ;  Price  v.  Worwood,  4  H.  &  N. 
513. 


«HApJ  XLVn.] 


Waiver  OF. 


1213 


by  acceptance  of  rent  from  him  after  his  discharge.' 
Where  a  lease  was  made  to  one  for  life,  rendering  rent  at 
a  certain  time,  with  a  clause  of  re-entry  for  non-payment, 
and  the  rent  being  in  arrear,  the  lessor  brought  an  action 
for  it ;  it  was  held,  that,  notwithstanding  the  action,  he 
might  still  enter  for  a  breach  of  the  condition,  for  the 
action  for  the  rent  did  not  affirm  tlie  lease,  because  it 
should  be  intended  to  be  brought  as  for  a  duty  due  upon 
a  contract."  So  if  he  had  taken  an  insufficient  distress  for 
rent  which  accrued  before  the  forfeiture,  he  might  after- 
wards have  entered  for  a  breach  of  the  condition,  because  , 
the  distress  would  under  those  circumstances  have  been 
no  waiver.'  A  right  of  re-entry  is  waived  by  acceptance 
of  the    reserved  rent,   though  from  a  stranger.*    The 


'  Gatehouse  v.  Eees,  4  Bing.  N. 
C.  384. 

'Cro.Eliz.3;  AnonSalk.S.  Alease 
provided  that  in  case  of  a  failure 
,to  pay  rent,  taxes  or  royalty,  that 
the  lessor  might,  "without  any 
^previous  notice  whatever,"  re- 
enter, repossess  and  retain,  and 
agaia  enjoy  the  demised  premises  ; 
and  that  such  re-entry  and  posses- 
sion may  be  made  by  "  entering 
upon  a  part  of  the  premises  in  the 
uameof  the  whole,"  and  that '  'from 
and  after  such  re-entry  made,  this 
lease,  and  every  part  thereof,  shall 
cease,  and  be  null  and  void." 
It  was  held,  that  the  the  lessor  had 
the  right,  and  it  was  his  duty  in 
the  first  instance  to  resort  to  the 
mode  of  re-entry  agreed  upon, 
and  if  prevented"  in  so  doing,  it 
was  his  privilege  to  adopt  any  other 
lawful  mode,  and  take  the  stat- 
utory or  any  other  appropriate 
legal  proceedings,  to  obtain  posses- 
sion. He  was  not  however  pre- 
vented from  taking  possession 
under  the  terms  of  the  lease.  If 
there  was  no  provision  in  the 
contract  as  to  the  mode  of  making 
known  the  election  of  a  forfeit,  it 
would  have  to  be  done  in  accord- 
ance with  the  recognized  rules  of 
the  common  law  as  modified  by 
the  statute.  SSEKWood,  G.,  said  : 
"  We  think  the  record  shows  the 
possession  of  the  lessor  rightfully 
and  not  forcibly  taken.  "The 
paity  entitled  to  the  possession  of 
property  has  the  right  to  take  it  in 


any  manner  that  does  not  involve 
a  breach  of  the  statute  to  take 
away  that  right."  Hyatt  v.  Wood, 
4  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  150 ;  Jackson  v. 
Farmer,  9  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  308 ;  Low 
V.  Elwell,  131  Mass.  315  ;  Mussey 
V.  Scott,  32  Vt.  83;  Sterling  v. 
Warden,  51  N.  H.  317  ;  Stearns  v. 
Sampson,  59  Me.  568 ;  Kellam  v. 
Janson,  17  Penn.  St.  467  ;  Overdeer 
V.Lewis.  1 W.  &  S.  (Penn.) 90  ; Page 
v.De  Puy,  40  lU.  506  ;  Latimer  v. 
Woodward,  3  Doug.  (Mich.)  369 ; 
Harrington  v.  Scott,  1  Mich.  17 ; 
Seitz  V.  Miles,  16  id.  456  ;  Huffman 
V.  Harrington,  33  id.  53 ;  Farmer 
V.  Hunter,  45  id.  337.  The  mere 
receipt  of  rent  due  before  forfeit- 
ure, after  the  lease  had  been  for- 
feited, will  not  be  a  waiver  of  the 
forfeiture.  Jackson  v.  Allen,  3 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  130  ;  Stuyvesant  v. 
Davis,  9  Paige  (N.  Y. )  437; 
Bleecker  v.  Smith,  13  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
533.  And  certainly  the  mere  pay- 
ment of  rent  or  royalty,  unless 
fully  paid,  would  not  waive  the 
forfeiture,  as  it  would  be  a  con- 
tinuing cause  of  forfeiture."  Alex- 
■an4er  v.  Hodges,  41  Mich.  691 ; 
Doe  V.  Woodbridge,  9  Barn.  &  C, 
376  ;  Doe  v.  Allen,  3  Taunt.  78 ; 
Doe  V.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  498.  PendUl 
V.  Union  Mining  Co.,  Mich.  Sup. 
Ct.,  Jan.  13,  1887. 

'  Brewer  d.  Onslow  v.  Eaton,  3 
Doug.  233  ;  6  T.  R.  330. 

*  GriiHth  v.  Pritchard,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
765. 


1214  FOKPEITURE.  [§  516. 

acceptance  of  rent,  from  an  assignee  of  the  lessee,  operates 
as  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  enforce  a  forfeiture  for  breach 
of  a  proviso  in  the  lease  against  assignment '  under  a  lease 
providing  that  the  lessee  shall  keep  the  building  insured 
"by  policies  in  the  name  of  the  lessor  or  assigned  to  her" 
equity  will  not  decree  a  forfeiture,  where  the  policies  are 
kept  in  the  name  of  the  lessee,  but  will  regard  them  as  held 
in  trust  for  the  lessor."  If  ejectment  is  brought  on  a  for- 
feiture of  a  lease,  and  after  the  bringing  of  such  ejectment 
the  landlord  accept  rent,  it  is  no  waiver  of  the  forfeiture.' 

Sec.  516.  Lessor  must  have  notice  of  forfeiture.— In  order 
to  render  acceptance  of  rent  or  any  other  act  a  waiver  of 
a  forfeiture,  the  lessor  must  have  notice  or  knowledge 
of  the  forfeiture  at  the  time  of  the  supposed  waiver,* 
unless  the  condition  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  equally 
within  the  knowledge  of  both  the  lessor  and  lessee.'' 
The  act  which  is  insisted  on  as  amounting  to  a  waiver  is 
matter  of  evidence  only,  as  to  quo  animo  it  was  done,  to 
be  left  to  the  jury  under  the  circumstances  of  the  case.' 
Where  a  lessor  was  too  ill  to  attend  to  business,  and  it 
did  not  appear  that  he  knew  of  a  forfeiture,  his  son, 
who  collected  the  rents,  was  held  not  to  have  authority 
to  waive  a  forfeiture.'  Where  the  breach  is  of  a  con- 
tinuing nature,  the  waiver  of  any  forfeiture  up  to  a 
certain  day  will  afford  no  defence  to  an  ejectment  for  a 
subsequent  breach.  °  Thus,  where  the  covenant  is  to 
keep  the  demised  premises  in  repair  during  the  term  ;° 
or  to  keep  them  insured  in  a  certain  manner  from  loss 
or  damage  by  fire  during  the  term  "  or  not  to  use  certain 
rooms  in  a  particular  manner."     Acceptance  of  rent 

'  Croch  Y.   Wabash,    St.  Louis,  '  Cheney  v.  Batten,  Cowp.  243. 

Etc.,  R.  R.  Co.  22  Mo.  App.  015.  '  Nash  v.  Birch,  1  M.  &  W.  403. 

2  Eherts  v.  Fisher,  54  Mich.  294.  «  Cole  Ejec.  409. 

^Moorecraft  v.  Meux,  4  B.  &  C.  '  Baker  v.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  498. 

666 ;  1  C.  &  P.  346  ;  Jones  V.  Carter,  "Mustin  v.    Gladwin,   6  Q.   B. 

15  M.  &  W.  718.  953  ;  PenniaU  v.  Harbome,  11  Q. 

4  Pennant's  Case,  3  Coke,  63  b;  B.  368  ;  Hyde  v.  Watts,  13  M.  & 

Duppa  V.    Mayo,  1  Wms.  Saund.  W.  254  ;  Flower  v.  Peck,  1  B.  & 

288  a,  b,  (note)  16 ;  Harvie  v.  Oswel,  Ad.  428. 

Cro.  Eliz.  553,  573  ;  Goodright  v.  "  Ambler  v.  Woodbridge,  9  B.  & 

Walker  v.  Davids,  2  Cowp.  803.  C.  376. 

'  Gregson  V.  Harrison,  3  T.  R.  425. 


CHAP.  XLVii.]  Lessor  Must  Have  Notice.  1215 

which  becomes  due  pending  a  notice  to  repair,  is  no 
waiver  of  a  subsequent  forfeiture  occasioned  by  non- 
compliance with  such  notice.'  Indeed  it  would  seem 
that  acceptance  of  rent  due  after  the  expiration  of  the 
notice  will  not  bar  an  ejectment  if  the  premises  continue 
subsequently  unrepaired."  A  distress  and  continuance 
in  possession  might  be  a  waiver  of  a  forfeiture  existing 
at  the  time ; '  but  a  distress  is  only  an  acknowledgment 
of  a  tenancy  to  the  day  of  the  distress,  and  a  waiver  of 
any  forfeiture  to  that  time.*  Where  the  plaintiff,  after 
the  service  of  a  writ  in  ejectment  for  non-payment  of 
rent,  distrained  for  rent  which  subsequently  became  due, 
and  by  the  notice  of  distress  stated  that  such  distress 
was  made  without  prejudice  to  the  year's  rent  due  on 
the  25th  of  March,  and  for  which  ejectment  proceedings 
were  then  pending ;  it  was  held,  that  such  distress  did 
not  operate  as  a  waiver  of  the  ejectment.'  A  forfeiture 
incurred  by  breach  of  a  covenant  to  repair  generally  is 
waived  by  a  notice  given  by  the  landlord,  under  a 
Special  covenant  that  he  should  enter  and  do  the  repairs 
and  distrain  for  the  expenses."  If  a  lessee  exercises  a' 
trade  on  the  demised  premises  by  which  his  lease  is 
forfeited,  the  landlord  does  not,  by  merely  lying  by  and 
witnessing  the  act  for  six  years,  waive  the  forfeiture,' 
as  some  positive  act  of  waiver  is  necessary ;  but  if  he 
permit  the  tenant  to  expend  money  in  improvements,  it 
would  seem  that  it  is  evidence  to  be  left  to  a  jury  of  his 
consent  to  the  alteration  of  the  premises  :  and  if  a  lessor 
after  a  forfeiture  advises  a  person  to  purchase  the  term 
of  his  lessee,  he  cannot  maintain  an  ejectment  for  a 
forfeiture  against  such  purchaser ;  but  he  may  do  so  if 
the  party  has  an  interest,  as  an  annuity  secured  on  the 
premises,  and  the  advice  is  merely  "to  take  to  them."° 

'  Rankin  v.  Brindley,  4  B.  &.  Ad.  '  Bailey  v.  Mason,  2  Ir.  Rep.  N. 

84  ;  Baker  v.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  468.  S.  583. 

»  Fryett  d.  Harris  v.  Jeflerys,  1  » Reutzen  v.  Lewis,  5  A.  &  E.  277 ; 

Esp.  393.  Goatley  v.  Paine,  3  Camp.  520. 

^Taylor  v.  Johnson,  1  Stark.  411 ;  ' Sheppard  v.  AUen,  3  Taunt.  78. 

Ward  V.  Willingale,  1 H.  Blac.  31 1 ;  « Sore  v.  Eykins,  1  C,  &  P.  154  ; 

■>  Flower  t.  Peck,  1  B.  &  Ad.  438  ;  Ry.  &  Moo.  39. 
Ward  V.  Day,  4  B.  &  S.  337  ;  S.  C. 
in  error,  5  B.  &  S.  359. 


1216  FOKFEITUEE.  [§  516^ 

If  A,  tenant  for  life,  subject  to  forfeiture,  with  a 
remainder  over  to  B,  leases  to  C  for  a  term,  and  after- 
wards apprehending  that  he  has  forfeited,  acquiesces  in 
B's  claim  to  and  receipt  of  the  rent  from  0,  his  executor 
may,  on  showing  that  he  acquiesced  under  a  false  appre- 
hension, recover  from  C  the  amount  of  the  rent  errone- 
ously paid  to  B  ;  for  in  order  to  constitute  a  confirma- 
tion of  the  payment,  some  act  must  appear  to  have  been 
done  by  A  with  the  knowledge  of  his  own  situation." 
Where  land  was  demised  with  a  covenant  by  the  lessee, 
to  build  and  complete  thereon  houses  within  a  year,  and 
a  proviso  that  if  he  did  not  the  lease  should  be  void ;  the 
houses  not  being  completed,  it  was  held,  that  the  for- 
feiture was  not  waived  by  the  steward  of  the  lessor 
having  permitted  the  lessee  to  employ  workmen  in 
completing  the  houses  for  a  short  period  after  the  for- 
feiture.' So  a  forfeiture  by  omission  to  repair  after 
notice  is  suspended  but  not  waived  by  an  agreement  to 
q,llow  further  time  to  repair.  °  When  the  landlord  does 
any  act  amounting  to  a  constructive  eviction  of  the 
tenant  he  cannot  maintain  an  ejectment  for  a  forfeiture 
for  not  repairing  during  the  continuance  of  such 
eviction."  A  demised  land  with  a  covenant  by  the  lessee 
to  finish  certain  houses  thereon  and  with  a  power  of 
re-entry  in  case  of  default,  and  by  another  indenture 
between  A  and  the  plaintiff,  reciting  that  A  had  made 
underleases  of  the  land  in  question,  A  assigned  the  land 
to  the  plaintiff  subject  to  the  underleases  ;  the  court 
inclined  to  think  that  if  the  condition  had  been  broken, 
the  assignment,  subject  to  the  underleases,  would  have 
been  a  waiver  of  the  forfeiture,  although  the  forfeiture 
was  not  known  to  A.'  Though  an  acceptance  of  rent  or 
other  act  of  waiver  may  make  a  voidable  lease  good,  it 
cannot  make  valid  a  deed  or  a  lease  which  was  actually 
void  at  first ;  but  where  a  lease  for  years  contains  the 

>  Williams  v.  Bartholomew,  ;  B.  ■"  PeUatt  v.  Boosey,  8  Jur.  N.  S 

&  P.  326.  1107. 

2  Ld.  Kensington  v.  Brindley,  12  '  Hunt  v.  Bishop,  8  Exchq.  675 ; 

Moo.  37.  Hunt  v.  Remnant,  9  Exchq.  635. 

^Eankin  v.  Brindley,  4  B.  &  Ad. 
84. 


CHAP,  xLvn.]  Lessor  Must  Have  Notice.  v^il 

common  proviso  "that  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful  for 
the  lessor  to  re  enter,"  or  a  proviso  "  that  the  term  shall 
cease  and  determine  if  the  lessor  please,"  the  lease  will 
be  voidable  only  by  a  breach  of  covenant ;  and  the  for- 
feiture may  be  waived  by  a  subsequent  acknowledgment 
of  a  tenancy.' 

•Bristow  V.  Old,  Ad.  Ejeo.  135 
4th  ed.). 


1518  FiXTUKES.  [§  517. 


CHAPTER  XLYIII. 

FIXTUBES. 

Sec.  517.    Meaning  of  the  term  "  fixtures." 

Sec.  518.    "Tenant's  fixtures." 

Sec.  519.     "  Landlord's  fixtures." 

Sec.  520.    What  are  not  fixtures. 

Sec.  521.    Between  what  persons  questions  as  to  fixtures  ariBO. 

Sec.  522.     General  rule  as  to  fixtures. 

Sec.  523.    General  rule  as  to  annexations  by  a  tenant. 

Sec.  524.    Exceptions  to  general  rule. 

Sec.  525.    Trade  fixtures. 

Sec.  526.    Decisions  as  to  trade  fixtures. 

Sec.  527.    Fixtures  for  ornament  and  convenience. — What  may  be 

removed. 
Sec.  528.    Contracts  respecting  fixtures. 
Sec.  529.    When  the  tenant  may  remove  fixtures. 

How  the  removal  must  be  effected. 

Remedies  respecting  fixtures. — Remedies  for  the  wrongful 
removal  of  fixtures. 

Remedies  to  recover  the  value  of  fixtures. 

Remedies  to  recover  damages  for  an  improper  sale  of  fix- 
tures. 

Buildings  erected  by  tenant  upon  leased  lands. 

Sec.  517.  Meaning  of  the  term  «  fixtures."— The  word 
"fixtures"  as  a  legal  term,  signifies  articles  of  a  personal 
nature  which  have  been  affixed  to  land.  It  is  a  word  of 
modern  origin  and  is  not  to  be  found  among  the  old  law 
terms.'    In  its  most  extensive  sense  it  means  anything 

1  WUtshear  v.  CottreU,  1  E.  &  or  a  positive  or  uniform  system. 

B.  674;  Sheen  v.  Rickie,  5  M.  &  It  is  fluctuating,   shifting,   so  to 

W.  175;  Elliott  V.  Bishop,  10  Exchq.  speak,  and  each  case  must  stand 

507.    TTie  law  relating  to  fixtures  upon   its   own   facts.    There  are, 

does  not  seem  to  be  susceptible  of  however,  some  general  rules  that 

being  reduced  to  invariable  rules,  are  applicable  when  the  facts  are 


Sec. 

530. 

Sec. 

531. 

Sec. 

582. 

Sec. 

583. 

Sec. 

584. 

CHAP  xLviii.J  Meaning.  1219 

annexed  to  the  freehold  in  such  a  manner  as  to  become 
parcel  of  it.  Everything  substantially  and  permanently 
affixed  to  the  soil  is  in  law  a  fixture.'  But  as  between 
landlord  and  tenant  it  has  generally  a  more  confined 
meaning,"  and  may  be  divided  into— 1 .  Tenant's  fixtures  ; 
2.  Landlord's  fixtures. 

Seo.  518.  •' Tenant's  fixtures."— "  Tenant's  fixtures  "  are 
personal  chattels  annexed  to  the  freehold  by  the  tenant 
during  the  term,  either  for  the  purposes  of  his  trade,  or 
for  mere  ornament  and  convenience,  and  which  he  has  a 
right  to  sever  and  remove  during  the  term,  in  the  absence 
of  any  express  stipulation  or  local  custom  to  the  con- 
trary. The  old  rule  that  a  personal  chattel  annexed  to 
the  freehold  by  a  tenant  became  a  part  of  the  realty,  has 
been  greatly  relaxed,  and  essentially  modified  by  the 
modern  cases.  Exceptions  have  been  made  in  favor  of 
ornament ;  and  ornamental  chimney  pieces,  pier-glasses, 
hangiugs,  wainscots,  &c.,  &c.,  come  under  this  head." 
Other  exceptions  have  followed  in  favor  of  enjoyment  of . 
the  occupation  and  in  favor  of  trade.  If  a  landlord  lets 
a  house  unfurnished  without  the  conveniences  of  grates 
or  gas-fittings,  and  the  tenant,  for  the  enjoyment  of  his 
occupations,  fixes  them  in  the  house,  he  may,  unless  he 
has  conti-acted  to  leave  them  behind,  remove  them  during 
his  term.  Whether  a  particular  fixed  chattel  belongs  to 
the  landlord  or  tenant,  must  in  some  instances  depend 
upon  what  the  contracting  parties  propose  to  be  the 
subject  of  the  demise,*  Erections  of  a  permanent 
character  annexed  to  the  freehold  are  held  to  be  a  part 

asoertajned,  bat  on  the  whole  there  450,  459  ;  Wahnsley  v.  Milne,  7  C. 

has  probably  been  more  judicial  B.  N.  S.  115  ;  Mather  v.  Fraser,  3 

legislation,  and  more  conflict  upon  Kay  &  J.  536. 

tMs  branch  of  the  law,  than  upon  ^  HaUen  v.'  Eunder,  supra ;  El- 

any  other  single  topic.     The  cases  liott  v.  Bishop,  10  Exchq.  508  ;  Ex 

are  in  a  state  of  grand  confusion  parte  Barclay,  5  De  Gex,  M.  &  G. 

and  are  wholly  incapable  of  being  403. 

reconciled.      All  that    an  author  *  Buckland     v.     Butterfleld,     4 

can  fairly  do  is  to  give  a  general  Moore,  447 ;  Beck  v.  Ribow,  1  P. 

summary   of  the  cases,  with  as  Wms.    94 ;  Avery  v.   Ohesslyn,  3 

littleconfusion  as  possible.    Wood-  Ad.  &  El.  75. 

fall's  L.  &  T.  515-536.  ■"  Elliott  v.  Bishop,  10  Exchq.  496 ; 

'  Lee  V.  Eisdon,  7  Taunt.  191 ;  11  id.  113  ;  Summer  v.  Bromilow, 

Hallen  v.  Bander,  1  C.  M.  &  E.  34  L.  J.  Q.  B.  180. 
266 ;  Minshall  v.  Lloyd,  3  M.  &  W. 


1220  FiXTUEES.  [§518. 

of  it,  though  convenient  for  the  tenant's  use/  as  barns, 
beast-houses,  wagon-houses,  fuel-houses,  pigeon-houses, 
carpenters'  shops  for  mending  wagons  and  carts,  and 
buildings  employed  and  used  on  a  farm,  and  let  into  the 
ground,  and  not  merely  placed  on  the  surface  thereof,  or 
on  a  brick  or  stone  floor ; "  also  hot-houses,  or  green- 
houses, erected  on  a  brick  or  stone  foundation,  and 
attached  thereto  by  permanent  fastenings,  so  that  if  the 
tenant  removes  .them  after  he  has  put  them  up  he  is 
guilty  of  waste.'  But  if  the  tenant  raises  and  constructs 
foundations  of  a  permanent  character  for  the  reception 
of  a  superstructure  of  wood,  such  as  a  wind-mill,  a 
pump,  a  granary,  a  pigeon  or  fowl-house,  or  a  conser- 
vatory, and  the  superstructure  merely  rests  on  this  foun- 
dation, or  is  attached  thereto  by  screivs  or  movable  pins 
or  bolts,  so  as  to  be  removable  at  pleasure  with- 
out material  or  permanent  injury  to  the  freehold. 
the  foundation  belongs  to  the  landlord,  as  part 
and  parcel  of  the  land,  and  the  movable  structure  placed 
on  such  foundation  by  the  tenant  continues  the  prop- 
erty of  the  latter,  and  may  be  carried  away  by  him  at 
the  expiration  of  his  lease.*  A  door  which  may  be 
lifted  from  its  hinges,  and  a  sliding  fender  u^ed  to  pre- 
vent the  escape  of  water  from  a  mill-stream,  does  not 
necessarily  become  part  of  the  freehold  ; '  nor  a  mooi-ing- 
pile,  driven  into  land  for  the  accommodation  of  the  navi- 
gation of  a  canal  or  river.'  But  locks,  keys,  and  bars 
belong  to  the  landlord ;  and  so  does  a  shutter  and  sliding 
bolt,  put  for  the  security  of  the  premises.  When  a  ten- 
ant makes  erections  of  a  permanent  character  without 
the  assent  of  his  landlord,  express  or  implied,  they  be- 
come fixtures  which  he  has  no  right  to  remove.'    But 

'  Leach  V.  Thomas,  7  C.&  p.  337.  B.   &  Ad.   161;  Wansborough  x. 

=  Elwes  T.   Maw,  3  East,  88  ;  3  Maton,  4  Ad.  &  El.  884 ;  Davis  v. 

Smith's  L.  C.  153 ;  6th  edit. ;  Wood  Jones,  3  B.  &  Aid.  165;  Bex  v. 

V.  Hewitt,  8  Q.  B.  913.  Londonthorpe,  6  T.  R.  377  :  Wilt- 

'  Buokland     v.     Butterfleld,     4  shear  v,  CottreU,  33  Law  J.  Q.  B. 

Moore,  440 ;  Jenkins  v.  Gething,  3  181. 

Johns.  &  H.  520  ;  Syme  v.  Harvey,  '  Wood  v.  Hewitt,  15  Law  J.  Q; 

34  Sc.  Sess.  Cas.  503 ;  Sleddon  v.  B.  347. 

Cruikshank,  16  M.  &  W.  71.  «  Lancaster  v.  Eve,  6  C.  B.  N.  S. 

"  Grymes  v.  Boweren,  4  M.  &  P  736. 

143 ;  6  Bmg.  487 ;  Rex  v.  Otley,  i  '  Reid  v.  Kirk,  12  Rich.  {S.  C.)  54 ; 


CHAP,  xi.vm.j        Tenant's  Fixtures.  1221 

when  the  annexation  is  made  under  authority,  express 
or  implied,  the  rule  is  otherwise,  and  authority  may  be 
implied  when  the  erection  is  necessary  to  the  enjoyment 
of  the  premises  for  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  let.' 
Therefore  it  becomes  important  to  understand  what  in 
law  is  regarded  as  a  fixture,  as  between  vendor  and 
,  vendee,  in  order  that,  in  cases  where  a  tenant  without 
authority,  express  or  implied,  annexes  things  to  a  free- 
hold, it  njay  be  known  what  his  rights  are  as  to  their 
removal.  As  a  general  rule,  whatever  is  annnexed  to 
the  freehold  becomes  a  part  of  it,  and  passes  by  deed  as 
lands.''  As  to  whether  or  not  a  thing  is  a  fixture,  is  a 
mixed  question  of  law  and  fact,'  and  depends  upon  the 
character  of  the  thing,  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
annexed  to  the  freehold,  the  intention  of  the  party 
annexing  it,  and  often  whether  it  can  be  removed  with- 
out inj  ury  thereto.  *  But  actual  annexation  to  the  lands  is 
not  necessary  to  make  the  thing  a  fixture  in  all  cases.  ° 
But  in  all  cases  when  a  thing  is  so  annexed  to  the  free- 
hold as  to  be  incapable  of  removal  without  injury  there- 
to, it  is  a  fixture.'  But  as  a  general  rule,  in  the 
absence  of  a  special  agreement  or  custom,  anything 
that  can  be  removed  without  injury  to  the  freehold,  or 
to  itself,  is  treated  as  personal  property  and  does  not  pass 
by  deed. '  A  fence  is  a  fixture,  however  built.  °  Eails  not 
in  a  fence,  are  not.'  And  a  boundary  fence  is  a  fixture 
and  the  adjoining  owners  have  an  undivided  interest  there- 
in, so  that   neither  can  maintain  trespass  against   the 

Fisher  v.  Saflfer,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  Wadleigh  v.  Janurin,  41  N.  H.  503 

611 ;  Washburn  v.  Sproat,  16  Mass.  Woodman  v.  Pease,  17  K.  H.  282 

449.  Leaff  v.  Hewitt,  1  Ohio  St.   211 

1  FuUer  v.  Taylor,  39  Me.  519.  State  v.  Bonham,  18  Ind.  211. 

»  EngUsh  V.  Foote,  16  Miss.  444.  "  McClintock  v.  Graham,  3  Mc- 

3  Campbell  V.  O'Neil,  64  Penn.  St.  Cord  (S.  C.)  553 ;  Gas  Co.  v.  Thm:- 

270 ;   Grand  Lodge  of  Masons   v.  ber,  2  R.  I.  15. 

Knox,  37  Mo.  315.  '  Wade  v.  Johnson,  25  Ga.  881. 

*  Richardson  v.  Borden,  43  Miss.  «  Hines  v.  Ament,  43  Mo.   308 ; 

71;    Piatt   V.    New   Jersey,    &c.,  GUdden  v.  Bennett,  43  N.  H.  306  ; 

Arms  Co.,   14  N.  J.  395;  Hill  v.  Smith   v.  Carroll,  4  Greene  (Iowa) 

Wentworth,  28  Vt.   423  ;  Ford  v.  146  ;   Wentz  v.   Fincber,   12  Ired. 

Cobb,  20  N.   Y.   344  ;  Perkins  v.  (N.  C.)  347. 

Swank,  43  Miss.   349 ;    Brown   v.  '  Robertson  v.  Phillips,  8  Iowa, 

LilUe,  6  Nev.  344.  230. 

5  Prescott  V.  Wells.  8  Nev.    83  ; 
Snediker  v.  Waning,  13  N,  Y,  170 ; 
II.— 35 


1222  FiXTUBES.  [§  518. 

other  for  its  removal.'  A  house  or  otljer  building  erected 
upon  a  foundation  and  annexed  to  the  land  in  any  way," 
though  resting  only  on  stone  posts ; '  a  stone  used  as 
door-step  ;  *  a  gin- house,  the  running  gear  and  a  packing 
screw  ; '  a  cistern  standiag  on  blocks  in  a  cellar ;  °  iron 
stoves  fastened  to  the  brick  work  of  a  chimney,'  or  set  in 
bricks  and  mortar  ;  °  but  not  stones  that  are  not  affixed 
to  the  building."  A  furnace  so  annexed  to  the  building 
that  it  cannot  be  removed  without  injury  thereto,'"  as  a 
furnace  set  in  a  pit  in  the  cellar  to  warm  the  house,  so  also 
is  the  smoke-pipe  leading  from  the  furnace  to  the  chim- 
ney." Steam-engines,  boilers,  miUs,  machinery,  pumps, 
&c.,  annexed  to  the  freehold  as  a  permanent  part  there- 
of;"  chandeliers,  gas-flxtures,  gasometers,  &c."  Plat- 
form-scales set  up  in  the  ground  in  front  of  a  building, 
and  connected  with  it  by  weighing  apparatus,  is 
regarded  as  a  fixture  between  landlord  and  tenant ;"  an 
organ  in  a  niche  in  a  church,  made  expressly  therefor 
and  fastened  to  it  so  that  it  cannot  be  removed  without 
defacing  the  building ; "  a  boiler,  engine,  and  stock  to  be 
used  as  motive  power  ; "  a  cotton-gin  connected  with  the 
running  works  in  a  gin-house  ; "  trees,  growing  fruit, 
shrubbery,  and  all  species  of  vegetation  not  severed  from 

'  Gibson  v.  Vauglin,  3  Bailey  (S.  "  Lawrence  v.  Kemp,  1  Duer.  (N. 

C.)  389.  Y.)  363  ;  Johnson  v.  "Wiseman,  4 

2  Gibbs  V.  Estey,  15  Gray  (Mass.)  Met.    (Ky.)    357,    See  Guthrie  v. 

587.  Jones,  108  Mass.  191,  for  fuU  dis- 

'  London  v.  Piatt,  34  Conn.  517.  cussion  of  this  question,  and  the 

*  Woodman  v.  Pease,  17  N.  H.  test  of  determining  when  gas  flx- 
S83.  tures  are  fixtures  ;  but  while  they 

*  McDaniel   v.   Moody,  3  Stew,  pass  as  fixtures  as  between  vendor 
(Ala.)  314.  and  vendee,  they  are  so  far  regard- 

8  Blethen  v.  Lamb,  40  Me.  810.  ed  as  personal  property  that  they 

'  Goddard  v.  Chase,  7  Mass.  433.  do  not  pass  on  a  sale  of  the  house 

8  Smith  V.  HeiskiQ,  1  Cranch  C.  on  execution.     Montague  v.  Dent. 

C.  (U.  S.)  99.  10  Rich.  (S.  C.)  135 ;  Vaughn  v. 
'  Blethen  v.  Lamb,  ante.  Haldeman,  83  Penn.  St.  533.  See 
"  Main  v.  Schwarzwalder,  4  E.  Rogers  v.  Crow,  40  Mo.  91. 

D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  273.  » BUss  v.  Whitney,  9  Allen 
"  Stockwell    V.    Campbell,    39  (Mass.)  114. 

Conn.  363.  "  Rogers  v.  Crow,  40  Mo.  91. 

>2  Sweetzer  v.  Jones,  35  Vt.  317 ;  "  HiU  v.  Hill,  4p  Penn.  St.  581 ; 

Corlis    V.    McLogin,  39  Me.   115;  Voorhis  v.   McGinniss,  48  N.  Y. 

Baker    v.   Davis,   19   N.   H.   335;  278. 

Christian  v.  Dripps,  28  Penn.  St.  "  Bratton  v.  Clawson,  3  Strob. 

271;  Sparks  V.  State  Bank,  7  Black.  (S.     C.)    478;     Degraffenried    v. 

(Ind.)  479 ;  Eice  v.  Adams,  4  How.  Scruggs,  4  Humph.  (TeimA  431. 
(Del.)  333. 


CHAP.  xLvm.]       Tenant's  Fixtuees. 


1223 


the  freehold,  including  nursery  trees  ; '  a  factory  bell 
and  blow-pipe  used  to  convey  air  to  a  forge ; "  gin- 
stands  ; "  pans  or  vats  attached  to  a  mill  ; '  a  steam  saw- 
mill ;  °  a  pipe  used  to  conduct  water  to  a  building  ;  °  the 
counters  and  drawers  of  a  store  ; '  a  portable  grist-mill ; ' 
machinery  built  into  a  wall,"  or  set  in  bricks  ;'°  a  wind- 
lass in  a  slaughter-house  firmly  affixed  to  the  building ; " 
heavy  stone  sink ; "  the  materials  of  which  a  building  iS 
composed  do  not  cease  to  be  realty  when  the  building  is 
blown  down,  but  pass  by  deed ; "  an  iron  safe  set  in  a 
brick  wall,  with  its  foundation  laid  in  brick  ; "  an  oyster 
•  and  lunch  counter  constructed  partly  of  joists  and  a  base- 
board both  nailed  to  the  floor,  as  well  as  a  bar  fastened 
to  the  floor  with  nails  with  iron  knees  ; "  the  main  wheel 
and  gearing  of  a  factory." 

In  determining  whether  or  not  a  chattel  is  so  annexed 
to  the  freehold  as  to  become  a  flxture,  reference  must  be 
had  to  the  nature  of  the  chattel  itself,  the  position  of  the 
party  placing  it  where  found,  the  probable  intention  in 


'  Maples  V.  Milton,  31  Comi.  598 ; 
Byasse  v.  Eeese,  4  Met.  (Ky.)  373; 
Mitchell  V.  BiUingsby,  17  Ala.  391. 

'  Manufacturing  Co.  v.  Grleason, 
36  Conn.  86. 

^  Richardson  YJBpiden,  42  Miss. 
71.  ^ 

<>  Prescott  V.  Wells,  3  Nev.  83. 

'  Perkins  v.  Swank,  43  Miss.  349. 

« Philbrick  v.  Ewing,  97  Mass. 
133 

1  Pope  V.  Garrard,  39  Ga.  471. 

8  Potter  V.  CromweU,  40  N.  Y. 
287. 

»  Cocy's  Estate,  1  Tucker  (N.  Y.) 
175. 

"  Theuner  v.  Nautre,  23  La.  An. 
749. 

"  Capen  v.Peckham,  35  Conn.  88. 

^^  Brinway  v.  Cobb,  99  Mass.  457. 

"  Rogers  v.  GiiUnger,  30  Penn. 
St.  185. 

"  Folger  V.  Kumer,  24  La.  An. 
436. 

"5  Guthrie  v.  Jones,  108  Mass.  191. 

>«  Powell  V.  Mfg.  Co.,  3  Mas.  (U. 
S.)  459.  The  water  wheel  and 
gearing  put  into  a  mill  to  be  used 
permanently  for  operating  said 
mill,  become  fixtures  and  pass  with 
the  mill.  Farrar  v.  Stackpole, 
6  Me.  164 ;  Pope  v.  Jackson,  65  id. 


165 ;  Blethen  v.  Towle,  40  id.  310- 
A  rnill  built  upon  land  in  posses' 
sion  of  the  builder  under  a  verbal 
contract  for  its  purchase  becomes 
a  part  of  the  realty,  and  the  same 
result  follows  though  built  for  a 
third  person  with  an  understanding 
that  such  third  person  will  take 
the  premises  upon  certain  condi- 
tions. Though  a  person  in  posses- 
sion under  a  verbal  contract  of  pur- 
chase is  a  tenant  at  will,  he  is  not 
liable  for  rent  so  long  as  he  per- 
forms the  terms  of  his  contract,  or 
they  are  waived  by  the  vendor. 
And  aU  improvements  made  while 
Buch  contract  is  in  force  are  made 
under  the  agreement  of  purchase 
and  not  as  tenant.  In  such  case 
the  principles  of  law  appUcable  to 
landlord  and  tenant  in  relation  to 
improvements  made  do  not  apply ; 
but  in  the  absence  of  any  other 
agreement,  they  become  a  part  of 
the  freehold,  as  in  the  case  of  mort- 
gagor and  mortgagee.  1  Cruise, 
46  ;  Fuller  v.  Tabor,  39  Me.  531  ; 
PuUen  V.  Bell,  40  id.  314 ;  Dingley 
V.  Buffum,  57  Me.  881 ;  Patterson 
V.  Stoddard,  47  id.  355 ;  Gould  v. 
Thompson,  4  Met.  (Mass.)  334. 
Lapham  v.  Norton,  N.  Y. 


1224  Fixtures.  [§  518. 

putting  it  there,  the  injury  that  would  result  from  its 
removal,  and  the  object  of  the  party  placing  it  on  the 
premises  with  reference  to  trade,  agriculture,  or  orna- 
ment. 

In  a  New  York  case'  the  following  tests  were  given: 

First, — Whether  actual  annexation  of  a  perma- 
nent character  has  been  made,  except  as  to  those  articles 
which,  though  not  actually  permanently  annexed  to  the 
freehold,  are  yet  regarded  as  a  part  of  it,  as  mill-stones, 
fences,  statuary,  fountains,  &c. 

Second, — Its  actual  adaptability  to  the  use  of  the  free- 
hold ;  and 

Third, — The  actual  intention  of  the  parties  at  the  time 
of  making  the  annexation." 

In  a  Pennsylvania  case "  a  similar  rule  was  adopted,  and 
in  that  case,  where  the  United  States  government  during 
the  war  erected  buildings  upon  a  public  common  for  bar- 
racks, and  afterwards  converted  them  into  hospitals,  and 
erected  additions  thereto,  it  was  held  that  the  buildings 
did  not  become  fixtures  in  the  sense  that  made  them 
realty,  for  the  reason  that  it  was  not  the  intention  of 
either  party  that  they  should  he  annexed  to  the  freeholds 
and  because  the  structures  were  not  of  a  class  that  could  he 
denominated  improvement  made  for  ohject^onnectedwith 
the  soil.* 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  while  aU  things  so  annexed 
to  the  freehold  that  they  cannot  be  removed  without 
material  injury  thereto  are  fixtures,  yet  as  to  all  erections 
upon  or  annexations  made  to  the  realty  that  may  be  re- 
moved without  serious  injury  thereto,  the  intention  of 

'  Voorhis  v.  McGinniss,  48  N.  Y.  *  But  see  Childress  v.  Wright,  3 
378.  See  also  Richardson  v.  Bor-  Cold.  (Tenn.)  350.  In  Foy  v.  Red- 
den, 43  Miss.  71 ;  Linahan  v.  Barr,  dick,  31  Ind.  414,  the  same  djoctrine 
41  Conn.  471 ;  Pennybecker  v.  was  adopted,  and  it  was  held  that 
McDougal,  48  Cal.  160.  a  house  built  partly  in  a  pubhc 

^  This  doctrine  has  been  re-af-  street  and  permanently  annexed  to 

firmed  by  the  coiut  of  appeals  in  an  adjoining  house  which  was  a 

McRae  v.  Nat'l,  &c.,  Bank,  66  N.  part  of  the  realty,  was,  neverthe- 

Y.  489,  and  in  a  late  case  in  Texas ;  less,  to  the  extent  that  it  covered 

Hutching    v.   Masterton,  46   Tex.  the  street,  personal  property,  for 

551 ;  and  indeed  it  may  be  said  to  the  reason  that  it  could  not  have 

be    the    general    doctriae.     Van  been  the  intention  of  the  party  to 

Keuren  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  38  N.  J.  L.  make  it  a  permanent  structure,  or 

165 ;  Thielman  v.  Carr,  75  111.  385.  to  improve  the  soil.     Potts  v.  N. 

^  Meigs'  Appeal,  63  Penn.  St.  38.  J.  Arms  Co. ,  3  Green  (N.  J.)  395. 


CHAP.  xLvm.]        Tenant's  Fixtures.  1225 

the  party  making  them,  and  the  purpose  for  which  they 
were  made,  is  the  real  test.  But  the  intent  alone  is  not 
decisive,  but  coupled  with  the  purpose  for  which  they 
were  made,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  party  and  the 
property  is  regarded  as  the  test.'  It  is  the  permanent 
and  habitual  annexation,  and  not  the  manner  of  fasten- 
ing, that  furnishes  the  test."  So,  too,  the  effect  of  inten- 
tion in  determining  the  question  as  to  whether  an  annexa- 
tion to  the  realty  is  a  fixture,  is  well  illustrated  in  a  Maine 
caSe.°  In  that  case,  a  husband  purchased  a  piece  of  land 
which  was  conveyed  to  his  wife.  He  joined  with  her  in 
building  a  house  on  the  land,  and  subsequently  becoming 
insolvent,  his  creditors  attached  the  house  and  sold  it  at 
auction.  It  was  held  in  an  action  of  trover  by  the  pur- 
chaser against  the  tenant  in  possession,  who  claimed  as 
grantee  of  the  husband  and  wife,  that  when  an  erection, 
though  made  with  the  consent  of  the  owner,  is  made 
with  the  agreement,  express  or  imphed,  that  it  shall  be- 
come and  remain  a  part  of  the  freehold,  it  must  be 
regarded  as  real  estate.  Thus,  materials  collected  for 
the  purpose  of  building,  but  which  have  not  actually 
been  used  for  that  purpose,  are  not  fixtures  ; '  nor  is  ma- 
chinery,— as  planing-machines,  saw-benches,  saws,  and 
other  utensils  that  can  be  removed  without  injury  to  the 
building ; '  or  a  house  erected  on  wooden  posts  set  into 
the  ground  ; "  bridge-piers  erectedjby  a  railroad  company ; ' 

'Voorhisv.  McGinniss,  48  N.  Y.  and    pictures    in  panels,    frames 

378 ;  Poor  v.  Oakman,  104  Mass.  309.  filled  with  satia  and  attached  to 

*Hill  V.  Schwald,  43  Penn.  St.  the  walls,  and  also  statues,  vases, 
271;  Walker  V.  Sherman,  30  Wend,  and  stone  garden -seats,  essentially 
(N.  Y.)  686 ;  Lafflin  v.  Griffiths,  35  a  part  of  the  architectural  design, 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  58 ;  Cook  v.  Cham-  however  fastened,  were  fixtures, 
plain  Transportation  Co. ,  11  N.  Y.  but  that  glasses  and  fixtures  not  in 
91.  This  principle  is  well  iUustrat-  panels  passed  under  the  will,  as 
ed  in  the  case  of  D'Eyncourt  v.  well  at  all  articles  bought  by  the 
Gregory,  L.  E.  3  Eq.  383.  In  that  testator,  but  fastened  to  the  build- 
case  the  tenant  for  life  of  an  estate,  ing  after  his  death,  by  the  remain- 
on  which  he  had  built  and  fur-  der-man. 

nished  a  house  (the  old  one  having  ^  Humphreys  v.  Newman,  51  Me. 

gone  to  decay),  bequeathed  all  the  40. 

tapestry,  marbles,  statues,  pictures  •*  Beard  v.  Durald,  33  La.  An.  384. 

with    their    frames    and   glasses,  '  Voorhis  v.  McGinniss,  48  N.  Y. 

which  should  be  in  or   about  the  378. 

house  at  his  death,  and  of  which  "  Krause  v.  Boss",  1  Cranch,  C.  C. 

he  had  the  power  to  dispose  to  the  (U.  S.)  368. 

remainder-man  for  life,  and  then  'Wagner  v.  Cleaveland,  &a.,  R. 

to  B.      It  was  held  that  tapestry  E.  Co.,  33  Ohio  St.  563. 


1226 


Fixtures 


[§  518- 


a  glass  case,  a  stand  of  drawers,  and  a  large  mirror 
screwed  or  nailed  to  the  ceiling,  and  gas  fixtures  screwed 
upon  gas-pipes  fastened  to  the  ceiling  ; '  steam-boilers 
used  in  a  saw-mill  on  a  plantation  ; "  bowUng  alleys  in  a 
room  leased  for  hall  purposes  ; '  marble  slabs  laid  upon 
but  not  screwed  to  brackets  ;  *  a  saw- mill  built  upon 
timbers  laid  upon  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  intended 
only  for  temporary  use ; '  a  wooden  ice-house 
built  on  blocks  ; "  a  whiskey-still  set  in  masonry ; '  un- 
attached pieces  of  scantling  used  on  a  tobacco  farm  to 
hang  tobacco  on ; '  blinds  and  double  windows  not 
attached  to  the  house ; '  a  kettle  or  boiler  put  up  in  a 
tannery  in  brick  and  mortar ; '°  machinery  in  a  woollen 


'  Guthrie  v.  Jones,  108  Mass.  191. 

2  Slack  V.  Gay,  22  La.  An.  387. 

8  Hanrahan  V.  O'Reilly,  102  Mass. 
201. 

^Weston  V.  Weston,  103  Mass. 
514. 

'  Brown  v.  LiUie,  6  Nev.  344. 

'  Antoni  v.  Belknap,  103  Mass. 
193. 

■>  Feinester  v.  Johnson,  64  N.  C. 
259;  Burk  v.  Baxter,  3  Mo.  207; 
Moore  v.  Smith,  34  111.  512.  In 
Hendy  v.  DinkerhofE,  57  Cal.  8,  L. 
was  in  possession  of  land  under  a 
contract  to  purchase  from  the  de- 
fendant; the  contract  providing 
that  if  L.  failed  to  perform  its 
terms,  then  all  tools  and  machin- 
ery put  upon  the  land  by  L.  should 
be  the  property  of  the  defendant. 
The  plaintiff  leased  an  engine  and 
boiler  to  L.  with  a  privilege  of  pur- 
chase. The  plaintiff  knew  that 
the  chattels  were  to  be  affixed  to 
the  land,  but  did  not  know  of  the 
terms  of  the  contract.  L.  affixed 
the  chattels  to  the  realty  so  that 
they  could  not  be  removed  without 
destroying  the  masonry  and  wall 
to  which  the  chattels  were  affixed. 
L.  failed  to  complete  his  purchase 
of  the  land,  and  forfeited  the  lease 
of  the  chattels.  It  was  held  as 
against  the  defendant,  that  the 
chattels  remained  the  personal 
property  of  the  plaintiff.  In 
March  v.  McKoy,  56  Cal.  85,  one 
"W.  being  in  ppssession  of  an  en- 
gine and  boiler  under  a  lease  from 
the  plaintiff  by  the  terms  of  which 
the  plaintiff  at  the  expiration  of 
the  term  and  on  full  payment  of 


*he  rent  was  to  execute  to  him  a 
bUl  of  sale  of  the  property,  perma- 
nently attached  the  same  to  land 
leased  by  him  from  another,  and 
executed  a  bill  of  sale  of  the  en- 
gine and  boiler  to  one  C. ,  and  after- 
wards the  boiler  and  engine  with- 
out any  land,  were  sold  under  a  de- 
cree of  foreclosure  of  an  alleged 
mechanics'  hen  for  repairs  on  the 
same,  and  on  a  saw  mill  adjoining, 
to  one  P.  In  an  action  against  the 
agents  of  C.  to  recover  possession 
of  the  engine  and  boiler  as  person- 
al property :  Held,  first,  that  the 
plaintiff  was  the  owner  of  the  prop- 
erty, and  that  his  right  could  not  be 
affected  by  a  sale  under  the  fore- 
closure suit  to  which  he  was  not  a 
party,  even  if  it  should  be  assumed 
that  a  mechanics'  lien  could  be  en- 
forced upon  personal  property  ;  and 
second,  that  whatever  might  be  the 
law  applicable  to  the  facts,  in  case 
W.  had  attached  the  machinery  to 
his  own  land,  and  then  sold  the 
land  with  the  machinery  attached 
to  an  innocent  party,  it  was  plain 
that  as  between  the  plaintiff  and 
"W.,  and  as  between  the  plaintiff 
and  any  purchaser  from  W.  of  the 
personal  property  simply,  with  or 
without  notice  of  the  rights  of 
plaintiff  as  the  real  owner,  the  en- 
gine and  boiler  were  to  be  treated 
as  personal  property,  and  were  re- 
coverable in  this  action. 

8  Noyes  v.  Terry,  1  Lans.  (N.  Y.) 

9  Peck  V.  Batchelder,  40  Vt.  283. 
"  Hunt  V.  MuUanphy,  1  Mo.  508. 


CHAP.  XLVin.]      Tenant's  Fixtures.  1227 

factory;'  heavy  machinery, — as  rolls  cast  expressly 
for  a  rolUng-mill,  in  which  they  have  lain  two  years, 
but  have  never  been  put  up ; '  machinery  in  a  cotton- 
mill." 

Amongst  the  various  domestic  and  trade  fixtures  held  to 
be  removable  by  the  tenant,  are  gas-pipes  and  gas-fittings, 
and  water-pipes  .attached  to  the  buildings  by  metal  bands 
and  nails,  grates,  ranges,  ovens,  coppers,  bella,  blinds, 
fixed  tables,  water-butts,  cupboards,  &c.,*  soap  boilers' 
furnaces,  fat-vats,  coppers,  dyeing  and  brewing  vessels, 
cider-mills,  baking-oyens,  steam  engines,  and  salt-pans  ;" 
also  machinery,  engines,  vats,^,  plants  and  utensils  used 
in  trade,  however  bul^y  or  cotnplex  they  may  be  in  their 
construction.  The  tenant  may  take  them  to  pieces,  and 
remove  them,  and  put  thejn  together  again  in  the  same 
form  in  some  other  place.  And  where  a  shed  or  build- 
ing is  a  mere  accessory  to  a,  trade  fixture,  such  as  a  shed, 
or  any  temporary  buildin^^  erecte4  merely  for  the  pur- 
pose of  covering  and  protecting  a  steam-engine,  or  ma- 
chinery or  trade  utensils,  from  the  effect  of  the  weather, 
it  may  be  removable  together  with  the  trade  fixture  to 
which  it  belonged,  on  the  ground  that  "  omne  accessor - 
ium  sequitur  suum  principme":  But  a  building  is  not 
removable  merely  because  it, has  been  erected  for  manu- 
facturing and  trading  purposes,  or  for  the  purpose  of 
covering  and  protecting  machinery.  If  the  building  is 
of  a  substantial  character,  standing  on  brick  or  stone 
foundations  let  into  the  soil,  and  is  constructed  so  as  not  to 
be  removable  without  the  entire  destruction  of  the  fabric, 
it  cannot  be  disannexed  from  the  freehold  and  taken  away, 
although  it  may  be  built  over  a  steam-engine,  and  may 
contain  nothing  but  steam-machinery,  spinning-jennies, 
drums  and  wheels,  all  of  which  may  be  removable,  and 
to  all  of  which  it  may  in  a  certain  sense  be  accessory.' 

'  steams  v.  Warren,  11  Vt.  433 ;  ^  Wall  v.  Hinds,  4  Gray's  Amer. 

Taffe  V.  Warwick,  3  Blackf .  (Ind.)  Eep.  373 ;  Elliott  v.  Bishop,  ante. 

Ill ;  Bartlett  v.  Wood,  33  Vt.  373  ;  '  43  Ed.  3,  fol.  6,  f)l.  19  ;  30  Hen.  7, 

Murdock  v.  Gifford,  38  N.  Y.  38  ;  fol.  13,  pi.  34;  Poole's  Case,l  Salk. 

Swift  V.  Thompson,  9  Conn.  63.  368 ;  Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  13 ; 

2  Johnson  V.  Mehaffy,  43   Penn.  Pentonv.Eobart,  3East,  90. 

St.  308.  'Whitehead  v.  Bennett,  37  Law 

'  Wade  V.  Johnston,  35  Ga.  331.  J.  Ch.  474.    See  Van  Ness  v.  Pack- 


1228  Fixtures.  [§  519. 

Sec.  519.  "  Landlord's  fixtures."— "  Landlord's  fixtures  " 
are  those  put  up  by  the  landlord  before  or  during  the 
term,  or  by  any  previous  owner  or  tenant,  or  by  any 
other  person.  Also  such  fixtures  put  up  by  the  tenant 
during  the  term  as  the  tenant  has  no  right  to  remove. 
All  these  constitute  part  of  the  freehold  and  also  part  of 
the  premises  demised.  In  a  more  confined  sense  "land- 
lord's fixtures"  mean  those  fixtures  which  are  on  the 
premises  at  the  time  of  the  lease,  and  are  demised  there- 
with, and  are  usually  specified  in  a  schedule  to  the  lease 
or  agreement,  to  which  may  be  added  such  erections 
and  fixtures  subsequently  added  by  the  tenant  which  he 
is  not  entitled  to  remove  during  the  term.  Of  course 
the  tenant  has  no  right  to  remove  any  such  fixtures,  and 
must  restore  them  at  the  end  of  the  term  ;  such  as  bolts, 
locks,  keys,  sash,  bars,  door-knobs,  latches,  doors,  grates, 
mantels,  chimney-pieces,  any  species  of  machinery  an- 
nexed to  or  used  with  the  estate,  as  hay-cutters,  boilers, 
steam-engines,  grinding  stones,  malt-mills,  corn-crush- 
ers, &c.,  &c.' 

Sec.  520.  What  are  not  fixtures.— Sometimes  machinery 
and  other  articles,  and  even  buildings,  may  be  so  erected 
as  not  to  be  let  into  the  soil,  or  annexed  to  it  or  to  any 
building  in  such  a  manner  as  to  become  part  of  the 
freehold,  or  to  lose  their  chattel  character.  Where  a 
tenant  erects  a  building  upon  premises  leased  by  him, 
for  temporary  purposes,  with  the  knowledge  and  assent 
of  the  landlord,  the  law  will  imply  a  promise  that  he 
may  remove  the  same  dming  the  term.  Thus,  in  a 
Massachusetts  case,"  K.,  the  lessee  of  premises,  a  baker, 
erected  thereon  a  bake-house  and  oven,  under  an  agree- 
ment with  B.  the  agent  of  the  owner,  that  if  K.  "should 
be  taken  away  or  anything  should  happen,"  B.  would 

ard,  2  Peters  (U.  S.)  137.    If  erect-  Townsend,  8  Mass.  411 ;  Washburn 

ed   with  the  landlord's    consent,  v.  Sproat,  16  Mass.  449 ;  StUhnan 

express  or   implied,  they  may  be  v.Hamer,  8Miss.  421 ;  Eeidv.  Kirk, 

removed,    however     built.      The  12  Rich.  (S.  C.)  54. 

foundation  is  treated  as  realty,  but         '  Walmsley  v.  Milne,  7  0.  B.  N. 

the  building  is  personalty.    Wells  S.  115. 

V.  Bannister,  4  Mass.  514  ;  Fuller         ^  Korbe  v.  Barber,  Mass. 

V.  Taylor,  39   Me.  519 ;  Taylor  v. 


CHAP.  xLvni.]  What  Are  Not.  1229 

"take  it  off  his  hands  at  a  fair  valuation."  The  bake- 
house was  built  of  brick  walls  set  on  ordinary  stone 
wall  foundations,  and  the  oven  was  built  of  brick  inside 
the  house,  resting  on  stone  foundations,  embedded  in 
the  ground.  The  premises  were  aftei-ward  leased  to 
plaintiff,  as  tenant  at  wiU.  In  an  action  for  the  con- 
version of  the  oven  and  bake-house  by  plaintiff,  against 
the  owner,  plaintiff  testified  that  he  purchased  of  K.  the 
entire  bakery  property,  including  the  bake-house  and 
oven,  and  that  before  he  did  so  B.  agreed  that  plaintiff 
might  remove  what  he  purchased,  including  the  oven. 
Upon  receiving  notice  to  quit,  plaintiff  attempted  to 
remove  the  bake-house  and  oven,  but  was  forbidden  to 
do  so  by  the  owner.  It  was  held  that  there  was  suffi- 
cient evidence  to  warrant  a  finding  for  the  plaintiff.  It 
is  settled  that  when  one  erects  a  building  for  a  tem- 
porary purpose  on  the  land  of  another,  with  the 
knowledge  and  consent  of  the  owner,  an  agreement  for 
the  separate  ownership  of  the  building  and  a  right  to 
remove  it  may  be  implied  from  the  circumstances  and 
conduct  of  the  parties.  There  was  evidence  which, 
under  the  decisions,  would  fully  warrant  a  jury  in 
finding  that  before  the  house  and  oven  were  built,  an 
agreement  that  it  should  remain  the  personal  property 
of  Kent  was  made  with  him  by  the  authorized  agent  of 
the  defendant.'  Under  such  circumstances  the  plaintiff 
could  maintain  trover  for  the  conversion  of  the  building 
and  materials  as  personal  property.  The  case  is  disting- 
uishable from  those  where  it  is  held  that  trover  will 
not  lie  for  the  conversion  of  trade  fixtures  which  have 
become  part  of  the  realty  so  long  as  they  remain 
annexed,  although  removable  by  the  tenant  during  the 
term.'  But  the  building  must  be  removed  during  the 
term.  If  the  term  expires,  and  the  lease  is  renewed 
without  any  reservation  of  the  right  to  remove  the 
buUdings,  they  become  a  part  of  the  realty.     In  a  Oali- 

'  Curtiss  V.  Hoyt,  19  Conn.  154 ;  191 ;  Marshall  v.   Lloyd,  3  M.  & 

Prince  v.  Case,  10  id.  375  ;  Smith  W.  450  ;  DoUiver  v.  Ela,  128  Mass. 

V.  Benson,  1  Hill  (N.  Y.)  176.  657. 

'  Guthrie    v.  Jones,  109    Mass. 


1230 


Fixtures. 


[§  520. 


fornia  case,'  premises  were  leased  for  a  term  during 
which  the  tenant  erected  a  house  and  barn.  At  the  end 
of  the  term  a  new  lease  was  given  for  another  term,  the 
tenant  agreeing  therein  to  quit  and  surrender  the 
premises  at  the  end  of  the  term  in  the  same  condition 
they  then  were.  It  was  held  that  the  buildings  became 
fixtures,  and  the  tenant  was  not  entitled  to  remove 
them."  If  a  tenant  erects  buildings  upon  the  lands 
covered  by  the  lease,  with  an  understanding  with  the 
landlord  that  he  may  remove  them,  or  that  the  landlord 
shall  pay  him  their  value,  at  the  end  of  the  term  ;  if  the 
buildings,  during  the  term,  are  taken  under  condemna- 
tion proceedings,  the  tenant,  or  his  assignees  are  entitled 
to  the  damages  awarded  therefor.    Barns, °  granaries, 


'  Marks  v.  Ryan,  63  Cal.  107. 

^  According  to  the  doctrine  in 
the  cases  of  Merritt  v.  Judd,  14 
Cal.  60,  and  Jungerman  v.  Bovee, 
19  id.  355,  upon  the  execution  of  a 
new  lease  the  lessee  "is  in  the 
same  situation  as  if  the  landlord, 
being  seized  of  the  land,  had 
leased  both  land  and  fixtures  to 
him."  The  correctness  of  the  doc- 
trine is  doubted,  or  more  strictly 
speaking,  denied  in  Kerr  v.  Kings- 
bury, 39  Mich.  ]  50.  But  generally 
the  rule  is  held  to  be  that  where 
the  same  tenant  continues  in  pos- 
session under  a  new  lease  contain- 
ing different  terms  and  conditions, 
making  no  reference  to  the  old 
lease,  reserving  no  rights  to  the 
lessee  in  fixtures  annexed  during 
the  previous  term  and  not  re- 
moved before  its  expiration,  and 
containing  the  covenant  to  de- 
Uver  up  the  premises  at  the  end  of 
the  term  in  the  same  condition, 
this  is  not  the  extension  of  or 
holding  over  under  an  existing 
lease ;  it  is  the  creation  of  a  new 
tenancy.  And  it  follows  that 
whatever  was  a  part  of  the  free- 
hold when  the  lessee  accepted  and 
began  his  occupation  under  the 
new  lease  must  be  deUvered  up  at 
the  end  of  the  term,  and  cannot 
be  severed  on  the  ground  that  it 
was  put  in  as  a  trade  fixture,  un- 
der a  previous  lease  which  has 
expired.  The  failure  of  the  lessee 
to  exercise  his  right  to  remove 
during  the  former  term,  or  to  re- 


serve it  in  his  new  contract,  pre- 
cludes him  from  denying  the  title 
of  his  landlord  to  the  estate  and 
the  fixtures  annexed,  and  is  such 
an  abandonment  as  vests  the  title 
in  the  landlord.  In  reason  and 
principle  the  acceptance  of  a  lease 
of  the  premises,  including  the 
buildings,  without  any  reserva- 
tion of  right  or  mention  of  any 
claim  to  the  buildings  and  fixtures, 
and  occupation  under  the  new 
letting,  are  equivalent  to  a  sur- 
render of  the  possession  to  the 
landlord  at  the  expiration  of  the 
first  term. 

*In  Livingston  v.  Sulzer,  19  Hun, 
375,  the  plaintiff  who  owned  a  hfe 
estate  in  certain  land,  leased  the 
same,  on  May  1, 1867,  to  one  Dowd- 
ney,  for  five  years,  at  the  annual 
rent  of  $1,500,  and  agieed  that 
Dowdney  should  have  the  privilege 
of  renewing  the  lease  at  the  annual 
rent  of  $3,500.  It  was  also  agi-eed 
that  if  Dowdney  should,  with  the 
plaintiff's  approval,  erect  any 
building  upon  the  premises,  the 
plaintiff  would  pay  for  the  same 
at  a  fair  valuation  at  the  end  of  the 
term,  and  keep  his  life  insured  for 
a  sum  equal  to  such  value,  and  as- 
sign the  poUcy  to  Dowdney.  Sep- 
tember 12th,  1867,  Dowdney  as- 
signed the  lease  to  Sulzer.  On  De- 
cember 12th,  1868,  plaintiff  and 
Sulzer  entered  into  an  agreement, 
reciting  the  former  lease  and  its 
terms,  the  assignment  to  Sulzer, 
and  that  plaintmE  had  had  his  life 


CHAP.  XLVin.]  What  Are  Not.  1231 

sheds  or  mills  erected  upon  blocks,  rollers,  patterns, 
pillars  or  plates,  resting  on  brickwoi'k,  but  not  affixed  to 
the  freehold  by  being  let  into  it,  or  united  to  it  by 
mortar,  nails  or  otherwise,  are  not  considered  as  fixtures, 
■but  only  as  chattels,  and  may  be  removed  by  a  tenant 
during  his  term,  notwithstanding  they  have  sunk  into 
the  ground  by  their  weight.'  A  wooden  windmill 
resting  by  its  own  weight  on  a  brick  foundation  does 
not  constitute  pai't  of  the  freehold ; "  nor  a  wooden  barn 
erected  by  a  tenant  on  a  foundation  of  brick  and  stone 
let  into  the  ground,  but  the  barn  resting  upon  it  by 
weight  alone,  is  a  mere  chattel  removable  by  the  tenant 
on  the  expiration  of  his  term,  and  for  which 
he  may  afterwards  maintain  trover.'  A  wooden 
bunding  standing  upon  blocks  or  rollers  so 
that  it  can  be  removed  without  disturbing  the  freehold, 
and  which  was  built  for  the  purpose  of  removal  if  neces- 
sary, is  a  movable  fixture,  and  may  be  removed  by  the 
tenant ;  *  so  is  a  stationary  mill  built  under  a  temporary 
shed,  the  posts  of  which  are  let  into  "the  soil,  if  the 
owner  of  the  land  treated  it  a^  personalty.'  So  sheds 
or  buildings  callen  Dutch   barns,  having   a   foundation 

insured  and  the  policy  assigned  to  the  assignees  of  Sulzer.  In  an  ac- 
Siilzer,  and  authorized  the  latter  in  tion  by  the  plaintifif  to  recover  the 
case  plaintifif  failed  to  pay  any  pre-  amount  awarded  for  the  building 
mium,  to  pay  it  himself,  and  de-  which  had  been  paid  into  court, 
duct  it  from  the  rent.  In  May,  it  was  held  that  the  buildings  erect- 
1873,  the  renewal  lease  provided  ed  were  such  as  were  contemplat- 
for  in  the  original  was  given.  It  ed  by  the  lease.  That  the  plaint- 
contained  all  the  provisions  of  the  iflf's  approval  thereof  was  suffi- 
former  lease,  except  the  renewal  ciently  shown  by  his  agreement, 
clause,  including  the  provision  as  with  Sulzer,  after  the  assignment 
to  the  payment  for  buildings  erect-  of  the  lease  to  the  latter,  and  by 
ed,  the  premises  being  described  the  terms  of  the  renewal  lease  giv- 
as  in  the  original  lease,  with  the  en  after  their  erection.  That  the 
addition  pf  a  clause  "excepting  lessee's  right  to  be  paid  their  fair 
such  portion  of  said  property  as  is  value  at  the  expiration  of  his  term 
owned  by  the  party  of  the  second  was  not  effected  by  his  taking  a 
part."  In  1868,  Sulzer  had  erect-  renewal  of  the  lease.  That  the  as- 
ed  a  large  building  on  the  premi-  signees  of  Sulzer  were  entitled  to 
ses  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  the  whole  amount  awarded  for  the 
the  business  of  selUng  lager  beer,  buildings. 

etc. ,  and  in  1875,  the  whole  of  the  '  Huntley  v.  Bussell,  13  Q.  B.  573. 

premises  and  the  building   were  '  Rex  v.  Otley,  1  B.  &  Ad.  161. 

taken  by  the  city  for  a  public  park,  "  Wansbrough  v.  Maton,  4  Ad. 

the  value  of  the  land  being  award-  &  El.  884. 

ed  to  the  plaintiff  and  those  enti-  *  Robinsonv.  Wright,  3  McArth. 

tied  in  remainder  and  $25,000,  be-  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  54. 

ing  awarded  for  the  building  to  '  Young  v.  Baxter,  55  Ind.  188. 


1232  Fixtures.  [§  620. 

of  brick-work  in  the  ground,  and  uprights  fixed  in  and 
rising  from,  the  brick-work,  and  supporting  the  roof, 
which  was  composed  of  tiles,  and  the  sides  open,  having 
been  held  removable.'  So  a  varnish  house  having  a  brick 
foundation,  let  into  the  ground,  and  a  chimney  belonging 
to  it,  upon  which  a  superstructure  of  wood  used  as  a 
varnish  manufactory,  but  merely  placed  upon  a  wooden, 
plate  laid  upon  the  brick  foundation,  may  be  removed." 
So  with  respect  to  a  wooden  stable  standing  upon  blocks 
and  rollers,  or  a  shed  standing  upon  brick- work  let  into 
the  ground."  A  tenant  erected  in  the  garden  apart  from 
the  house,  hot-houses  about  seventy  feet  long,  and 
between  ten  and  twenty  feet  high.  They  consisted  of  a 
frame  and  glasswork,  resting  in  brick  walls  about  two 
feet  high,  and  embedded  in  mortar  on  these  walls  :  — 
held,  that  he  or  his  executors,  in  a  reasonable  time  after 
his  death,  were  entitled  to  remove  them,  without  incur- 
ring any  liability  for  waste."  Stills  set  in  brick- work 
have  been  considered  as  fixed  to  the  freehold,  though 
vats  supported  by  and  resting  on  brick-work  and  timber, 
but  not  fixed  in  the  ground,  were  not."  Stills  set  up  in 
furnaces  in  the  usual  manner,  for  making  whiskey,  &c., 
have  been  held  not  to  be  fixtures."  Iron  salt-pans  fixed 
with  mortar  to  a  brick  floor,  with  furnaces  under  them, 
may  be  removed  by  the  lessees  of  salt  springs  ; '  but 
where  a  lessee  of  salt  springs  was  to  pay  rent  according 
to  the  number  of  pans,  and  he  covenanted  to  deliver  up 
all  worJcs  erected  or  to  be  erected,  at  the  end  of  the  term, 

'  Dean  v.   AllaUey,   3    Esp.  11 ;  rence,   5    Jones    (N.    C.)    L.   337. 

cited  in  Elwes  V.  Maw,  3  East,  47  ;  Copper    stills,   &o.,  affixed   to    a 

2  Smith  L.  C.  128  (4th.  ed.).  building  by  a  tenant  for  thf  pur- 

'  Penton  v.  Robart,  4  Esp.  33  ;  3  poses  of  his  trade,  for   distilling, 

East,  88.  are  removable  by  him  at  any  time 

"  Fitzherbert  v.  Shaw,  1  H.  Blac.  during    his    term.      Reynolds    v. 

258.  Shuler,  5  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  338 ;  Ray- 

*  Martin  v.  Roe,  7  E.  &  B.  237 ;  mond  v.  White,  7  id.  319 ;    Heer- 

26  L.  J.  Q.  B.  129.  mance  v.  Vernoy,  6  Johns.  (N.  Y.) 

6  Horn  V.  Baker,  9  Bast,  315  ;  3  5. 
Smith,  L.  C.  161  (4th  ed.).   But  see         '  Lawton  v.  Sahnon,  1  H.  Blac. 


Trappes  v.  Barter,  3  C.  &  M.  153 
cited  6  Exchq.  313. 

« Moore  v.    Smith,  34  111.   512 
Crenshaw  v.  Crenshaw,  2  H.  &  M, 
(Va.)  32  ;  Burke  v.  Baxter,  3  Mo. 
307;    Terry  v.   Bobbins,   13  Miss, 


359,  n.  A  kettle  or  boiler  set  up 
in  a  tannery,  with  brick  and 
mortar,  is  not  a  fixture,  unless  there 
is  something  to  show  that  it  was  so 
intended.  Hunt  v.  MuUanphy,  1 
Mo.   508;     Earl    of    Mansfield    v. 


291.      Contra,  see  Bryan  v.  Law-     Blackburn,  6  Bing.  N.  C.  426. 


CHAP.  XLviii.]  What  are  Not.  1233 

it  was  held  that  he  could  not  remove  iron  salt-pans 
though  merely  resting  on  brick-work,  and  having  iron 
rings  in  their  sides,  by  which  they  were  occasionally 
lifted  up  to  be  repaired."  Stoves  annexed  to  the  brick- 
work in  a  chimney/  a  cistern  on  blocks  in  a  cellar/  a 
furnace  that  cannot  be  removed  without  injury  to  the 
building/  chandeliers  attached  to  a  house/  are  fixtures  ; 
but  a  gasometer  and  other  apparatus  used  for  generating 
gas,  as  between  landlord  and  tenant,  is  not."  Where 
certain  jibs,  being  parts  of  a  machine,  had  been  put  up 
by  the  tenant  during  his  term,  and  were  capable  of  being 
removed  without  either  injuring  the  other  parts  of  the 
machine  or  the  building,  and  had  been  usually  valued 
between  the  outgoing  and  incoming  tenant,  it  was  held 
that  these  were  the  goods  and  chattels  of  the  outgoing 
tenant,  for  which  he  might  maintain  trover.'  In  all 
cases  of  this  description,  whatever  may  be  the  mag- 
nitude, or  however  substantial  the  nature  of  the  erection, 
still  if  it  is  so  constructed  as  not  to  be  actually  fastened 
to  or  let  into,  the  freehold,  the  tenant  may  always  re- 
move it,  because  the  law  considers  it  as  a  mere  loose 
and  movable  chattel.'  Machinery  in  a  factory,  miU,  or 
other  ntianufactory,  is  not  treated  as  a  part  of  the  free- 
hold unless  it  is  so  annexed  thereto  as  to  be  incapable  of 
removal  without  injury  to  the  building.  Thus,  where  it 
is  merely  attached  to  the  floor,  or  to  posts  or  beams,  by 
cleats  and  screws  to  keep  it  firm,  if  it  can  be  removed 
without  injury  to  the  building  it  is  personal  property."    It 

'  Davis  V.  Jones,  2  B.  &  A.  165  ;  v.  Eussell,  13  Q.  B.  572  ;  Wood  v. 

Sunderland  V.  Newton,  3  Sim.  450.  Hewitt,  8  Q.  B.  913 ;  Wansborough 

^  Goddard  v.  Chase,  7  Mass.  432.  v.  Maton,  4  Ad.  &  El.  884 ;  Martin 

'Blithen  v.  Towle,  40  Me.  310.  v.  Roe,  7  B.  &  B.  237. 

^Main  v.  Schwarzwaedler,  4  E.  *  Buckland  v.  Butterfleld,  2  Brod, 

D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  C.  P.  273.  &  B.  54  ;  Amos  &  F.  76.    And  see 

'■  Johnson  v.   Wiseman,  4  Met.  West  v.  Blakeway,  2  M.  &  G.  729, 

(Ky.)  357;  but  not  when  they  are  »Bartlett  v.  Wood,  32  Vt.  872 

merely  screwed  to   the  gas-pipe,  Fullam    v.   Steams,    30    id.    443 

nor   side-brackets.     Vaughen    v.  Sturgis   v.    Warren,   11  Vt.    433 

Haldeman,     33    Penn.     St.     522  ;  Tafle  v.  Warwick,  3  Blackf .  (Ind. 

Montague  v.  Dent,  10  Rich.  (S.  0.)  Ill  ;  Swift  v.  Thompson,  6  Conn, 

135.  63  ;  Childress  v.   Wright,  2  Cold 

«Hayesv.Doane,  UN.  J.  Ep,  84;  (Tenn.)  350  ;   Murdock  v.   Gifford, 

Lawrence  v.  Kemp,  1  Duer.  (N.  Y.  18    N.    Y.    28.      In    Holbrook   v. 

Sup.  Ct.)   363.  Chamberlain,      116      Mass.      155, 

'  Amos  &  F.   43  ;  HeUawell  v.  counter  shafting,  pulleys,  hangers 

Eastwood,  6  Exchq.  312  ;  Huntley  and  bolts  fastened  to  the  building 


1234 


Fixtures. 


[§  520. 


is  the  permanent  and  habitual  annexation,  rather  than  the 
manner  of  fastening,  which  determines  whether  personal 
property  annexed  to  realty  becomes  a  part  of  it ; '  and 
articles  of  machinery,  such  as  steam-engines,  boilers, 
mill- machinery,  &c.,  placed  on  the  premises,  and  attached 
to  the  freehold  as  a  fixed  establishment,  are  a  part  of  the 
realty."^    TcratRx  a  chattel  to  realty;  so- as-  to.  give  it  the 


with  bolts  ;  also  a  portable  boiler 
and  steam-pipes,  supported  by 
hoops  screwed  to  the  building, 
were  held  to  be  removable  by  a 
tenant.  In  Bogers  v.  Brokaw,  25 
N.  J.  Eq.  496,  a  planer  and  matcher, 
ajid  a  moulder,  weighing  about 
two  tons  each,  placed  directly  on 
the  floor  of  a  sash  and  blind  factory, 
and  driven  by  connections  with 
secondary  shafting,  were  held  not 
to  be  fixtures  as  between  mortgagor 
and  mortgagee,  the  court  saying  : 
"Movable  machines,  whose  num- 
ber and  premanency  are  contin- 
gent on  the  varying  circumstances 
of  business,  subject  to  its  fluctuat- 
ing conditions  and  liable  to  be 
taken  in  or  out  of  the  building,  as 
exigencies  may  require,  are  differ- 
ent in  their  nature  and  legal  char- 
acter from  steam-engines,  boilers 
and  other  articles  secured  by 
masonry  or-  other  substantial  an- 
nexation designed  to  bepermanent, 
and  indispensable  to  the  enjoyment 
of  the  freehold."  In  Deal  v. 
Palmer,  73  N.  C.  582,  however,  a 
heavy  carding  machine,  run  by 
water  power,  but  not  fastened  to 
the  building,  was  held  prima  fade 
to  be  a  flxture,  and  passed  with 
the  building  in  the  absence  of  any 
showing  to  the  contrary.  In 
Pierce  v.  Greorge,  108  Mass.  78  ;  11 
Am.  Rep.  310,  it  was  held  that  a 
mortgage  of  a  "machine  shop" 
covered  such  machinery  as  was 
bolted  or  screwed  to  the  building 
or  to  blocks  bolted  to  the  building, 
such  as  pulleys,  shafting,  &c. ,  also 
essentail  parts  of  the  machinery, 
although  they  could  be  removed 
without  injury  to  the  building,  but 
that  the  mortgage  did  not  cover 
machines  which  were  not  fastened 
to  the  floor,  but  were  supported  by 
their  own  weight ;  nor  machinery 
which  was  merely  fastened  to 
benches,  although  run  by  the 
shafting ;  nor  voices  screwed  to 
benches,  although  the  benches  were 


nailed  to  the  building.  In  Randall 
V.  Elwell,  53  N.  531,  the  rolhng 
stock  of  a  raihoad  company  was 
held  to  be  personalty ;  and  there 
would  seem  to  be  no  question  that 
this  is  the  correct  doctrine, 
although  there  are  oases  holding 
the  contrary.  The  rolling  stock  of 
a  raihoad  is  in  no  sense  a  flxture. 
It  is  constantly  passing  from  its 
own  lines  to  the  lines  and  track  of 
other  raOroads  in  the  transaction 
of  its  ordinary  business,  and  is  in 
no  sense  any  more  a  part  of  the 
realty  than  a  farm-wagon  is,  or  a, 
stage-coach  owned  by  the  company 
and  used  to  convey  passengers 
from  one  point  to  another  upon  its 
line,  as  when  machinery  is  to  be 
treated  as  personalty.  See  Trull  v. 
Fuller,  28  Me.  545 ;  Voorhis  v.  Mc- 
Ginniss,  46  N.  Y.  243 ;  Godard  v. 
Gould,  14  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  663  ;  Hovey 
V.  Smith,  1  Barb.  (N.  Y.)373  ;  Cren- 
shaw V.  Crenhaw,  3  H.  &  W.  (Va.) 
23 ;  Halchman's  Appeal,  37  Penn. 
St.  209. 

'  '  Walker  v.  Sherman,  20  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  636 ;  Lafilin  v.  Griffiths,  35 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  58 ;  Brennan  v.  Whit- 
taker,  15  Ohio  St.  446  ;  Cook  v. 
Champlain  Trans.  Co.,  31  Den.  (N. 
Y.)  91 ;  Lacy  v.  Giboney.  36  Mo. 
320  ,•  HuU  V.  Alexander,  26  Iowa, 
569 ;  Harlan  v.  Harlan,  30  Penn. 
St.  303;  Richardson  v.  Borden,  43 
Miss.  71;  2  Am.  Rep.  595.  In 
Wagner  V.  Cleaveland,  &o.,  R.  R. 
Co.,  33  Ohio  St.  .563;  10  Am.  Rep 
770,  a  raihoad  company  entered 
upon  lands,  under  a  right  of  way 
legally  acquired,  and  built  thereon 
stone  piers  and  abutments  for  a 
bridge ;  and  having  subsequently 
abandoned  that  portion  of  the 
road,  it  was  held  that  the  piers 
and  abutments  might  be  removed 
by  it. 

'  Trull  V.  Fuller,  ante  ;  Sweetzer 
V.  Jones,  35  Vt.  317 ;  Harris  v. 
Haynes,  34  id.  320  ;  Corliss  v.  Mc- 
Lagin,    29    Me.    115 ;    Parsons   v. 


CHAP.  XLVni.] 


What  are  Not. 


1235, 


character  of  a  permanent  fixture,  it  is  not  sufficient  that 


Copeland,  88  id.  537  ;  Witner's  Ap- 
peal, 45  Penn.  St.  455 ;  Franks  v. 
Craven,  6  W.  Va.  185 ;  Smith  y. 
Attick,  24  Ohio  St.  369.  A  cotton- 
gin,  secured  by  the  usual  method 
of  letting  the  front  ledge  rest 
again^  a  plank  in  the  gin-house, 
has  been  held  to  be  a  fixture. 
Latham  v.  Blakely,  70  N.  C.  369 ; 
Bratton  v.  Clawson,  3  Strobh.  (S. 
C.)478;  DegraflEenreid  V.  Scruggs, 
4  Humph.  (Tenn.)  431 ;  McKenna 
V.  Hammond,  3  HiU  (S.  C.)  331 ; 
Richardson  v.  Borden,  ante.  But 
a  giu-stand,  not  attached  to  the 
realty,  though  used  for  the  pur- 
poses of  the  farm,  and  a  bell  used 
for  farm  purposes,  merely  set  upon 
posts  and  not  permanently  affixed 
thereto,  have  been  held  not  to  be 
fixtures.  Cole  v.  Roach,  37  Tex. 
413.  And  in  Missouri  a  carding 
machine  is  held  not  to  be  a  fixture 
within  the  machanics'  hen  law. 
Graves  v.  Pierce,  53  Mo.  433.  And 
in  Tennessee,  a  steam  saw-mill,  in- 
cluding machinery,  erected  for  the 
purposes  of  manirfacturing,  has 
been  held  to  be  personalty.  Mc- 
David  v.  Wood,  5  Heisk.  (Term.) 
95 ;  Saunders  v.  Stullings,  5  id.  65. 
In  Michigan  it  is  held  that  a  bar, 
bar-fixiures,  cupboard,  bowling- 
alley  ways,  and  racks,  attached 
by  a  tenant  to  a  building  occupied 
»  by  him  as  a  saloon  under  a  lease, 
so  annexed  to  the  freehold  as  to 
belong  to  it,  are  permanent  fixtures 
and  become  the  property  of  the 
landlord,  and  cannot  be  removed 
by  the  tenant  as  against  a  vendee 
of  the  landlord.  O'Brien  v.  Kus- 
tener,  37  Mich.  289.  See  upon  the 
general  proposition  stated  in  the 
text,  Buckley  v.  Buckley,  11  Barb. 
(N.  T.)  48 ;  Symonds  v.  Harris,  51 
Me.  14;  Baker  v.  Davis,  19  N.  H. 
325 ;  Idchardson  v.  Copeland,  6 
Gray  (Mass.)  536;  McKim  v. 
Mason,  3  Md.  Oh.  186 ;  Christian  v. 
r>ripps,28Penn.St.  71.  In  Bhss  v. 
Whitney,  9  Allen  (Mass.)  114,  plat- 
form scales,  set  into  the  earth  in 
front  of  a  building,  and  connected 
with  a  room  in  it,  to  which  the 
weighing  apparatus  was  firmly  at- 
tached, were  held  to  be  fixtures. 
Articles  of  machinery  in  a  cotton 
mill,  fastened  to  the  building  only 
by  belts,  by  which  the  machinery 
was  put  in  motion,  and  as  to  some 


parts  by  cleats  tacked  to  the  floor 
to  bring  the  machinery  on  a  level, 
— Held,  not  so  attached  to  the 
realty  as  to  become  fixtures.  Van- 
derpoel  v.  Van  Allen,  10  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  157.  Looms  in  a  woollen  fac- 
tory, connected  with  the  motive 
power  by  leathern  bands,  and  fas- 
tened to  the  floor  by  screws,  which 
kept  them  steady  while  working, 
and  which  could  be  removed  with- 
out injury  to  themselves  or  the 
building,  are  chattels,  and  vat  a 
part  of  the  realty.  Murdock  v. 
Giflford,  18  N.  Y.  28 ;  Walker  v. 
Sherman,  20  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  636. 
The  water-wheels,  mill-stones, 
bolting  apparatus,  &c.,  of  a  grist- 
mill, being  not  only  convenient, 
but  essential  to  the  proper  enjoy- 
ment of  the  inheritance,  pass  to 
the  heir  as  a  part  of  the  freehold. 
House  V.  House,  10  Paige  Ch.  (N. 
Y.)  158.  Erections  connected  with 
a  cotton  factory — ^the  dams,  water- 
wheels,  gearing  machinery,  &c., — 
are,  presumptively  fixtures,  as  be- 
tween heir  and  executor.  Buckley 
V.  Buckley,  11  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  43. 
Machinery  fixed  to  a  building 
partly  by  timbers  imbedded  in  the 
earth,  and  partly  by  bolts,  screws, 
&c.,  to  the  frame  and  floor,  driven 
by  a  horse-power  entirely  discon- 
nected with  the  building,  and  put 
up  with  the  view  to  its  removal 
without  injury  to  the  building,  is 
not  a  fixture  such  as  would  pass 
by  a  conveyance  of  the  land.  Far- 
rarv.  ChauffetSte.  5  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
527.  G  put  up  machinery  in  a 
mill  owned  by  S,  so  that  it  could 
be  removed  without  injury  to  the 
building,  under  a  contract  that  it 
was  to  remain  the  property  of  G 
until  paid  for.  Held,  that,  not 
having  been  paid  for,  it  did  not 
pass  by  S's  grant  of  the  mill.  Go- 
dard  v.  Gould,  14  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  662. 
Spinning-frames  and  carding-ma- 
chines  in  a  mill  fastened  to  the 
floors  by  cleats  and  wooden  pins, 
are  personal  property,  as  between 
mortgagor  and  mortgagee.  Cres- 
son  V.  Stout,  17  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  116. 
Where  a  mortgagor,  after  execut- 
ing a  mortgage  on  his  mill,  puts 
machinery  and  other  fixtures  mto 
it,  a  purchaser  of  the  premises,  at 
a  foreclosure  sale  wiU  acquire  title 
to  the  fixtures,  as  being  a  part  of 


1236 


FlXTUEES. 


[§  520. 


it  has  been  laid  upon  the  land  and  brought  into  contact 
■with  it ;  something  more  is  required  than  mere  juxtapo- 
sition ;  as,  that  the  soil  should  have  been  displaced  for 
the  purpose  of  receiving  the  article,  or  that  it  should  be 
cemented  or  otherwise  fastened  to  the  building,  or  some 
fabric  previously  attached  to  the  ground  ; '  and,  although 
there  are  American  cases  holding  the  contrary,"  yet,  the 
generally  recognized  doctrine  is,  that  machinery  held  in 
place  by  its  own  weight  merely,  is  not  a  fixture,'  such  as 
wooden  erections  resting  upon,  but  not  attached  to, 
blocks  of  wood '  or  brick  pillars, '  or  a  foundation  of  brick 


the  real  estate.  Gardner  v.  Finley, 
19  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  317.  Engines  and 
machinery,  though  firmly  affixed 
to  a  building  by  a  tenant  for  years, 
yet  having  been  so  afiixed  for  car- 
rying on  a  business  of  a  personal 
nature,  are  the  personal  prop- 
erty of  the  tenant,  and  remov- 
able at  tis  ■will.  Cook  v.  Cham- 
plain  Transportation  Co.,  1  Den. 
(N.  Y.)  91.  A  lessee,  for  a  term  of 
years,  of  land,  built  thereon  a  fac- 
tory, with  a  steam-engine,  ma- 
chinery, and  apparatus  connected 
therewith,  appropriate  for  manu- 
facturing white  lead.  He  after- 
wards gave  a  mortgage  upon  his 
lease.  Held,  that  the  mortgagee 
was  entitled  to  hold  the  engine, 
machiaery,  and  other  apparatus, 
as  fixtures.  Day  v.  Perkins,  2 
Sandf .  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  359. 

'  Turner  v.  Cameron,  39  L.  J.  Q. 
B.  130  ;  Amos  v.  Ferrandon,  Fix- 
tures, 3.  In  Stockwell  V.  CampbeU, 
89  Conn.  362,  a  portable  hot-air 
furnace,  used  for  warming  a 
dwelling-house,  set  in  pits  pre- 
pared expressly  for  them  in  the 
cellar,  and  kept  in  place  by  their 
own  weight,  where,  as  between 
vendor  and  vendee,  held  a  part  of 
the  realty,  as  also  the  pipes  feaduig 
from  the   same  to  the  chimney. 

2  In  Deal  v.  Pahner,  73  N.  C. 
583,  a  very  heavy  csbTding-msLcbine, 
run  by  water-power,  but  merely 
resting  on  the  floor,  and  not  at- 
tached to  the  building,  was  held  a 
fixture. 

"  Holbrook  v.  Chamberlain,  ante ; 
Mather  v.  Frazer,  2  K.  &  J.  536  ; 


Cope  V.  Eomeyne,  4  McLean  (U. 
S.)  384.  In  Johnson  v.  Mehaffey, 
43  Penn.  St.  308,  very  heavy  rolls, 
cast  for  a  rolling-miU,  deUvered 
and  paid  for  at  the  mill,  but  not 
turned  or  finished  off,  were  held 
not  to  be  fixtures.  See  also  LaflBin 
V.  Griffiths,  35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)58,  and 
the  cases  following,  holding  that 
it  is  the  permanent  and  habitual 
annexation  that  determines  the 
question  whether  machinery  be- 
comes a  fixture  or  not.  Walker  v. 
Sherman,  20  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  636 ; 
Brennan  v.  Whittaker,  15  Ohio  St. 
436.  In  Park  v.  Baker,  7  Allen 
(Mass.)  78,  a  large  and  very  .heavy 
wooden  box,  lined  with  zinc,  which 
was  put  together  in  a  room  of  a 
tavern  and  used  as  an  ice-chest, 
and  which  could  not  be  removed 
from  the  room  without  being  taken 
apart,  was  held  not  to  be  a  fixture. 
If  the  mere  circumstance  that  an 
article  placed  upon  land  or  in  a 
building  is  very  heavy  was  to 
determine  the  fact  of  its  being  a 
fixture,  it  would  apply  to  many 
articles  of  furniture,  such  as  pianos, 
&o.,  and  would  lead  to  most  dis- 
astrous as  well  as  ridiculous  results. 
*  Culling  v.Tuffnal,Bull.  N.P.  34 ; 
Wadleigh  v.  Janvin,  41  N.  H.  403. 
A  heavy  stone  brought  into  a  door- 
yard  to  be  used  as  a  door-step,  but 
which  has  not  been  placed  as  such, 
is  not  a  fixture.  Woodman  v. 
Pease,  17  N.  H.  382.  It  is  said  that 
the  mera  matter  of  physical  annex- 
ation to  the  soil  is  not  the  test  as 
to  whether  a  chattel  has  become  a 
fixture,  but  that  the  intention  of 


377. 


Rex  V.  Londonthorpe,  6  T.   E. 


CHAP.  xLvm.]  What  aee  Not.  1237 

and  stone.'  The  annexation  must  be  of  a  permanent,  as 
contra-distinguished  from  a  temporary  character ;  and 
machinery  merely  screwed  to  the  floor  to  keep  it  steady, 
or  in  place,  does  not  from  jthat  circumstance  become  a 
fixture'  if  it  can  be  removed  without  injury  to  the  free- 
hold.' A  conservatory  erected  on  a  brick  foundation 
affixed  to  and  communicating  with  rooms  in  a  dwelling- 
house  by  windows  and  doors  cannot  be  removed  by  a 
tenant  for  years  who  erected  it  during  his  tenancy  .*  So 
a  veranda,  the  lower  part  of  which  is  attached  to  posts 
fixed  in  the  ground,  cannot  be  removed.  Nor  green- 
houses bunt  in  a  garden,  and  constructed  of  wooden 
frames  fixed  with  mortar  to  foundation  walls  of  brick- 
work.' Nor  a  boiler  built  into  the  masonry  of  a  green^ 
house ;  but  it  is  otherwise  with  respect  to  the  pipes  of  a 
heating  apparatus  connected  with  the  boiler  by  screws.' 
Farm  buildings  erected  by  a  tenant  for  agricultural  pur- 
poses, and  which  cannot  he  removed  without  injury  to  the 
freehold,  are  not  removable.''  So  it  has  been  decided  that 
an  outgoing  tenant  has  no  right  to  remove  pillars  of 
brick  and  mortar  huilt  on  a  dairy  floor  to  hold  pans, 
although  such  piUars  are  not  let  into  the  ground.     The 

the  party  in  placing  it  upon  the  the  freehold,  it  remains  personalty- 
premises,  the  character  of  the  chat-  because  the  person  bringing  it 
tel  and  the  purposes  for  which  it  there  stiU  has  the  opportunity  of 
was  brought  there,  are  to  be  con-  changing  his  intention, 
sidered,  and  must  control.  This  is  '  Wiltshear  v.  Cottrell,  1  E.  &  B. 
doubtless  the  rule,  but  the  tnfe?ito?i  674;  Wansbrough  v.  Muxton,  4 
must  be  gathered  from  the  acts  of  Ad.  &  El.  884  ;  Eex  v.  Ottey,  1  B. 
the  party,  rather  than  from  his  &  Ad.  161 ;  Dean  v.  Allaley,  3  Esp. 
declarations,  and  the  circumstance  11. 

that  he  does  not  annex  the  chattel  *  FuUam  v.  Stearns,  30  Vt.  443 ; 

to  the  freehold  is  pretty  decisive  of  Bartlett  v.  Wood,  32  id.  373  ;  Voor- 

his    intention.       Potts   v.    N.   J.  his  v.  McGinniss,  46  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 

Arms  Co.,  14  N.  J.  L.  395 ;  HUl  v.  243. 

Wentworth,    28    Vt.    438  ;    Ford  ^  Swift  v.  Thompson,  9  Conn.  66  ; 

V.  Cobb,    20   N.   Y.  344.     In  the  ChUdressv.  Wright,3Cold.  (Tenn.) 

case  of   the  stone  brought  upon  350 ;  Murdock  v.  Gififord,  18  N.  Y. 

the    premises    to    be   used  as   a  38;  Trappe  v.   Harter,  3  Cr.  &  M. 

door-step,  if   the  intention  of  the  177 ;    Hellawell    v.    Eastwood,  6 

Earty  in  bringing  it  there  was  to  Exchq.  295. 

e  decisive,  the  stone  would  be  a  ■*  Penry  v.   Brown,  3  Stark.  403. 

fixture  whether  it  was  set  or  not ;  '  Jenkins  v.  Gething,  3  Johns.  & 

but  the  fact  that  it  was  not  set  does  H.  520. 

not  give  to  the  original  intention,  *Elwes  v.   Maw,  3  East,  38. 

sufficient  character  to  impress  the  '  Leach  v.   Thomas,  7  C.   &  P. 

character  of  a  fixture,  and  until  337.    And  see  Jenkins  v.  Gething, 

the  ■  original  intention  is  consum-  3  Johns.  &  H.  530. 
mated  by  annexing  the  stone  to 
II.— 26 


1238  .  FrXTUEES.       ,.,^^  [§520. 

screwing  of  a  gtocking-frame  to  the  floQr  to  keep  it 
steady  will,  not  make  it  a  fixture.'  .  Qptton-spinning 
machines,  caUed  "mules,"  some  of  which  were  fixed  by 
screws  to  the  wooden-  floor,.a,nd  some  by  screws  which 
had  been  sunk  into  holes  in  the  stone  flooring,  and 
secured  by  molten  lead,  merely  to  steady  them  for  more 
convenient  use  as  machines,  continue  to  be  chattels,  and 
as  such  are  distrainable  for  rent."    Whether  a  machine 
or  any  other  article  has  been  so  fixed  and  attached  to 
the  freehold  as  to  become  parcel  of  it,  is  a  question  of 
fact  depending,  on  the  circumstances  of  each  case,  and 
principally  on  „  two  circumstances :  first,   the  mode  of 
annexation  to,  the,  soil  or  fabric  of  the  house,  and  the 
extent  to  which  it  is  united  to  them,  whether  it  can 
easily  be  remoyed.  integre,   salve  et  commode,  or  not, 
without  injury  to  itself  or  the  fabric  of  the  building; 
secondly,  on  the  object  and  purpose  of  the  annexation, 
whether  it   was  for   the    permanent    and    substantial 
improvement  of  the  dwelling,  in  the  language  of  the 
civil  law,  perpetui  usus  causa,  or  in  that  of  the  year 
book,  pur  un  profit  del  inheritance,  or  merely  for  a  tem- 
porary purpose,  or  the  more  complete  enjoyment  and 
use  of   it    as   a  chattel.     If    machines    are   attached 
slightly,  by  screws  or  otherwise,  so  as  to  be  capable  of 
removal  without  the  least  injury  to  the  fabric  of  the 
building  or  to  themselves,  and  the  object  and  purpose  of 
the  annexation  was,  not  to  improve  the  inheritance,  but 
merely  to  render  the  machines  steadier  and  more  capa- 
ble of  convenient  use  as  chattels,  they  do  not  become 
"fixtures"  or  part  of  the  freehold,  any  more  that  a 
carpet  would  be  which  is  attached  to  the  floor  by  nails 
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  it  stretched  out,  or  curtains, 
looking-glasses,  pictures  and  other  matters  of  an  orna- 
mental nature,  which  have  been  slightly  attached  to  the 
walls  of  the  dwelling-house  as  furniture,  and  which  is 
probably  the  reason  why  they  and  similar  articles  have 
been  held  indifferent  cases  to  be  removable.'    Machines 

'  Trappes  y.  Barter,  3  Cr.  &  M,        «  Hellawell    v.     Eastwood,     6 
177  ;  cited  6  Exchq.  313.    See  ante,     Exchq.  395,  313. 
p.  883,  n.  8.  ^  Bartlett  v.  Wood,  33  Vt.  373  ; 


CHAP.  XLVin.] 


What  are  Not. 


1239 


so  attached  would  pass  to  the  executor  as  chattels  rather 
than  to  the  heir  as  part  of    the  freehold.'    Fixtures 

Voorhis  V.  McGinniss,  48  N.  Y.  278 ; 
Linahan  v.  Burr,  41  Conn.  471 ; 
Meigs'  Appeal,  62  Penn.  St.  28  ; 
McRae  v.  Cent'l,  &c..  Bank,  66  N. 
Y.  489 ;  Van  Kennen  v.  R.  R.  Co., 
38  N.  J.  L.  165 ;  Thielman  v.  Carr, 
78  m.  385;  Hnmphxeys  v.  New- 
man, 51  Me.  40.  m  Richardson  v. 
Borden,  43  Miss.  71,  Jeffords,  J., 
in  passing  upon  the  question  as  to 
•whether  a  cotton  gin,  connected 
with  and  used  upon  a  plantation, 
is  a  fixture  that  passes  to  the  ven- 
dee upon  the  sale  of  the  land,  says : 
"  What  is,  or  what  is  not  a  fixture, 
seems  to  depend  upon  the  peculiar 
facts  and  circumstances  surround- 
ing each  particular  case,  more  than 
any  other  consideration.  A  thing 
or  article  may  have  been  regarded 
as  a  fixture  under  one  state  of 
facts,  and  the  same  thing  has  been 
held  not  to  be  a  fixture  under  an- 
other state  of  facts.  Take,  for  in- 
stance, the  article  of  manure, 
where  by  the  sale  of  agricultural 
lands,  and  whether  in  heaps  or 
scattered  in  the  barnyard,  it  is  a 
fixture,  and  passes  as  a  part  of  the 
realty  to  the  vendee ;  but  when 
upon  lands  in  a  village  or  city, 
where  the  lands  are  not  used  for 
agricultural  purposes,  it  is  not  a 
fixtin-e,  and  is  treated  as  personal 
property.  It  will  be  found  upon 
examination  that,  in  determining 
the  question  whether  a  thing  is  a 
chattel  or  fixture,  reference  must 
be  had  to  the  nature  of  the  thing 
itself;  the  position  of  the  party 
placing  it  where  found ;  the  prob- 
able intention  in  putting  it  there, 
and  the  injury  which  would  result 
from  its  removal;  and  we  must 
also  consider  the  object  of  the  party 
in  placing  the  article  on  the  lorem- 
ises  with  reference  to  trade,  agri- 
culture or  ornament.  In  the  pres- 
ent case,  for  example,  the  article 
in  controversy  was  in  its  very 
nature  adapted  to  the  business  for 
which  the  lands  were  used.    The 


part^  who  annexed  it  when  he  put 
it  there  must  have  intended  it 
should  remain  as  long  as  it  contin- 
ued serviceable,  as  the  convenience 
and  usefulness  of  his  cotton  plan- 
tation would  have  been  seriously 
impaired  by  its  removal.  The  gin- 
stand  is  not  only  a  highly  neces- 


sary article,  but  may  be  declared 
to  be  an  indispensable  one.    The 
doctrine  is  well  established  that, 
as  between  executor  and  heir,  the 
vendor  and  vendee,  mortgagor  and 
mortgagee,  the  strict  rule  is  apphed 
in  favor  of  the  heir,  vendee  and 
mortgagee,  holding  many  articles 
to  be  fixtures,  and  as  belonging  to 
the  freehold,  which  would  not  be 
so  as  between  landlord  and  tenant. 
In  one  class  of  cases  the  rule  of 
construction  is  rigorous  and  strin- 
gent, in  the  other  it  is  relaxed  and 
liberal.  This  precise  question  seems 
never  to  have  been  passed  upon  by 
tliis  court,  but  we  find  many  decis- 
ions in  the  cotton-growing  States ; 
and  as  far  as  our  examination  has 
extended,  these  decisions  have  all 
been  in  one  direction.     In  South 
Carolina,  in  the  case  of  Farris  v. 
Walker,  1  BaUey  (S.  C.)  540.  the 
plaintiff   sold   and  conveyed   his 
plantation  to  the  defendant.    Cot- 
ton was  grown  on  this  plantation 
and  a  cotton-gin  was  in  the  gin- 
house  on  the  premises,  attached  to 
gears.    PlaintifiE  brought  an  action 
of  trover  for  the  gin,  but  the  court 
were  of  opinion  that  it  was  a  fixt- 
ure and  passed  with  the  freehold. 
The  court  say :  '  The  rule  on  the 
subject,  as  between  the  heir  and 
executor,  or  between  vendor  and 
vendee,  is  more  rigorous  than  be- 
tween landlord  and  tenant,  or  the 
executor  of  a  tenant  for  life  and 
the  remainder-man.     In  relation 
to  the  former,  all  things  which  are 
necessary  to  the  f uU  and  free  en- 
joyment of  the  freehold,  and  which 
are  in  any  way  attached  to  it,  are 
held  to  be  fixtures,  and  pass  with 
it.    What  ought  to  be  considered 
a  fixture  depends  materially  upon 
the  nature  of  the  freehold  sold.    If 
a  plantation,  then  all  such  things  at- 
tached to  the  land  which  are  usually 
necessary,  or  used  in  the  manage- 
ment of  a  farm,  would  pass.'   See 
McMenna  v.  Hammond,  3  HiU  (S. 
C.)  331.  The  same  rule  is  laid  down 
in  Alabama,  in  the  case  of  Bratton 
V.  Clawson,2Stew.  (Ala.)478.  The 
same  principle  has  been  followed  in 
Tenn.,  in  the  case  of  Degraffenreid 
V.  Scruggs,  4  Humph.  (Tenn.)  451." 
'  Trappes  v.  Harter,  3  Cr,  &  M. 
177 ;  cited  6  Exchq.  318, 


1240  Fixtures.  [§  521. 

which  a  tenant  may  sever  from  the  freehold  and  take 
away  during  his  term  are  not  distrainable  for  rent ; '  but 
machines  which  have  not  been  sufficiently  annexed  to 
constitute  them  part  of  the  freehold  are  considered  as 
mere  goods  and  chattels,  and  may  be  distrained  for  rent." 

Sec.  521.  Between  what  persons  questions  as  to  fixtures 
arise.— Questions  respecting  the  right  to  what  are  ordina- 
rily CaJled  fixtures,  principally  arise  between  three  classes 
of  persons  : — 1st.  Between  different  descriptions  of  rep- 
resentatives of  the  same  owner  of  the  inheritance ;  viz., 
between  his  heir  and  executor.  In  this  first  case,  i,  e .,  as 
between  heir  and  executor,  the  rule  obtains  with  the 
most  rigor  in  favor  of  the  inheritance,  and  against  the 
right  to  disannex  therefrom,  and  to  consider  as  a  per- 
sonal chattle  anything  which  has  been  affixed  thereto. 
2d.  Between  the  executor  of  tenant  for  life  or  in  tail, 
and  the  remainder-man  or  reversioner,  in  which  case  the 
right  to  fixtures  is  considered  more  favorably  for  execu- 
tors then  in  the  preceding  case  between  heir  and  execu- 
tor. The  3d  case,  and  that  in  which  the  greatest  latitude 
and  indulgence  has  always  been  allowed  in  favor  of  the 
claim  to  have  any  particular  articles  considered  as  per- 
sonal chattels  as  against  the  claim  in  respect  of  freehold 
or  inheritance,  is  the  case  between  landlord  and  ten- 
ant." Hence  it  may  be  received  as  a  rule,  that  the  decis- 
ions in  favor  of  the  executors  of  tenants  for  life,  in 
tail,  or  in  fee,  as  against  the  remainder-man,  reversioner, 
or  heir,  may  in  general  be  applied  to  cases  between 
landlord  and  tenant,  and  are  to  be  considered  as  govern- 
ing authorities  m  support  of  a  tenant's  rights.' 

Sec.  522.  General  rule  as  to  fixtures.— The  general  rule 
of  law  respecting  fixtures  is,  that  whatever  is  fixed  to 
the  freehold  becomes  part  of  it,  and  is  subjected  to  the 
same  rights  of  property  as  the  land  itself;  the  maxim 
being  quicquid  solo  plantatur,  solo  cedit."    But  thepre- 

iDalton  V.    Whittem,   3  Q.   B.  'Amos  &  F.  38,39,  73. 

961 ;  Darby  v,  Harris,  1  Q.  B.  895.  ^  Broom,  Max.  387  (4th  ed.) ;  Min- 

''HeUaweU V.Eastwood, 6 Exchq.  shall  v.   Lloyd,   3  M.  &  W.  459; 

395.  Elhott   V.  Bishop,  10  Exchq.  507  ; 

» Elwes  V,  Maw,  3  East,  51.  Lancaster  v.  Eve,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  717. 


CHAP.  XLvm.]   Annexations  by  Tenant.  1241 

sumption  that  that  which  is  annexed  to  the  soil,  becomes 
part  of  the  soil,  may  be  rebutted  by  circumstances  show- 
ing the  intention  of  the  parties  to  the  contrary."  Thus, 
where  a  chattel  has  been  annexed  by  its  owner  to  an- 
other's freehold,  and  may  without  injury  be  severed,  it  is 
not  necessarily  to  be  inferred  from  the  annexation  that 
such  chattel  becomes  the  property  of  the  freeholder. 
Whether  in  a  particular  case  it  has  become  so  or  not, 
may  be  a  question  on  the  evidence ;  and  the  jury  may 
infer,  from  user  or  other  circumstances,  an  agreement, 
when  the  chattel  was  annexed,  that  the  original  owner 
should  have  liberty  to  take  it  away  again  at  any  time, 
and  to  use  it  in  the  mean  time  for  the  purposes  of  an 
easement."  When  the  owner  of  the  inheritance  annexes 
thereto  fixtures,  which  would  in  the  ordinary  case  of 
landlord  and  tenant  be  removable  by  the  latter  during 
his  term,  for  a  permanent  purpose,  and  for  the  better  en- 
joyment of  his  esta,te,  they  become  part  of  the  freehold. 
The  principle  upon  which  the  rule  of  law,  that  fixtures 
pass  with  the  soil,  is  relaxed  in  favor  of  trade,  has  no 
applicatibn  where  the  parties  who  affix  the  machinery 
are  themselves  owners  in  fee  of  the  soil.' 

Sec.  523.  Generalruleastoannexationsby  a  tenant  .—The 
general  rule  of  law,  with  respect  to  annexations  made 
by  a  tenant  during  the  continuance  of  his  term,  has  been 
established  from  a  very  remote  period,  and  may  still  be 

'  Lancaster  v.  Eve,  ante.  Also  p.  Hewitt,  8  Q.B.  913 ;  Lancaster  v. 

883,  n.  8.  Eve,  ante.    In  all  cases,  whether 

*  In  Meigs'  Appeal,  63  Penn.  St.  the  building  or  erection  is  a  fixture 

28,  the  United   States  erected  in  under  such' circumstances  depend-s 

the  borough  of  York,  upon  ground  upon  the  fact  whether  it  was  placed 

dedicated  as  a    pubhc    common,  there  by  the  assent,  express  or  im- 

buildingsfor  use  during  the  war.  pUed,  of  the  owner   of  the  land. 

It  was  held  that  the  circumstances  If  so,  it  is  not ;  WeUs  v.  Bannister, 

showed  that  these  buUdings  were  4  Mass.  514 ;   FuUer  v.  Taylor,  39 

intended  for  temporary  use  and  Me.  51 ;    Washburn  v.   Sprout,  16 

not  as  permanent  structures,  and  Mass.  449 ;    otherwise  it  is.     StiU- 

that  the  borough,  by  lying  by  and  man  v.  Hamer,  8  Miss.  421 ;  Reid 

suffering  them  to  be  erected  upon  v.  Kirk,  13  Eioh.  (S.  C.)  54 ;  Fisher 

a  public  common  where,  as  per-  v.  Staeffer,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P,) 

•  manent  structures,  they  would  be  611. 

nuisances,  is  estopped  from  declar-  ,  ^Walmsley  v.  Milne,  7  C.  B.  N. 

ing  that  the  United  States  intend-  S.  115  ;  Fisher  v.  Dickson,  13  CI.  & 

ed  to  annex  their  chattels  to  the  F.  313. 

freehold.       See,    also,    Wood    v.  ■>  Mather  v.  Eraser,  3  K.  &  J.  536. 


1242  Fixtures.  [§  524. 

regarded  as  the  rule  in  ordinary  cases.  It  is,  that  when- 
ever the  tenant  has  affixed  anything  to  the  demised 
premises  during  his  term,  he  can  never  again  sever  it 
■without  the  consent  of  his  landlord.  The  property,  by 
being  annexed  to  the  land,  immediately  belongs  to  the 
freeholder ;  the  tenant,  by  making  it  part  of  the  free- 
hold, is  considered  to  abandon  all  future  right  to  it,  so 
that  it  would  be  waste  in  him  to  remove  it  afterwards. 
It  therefore  falls  in  with  liis  term,  and  comes  to  the 
reversioner  as  part  of  the  land.' 

Sec.  524.  Exceptions  to  general  rule.— But  to  this  rule 
there  are  important  exceptions  with  respect  to  fixtures 
erected  by  the  tenant  for  mere  ornament  and  convenience 
during  his  term,  and  fixtures  erected  by  him  for  the 
purposes  of  his  trade  and  not  merely 'for  farm  purposes. 
Whether  the  tenancy  be  for  life,  or  for  years,  or  from 
year  to  year,  or  only  at  will,  makes  no  difference  with 
respect  to  his  right  to  remove  fixtures  ;  nor  whether  he 
holds  under  a  lease  by  parol,  or  by  writing,  or  under  seal, 
except  as  to  any  stipulations  on  the  subject  therein 
contained.  It  iSj  however,  to  be  observed,  that  every  case 
in  which  there  is  a  right  of  severing  a  thing  from  the 
freehold  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  fixtures,  is  considered  as 
an  exception  to  the  general  rule.'  Fixtures  which  may 
be  removed  by  the  tenant  during  his  term  constitute  part 
of  the  freehold  until  severed  therefrom.'  Until  so  severed 
they  are  not  goods  or  chattels  for  which  trover  may  be 
maintained."  But  sometimes  a  special  action  may  be 
maintained  for  preventing  a  tenant  or  any  person  cla,iming 

'  Amos &F.  19, 91 ;  Co.  Litt.  53,  a ;  metal  bands,  though  some  of  them 

Herlakenden's  Case,  4  Co.  R.  64  ;  pass  through  wooden  ornaments  of 

Elwes  V.  Maw,  3  East,  51.  the  ceihng,  which  are  cut  away  for 

'^Buckland  V.  Butterfield,  SBrod.  the  purpose.       Wall  v.  Huads,  4 

&  B.  54.    A  pump  placed  in  a  well  Gray  (Mass.)  256. 

bv  a  tenant  may  be  removed.    Mc-  '  Lee  v.  Eisdon,7Taunt.  188.  ^a; 

Cracken  v.   Hall,   7  Ind.   30.    So  parte  Lloyd,  1  Mont.  &  Ayr.  508. 

may  a  cistern  and  sinks,  fastened  *  Green  v.  Cole,  3  Wms.  Saund. 

by  nails,  or  set  into  the  floor  and  359,  c.    note    (r) ;    Macintosh    v. 

passing  through  holes  cut  through  Trotter,  3  M.  &  W.  184 ;  Eoflfey  v. . 

the  floor  for  that  purpose,  or  gas-  Henderson,  17  Q.  B.  574 ;  Wilde  v. 

pipes    passing     from    the    cellar  Waters,  16  C.  B.  636. 
through  the  floors  and  partitions, 
and  kept  in  place  in  the  rooms  by 


CHAP.  XLvm.]  Trade  Fixtures.  1243 

under  him  from  exercising  his  right  to  sever  and  remove 
the  fixtures." 

Sec.  525.  Trade  fixtures.— It  is  difficult,  to  state  the 
precise  extent  of  exception  in  favor  of  the  removal  of 
fixtures  put  up  for  the  purposes. of  trade,  so  as  to  afford 
a  safe  guide  as  between  landlord  and  tenant."  The  old 
cases  upon  this  subject  leant  to  consider  as  realty  what- 
ever was  annexed  to^thg  freehold  by.the  occupier  ;  but  in 
modern  times  the  leaning  has  always  been  the  other  way 
— in  favor  of  the  tenant — in  support  of  the  interests  of 
trade,  which  is  become  the,  piUar  of  the  state.  What 
tenant  will  lay  out  his,  money  in  cosatly  improvements  of 
the  land,  if  he  must  leave  everything  behind  him  which 
can  be  said  to  be  annexed  to,  it !  ShallJt  be  said  that  the 
great  gardeners  and  nursery  men  in  the  neighborhood  of 
cities  and  towns,  who  expend  thousands  of  pounds  in  the 
erection  of  greenhouses,  hgthouse^  &c.,  are  obliged  to 
leave  all  these  thingsi  upon  the  premises,  when  it  is  noto- 
rious that  they  are  even  permitted  to  remove  trees,  or 
such  as  are  likely  to  beconae  such,  by  the  thousands, 
in  the  necessary  course  of  their  trade  ?  If  it  were  other- 
wise, the  very  object  of  their  holding  would  be  defeated.' 
This  rule  at  a  very  early  period  had  several  exceptions 
engrafted  upon  it  in  favor  of  trade,  and  of  those  vessels 
and  utensils  which  are  immediately  subservient  to  the 
purposes  pf  trade.  And  it  was  laid  down  that  if  a  lessee 
for  years  erect  a  furnace  for  his  advantage,  or  a  dyer 
makes  his  vats  or  vessels  to  occupy  his  occupation  during 
his  term,  he  may  remove  them  ;  but  if  he  suffer  them  to 
be  fixed  to  the  earth  after  the  term,  then  they  belong  to 
the  lessor.  And  so  of  a  baker.  And  it  is  not  waste  to 
remove  such  things  within  the  term.  And  as  between  the 
executor  and  the  heir-at-law,  it  has  since  been  held  that 
where  a  fixed  instrument,  engine,  or  utensil,  or  a  building 
covering  machinery,  is  accessory  to  matter  of  a  personal 
nature,  then  it  shall  itself  be  considered  personalty,  and 

I  London,  &c.,  v.  Drake,  6  C.  B,         ^penton  v.  Robart,  3  East,  88: 
N.  S.  798,811.  Lawton   v.    Lawton,  3   Atk.   14 ; 

» Ainos  &  F.  48.  Dean  v.  AUalley,  3  Esp.  11. 


1244 


FiXTUEES. 


[§  525. 


belong  to  the  executor,  such  as  a  fire-engine  accessory  to 
the  carrying  on  the  trade  of  getting  and  vending  coals  ; 
or  a  brew-house  fui^nace  and  coppers,  or  a  cider-mill,  or 
varnish-house  ;  but  salt-pans  connected  with  salt-springs, 
and  erected  for  the  benefit  of  the  inheritance,  and  barns 
and  agricultural  buildings,  erected  for  farming  purposes, 
are  not  by  the  commen  law  removable  by  executors,  but 
belong  to  the  heir. '    The  reason  which  induced  the  courts 


>  Elwes  V.  Maw,  3  Smith's  L.  C. 
153,  6th  edit.  In  Van  Ness  v. 
Packai-d,  2  Pet.  (U.  S.)  137,  the  de- 
fendant was  the  lessee  of  the  prem- 
ises which  he  had  i-ented  for  the 
purpose  of  carrying  on  the  business 
of  a  dairy-man  for  a  term  of  years. 
He  erected  thereon  for  his  use  in 
the  prosecution  of  the  business,  a 
'  frame  dweUing-house,  with  a  cel- 
lar and  a  stone  or  brick  founda- 
tion. Prior  to  the  expiration  of 
his  term  he  tore  down  the  build- 
ings erected  by  him,  and  converted 
the  materials.  The  landlord  sued 
him  as  for  waste.  Story,  J.,  de- 
livered the  opinion  of  the  court, 
affirming  the  tenant's  right  to  re- 
move the  buildings  at  anytime  be- 
fore the  expiration  of  his  term, 
adopting  fully  the  doctrine  of  El- 
wes Y.  Maw,  cited  by  the  author. 
In  commenting  upon  this  question, 
the  learned  judga  said:  "It  has 
been  suggested  at  the  bar,  that  the 
exception  in  favor  of  trade  has 
never  been  appUed  to  cases  like 
that  before  the  court,  where  a  large 
house  has  been  built,  and  used  in 
part  as  a  family  residence.  But 
the  question,  whether  removable 
or  not,  does  not  depend  upon  the 
form  or  size  of  the  building, 
whether  it  has  a  brick  foundation 
or  not,  or  is  of  one  or  two  stories 
high,  or  has  a  brick  or  other  chim- 
ney. The  sole  question  is  whether 
it  was  designed  for  the  purpose  of 
trade  or  not.  A  tenant  may  erect 
a  large,  as  well  as  a  small  messu- 
age, or  a  soap  boilery  of  one  or  two 
stories  high,  and  on  whatever 
foundation  he  may  choose."  The 
strict  rule  as  to  fixture  as  between 
heir  and  executor  does  not  exist  as 
between  landlord  and  tenant,  but 
the  rule  is  relaxed  in  favor  of  fix- 
tures annexed  to  the  estate  for  the 
purposes  of  trade,  and  may  be  re- 
moved by  him  at  any  time  before 


his  term  expires,  but  not  after" 
Weatherby  v.  Sleeper,  43  Miss.  733  ! 
Thomas  v.  Crout,  5  Bush.  (Ky.)  37  '. 
Dingley  v.  BufEum,  57  Me.  381  ' 
WUgus  V.  Gettings,  31  Iowa,  177  > 
Treadway  v.  Shawn,  7  Nev.  37- 
A  steam  boiler  placed  in  a  flouring 
mill  may  be  removed  by  the  ten- 
ant during  his  term,  and  if  he  is 
enjoined  from  removing  it  by  the 
landlord,  he  may  remove  it,  within 
,  a  reasonable  time  after  the  injunc- 
tion is  dissolved.  Masoa  v.  Fenn, 
13  lU.  535,  Gas  fixtures,  including 
gasometer  and  apparatus  for  gen- 
erating gas,  as  between  landlord 
and  tenant,  are  not  fixtures,  and 
may  be  removed  by  him,  but  other- 
wise between  vendor  and  vendee 
of  the  estate.  Lawrence  v.  Kemp, 
1  Duer.  (N.  Y.)  363;  Hayes  v. 
Doan,  11  N.  J.  84.  Neither  are 
chandehers  or  side  brackets  re- 
garded as  fixtures.  Montagu  v. 
Dent,  10  Rich.  (S.  C.)  135;  Vaugh- 
an  V.  Holdeman,  33  Perm.  St.  533. 
But  in  all  cases  where  the  thing  is  so 
affixed  to  the  freehold  that  it  can- 
not be  removed  without  injury,  it 
cannot  be  levied  upon  as  the  prop- 
erty of  the  tenant  until  it  is  sev- 
ered. It  is  treated  as  a  realty  un- 
til he  sees  fit  to  detach  it  from  the 
estate.  Pemberton  v.  King,  3  Dev. 
(N.  C.)  376.  The  fact  that  he  may 
lawfully  remove  it  does  not  de- 
stroy its  character  as  a  fixture  so 
as  to  make  it  personal  property  lia- 
ble to  be  attached  upon  his  debts. 
But  in  Hemming  v.  Cutler,  51  Me. 
407,  it  was  held  that  where  a  per- 
son went  into  the  possession  of  land 
under  a  parol  agreement  to  pur- 
chase, and  erected  a  house,  not  un- 
derpinned, and  left  it  unfinished, 
the  house  was  liable  to  attachment 
as  the  personal  property  of  the 
debtor.  But  while  it  is  true  that  a 
person  who  erects  buildings  upon 
the  land  of  another,  with  his  con- 


CHAP.  XLVm.] 


Trade  Fixtures. 


1245 


to  relax  the  strictness  of  the  old  rules  of  law,  and  to 
admit  an  innovation  in  this  particular  instance,  was, 
that  the  commercial  interests  of  the  country  might  be 
advanced,  by  the  encouragement  given  to  tenants  to 
employ  their  capital  in  making  improvements  for  carry- 
ing on  trade,  with  the  certainty  of  having  the  benefit  of 
their  expenditure  secured  to  them  at  the  end  of  their 
terms :  the  benefit  of  the  public  may  be  regarded  as  the 
principal  object  of  the  law  in  bestowing  this  indulgence.' 
Whenever  the  following  circumstances  concur  (and  soine- 
times  when  they  do  not  all  concur)'  the  tenant  may 
remove  the  article  :  viz.,  things  which  a  tenant  has  fixed 
to  the  freehold  for  the  purposes  of  trade  or  manufacture 
may  be  taken  away  by  him  during  his  term,  whenever 
the  removal  is  not  contrary  to  any  express  or  impHed 
stipulation  in  his  lease  or  agreement,  or  the  custom  of 
the  country,'  and  the  articles  were  of  a  perfect  chattel 


sent,  holds  the  houses  as  personal 
property,  yet  they  are  bo  far  quasi 
realty  that  if  he  sells  them  to  the 
owner  of  the  land  they  instanter 
hecome  realty.  Curtis  v.  Riddle,  7 
Allen  (Mass.)  185  ;  Powers  v.  Den- 
nison,  30  Vt.  753 ;  Bumside  v. 
TwitcheU,  43  N.  H.  390.  Buildings 
so  erected  are  treated  as  personal 
property  so  far  that  the  tenant  may 
enter  to  remove  them,  even  after 
the  expiration  of  his  lease,  on^ay- 
ment  of  nominal  damages  ;  but  so 
long  as  they  are  annexed  to  the 
realty,  and  are  a  part  of  it  except 
to  the  extent  that  the  tenant  may 
sever  them  therefrom,  it  would 
hardly  seem  reasonable  that  a  third 
person  acting  under  a  legal  process, 
could  avail  himself  of  the  license 
to  the  tenant  to  sever  them.  And 
there  would  seem  to  be  no  good 
reason,  according  to  the  case  of 
Curtis  V.  Riddle,  ante,  why  the 
tenant  might  not,  even  after  levy, 
by  a  sale  to  the  landowner,  so 
change  the  character  of  the  prop- 
erty as  to  make  the  levy  inopera- 
tive. See  Wells  v.  Bannister,  4 
Mass.  514 ;  FuUer  v.  Taylor,  39  Me. 
519  ;  Washburn  V.  Sprout,  16  Mass. 
449  ;  Taylor  v.  Townsend,  8  Mass. 
411  ;  Curtis  v.  Hoyt,  19  Conn.  154  ; 
White's  Appeal,  10  Penn.  St.  253  ; 
Dame  v.  Dame,   38  N.    H.    439. 


There  is  a  wide  distinction  between 
buildings  or  other  erections  erected 
upon  the  land  of  another  with  his 
consent,  and  erections  made  with- 
out it.  In  the  former  case  they 
are  treated  as  personalty,  and  may 
be  removed,  and  in  the  latter  they 
are  treated  as  realty,  and  belong  to 
the  owner  of  the  land,  Fisher  v. 
Saffer,  1  E.  D.  Smith  (N.  Y.)  611  ; 
Reid  V.  Kkk,  13  Rich.  (S.  C.)  54 ; 
Washburn  v.  Sprout,  ante,  even 
though  made  under  mistake  as  to 
boundaries  or  title,  Himes  v. 
Ament,  43  Mo.  298.  And  even 
though  the  greater  part  of  it  is 
upon  the  builder's  land.  Boiling 
V.  Whittle,  1  Ala.  Sel.  Cas.  268. 

'  Amos  &  F.  33 ;  Lawton  v.  Law- 
ton,  3  Atk.  14,  16. 

»  Amos  &  F.  49. 

3  CuUing  V.  Tuffnall,  Bull.  N.  P. 
34;  Wetherell  v.  Howells,  1  Camp. 
337 ;  Davis  v.  Jones,  3  B.  &  Aid., 
165 ;  Amos  &  F.  44.  A  executed 
a  written  lease  to  B  of  a  parcel  of 
land,  to  be  used  as  a  coal  yard,  for 
a  term  of  ten  years,  rent  payable 
monthly.  The  lease  contained  a 
clause  by  which  A  agreed  to  pay 
B  the  value  of  all  buildings  and 
scales  which  he  should  place  and 
leave  on  the  premises  at  the  end  of 
the  term,  "  provided  the  said  prem- 
ises shall  not  be  rele't  to  the  lessee." 


1246 


Fixtures. 


[§  526. 


nature  before  they  were  put  up,  or  have  in  substance 
that  character  independently  of  their  union  with  the  soil, 
and  may  be  removed  without  material  injury  to  the  free- 
hold, andwithout  losing  their  essential  character  or  value.' 

Sec.  526.  Decisions  as  to  trade  fixtures.—  Thus,  if  a 
lessee  for  years  sets  up  a  furnace  for  his  advantage,  or  a 
dyer  makes  his  vats  and  vessels  to  occupy  his  occupation 
during  the  term,  he  may  remove  them  :  and  so  of  a 
baker."  So  a  soap-boiler,  who  for  the  convenience  of 
his  trade  puts  up  vats,  coppers,  tables  and  partitions, 
may  remove  them  during  his  term  :  or  they  may  be 
taken  under  an  execution  against  him.'  So  a  fire-engine 
or  steam-engine  set  up  by  a  tenant  for  the  purpose  of 
working  a  colliery  may  be  removed  by  him  during  the 
term."  Salt-pans  erected  by  a  tenant  for  the  purpose  of 
working  salt  works  let  to  him  may  be  removed  during 
the  term  ;  but  it  would  be  otherwise  between  the  heir 


After  the  execution  of  the  lease  B 
placed  upon  the  land  expensive 
buildiugs  and  scales.  After  the 
expiration  of  the  lease  B  contin- 
ued to  occupy  the  premises  for 
more  than  two  years,  paying 
monthly  the  same  amount  as  the 
rent  fixed  in  the  lease.  It  was 
held  in  an  action  on  the  agree- 
ment in  the  lease  that  even  if 
the  subsequent  occupation  by  B 
amounted  to  a  tenancy  at  will, 
the  premises  were  not  "relet" 
within  the  meaniag  of  that  word 
in  the  lease.  Moseley  v.  Allen, 
138  Mass.  81. 

I  Fisher  v.  Dixon,  13  CI.  &  Fin. 
312.  In  Seeger  v.  Petit,  1  Weekly 
F.  C.  226,  the  defendant  rented 
premises  for  the  purpose  of  carry- 
ing on  the  business  of  selling  drugs 
and  dyes  for  manufacturers.  He 
put  in  gas-fixtures,  platform  scales, 
raiUngs,  a  coal-bin,  shelves  and  a 
stancase ;  and  the  question  arose 
whether  they  were  fixtures.  The 
judge  charged  that  if  they  were 
afiixed  to  the  freehold  in  a  perma- 
nent manner  they  could  not  be  re- 
moved as  fixtures.  But  the  court, 
on  error  brought,  said ;  "  The  test 
of  physical  annexation  was  over- 
turned in  Voorhees  v.  Trueman,  3 


W.  &  S.  (Penn.)  116  ;  Pyle  v.  Pen- 
nock,  3  id.  390 ;  and  other  cases 
cited  in  HiU  v.  Sewald,  58  Penn. 
St.  372.  The  true  rule  was  the  in- 
tention to  annex.  The  jury  were 
instructed  in  substance  that  the 
test  was  physical  annexation.  In 
this  there  was  error."  In  Hanra- 
han  V.  O'Reilly,  103  Mass.  301,  it 
was  held  that  bowliug-alleys  erect- 
ed by  a  tenant  for  the  purposes  of 
profit  in  a  room  which  the  land- 
lord let  for  hall  purposes  were 
trade  fixtures  which  the  tenant 
might  remove,  although  they  were 
nailed  to  the  floor,  and  although 
the  drawing  of  the  nails  would  in- 
jure the  building.  And  Brown  in 
his  Law  of  Fixtures,  §  67,  says 
that  in  the  late  cases  there  is  a 
clear  alteration  in  the  point  of 
view  from  which  fixtures  are  re- 
garded, an  alteration  which 
amounts  to  an  entire  inversion  of 
the  ancient  point  of  view, 

'  Amos  &  F.  33. 

s  Poole's  Case,  1  Salk.  368. 

*  Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  13 ; 
Ld.  Dudley  v.  Ld.  Warde,  Ambler, 
114 ;  Bull.  N,  P.  34 ;  Amos  &  F. 
29,  34,  339. 


CHAP.  XLVin.] 


Tkadb  Fixtures. 


1247 


and  executor  of  a  tenant  in  fee  : '  or  where  there  is  an 
express  covenant  to  leave  the  salt-works  in  good  repair 
at  the  end  of  the  term.'  Coppers  and  all  sorts  of  brew- 
ing vessels  cannot  possibly  be  used  without  being  as 
much  fixed  as  fire-engines  ;  and  in  brew-houses  especially, 
pipes  must  be  laid  through  the  walls  and  supported  by 
the  walls  ;  and  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  as  they  are  laid 
for  the  convenience  of  trade,  landlords  wiU  not  be  allowed 
to  retain  them ;  °  or  rather,  it  should  be  said,  the  tenants 
may  remove  them  during  their  tenancy.  Though  a  build- 
ing may  be  raised  on  a  brick  foundation,  and  have  a  brick 
chimney,  yet  if  the  erection  of  such  foundation  is  of  wood, 
and  the  building  used  for  the  purpose  of  trade  or  manufac- 
ture, the  tenant  may  remove  it  before  or  at  the  end  of  his 
term.'  A  steam-engine,  to  which  a  chimney  necessarily 
belonged,  has  been  held  to  be  removable,  and  the  same  may 
be  said  of  any  species  of  machinery  so  erected  for  the  prose- 
cution of  the  business  for  which  the  premises  were  leased.' 


'  Lawton  v.  Salmon,  1  H.  Blac. 
359,  n. ;  3  Atk.  16,  S.  C.  ;  Amos  & 
F.  30,  339. 

2  Earl  of  Mansfield  v.  Blackburn, 
6  Bing.  N.  C.  426. 

'Per  Lord  Haedwicke,  C,  in 
Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  15. 

^Penton  v.  Robart,  2  East,  88  ; 
4  Esp.  33.  A  building,  though  but 
slightly  fixed  to  the  freehold,  is, 
presumptively,  a  part  of  the  realty ; 
but  the  parties  may  control  its 
nature  by  an  agreement  that  it  may 
be  removed  at  any  time  ;  and  it 
being  treated  by  them  as  personal 
property,  trover  will  he  by  the 
owner  for  its  conversion.  Smith 
V.  Benson,  1  HiU  (N.  Y.)  176.  A 
cider-miU  and  press,  erected  by  a 
tenant  at  his  own  expense,  and  for 
Ids  own  use,  though  affixed  to  the 
soil,  are  his  personal  property,  and 
removable  by  him  at  the  end  of  his 
term,  though  if  the  tenant  enter 
after  the  term,  and  take  away  the 
mill,  he  is  a  trespasser,  yet  the 
property  stiU  remains  his.  Holmes 
V.  Tremper,  30  John.  (N.  Y.)  39. 
So  a  building  erected  by  a  tenant, 
for  the  more  profitable  and  com- 
fortable enjoyment  of  the  premises 
during  his  tenancy,  is  removable 
by  him  at  any  time  before  his  right 
of    enjoyment  expires,  or   while 


holding  over,  where  the  erection 
and  removal  will  not  prejudice  the 
owner's  rights,  by  leaving  it  in  a 
worse  condition  than  when  he  took 
possession.  Dubois  v.  Kelly,  10 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  496.  A  building, 
called  a ' '  shanty,"  with  a  chimney, 
door,  and  windows,  divided  into 
rooms,  and  occupied  by  a  family, 
was  held  to  be  a  part  of  the  realty, 
and  not  a  personal  chattle,  it  not 
appearing  that  it  merely  rested  up- 
on the  soil,  with  no  impediment  to 
its  removal  hut  its  own  weight,  or 
that  it  was  held  upon  terms  giving 
the  tenant  liberty  to  remove  it. 
Fisher  v.  Saffer,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  611.  For  other  instances  in 
which  buildings  have  not  been 
treSlted  as  fixtures,  see  Howard  v. 
Fessenden,  14  AUen  (Mass.)  434 
Leland  v.  Gassett,  17  Vt.  403 
I\iller  V.  Taylor,  89  Me.  519 
Schemmer  v.  North,  32  Mo.  206 
Meigs'  Appeal,  63  Penn.  St.  206 
Washburn  v.  Sprout,  16  Mass.  449 
Gofif  V.  O'Connor,  16  111.  431 ;  Clark 
T.  Eeyburn,  1  Kan.  381.  Windows 
put  into  a  house  by  a  tenant  can- 
not be  removed  by  him  after  his 
term  has  ended.  State  v.  Elliott, 
11  N.  H.  504. 

^  Ld.  Dudley  v.  Ld.  Warde,  Amb. 
114  ;  Bull.  N.  P.  34. 


1248  Fixtures.  [§  526. 

The  principle  in  favor  of  buildings  erected  for  the  pur- 
poses of  ti-ade  has  been  extended  to  many  buildings 
■which  come  by  no  means  strictly  under  the  term*.  Thus, 
jn  the  famous  case  of  the  cider-mills,  although  the  mill 
•was  put  up  in  part  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  real  estate, 
yet  as  the  making  of  cider  was  a  species  of  trade,  the 
mill  was  considered  to  fall  within  the  general  exception 
in  favor  of  trade  fixtures  ; '  but  that  case  has  been  dis- 
approved of  by  the  House  of  Lords  ; '  but  the  doctrine  of 
the  first  case  has  been  recognized  and  adopted  in  New 
York.'  In  the  case  of  fire-engines  and  steam-engines  in 
collieries,  it  was  held  that  the  getting  and  vending  the 
coals  so  far  partook  of  the  nature  of  a  trade  that  the 
engines  employed  in  the  collieries  might  be  deemed  trad- 
ing erections."  But  it  has  not  yet  been  decided  that  a 
tenant  may  remove  substantial  and  extensive  additions 
to  the  premises,  although  he  has  built  them  exclusively 
for  the  convenience  of  trade — such  as  lime,  pottery  or 
brick  kilns,  wind  or  water  mills,  workshops,  store-houses, 
furnaces  and  flues  of  smelting  and  glass-houses,  stoves 
and  floors  of  smelting-houses,  and  other  erections  of  the 
like  description."  The  distinction  is  between  buildings 
of  a  permanent  nature  and  machinery  and  fixtures  erected 
for  the  purposes  of  trade,  the  latter  being  removable, 
but  the  former  not."  A  reversionary  interest  in  trade 
fixtures  will  pass  to  a  purchaser  under  a  parol  agree- 
ment.' 

At  the  common  law,  the  privileges  extended  to  ten- 
ants in  trade  do  not  extend  to  farm  tenants,  so  as  to 
entitle  them,  as  a  matter  of  right,  to  remove  things 

'Lawton  V.   Lawton,  3  Atk.  14.  aaybuildingshemay  erect,  he  does 

^  Fisher  v.  Dixon,  12  CI.  &  Fin.  not  lose  this  right  by  taking  a  new 

313;    Walmsley  v.  Mihie,  7  C.  B.  lease  before  the  expiration  of  the 

N.  S.  115.  old  one.     Kerr  v.   Kingsbury,   89 

^  Holmes  v.  Tremper,  ante.  Mich.  150.     But  a  Ucense  to  enter 

■•Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  14 ;  on  land  apd  remove  buildings  wiU 

Ld.  Dudley  v.  Ld.  Warde,  Ambl.  not  be   implied    where  a   tenant 

114 ;   Bull.  N.  P.  34 ;  MinshaU  v.  holding  over  gives  notice  that  he 

Lloyd,  3  M.  &  W.  450.  reserves  the  right  to  remove  oer- 

^  Amos  &  F.  340.  tain  buildings  from  the  premises, 

"  Whitehead  v.  Bennett,  37  L.  J.  and  the  landlord  is  silent.    Morgan 

Ch.   474  ;   Foley  v.  Addenbrooke,  v.  United  States,  14  Ct.  of  CI.  319. 

13  M.  &  W.  174.    Where  a  lease  '  Petrie  v.  Dawcon,  3  C.  &  K. 

contains  a  provision  allowing  the  138. 

lessee  at  its  termination  to  remove 


CHAP.  xLvm.J  Trade  Fixtures.  1249 

which  they  have  erected  for  the  purposes  of  husbandry, 
even  though  the  premises  are  left  in  exactly  the  same 
state  as  upon  the  tenant's  entry.  Therefore,  a  tenant 
who  erected  at  his  own  expense,  and  for  the  more  neces- 
sary and  convenient  occupation  of  his  farm,  a  stable, 
carpenter's  shop,  fuel-house,  cart-house,  pump-house 
and  fold-yard  wall,  which  were  aU  built  of  brick  and 
mortar,  and  tiled,  and  let  into  the  ground,  was  held  not 
entitled  to  remove  the  same,  even  during  his  term,  and 
although  he  thereby  left  the  premises  in  the  same  state 
as  when  he  entered,  the  court  holding  that  there  was  a 
distinction  between  annexations  to  the  freehold  for  the 
purposes  of  trade  and  those  made  for  the  purposes  of 
agriculture,  and  better  enjoying  the  immediate  profits  of 
the  land,  in  favor  of  the  tenant's  right  to  remove  the 
former.' 

Although  a  farm  tenant  cannot  remove  articles  which 
are  strictly  of  an  agricultural  nature,  yet,  if  the  object 
and  purpose  of  the  erections  relate  partly  to  trade  of  any 
description,  the  tenant  may  remove  them.  Thus,  ma- 
chinery for  working  mines  and  collieries, "  and  salt-pans,' 
have  been  considered  removable  ;  nurserymen  have  been 
allowed  to  remove  trees  and  shrubs  which  they  have 
planted  for  the  purposes  of  sale,*  but  not  to  plough  up 
strawberry  beds  out  of  the  ordinary  course  of  manage- 
ment of  the  nursery-ground ; '  but  it  would  seem  that 
they  can  remove  hothouses,  greenhouses,  forcing-pits, 

'  Elwes  V.  Maw,  3  East,  38  ;  3  Shephard  v.  Philbrick,  3  Den.  (N. 

Smith,  L.  C.  138, 144(4th ed.) ;  Amos  Y.)  174 ;  Gillett  v.  Balcom,  6  Barb. 

&  F.  50-^3,  348  ;  Williams  v.  Wil-  (N.  Y.)  370 ;  Aldrich  v.  Reynolds, 

liams,  13  East,  309.  1  Barb.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  613.     Growing 

^  Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  13  ;  trees,  fruit  and  grass  are  parcel  of 

lid.  Dudley  v.  Ld.  Warde,  Amb.  the  land,  and  descend  with  it  to 

113  ;  BuU.  N.  P.  34  ;  Amos  &  F.  the  heir,  and  cannot  be  seized  on 

64,  343.  execution  as  chattels,  until  severed 

'  Lawton  v.  Salmon,  1  H.  Blac.  from  the  land.     Bank  of  Lansing- 

360,  note ;  Amos  &  F.  36,  343.  burgh  v.  Crary,  1   Barb.  (N.   Y.) 

*  WardeU  v.  Usher,  S^cott,  N.  543  ;  Warren  v.  Leland,  3  id.  613. 

R.   508.     Neither  the   mortgagor  See  also  Mitchell  v.  Billingsley,  17 

nor  his  lessee,  subsequent  to  the  Ala.    391 ;    Maples   v.   Millon,    31 

giving   of   the  mortgage    is    en-  Conn.  598;  Price   v.   Bray  ton,   19 

titled  to  the  crops  growing  upon  Iowa,  309;  Byasseev.Eeese,  4Met. 

the    land    at    the    time    of    the  (Ky.)  373 ;  Branch  v.  Morrison,  6 

foreclosure   and  sale  ;   but    they  Jones  (N.  0.)  L.  18. 

belong    to   the  purchaser.    Lane  '  Wetherell  v.  Howells,  1  Camp. 

V.   I<mg,  8   Wend.   (N.  Y.)  584;  337. 


1250 


Fixtures. 


[§  527. 


and  erections  of  that  description.'  In  no  case  can  pri- 
vate persons  sell  or  remove  fruit-trees,  although  planted 
by  themselves ; "  nor  hedges,  nor  flowers,  nor  even  a 
border  or  edging  of  flowers  or  shrubs,"  nor  fences.' 

Sec.  527.  Fixtures  for  ornament  and  convenience.— What 
may  be  removed.— Articles  put  up  for  ornament  and  con- 
venience during  the  term  have  been  long  allowed  to  be 
taken  away  by  the  tenant  at  the  expiration  of  his  lease. 
They  are  considered  rather  as  articles  of  fixed  furniture, 
or  of  utility  and  domestic  convenience,  than  as  parts  of 
the  house  or  freehold  ; ''  unless,  indeed,  the  tenant  leaves 


'  Syme  v.  Harvey,  24  So.  Sess. 
Cas.  202. 

^  Wyndham  v.  Way,  4  Taunt. 
316,  Heath,  J.  ;  Com.  Dig.  tit. 
Waste  (D.  3). 

^  Empson  v.  Soden,  4  B.  &  Ad. 
655. 

•*  Fences  are  a  part  of  the  free- 
hold ;  and  the  fact  that  the  mater- 
ials of  which  they  axe  composed, 
are  accidentally  or  temporarily 
detached,  without  any  intent  in 
the  owner  to  divert  them  from 
their  use  as  a  part  of  the  fence, 
works  no  change  in  their  nature. 
They  will,  notwithstanding,  pass 
hy  a  deed  of  the  land.  Goodrich 
V.  Jones,  3  Hill  (N.  Y.)  142.  But 
it  seems  that  rails  built  into  fence 
by  a  tenant,  under  an  agreement 
that  he  may  remove  them  from  the 
land,  are,  as  between  such  tenant 
and  the  owner  of  the  soil,  personal 
property.  Mott  v.  Palmer,  1  N. 
Y.  564  ;  Ford  v.  Cobb,  20  N.  Y. 
344.  In  the  absence  of  any  special 
agreement  to  the  contrary,  a  fence, 
however  and  of  whatever  con- 
structed, is  a  part  of  the  realty. 
Wentz  V.  Fincher,  12  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
L.  297  ;  Carroll  v.  Carroll,  4  Greene 
(Iowa)  146 ;  Glidden  v.  Bennett,  43 
N.  H.  306;  Gibson  v.  Vaugh,  2 
Bailey  (S.  C.)  389. 

^  Birch  V.  Dawson,  3  Ad.  &  El. 
87.  If  the  tenant  has  entered  into  an 
express  covenant  to  yield  up  at  the 
expiration  of  his  term  "all  erec- 
tions and  buildings  that  may  be 
erected,"  or  "all  improvements 
that  may  be  made  "  upon  the  de- 
mised premises,  he  cannot  after- 
wards remove  trade  erections  or 
buildings,  or  trade  or  ornamental 


or  domestic  fixtures.  Naylor  v. 
Collinge,  1  Taunt.  19  ;  Thresher  v. 
E.  L.  Water  Co.,  3  P.  &  C.  608  ; 
Martyr  v.  Bradley,  9  Bing.  34; 
West  V.  Blakeway,  3  Sc.  N.  R.  318 ; 
EUiott  V.  Bishop,  ante.  See  also 
Dumergue  v.  Rumsey,  33  L.  J. 
Exchq.  88 ;  Summer  v.  Bromilow, 
34  id.  Q.  B.  130.  A  covenant  in  a 
lease  to  yield  up  the  demised  prem- 
ises to  the  lessor  at  the  expiration 
of  the  lease,  together  with  all  fixt- 
ures thei-eunto  belonging,  is  con- 
fined to  fixtures  which  belonged  to 
the  demised  premises,  at  the  time 
of  the  execution  of  the  lease,  and 
does  not  extend  to  fixtures  which 
were  not  then  in  existence  ;  but  a 
covenant  to  yield  up  fixtures  be- 
longing, or  that  may  belong,  to  the 
demised  premises,  extends  to  fixt- 
ures that  are  afterwards  put  up 
by  the  tenant.  Hitchman  v.  Wal- 
ton, 4  M.  &  W.  414 ;  Metrop.  Co. 
Ins.  Soc.  V.  Brown,  28  Law  J.  Ch. 
581.  In  such  a  case,  buildings  are 
not  mere  fixtures,  but  become  im- 
mediately upon  their  erection  a 
part  of  the  realty,  and  the  property 
in  them  vests  in  the  landlord. 
Curtis  V.  Riddle,  7  Allen  (Mass.) 
185  ;  Washburn  v.  Sprout,  16  Mass. 
449  ;  Fisher  v.  Saffer,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N. 
Y.)  611 ;  Reed  v..  Kirk,  13  Rich.  (8. 
C.)  54.  Where  a  person  erects  a 
building  upon  the  land  of  another, 
under  an  agi-eement  that  he  may 
remove  it,  the  mere  fact  that  he 
removes  from  the  building  prepar- 
atory to  its  sale  and  removal  can- 
not be  treated  as  an  abandonment 
of  his  right.  Howard  v.  Fessen- 
den,  14  AUen  (Mass.)  124.  But  a 
tenant  who  has  put  windows  into 


CHAP.  xLvin.]  Oenament  and  Convenience. 


1251 


them  annexed  to  the  premises  after  the  expiration  of 
his  term.'  Instances  are  to  be  found  as  far  back  as  the 
year  books  ;"  but  the  relaxation  of  the  general  rule  in 
these  instances  is  an  indulgence,  which  is  an  exception 
only,  and  though  to  be  fairly  considered  is  not  to  be 
extended.'  It  is  a  privilege  of  a  more  limited  nature 
than  that  in  respect  to  trade  fixtures,*  although  such  dis- 
tinction does  not  appear  to  have  been  taken  in 
many  of  the  early  cases."  The  principle  upon  which  this 
exception  to  the  general  rule  is  founded  appears  to  be, 
that,  as  annexation  of  this  nature  must  be  generally 
designed  for  temporary  purpose  only ;  it  would  greatly 
incommode  tenants  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  estates,  if 
by  every  slight  attachment  to  the  freehold  the  property 
should  be  immediately  changed,  and  pass  over  to  the 
reversioner."  Fixtures  for  ornament  or  convenience  can- 
not be  removed  where  erection  may  be  deemed  a  permanent 


a  dwelling-house  cannot  enter  to 
take  them  away  after  his  removal 
from  the  premises.  State  v.  Elliott, 
11  N.  H.  504.  Whenever  an  out- 
going tenant  is  possessed  of  fixtures 
which  he  has  a  right  to  remove,  he 
must  exercise  such  right  prior  to 
the  determination  of  his  tenancy  ; 
he  cannot  after  a  formal  disclaimer 
of  the  title  of  his  landlord,  or  after 
he  has  once  quitted  the  demised 
premises  and  given  up  the  key  to 
the  landlord,  re-enter  for  the  pur- 
pose of  severing  and  removing  fixt- 
ures. "After  the  term,  they  be- 
come a  gift  in  law  to  him  in  rever- 
sion, and  are  not  removable,"  unless 
the  tenant,  after  the  expiration  of 
the  term,  has  remained  in  posses- 
sion, with  the  sufferance  and  per- 
mission of  the  landlord,  and  actual- 
ly severs  them  and  removes  them 
during  the  continuance  of  his  law- 
ful possession,  after  the  expiration 
of  the  term.  If  he  holds  over 
wrongfully,  he  loses  hia  right  to 
sever  and  remove  his  fixtfires ;  and 
if  he  quits  possession,  and  the  ten- 
ancy is  determined,  his  right  to 
his  fixtures  is  extinguished,  and 
they  become  the  property  of 
the  reversioner.  Leader  v.  Home- 
wood,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  546;  Ruf- 
fey  V.  Henderson,  17  Q.  B.  574  ; 
Heap    V.   Barton,  13  0.  B.    274 


If  the  lease  becomes  forfeited 
and  the  tenant,  whilst  he  continues 
in  possession  after  the  forfeiture, 
and  before  judgment  in  ejectment 
has  been  obtained  against  him,  re- 
moves his  fixtures,  he  will  be  en- 
titled to  retain  those  removed 
within  a  reasonable  time,  as  they 
are  not  forfeited  to  the  landlord 
by  the  forfeiture  of  the  lease. 
Stansfield  v.  Mayor  of  Portsmouth, 
4  C.  B.  N.  ■  S.  131  ;  Summer  v. 
Bromilow,  34  L.  J.  Q.  B.  130.  But 
see  Storer  v.  Hunter,  3  B.  &  C. 
368.  But  if  the  landlord  re-enters 
for  the  forfeiture ,  the  tenant's  right 
to  remove  the  fixtures  is  gone. 
Pugh  V.  Acton,  L.  R.  8  Eq.  Ca. 
636.  But  can  he  not  remove  them 
on  paying  nominal  damages? 
Wells  V.  Bannister,  4  Mass.  514 ; 
FuUer  v.  Taylor,  39  Me.  519 ;  Wash- 
burn V.  Sprout,  16  Mass.  449. 

J  Lyde  v.  Russell,  1  B.  &  Ad.  394. 

2 8  Hen.  7,  13;  31  Hen.  7,  26; 
Day  V.  Austin,  Owen,  70 ;  Cro. 
Ehz.  374. 

*  Per  Dallas,  C.  J.,  inBuckland 
V.  Butterfleld,  2  Brod.  &  B.  54; 
Amos  &  F.  98. 

*Buckland  v.  Butterfleld,  su- 
pra ;Leachv.Thomas,7C.&P.  327. 

6  Beck  V.  Rebow,  1  P.  Wms.  91 ; 
Squier  v.  Mayer,  3  Freem,  349. 

s  Amos  &  F.  on  Fixtures,  83. 


1252  Fixtures.  [§  527; 

improvement,  and  cannot  be  conveniently  detached  and 
removed  vpithout  material  injury  or  damage  to  the 
house  or  freehold  ;  thus,  a  conservatory  erected  on  a  brick 
foundation  affixed  to,  and  communicating  with  rooms  in, 
a  dwelUng-house,  by  windows  and  doors,  may  not  be 
removed  by  a  tenant  for  years,  who  has  erected  it  during 
his  tenancy,  although  he  has  a  reversion  in  fee  after  the 
death  of  his  lessor.'  So  a  veranda,  the  latter  part  of 
which  is  attached  to  posts  fixed  in  the  ground,  may  not 
be  removed.  °  And  upon  the  same  principle  4t  has  been 
held,  that  ranges,  ovens  and  set  pots,  affixed  to  a  house 
built  by  the  person  against  whom  an  execution  has 
issued,  cannot  be  taken  by  the  sheriff  under  a  writ  of  fi. 
fa.  °  Window-sashes,  which  are  neither  hung  nor  beaded 
into  the  frames,  but  merely  fastened  by  laths,  nailed 
across  the  frames  to  prevent  their  falling  out,  are  not 
fixed  to  the  freehold  ;*  so  a  pump  erected  by  a  tenant 
during  his  term,  and  very  slightly  affixed  to  the  freehold, 
is  removable  as  a  tenant's  fixture."  A  bequeathed  his 
leasehold  messuage,  with  the  gi'ates,  stoves,  coppers, 
locks,  bolts,  keys,  bells  and  other  fixtures  and  fixed  fur- 
niture, to  V  for  life  ;  and  the  household  goods,  furniture 
plates,  linen,  china,  books,  wines  and  Kquors,  and  other 
properties  in  the  messuage,  not  being  comprehended 
under  the  preceding  terms  fixtures  and  fixed  furniture, 
to  V  absolutely  ;'  there  were  in  the  messuage  looking- 
glasses  standing  on  chimney-pieces  and  nailed  to  the 
wall,  and  a  book-case  standing  on  (but  not  fastened  to) 
brackets  and  screwed  to  the  wall ;  it  was  held,  that  V 
took  only  a  life  interest  in  these.'  Erections  of  the 
description  above  mentioned  also  cannot  be  removed  if 
the  removal  would  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  constitute 
waste,  or  if  the  premises  could  not  be  left  in  the  same 
state  as  before  the  removal ;  at  least  the  contrary  of  this 
was  assigned  by  Lord  Mansfield   as   a   ground   for 


'  Buckland  v.  Butterfield,  supra ;  *  Rex  v.  Hedges,  3  East,   P.  C. 

West  T.  Blakeway,  3  M.  &  G.  739.  500,  n. 

'  Penry  v.  Brown,  3  Stark.  403.  *  Grymes  v.   Boweren,   6    Bing. 

=  Wynne  v.  Ingleby,  5  B.  &  A.  437. 

635.  « Birch  v.  Dawson,  6  C.  &  P.  658. 


CHAP.  XLvniJ  Ornament  and  Convenience. 


1253 


removal,  although  the  principle  has  not  been  adverted  to 
in  more  modei'n  decisions.' 

The  articles  for  ornament  and  convenience  which  have 
been  held  to  be  removable  are  : — hangings,  tapestry  and 
pier-glasses,  whether  nailed  to  the  walls  or  panels,  or 
put  up  in  lieu  of  panels  ; '  cornices  ;  °  marble  or  other 
ornamental  chimney-pieces ;  *  marble  slabs  ; '  window 
blinds  ;  °  wainscot  fixed  to  the  walls  by  screws  ; '  grates, 
ranges  and  stoves,  although  fixed  in  brick- work  ; '  iron 
backs  to  chimneys  ; '  beds  fastened  to  the  walls  or  ceil- 
ing ; '"  fixed  tables  ;  "  furnaces  and  coppers  ; "  pumps  ; " 
wash-tubs  and  fixed  water-tubs ; "  coffee  and  malt- 
miUs;"  cupboards  fixed  with  holdfasts  ;"  book- cases 
standing  on  brackets  and  screwed  to  the  walls  ;  "  clock 
cases  ;  "  iron  ovens  and  the  like. "  It  must,  however,  be 
remarked,  that  things  can  be  removed  only  when  the 
separation  wiU  occasion  but  little  or  no  damage  to  the 
freehold  or  to  the  articles  removed."  The  question 
whether  a  fixture  can  be  removed  by  a  tenant  without 


'  Lawton  v.  Salmon,  1  H.  Blac. 
259,  n.  ;  3  Atk.  16,  n.  Manure  be- 
longs to  the  farm  whereon  it  is 
made.  Even  yet  though  lying  in 
heaps  in  the  barnyard,  it  wiU  pass 
as  a  part  of  the  realty,  by  a  deed 
of  the  land.  Goodrich  v.  Jones,  3 
Hill.  143  ;  Middlebrook  v.  Corwin, 
15  Wend.  169.  Butmanure  which 
is  not  the  produce  of  agricultural 
lands — e.  g.,  such  as  accumulates 
in  livery  stables, — is  removable. 
Carroll  v.  Newton,  17  How.  Pr. 
(N.  y.)  189.  Hop-poles  which  are 
put  into  the  ground  every  season, 
and  continue  there  until  they  are 
removed  to  gather  the  crop,  and 
are  then  piled  in  a  yard  until  the 
next  season,  are  a  part  of  the  real 
estate,  as  between  vendor  and  ven- 
dee. Bishop  V.  Bishop,  11  N.  Y. 
133. 

^Squier  v.  Mayer,  2  Freem.  249  ; 
Beck  V.  Eebow,  1  P.  Wms.  94  ; 
Elwes  V.  Maw,  3  East,  53  ;  Buck- 
land  V.  Butterfleld,  3  Brod.  &  B. 
54. 

3  Avery  v.  Cheslyn,  3  Ad.  &  El. 
75. 

■•Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  15 ; 
Lawton  v.  Salmon,  1  H.  Blac.  360, 
n. ;  Allen  v.  Allen,  Moseley,  113  ; 

11,-37 


Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  C.  &  P.  337  ; 
Bishop  V.  EUiott,  11  Exchq.  115. 

'  Allen  V.  Allen,  Mosely,  113. 

«  Amos  &  F.  341. 

'  Lawton  v.  Lawton,  3  Atk.  15  ; 
ex  parte  Quincey,  1  Atk.  477  ;  Ld. 
Dudley  v.  Ld.  Warde,  Amb.  113  ; 
Lee  V.  Risdon,  7  Taunt.  191  ;  Amos 
&  F.  341.    But  see  id.  85,  note  (&). 

8  Lee  V.  Risdon,  7  Taunt,  191 ; 
Rex  V.  St.  Dunstan,  4  B.  &  C.  636  : 
Amos  &  F.  76. 

'  Harvey  v.  Harvey,  3  Stra. 
1141. 

•"  Ex  parte  Quincy,  1  Atk.  477. 

■"  Amos  &  F.  187,  343. 

"  Squier  v.  Mayer,  2  Freem.  249. 

'*  Grimes  v.  Boweren,  6  Bing. 
437. 

'*  Amos  &  F.  343. 

'« R.  V.  Londonthorpe,  6  T.  R. 
379  ;  Amos  &  F.  76,  note  (a) ;  Id. 
343. 

"  Rex  V.  St.  Dunstan,  4  B.  &  C. 
686. 

"  Birch  V.  Dawson,  6  C.  &  P.  658. 

'8  Amos  &  F.  187,  342. 

'»  Winn  V.  Ingleby,  5  B.  &  A. 
625  ;  Amos  &  F.  185,  342. 

«» Avery  v.  Cheslyn,  3  Ad.  &  El. 
75  ;  Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  C.  &  P. 
837.    A  fm-nace  so  placed   in  a 


1254  Fixtures.  [§  528; 

substantial  injury  to  the  premises  is  a  question  for  the 
jury,  upon  an  issue  whether  the  fixture  is  removable  or 
not  by  law.  A  plea  to  an  action  by  a  landlord  against  his 
tenant  for  removing  a  cornice,  stated  that  it  was  the 
property  of  the  defendant ;  that  it  was  fixed  up  by  him 
with  screws  only,  for  the  purpose  of  ornament ;  that  he 
carefuUy  removed  it  during  the  term,  doing  no  unneces- 
sary damage  ;  and  that  he  repaired  all  the  damage  done. 
The  replication  stated  that  it  was  afiixed  to  the  freehold 
of  the  house,  and  was  not  removable  by  law.  Issue  on 
that  question : — held,  that  it  was  not  a  misdirection  to 
leave  it  to  the  jury  to  say  whether  they  were  of  opinion 
that  the  cornice  was  ornamental,  and  was  so  afiSxed  to 
the  freehold  that  it  could  be  removed  without  substan- 
tial injury  ;  and  that  if  they  thought  so,  and  that  it  had 
been  so  removed,  the  tenant  had  a  right  to  remove  it. 
The  question  whether  removable  by  law  or  not  is  a 
mixed  question  of  law  and  fact.'  If  the  damages  caused 
by  the  removal  would  be  insignificant,  they  would  not 
prevent  the  removal."  It  appears,  however,  ■  to  have 
been  generally  understood  in  practice,  that  where  orna- 
mental or  other  fixtures  are  taken  down,  the  tenant  is 
liable  to  repair  the  injury  the  premises  may  suffer  by 
the  act  of  removal ;  and,  in  like  manner,  that  where  a 
fixture  has  been  put  up  in  substitution  for  an  article 
which  was  attached  to  the  premises  at  the  time  of  the 
demise,  the  tenant,  in  taking  down  his  own  fixture,  is 
bound  to  restore  the  former  article,  or  to  replace  it  by 
another  erection  of  a  similar  description.' 

Sec.  528.  Contracts  respecting  fixtures.— The  parties  on 
entering  into  a  contract,  may  agree  to  vary  the  strict 
position  in  which  they  would  otherwise  legally  stand 
towards  each  other  as  to  fixtures,  where  no  absurdity  or 

house  that  it  cannot  be  removed  'Avery  v.  Cheslyn,  3  Ad.  &  EI. 

without  disturbing  the  brick -work  85. 

of  the  house  adjoining  the  furnace,  *  Governors  of  Harrow  School  v. 

and  without,  probably,  causing  a.  Aiderton,  2  B.  &  P.  86. 

portion  of  the  ceiling  to  fall,  is  a  ^  Martyr  v.  Bradley,  9  Bing.  34 ; 

fixture,  and  passes  with  the  realty  Sunderland    v.    Newton,    3    Sim, 

to  a  purchaser.    Main  v.  Schwarz-  450, 

waelder,  4  E.  D.  S.  (N,  Y.  C.  P.) 

273. 


CHAP.  XLVm.]  CONTBACTS.  1255 

general  inconvenience  would  result  from  the  transac- 
tion.' Modus  et  conventio  vincunt  legem.''  Therefore 
buildings  erected  for  the  purposes  of  trade,  under  leases 
containing  covenants  to  yield  up  in  repair,  at  the  expir- 
ation of  the  term,  all  buildings  vsrhich-  should  be  erected 
upon  the  demised  premises,  cannot  be  removed  by  the 
lessees,  when  the  words  of  the  covenant  are  general,  and 
contain  no  exception  of  any  particular  sort  of  buildings.' 
Where  a  lease  contained  a  general  covenant  to  repair, 
and  lime-kilns  were  erected  by  the  lessee  during  the 
term,  it  was  held,  that  he  could  not  remove  them  at  the 
end  of  his  term  without  committing  a  breach  of  cove- 
nant.' So  salt-pans  erected  by  a  tenant  during  his  term 
cannot  be  removed  where  the  lease  contains  a  covenant 
to  leave  the  salt  works  in  good  repair  at  the  end  of  the 
term.'  Where  there  was  a  covenant  to  keep  in  repair 
the  premises,  and  all  erections,  buildings  and  improve- 
ments erected  on  the  same  during  the  term,  and  to  yield 
up  the  same  at  the  end  of  the  term,  it  was  held  to  be 
broken  by  the  removal  of  a  veranda  erected  during  the 
term,  the  lower  part  of  which  was  affixed  to  the  ground 
by  means  of  posts."  Where  there  is  a  covenant  to  yield 
up  at  the  expiration  of  the  term  all  erections  and 
improvements  made  during  the  term,  a  greenhouse,  the 
frame-work  of  which  is  laid  on  walls  embedded  in 
mortar,  cannot  be  removed,  although  no  damage  is  done 
to  the  walls  by  removing  it.'  A  lease  contained  cove- 
nants by  the  lessee  to  keep  and  leave  in  repair  the 
demised  premises,  "together  with  all  wainscots,  win- 
dows, shutters,  fastenings,  &c.,  and  other  things  which 
then  were,  or  at  any  time  thereafter  should  be,  there- 
unto affixed  or  belonging  (looking-glasses  and  furniture 
excepted),  and  together  also  with  all  sheds  and  other 

'Duinergue  v.  Eumsey,  3  H.  &  works  Ck).,  3  B.  &.  C.  608.    But  see 
C.  777  ;  Stansfeld  v.  Mayor,  &c.,  of  Dean  v.  AUaUey,  3  Esp.  11. 
Portsmouth,  4   C.  B.  N.   S.    130 ;         "  Thresher  v.  East  London  Water- 
Bishop   T.    Elliott   (in    error),    11  works  Co.,  ante. 
Exchq.  113;  Earl  of  Mansfield  v.         'Earlof  Mansfield  v.  Blackburne, 
Blackbume,  6  Bing.  N.  C.  426.  6  Bing.  N.  C.  436. 

2  Co.  R.  73 ;  Broom's  Max.  661 ;         «  Penry  v.  Brown,  3  Stark.  403. 
Haslett  V.  Burt,  18  C.  B.  163,  898.  ■>  West  v.  Blakeway,  3  M.  &  G. 

»  Naylor  v.  Collinge,  1  Taunt.  19 ;  739. 
Thresher  v.  East  London  Water- 


1256  FiXTUEES.  [§  528. 

erections  and  improvements  which  should  be  erected, 
built  or  made  upon  the  demised  premises."  An  assignee 
of  the  lease,  during  the  term,  removed  an  old  shop- 
window,  and  put  up  in  its  place  a  plate  glass  front,  but 
without  in  any  manner  fastening  it  to  the  premises, 
except  by  means  of  wedges :  held,  that  this  plate-glass 
front  was  either  a  "window"  or  an  "improvement" 
within  the  true  meaning  of  the  covenant,  and  therefore 
irremovable  by  the  tenant'  at  the  end  of  the  term, 
although  erected  for  the  purposes  of  trade.'  A  lease 
contained  a  covenant  to  yield  up  certain  scheduled 
articles,  together  with  all  doors,  wainscots,  shelves, 
presses,  dressers,  drawers,  locks,  keys,  bolts,  bars, 
staples,  hinges,  hearths,  chimney-pieces,  mantel-pieces, 
chimney-jambs,  foot-pans,  slabs,  covings,  window- 
shutters,  partitions,  sinks,  water-closets,  cisterns,  pumps 
and  rails,  water-tanks  and  other  additions,  improve- 
ments, fixtures  and  things  which  were  and  should  be 
anyways  fixed  or  fastened  upon  the  premises :  held, 
that  the  general  words  could  not  be  restricted  (there 
being  no  assignable  genus  to  which  the  enumerated 
ai'ticles  belonged),  and  that  the  lessee  could  not  make  a 
marketable  title  even  to  articles  in  the  nature  of  tenant's 
fixtures."  Where  by  the  terms  of  his  lease  or  agreement 
the  tenant  renounces  his  ordinary  right  to  remove  any 
of  his  fixtures  during  the  term,  the  sheriff  cannot  take 
them  under  an  execution  against  him.'  A  lease  of 
mines  contained  a  covenant  for  the  lessee  to  erect 
furnaces,  iron- works,  &c.,  and  to  repair  and  yield  up 
the  furnaces,  fire-engines,  iron-works,  dwelling-houses 
and  all  other  erections,  &c.,  to  be  erected,  built  or  set 
up,  except  the  iron-work  castings,  railways,  wimseys, 
gins,  rnachines  and  the  movable  implements  and 
materials  used  in  or  about  the  said  furnaces,  flre- 
engmes,  iron- works,  stone-pits  and  premises ;  and  there 
was  a  power  given  to  the  lessor  to  purchase  the  excepted 
articles  j  it  was  held,  that  the  lessee  had  a  right  to  re- 

■  Haslett  V.  Burt,  18  C.  B.  163.  » Dumej-gue  v.  Eumsey,  3  H.  & 

''WUsonv. -VWbately.TJur.N.S.      C.  777. 


CHAP.  xiiVni.]  Contracts.  1257 

move  whatever  was  in  the  nature  of  a  machine,  or  part 
of  a  machine,  though  fixed  in  brick-work,  but  not  what 
was  in  the  nature  of  a  building  or  support  of  a  building, 
although  made  of  iron.'  Where  various  engines  and 
other  fixtures  used  in  mining  and  smelting  were  stand- 
ing on  the  premises  at  the  date  of  the  demise,  of  which 
the  engines  were  purchased  by  the  incoming  from  the 
outgoing  tenant,  and  were  not  mentioned  in  the  general 
words  of  the  demise,  nor  in  the  clause  of  re-entry  ;  but 
the  lessee  covenanted  to  keep  the  "said  engines"  (the 
word  "  engines  "  never  having  occurred  before)  in  good 
and  tenantable  repair,  and  the  same  in  such  state  to 
yield  up  at  the  end  or  other  sooner  determination  of  the 
term ;  and  the  lessor  covenanted  that  the  lessee  might 
remove  (at  the  end  of  the  term  or  sooner,  except  as  in 
the  cases  and  events  before  mentioned,  in  any  of  which,  a 
taking  in  execution,  being  one,  it  was  made  lawful 
for  the  lessor  to  re-enter)  all  such  engines,  &;c.,  as  had 
theretofore  been  erected,  and  all  such  as  should  by  him- 
self be  erected  for  carrying  on  the  smelting  business  ;  it 
was  held,  that  upon  a  forfeiture  of  the  demise  by  a  tak- 
ing in  execution  the  lessee  had  lost  his  right  to  recover 
any  of  the  fixtures,  and  that  they  all  belong  to  the  lessor, 
such  being  the  intention  of  the  parties  as  collected  from 
the  covenants."  A  convenant  to  leave  a  water-miU 
with  all  fixtures,  fastenings  and  improvements,  was  held 
to  include  a  pair  of  new  mfil-stones  set  up  by  the  lepsee 
during  the  term,  although  by  custom  they  might  have 
been  removed.'  A  covenant  by  a  lessee  that  at  the  end 
of  the  term  he  would  deliver  up  to  the  lessor  the  demised 
premises,  "  together  with  all  locks,  keys,  bars,  bolts, 
marble  and  other  chimney-pieces,  foot-pans,  slabs  and 
other  fixtures  and  articles  in  the  nature  of  fixtures 
which  shall  at  any  time  during  the  said  term  be 
fixed  or  fastened  to  the  said  demised  premises,  or 
to  be  thereto  belonging,"  is  confined  to  "landlord's 
fixtures, "    and    does    not    prevent    the    lessee     from 

'  Foley  V.  Addenbrooke,  13  M.  &     544  ;  Dumergue  v.  Rumsey,  2  H. 
W.  174.  &  C.  777. 

2  Rex  V.  Topping,  McClel.  &  You.         ^  Martyr  v.  Bradley,  9  Bing.  34. 


1258  Fixtures.  [§  528. 

removing  or  selling  trade  and  other  tenant's  fixtures 
erected  by  himself  during  the  term.'  A  lease  was 
made  of  a  cotton  factory  and  machinery,  contain- 
ing a  proviso  that  the  lessor  might  distrain  the 
machinery  for  rent ;  and  also  a  proviso  that  when  the 
rents  by  the  lease  reserved  to  be  payable  for  the  first  year 
should  have  been  paid,  and  all  other  covenants,  &c., 
therein  contained  on  the  lessee's  part  have  been  f ulfiled 
the  lessee  should  become  absolutely  entitled  to  the 
machinery  as  his  own  goods  and  chattels  absolutely  for- 
ever ;  there  was  also  a  covenant  to  use  the  machinery 
on  the  premises  and  not  elsewhere  ;  it  was  held,  that  the 
property  in  the  machinery  passed  to  the  lessee  on  the  pay- 
ment of  the  sum  agreed  upon,  and  that  it  did  not  con- 
tinue in  the  lessor  until  the  end  of  the  term."  Some- 
times a  lessee  expressly  stipulates  not  to  commit  waste  ;  ° 
in  which  case  he  must  not  do  any  act  amounting  to 
waste.  Before  a  tenant  removes  an  article  which  he 
considers  as  a  removable  fixture,  he  should  examine  his 
right  not  only  with  reference  to  the  general  law  of  fixt- 
ures, but  also  as  it  may  be  affected  by  any  express  or 
imphed  contract  by  which  he  may  be  bound.  Where  a 
tenant  renews  or  extends  his  term,  he  must  be  careful  to 
presei-ve  his  right  to  fixtures,  for  without  some  express 
stipulation  on  the  subject  he  may  lose  his  right  at  the 
expiration  of  his  first  term  * 

Accepting  the  demise  of  a  house  containing  fixtures 
does  not  raise  an  implied  contract  to  pay  for  the 
fixtures.^  By  the  grant  of  a  house  with  the  appurte- 
nances aU  the  fixtures  pass,  unless  some  intention  to  the 
contrary  be  expressed."  But  it  is  otherwise  where,  by 
an  enumeration  of  particular  fixtures  in  the  conveyance, 
an  intention  is  shown  to  exclude  others :  expressio  unius 

'  Bishop  V.  ElUott,  11  Exohq.  113.  ^Fitzherbert  v.  Shaw,  1  H.  Bl. 

The  court  below  decided  that  the  •  258  ;    Thresher   v.    East    London 

lessee  had  the  right  to  sell  only  the  Waterworks  Co. ,  2  B.  &  C.  608. 

trade  fixtures,  ElUott  v.  Bishop,  10  « Qoff  v.  Harris,  M.  &  G.  573. 

Exchq.  496,  but  the  judges  were  « Colegrave  v.  Bias  Sontos,  2  B. 

divided  in  opinion.  &  C.  76  ;  Stewart  v.  Lombe,  1  Brod. 

■'  Duck  V.  BraddyU,  13  Price,  455.  &  B.  506  ;  Boydell  v.  M'Michael,  1 

2  Leach  y.   Thomas,   7  C.   &  P.  C.  M.  &  R.  177;  Longstaffv.  Mea- 

337.  goe,  3  Ad.  &  El.  167. 


CHAP,  XLvm.J  Contracts.  1259 

est  exclusio  alterius^  Upon  the  sale  of  a  mill  or  factory, 
looms  used  iu  the  mill  are  not  within  the  words  "steam- 
engines,  boilers,  shafting,  piping,  mill-gearing,  gaso- 
meter, gas-pipes,  drums,  wheels,  and  all  and  singular  other 
the  machinery,  fixtures  and  effects  fixed  up,  in,  attached 
or  belonging  to  the  mill  or  factory  or  premises.'"'  So 
looms  standing  upon  a  loom-foot,  from  which  they  may 
be  removed  at  pleasure,  will  not  pass  by  the  general 
term  of  machinery,  though  they  are  worked  by  steam- 
power  which  is  attached  to  the  mill  and  mortgaged  with 
it.'  A  mortgage  of  a  silk-mill  was  expressed  to  include 
"all  those  the  steam-engines,  boilers,  steam-pipes,  main- 
shafting,  mill-gearing,  miU-wrought  work  and  other 
machinery  and  fixtures  whatsoever,  then  erected  or  set 
up  or  standing,  &c.,  in  or  upon  the  mill  or  any  part 
thereof:" — Held,  that  all  the  machinery  and  fixtures 
used  in  the  manufacturing  of  silk  within  the  raill  were 
included.*  Where  a  freehold  mansion-house  was  sold  at 
public  auction,  without  any  stipulation  on  the  part  of 
the  owner  that  the  fixtures  were  to  be  taken  and  paid 
for  separately,  and  the  vendee,  who  had  paid  the  pur- 
chase money,  entered  into  possession  under  a  convey- 
ance, it  was  held,  that  the  fixtures  still  remaining  in  the 
house  passed  to  the  vendee  by  the  conveyance  of  the 
freehold,  and  were  not  the  subject  of  trover ;  and  that  a 
demand  of  and  refusal  to  deliver  the  fixtures  would  not 
entitle  the  vendor  to  such  articles,  left  in  possession  of 
the  vendee,  as  appeared  to  be  removable  ;  °  and  the  prin- 
ciple was  laid  down,  per  Best,  J.,  that,  without  a  stipu- 
lation for  a  valuation  in  the  conditions  of  sale,  fixtures 
would  pass  to  the  vendee  in  a  conveyance,  like  timber 
upon  land.'  Wherever,  therefore,  it  is  intended  in  con- 
tracts which  concern  the  realty  as  well  as  the  fixtures, 
that  the  latter  should  be  paid  for  separately,  a  stipula- 
tion to  that  effect  ought  to  be  introduced.    Contracts 

'  Hare  v.  Horton,  5  B.  &  Ad.  715.  'Colegrave  v.  Dias  Santos,  3  B. 

2  Hutchinson  v.  Kay,  33  Beav.  413.  &  C.  76. 

*  Hutchinson  v.  Kay,  33  Beav.  'Crockford    v.     Alexander;    15 
413.  Ves.  138 ;  Boydell  v.  M'Michael,  1 

*  Haley  v.  Hammersley,  80  L.  J.  C.  M.  &  E.  177. 
Ch.  771. 


1260  FiXTTJEES.  [§  529. 

for  the  sale  of  fixtures  are  not  within  the  statute  of 
frauds,  as  they  are  not  goods  and  chattels  within  the 
meaning  of  the  statute ;  nor  do  they,  although  annexed 
to  the  freehold,  constitute  an  interest  in  land.'  But  a 
memorandum  of  the  actual  sale  of  fixtures  requires  a 
conveyance  stamp,  and  it  makes  no  difference  that  it  is 
in  the  past  tense/  A  reversionary  interest  in  trade  fixt- 
ures will  pass  by  an  agreement  in  writing,  though  not 
under  seal/  Where  a  lessee,  who  had  power  to  remove 
a  greenhouse  fixed  to  the  freehold,  agreed  to  sell  the 
lease,  together  with  the  green-house  and  furniture,  plants 
and  crops,  for  a  certain  sum,  but  was  afterwards  unable 
to  obtain  the  lessor's  consent  to  the  assignment  of  the 
lease,  which  was  necessary ;  it  was  held,  that  the  con- 
tract was  an  entire  one,  and  that  the  lessee  could  not 
sue  for  the  price  of  the  greenhouse/  A  steam-engine, 
erected  for  the  purpose  of  working  a  coUiei-y,  to  be  used 
by  the  lessee  of  such  colliery  during  his  term,  but  to  be 
held  as  the  property  of  the  landlord,  subject  to  such  use, 
is  a  fixture,  and  cannot  be  levied  upon  as  the  tenant's 
property/  Where  copper  roller  manufacturers,  being 
seized  in  fee  of  a  mill  and  land,  erected  thereon  steam- 
engines,  machinery,  &c.,  for  the  purposes  of  their  trade, 
and  then  mortgaged  in  fee  the  mill  and  land,  with  all 
fixtures,  &c.,  and  afer wards  become  bankrupt,  it  was 
held,  that  the  mortgagees  were  entitled  to  all  the 
machinery,  &c.,  fixed  to  the  freehold/ 

Sec.  629.  When  the  tenant  may  remove  fixtures.—  The 
right  of  a  tenant  to  remove  tenant's  fixtures  is  a  power 
coupled  with  an  interest'  which  may  be  assigned  by 

1  Hallen  v.  Bunder,  1  C.  M.  &  E.  « Mather  v.  Fraser,  3  Kay  &  J. 

275 ;  Lee  v.  Risdon,  7  Taunt.  191  ;  536  ;  Waterfall  v.  Penistone,  6  E. 

Pinner  t.  Arnold,  1  Tyr.  &  Gr.  4.  &  B.  876  ;  Whitmore  v.  Empson, 

■'  Horsfall  v.  Hey,  3  Exchq.  778.  23  Beav.  313  ;  Badger  v.  Shaw,  3 

.     s  Petrie  v.  Dawson,  2  C.  &  K.  138.  E.  &  E.  473  ;  39  L.  J.  Q.  B.  73  ;  Re 

*Sleddon  v.  Cruikshank,  16  M.  Daniel,  ex   parte    Ashby,   25    L. 

&  W.  71.  T.  Rep.  188  ;  Place  v.  Fagg,  4  Man. 

*  Coombs  V.  Beaumont,  5  B.  &  &  R.   377;    ex  parte  Bentley,  Re 

Ad.  73  ;   ex  parte  Scarth,  1  Mont.  West,  2  Mont.  E.&D.  591 ;  exparte 

D.  &  De  G.  340  :   ex  parte  Broad-  Barclay,  5  De  G.  M.  &  G.  403  ;  35  L. 

wood,  id.  631 ;   ex  parte  Reynel,  3  J.  Bank.  1  ;  Williams  y.  Evans,  23 

Mont.  D.  &  De  G.  443  ;  Fletcher  v.  Beav.  239. 

Manning,   1    C.    &    K.    350  ;    ex  '  Poole's    Case,    1    Salk.     868 ; 

parte  Cowell,  17  L.  J.  Bkt.  16.  Mmshall  v.  Lloyd,  3  M.  &  W.  460. 


CHAP.  xLvm.]       When  Removablr 


1261 


deed,'  and  which  continues  only  during  his  original 
term,"  and  during  such  further  period  of  possession  by 
him  as  he  holds  the  premises  under  a  right  still  to  con- 
sider himself  as  tenant '  under  the  old  lease;  But,  while 
a  tenant  may  remove  a  trade  fixture  at  any  time  during 
his  original  term,*  or  any  renewal  thereof,  yet,  although 


'  Hallen  v.  Eunder,  1  C.  M.  &  E. 
266 ;  London,  &c..  Loan  and  Dis- 
count Co.  (Liimited)  v.  Drake,  6  C. 
B.  N.  S.  798,  811. 

2  Ex  parte  Quincey,  1  Atk,  477  ; 
Lee  V.  Eisdon,  7  Taunt.  191 ;  Cole- 
grave  V.  Dias  Santos,  3  B,  &  C.  76  ; 
Lyde  v.  EusseU,  1  B.  &  Ad.  894 ; 
Minshall  v.  Lloyd,  3  M.  &  W.  450. 

*  Penton  v.  Eobart,  3  East,  88  ; 
4  Esp.  35 :  Weeton  v.  Woodcock, 
7  M.  &  W.  14 ;  Leader  v.  Home- 
wood,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  546 ;  London 
and  Westminster  Loan  and  Dis- 
coimt  Co.  (Limited)  v.  Drake,  6  C. 
B.  N.  S.  798.  In  the  case  of  ex 
parte  Heminway  v.  Stevens,  8 
Lowell's  Doc.  (U.  S.  D.  C.)  496,  the 
question  arose  as  to  what  are  the 
rights  of  the  tenant  of  premises  in 
respect  to  fixtures  put  in  the 
leased  premises  by  him,  and  it  was 
held  that  the  right  of  the  tenant 
to  remove  such  fixtures  is  not  lost 
by  non-payment  of  rent  and  notice 
to  quit,  but  only  by  quitting.  If 
the  landlord  has  prevented  the 
removal  by  an  attachment  of  the 
fixtures,  the  right  is  not  then  lost, 
even  by  leaving  the  premises.  It 
was  also  held  that  a  parol  renewal 
of  a  lease  renews  whatever  rights 
the  tenant  had  to  remove  the 
fixtures.  See,  as  sustaining  the 
doctrine  permitting  removal,  not- 
withstanding non-payment  of  rent, 
Slossfield  V.  Mayor  of  Portsmouth, 
4  C.  B.  N.  S.  130,  though  the  point, 
as  a  general  one,  was  not  decided 
in  that  case.  See,  however, 
Whipley  v.  Dowey,  8  Cal.  36,  and 
Weeton  v.  Woodstock,  7  M.  &  W. 
14.  As  to  parol  occupancies  from 
year  to  year,  or  from  month  to 
month  by  the  same  tenant,  it  has 
been  held  that  they  make  up  but  one 
tenancy.  Birch  v.  Wright,  1  T.  E. 
380 ;  Eex  v.  Herstmonceaux,  7  B. 
&  C.  551.  And  the  successor  of 
a  tenant,  in  the  absence  of  evidence 
of  a  new  and  different  contract 
with  him,  succeeds  to  the  duties 
and  rights  of  his  predecessor.    And 


a  mere  holding  over  of  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year  does  not  affect 
the  tenant's  privilege  to  remove 
fixtures  put  hi  during  the  term  of 
his  previous  lease  in  writting,  and 
so  long  as  he  holds  under  a  fair 
claim  of  right  as  tenant  he  pre- 
serves his  privilege.  See  Penton 
V.  Eobart,  3  East,  88  ;  Eoffey  v. 
Henderson,  17  C.  B.  574  ;  Heap  v. 
Barton,  13  id.  374;  Marshall  v. 
Lloyd,  3  M.  &  W.  450.  It  has  been 
held,  however,  that  when  one 
accepts  a  written  lease  of  the  same 
premises,  with  the  buildings,  &c., 
from  his  landlord  on  the  expira- 
tion of  the  former  tenancy,  he 
impliedly  admits  that  the  fixtures, 
of  which  he  accepts  a  demise, 
belong  to  the  landlord.  Loughran 
V.  Eoss,  45  N.  Y.  793  ;  6  Am.  Eep. 
173.  See,  also,  Shepard  v.  Spauld- 
ing,  4  Met.  (Mass.)  416.  In  Saint  v. 
PiUey,  L.  E.,  10  Ex.  137,  a  lessee  of 
business  premises  having  become 
insolvent,  the  trustee  in  liquidation 
put  up  the  fixtures  for  sale  by 
auction,  under  conditions  which 
required  them  to  be  "cleared"  by 
the  purchaser  in  two  days  from  the 
sale.  The  plaintiff  bought  the, 
fixtures,  but,  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  trustee,  allowed  them  to 
remain  on  the  premises  whilst  he 
was  treating  with  the  landlord  for 
a  new  lease.  This  negotiation  fell 
through,  and  the  trustee  surren- 
dered the  premises  to  the  landlord 
who  relet  them,  the  fixtures  still 
remaining  affixed.  About  a  fort- 
night afterward  .  the  plaintiff, 
learning  of  the  surrender,  applied 
to  the  landlord  for  the  fixtures.  In 
an  interpleader  issue  between  the 
plaintiff  anci  a  person  claiming  title 
through  the  new  tenant, — Held, 
that  the  plaintiff  had  not  lost  his 
right  by  delay  or  laches,  and  that 
he  was  entitled  to  the  fixtures. 

*  Talbot  V.  Whipple,  14  Allen 
(Mass.)  177 ;  Gaffield  v.  Hapgood, 
17  Pick.  (Mass.)  l5-3  ;  Poole's  Case, 
1  Salk.  368  ;  Lyde  v.  EusseU,  1  B. 


1262 


Fixtures. 


[§  529. 


he  continues  in  possession  after  the  expiration  of  his 
original  term,  if  he  holds  under  a  new  lease,  in  which  no 
provision  for  the  removal  of  the  fixtures  is  made,  he  is 
treated  as  having  abandoned  his  right  thereto.'    This 


&  Ad.  394 ;  Minshall  v.  Lloyd,  2  M. 
&  W.  450 ;  Ellis  v.  Paige,  1  Pick. 
(Mass.)  43 ;  Reynolds  v.  Thuler,  5 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  323.  The  right  may 
be  waived  by  him,  and  a  surrender 
of  the  premises  after  the  expiration 
of  the  term  operates  as  a  waiver. 
Loughran  v.  Ross,  45  N.  Y.  793. 

'  Watriss  v.  First  National  Bank 
of  Cambridge,  124  Mass.  571 ;  36 
Am.  Rep.  694;  Fitzherbert  v. 
Shaw,  1  H.  Bl.  258 ;  Jungerman  v. 
Bovee,  19  Cal.  354 ;  Abell  v.  Wil- 
Kams,  3  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  17 ; 
Thresher  v.  East  London  Water 
Works,  3  B.  &  C.  608;  Heap  v. 
Barton,  13  C.  B.  274.  "The  ac- 
ceptance of  a  new  lease,"  says  Al- 
len, J.,  in  Loughran  v.  Ross,  ante, ' 
"including  the  buUduigs,  without 
any  reservation  of  the  rights,  or 
mention  of  any  claim  to  the  fixt- 
ures or  buildmg,  and  occupation 
under  the  new  letting,  are  equiv- 
alent to  a  surrender  of  the  posses- 
sion to  the  landlord  at  the  expira- 
tion of  the  first  term.  The  tenant 
is  in  under  a  new  tenancy,  and  not 
imder  the  old;  and  the  rights 
which  existed  under  the  former 
tenancy,  and  which  were  not 
claimed  or  exercised,  are  aban- 
doned as  effectually  as  if  the  ten- 
ant had  actually  removed  from 
the  premises,  and  after  an  inter- 
val of  time,  shorter  or  longer,  had 
taken  another  lease  and  returned 
to  the  premises.  A  lease  of  lands 
and  premises  carries  with  it  the 
buildings  and  fixtures  on  the 
premises,  and  the  tenant,  accept- 
ing a  lease  of  the  premises  with- 
out excepting  the  buildings,  takes 
a  lease  of  the  lands  with  the  build- 
ings and  fixtures,  and  acknowledg- 
es the  title  of  the  landlord  to  both, 
and  is  estopped  from  controvert- 
ing it.  In*  respect  to  the  lot  of 
which  there  was  a  written  lease 
for  the  new  term,  the  tenant  ex- 
pressly covenanted  to  surrender 
the  premises  at  the  end  of  the 
term,  '  in  as  good  state  and  condi- 
tion as  a  reasonable  use  and  wear 
thereof  wiU  permit,  damages  by 
the  elements  excepted  :'  and  this 
covenant  relates  to  and  includes 


the  buildings  then  on  the  premis- 
es, and,  if  they  are  excluded  from 
its  operation,  it  can  have  no  effect. 
It  follows  that  the  tenant  becom- 
ing a  party  to  that  lease,  and  occu- 
pying under  it,  is  estopped  from 
claiming  the  buildings  as  his  own, 
for  he  has  covenanted  to  surrender 
them,  as  a  part  of  the  premises  and 
included  within  the  general  de- 
scription, to  the  landloi'd  at  the 
end  of  the  term,  in  good  repair. 
Such  is  also  the  implied  undertak- 
ing of  the  tenant  taking  a  new 
lease  by  parol.  Elementary  writ- 
ers are  very  well  agreed,  that  when 
a  tenant  continues  in  possession  un- 
der a  new  lease  or  agreement,  his 
right  to  remove  fixtures  is  deter- 
mined, and  he  is  in  the  same  situ- 
ation as  if  the  landlord,  being 
seized  of  the  land  with  the  fixtures, 
had  demised  both  to  him.  Gib. 
Law  of  Fixt.  43 ;  and  Grady's  Law 
of  Fixt.  98.  And  it  would  seem 
that  the  position  is  warranted  by 
authority.  When  the  tenant  con- 
tinues in  possession  after  eject- 
ment brought  by  the  landlord,  un- 
der an  arrangement  with  him,  and 
with  his  assent  to  a  stay  of  execu- 
tion, the  tenant's  right  to  remove 
buildings  from  the  premises,  erect- 
ed by  himself  durmg  his  lease,  is 
gone.  Fitzherbert  v.  Shaw,  1  H. 
Black.  358.  The  court  held,  that 
there  was  an  imphed  agreement 
that  the  tenant  should  deliver  up 
the  premises  in  the  same  condition 
as  they  were  in  when  the  agreement 
was  made.  The  same  was  held  in 
Heap  .  V.  Bai-ton,  13  C.  B.  274, 
Jbbvis,  C.  J. ,  saying :  '  If  the  ten- 
ants meant  to  avail  themselves  of 
their  continuance  in  possession  to 
i-emove  the  fixtures,  they  should 
have  said  so.'  The  general  form 
of  expressing  the  right  of  the 
tenant  to  remove  fixtures  is, 
that  they  must  be  removed  with- 
in the  term ;  that  is,  the  term 
during  which  they  were  erect- 
ed, and  unless  the  lessee  uses,  dur- 
ing the  lease,  the  privilege  to  sever 
them,  he  cannot  afterward  do  it. 
Lee  V.  Risdon,  7  Taunt.  288 ;  Lynde 
V.  Russell,  1  B.  &  Aid.  394.    But  it 


CHAP.  XLvm.]        When  Eemovable.  1263 

rule  was  well  illustrated  in  a  recent  Massachufjetts  case.' 
In  that  case  the  defendants  went  into  possession  under  a 
lease  dated  January  1st,  1861,  for  the  term  of  five  years. 
The  lease  was  executed  by  the  plaintiff  and  another, 
who  were  then  owners  of  the  premises,  to  the  Harvard 
Bank,  which  was  subsequently,  and  before  the  expira- 
tion of  the  lease,  changed  to  the  First  National  Bank  of 
Cambridge.  Before  the  expiration  of  the  original  term, 
and  before  the  execution  of  the  new  lease,  which  will  be 
referred  to  hereafter,  the  plaintiff  became  sole  owner  of 
the  premises.  The  old  lease  covenanted  for  the  sur- 
render of  the  premises  at  the  end  of  the  term  in  ds  good 
order  and  condition  as  the  same  then  were,  against 
waste  and  alteration,  and  for  a  right  of  entry  by  the 
lessor  in  case  of  a  failure  to  pay  rent,  or  in  case  of  waste. 
The  lessee  constructed  a  fire- proof  vault  or  safe,  and  a 
portable  furnace  with  pipes  and  registers,  and  counters 
to  fit  the  premises  for  use  as  a  banking  house.  The  lease 
was  extended  until  October  Tth,  18T0,  when  a  new  lease 
was  made  to  take  effect  January  1st,  1871,  at  an  increased 

may  be  done  so  long  as  the  posses-  inal  term,  and  during  such  further 
sion  continues,  although  the  term  period  of  possession  by  him,  as  he 
may  have  ended,  if  there  has  been  holds  the  premises  under  a  right 
no  new  agreement.  Penton  v.  stUl  to  consider  himself  a  tenant,' 
Eobart,  2  East,  88.  A  case  some-  and,  the  right  to  remove  the  fixt- 
vrhat  analogous  in  principle  to  vu'es  was  denied  to  the  assignees  of 
this  was  that  of  Thresher  v.  Pro-  the  tenant,  although  thej  retained 
prietors  of  the  East  London  Wa-  the  possession,  the  plaintiff  having 
terworks,  3  B.  &  C.  608,  in  vs^hich  made  an  entry  to  enforce  a  forfeit- 
it  was  decided  that  a  lessee,  who  ure.  See,  also,  Minshall  v.  Lloyd, 
had  erected  fixtures,  for  the  pur-  2  M.  &  W.  450 ;  Shepherd  v.  Spauld- 
poses  of  trade,  upon  the  demised  ing,  4  Met.  416.  The  tenants,  hold- 
premises,  and  afterward  took  a  ing  under  a  new  demise,  had  not 
new  lease,  to  commence  at  the  ex-  the  legal  right  to  remove  the  flxt- 
piration  of  the  former  one,  which  ures  put  by  them  on  the  premises 
new  lease  contained  a  covenant  to  during  a  former  term,  there  being 
repair,  was  bound  to  repair  those  no  mention  of  the  right  in  the  sec- 
flxturea,  unless  strong  circumstanc-  ond  lease.  The  offer  to  prove, 
es  existed  to  show  that  they  were  that,  by  custom  in  the  city  of  New 
not  intended  to  pass  under  the  gen-  York,  tenants  had  a  right  to  re- 
eral  words  of  the  second  demise,  move  buidings,  did  not  go  beyond 
and  a  doubt  was  expressed  wheth-  the  right  conceded  by  the  defend- 
er any  circumstances,  dehors  the  ant.  The  evidence,  thetefore,  if 
deed,  could  be  alleged  to  show  that  otherwise  competent,  could  not 
they  were  not  intended  to  pass,  have  aided  the  plaintiff.  The  dif- 
Aldeeson,  B.,  in  Weeton  v.  Wood-  Acuity  is,  that  the  conceded  right 
cock,  7  M.  &  W.  14,  says ;  '  The  rule  was  abandoned  and  lost  by  its  non- 
to  be  collected  from  tlxe  several  exercise  during  the  tenancy  under 
cases  decided  seems  to  be  this,  which  the  buildings  were  erected." 
that  the  tenant's  right  to  remove  '  Watriss  v.  First  National  Bank 
fixtures  continues  during  his  orig-  of  Cambridge,  ante. 


1264  Fixtures.  [§  529. 

rent,  containing  a  like  covenant  as  to  surrender,  &c.,  as 
was  contained  in  the  old  one,  and  also  a  provision  for  a 
cessor  of  the  lease  at  the  election  of  the  defendant  in 
case  of  an  injury  to,  or  destruction  of,  the  premises  by 
fii-e  ;  but  did  not  contain  any  provision  as  to  the  fixtures. 
About  November  5th,  1875,  the  lessee  being  about  to  re- 
move from  the  premises,  began  removing  the  fixtures. 
In  action  for  that  injury,  it  was  held,  that  the  lessee 
had  no  right  to  remove  the  fixtures,  upon  the  ground 
that  the  term  under  which  the  fixtures  were  erected  had 
been  surrendered,  and,  when  the  new  lease  came  into 
effect,  the  right  to  remove  the  fixtures  was  lost,  notwith- 
standing the  holding  was  continuous.  In  other -words, 
the  rule  deducible  from  this  as  well  as  other  cases '  is, 
that  a  continuous  holding  of  the  premises  does  not  of 
itself  continue  the  right  of  disannexing  and  removing 
fixtures,  hut  a  continuous  holding  under  the  same  lease  ; 
and  although  the  tenant  remains  in  possession  after  the 
old  lease  has  expired,  yet,  if  his  holding  is  under  a  new 
lease  which  does  not  reserve  a  right  of  removal  the  right 
is  lost."  Where  the  term  is  uncertain,  or  depends  upon 
a  contingency — ^as,  where  a  person  is  in  as  a  tenant  for 
life,  from  year  to  year,  by  sufferance,  or  at  will — trade 
fixtures  may  be  removed  by  him  within  a  reasonable 
time  after  his  tenancy  is  determined  ; '  or,  where  he  has 
been  let  into  possession  by  an  agent  who  did  not  have 
sufficient  authority.*  Where  a  tenant  holds  over  beyond 
his  term  he  may  still  remove  the  fixtures,  because  he  is 
still  in  fact  in  possession  of  the  premises  when  the  fixt- 

'  Elwes   V.    Maw,    3    East,    38 ;  terially    affecting    such  building, 

Abell  V.  "Williams,  3  Daly  (jf.  Y.  does  not  lose  such  right  of  removal 

C.  P.)  17;  Jungerman  v.  Bovee,  by  taking,  during  his  original  term, 

19  Cal.  354 ;    Merritt  v.  Judd,  14  a  new  lease    which    contains  no 

id.  59 ;  Boughran  v.  Ross,  45  N.  Y.  provision  as  to  the  erection  already 

693  ;  6  Am.  Rep.  173.    A  contrary  made,  and  continuing  in  possession 

doctrine  was    held    in    Devin  v.  under  such  new  lease. 

Dougherty,  27  How.   Pr.   (N.   Y.)  ^  Loughran  v.  Ross,  ante ;  Wat- 

455  ;  and  in  that  case  it  was  held  riss  v.  National  Bank,  ante. 

that  a  tenant  who  erects  a  structure  ^Whitney  v.   Brastow,  4  fick. 

which  he  might  remove  during  his  (Mass.)  310  ;  Ellis  v.  Paige,  1  Pick, 

term  or  at  the  expiration  thereof,  (Mass.)  43  ;  Martin  v.  Roe,  7  C.  & 

— e.  g..  a  wooden  avsTiing  in  front  B.  237. 

of  the  building  which  stood  upon  *  Antoni  v.    Belknap,  102  Mass. 

the  demised  premises, — and  which  193. 
might  be    removed   without  ma- 


CHAP.  xLvrnJ        When  Eemovable.  1266 

ures  are  taken  away,  and  there  can  be  no  pretence  fhat 
he  has  abandoned  his  right  to  them.'  When  a  term  is 
forfeited  for  any  cause  named  in  the  lease,  the  tenant  is 
entitled  to  a  reasonable  time  after  the  re-entry  of  the 
landlord  in  which  to  remove  his  fixtures."  Where  prem- 
ises are  let  for  no  definite  term,  but  until  a  certain  crop 
is  fit  to  harvest,  the  tenant  has  a  right,  as  against  the 
lessor  and  all  persons  claiming  under  him  with  notice  of 
the  lease,  to  remove  such  crop  when  ready  to  harvest, 
although  it  requires  several  years  for  it  to  mature. 
Thus,  where  land  was  let  for  a  nursery,  in  raising  trees 
and  plants  until  they  are  ready  to  be  transplanted,  the 
interest  of  the  tenant  in  the  land  was  held  to  continue 
until  that  purpose  was  accomplished,  as  against  a  mort- 
gagee of  the  premises,  with  notice  ; '  but  if  the  premises 
are  leased  for  a  definite  term,  although  for  a  special  pur- 
pose, as  raising  trees,  &c.,  the  tenant  must  remove  the 
trees  as  well  as  all  other  fixtures  before  the  term  is  ended, 
whether  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  rented  is 
accompUshed  or  not,  or  his  right  of  removal  is  lost.'  It 
would  rather  seem  that  a  tenant  for  years  who  holds 
over  on  sufferance  after  the  expiration  of  his  term  may, 
during  such  holding  over,  remove  such  fixtures  as  he 
might  have  removed  during  the  term  ;  but  if  he  quits 
possession,  pursuant  to  a  notice  and  demand  of  posses- 
sion, and  leaves  any  fixtures  on  the  premises,  his  right  to 
them  is  gone.'  The  principle  seems  to  be  that  he  had 
the  option  to  remove  them  or  not  during  his  tenancy, 
and  that  he  exercised  such  option  by  not  removing  them.' 
Upon  the  determination  of  a  tenancy  at  will  by  the 
lessor,  the  tenant  may,  within  a  reasonable  time  and 
before  quitting  possession,  remove  fixtures  belonging  to 

'  Lord  Kenyon,  in   Penton  v.  where  land  is  rented  for  a  nursery 

Eobart,  3  East,   88 ;    Minshall  v.  the  tenant  must  remove  the  trees 

Lloyd,  3  M.  &  W.  450 ;  Mackintosh  before  quitting  possession  on  the 

v.  Trotter,  3  id.  184.  termination  of  his  lease,  or  the  title 

^  Weeton  v.  Woodcock,  7  M.  &  to  them  will  vest  in  the  owner  of 

"W.  14.  the  reversion. 

^King  -v.  Williams,  7  Barb.  (N.  'Leader  v.  Homewood,  5  C.  B. 

Y.)  263.  N.  S.  546. 

■•Id.    In  Brooks  v.   Galster,  51  « Gibson  v.    The  Hammersmith 

Barb.  (N.  Y.)196,  it  was  held,  that,  E.  Co.,  33  L.  J.  Ch.  ?37,  342, 


1266  FiXTUEES.  [§  529. 

him  and  legally  removable  during  his  tenancy.  So 
where  a  tenancy  is  determined  by  the  death  of  the  lessor.' 
But  where  steam-engines  were  removable  by  the  lessee, 
and  had  not  been  removed  previously  to  the  lessor  enter- 
ing for  a  forfeiture,  it  was  held  that  trover  could  not  be 
maintained  for  them ."  So  where  a  lessor  re-enters  for  a 
forfeiture  by  reason  of  the  tenant  having  become  a 
bankrupt,  the  bankrupt  or  his  assignees  cannot  after- 
wards sever  and  remove  any  fixtures,'  except  in  pursu- 
ance of  a  special  stipulation  in  that  behalf.*  So  where  a 
lessor  recovers  possession  under  an  ejectment  for  a  for- 
feiture, the  tenant  has  no  right  afterwards  to  sever  and 
remove  any  fixtures."  Where  the  purchaser  of  lands, 
having  brought  an  ejectment  against  the  tenant  from 
year  to  year,  the  parties  entered  into  an  agreement  that 
judgment  should  be  signed  for  the  plaintiff,  with  a  stay 
of  execution  till  a  given  period  ;  it  was  held,  that  the 
tenant  could  not  in  the  interval  remove  buildings,  &c., 
from  the  premises,  which  he  had  himself  erected  during 
his  term,  and  before  the  action  was  brought.'  Where 
the  landlord  during  the  term,  by  letter,  declines  to  buy 
the  tenant's  fixtures,  but  adds,  "I  have  no  objection  to 
your  leaving  them  on  the  premises  and  making  the  best 
terms  you  can  with  the  incoming  tenant,"  such  letter 
does  not  operate  as  a  vaUd  license  (it  not  being  under 
seal)  ;  and  if  the  new  tenant  refuses  to  pay  for  the  fixt- 
ures so  left,  or  to  permit  them  to  be  removed,  no  action 
of  trover  wiU  he  for  them,  whilst  they  remain  unsevered 
from  the  freehold.'  Where  the  tenant  has  a  legal  right 
to  remove  fixtures  after  the  end  of  his  term,  and  is  pre- 
vented from  doing  so  by  the  landlord  or  incoming  tenant, 

•  ColeEjec.  346  ;  Heap  v.  Barton,  » Minshall  v.  Lloyd,  2  M.  &  W. 

12  C.  B.  278  ;  Martin  v.  Roe,  7  E.  &  450  ;  Mackintosh  v.  Trotter,  3  M. 

B.  237.  &  W.   184.      But  see  Sumner  v. 

'  Miinshall  v.  Lloyd,  2  M.  &  W.  Bronailow,  supra. 

450 ;  Mackintosh  V.  Trotter,  8  M.  &  « Fitzherbert  v.  Shaw,  1  H.  Bl. 

W.  184.    But  see  Sumner  v.  Bromi-  258  ;    Heap  v.    Barton,   13  C.   B. 

low,  34  L.  J.  Q.  B.  130.  374. 

3  Weeton  v.  Woodcock,  7  M.  &  '  Eoffey  v.  Henderson,  17  Q.  B. 

W.  14.  574 ;  Leader  v.  Homewood,  5  C.  B> 

"Stansfeldv.  The  Mayor,  &c.,  of  N.  S.  546. 
Portsmouth,  4  C.    B.  N.   S.   130 ; 
Sumner  v.  Bromilow,  ante. 


CHAP.  XLvin.J  Removal.  1267 

the  action  should  be  for  preventing  the  plaintiff  from 
exercising  his  right  to  sever  and  remove  the  fixtures.' 
But  the  value  of  fixtures  severed  during  the  tenancy, 
and  of  other  goods  left  behind,  may  (after  a  suffi- 
cient demand  and  refusal)  be  recovered  in  trover."  But 
it  is  otherwise  with  respect  to  fixtures  which  were  left 
unsevered  On  the  expiration  of  the  tenancy.'  The 
demand  should  not  be  confined  to  "fixtures."  * 

Sec.  530.  How  the  removal  must  be  eflfeeted.— Where 
trading  as  weU  as  ornamental  fixtures  may  be  removed  and 
are  accordingly  taken  down,  the  tenant  is  liable  to  repair 
any  injury  the  premises  may  sustain  by  the  act  of  removal ; 
and  where  a  fixture  has  been  put  up  in  substitution  for  an 
article  which  was  attached  to  the  premises  at  the  time  of 
the  demise,  the  tenant,  on  taking  down  his  own  fixture, 
is  bound  to  restore  the  former  article,  or  to  replace  it  by 
another  erection  of  a  simihar  description.'  But  it  has 
been  held,  that  in  removing  engines,  &c.,  partly  fixed  in 
brick-work,  which  a  tenant  has  by  the  terms  of  his  lease 
a  right  to  remove,  he  may  disturb  such  brick- work  as  is 
necessary,  and  is  not  bound  to  restore  it  to  a  perfect  state, 
but  that  he  is  liable  for  unnecessary  disturbance  of  the 
brick-work.' 

Sec.  531.  Eemedies  respecting  fixtures.— Remedies  for  the 
wrongful  removal  of  fixtures.— An  action  on  the  case  in  the 
nature  of  waste  lies  for  the  wrongful  removal  of  fixtures, 
for  such  removal  amounts  to  an  injury  to  the  reversion, 
which  the  law  regards  as  waste ; '  and  where  the  act 
amounts  to  a  breach  of  covenant  the  landlord  may  sue 
either  in  case,  or  on  the  covenant,  as  he  prefers.'  He 
may  also,  before  the  removal,  apply  to  a  court  of  equity 
for  an  injuction  to  prevent  the  removal."    Although  a 

'The  London,  &e.,  Co.  v.  Drake,  'Hitchman  y.   Walton,  4  M.   & 

6  C.  B.  N.  S.  800.  W.  409 ;  Smith  v.  Render,  37  L.  J. 

« Leader  v.  Homewood,  5  C.  B.  Ex.  83. 

N.  S.  546.  8Kinlyside  v.  Thornton,  3  W.  Bl. 

"Wilde  V.  Waters,  16  C.  B.  637.  1111 ;  Kerne  v.  Benbow,  4  Taunt. 

■•Colegrave  V.  Dias  Santos,  3  B.  764;  Martyr  v.   Bradley,   9  Bing. 

&  C.  76.  34. 

5  Amos  &  F.  89.  "  Amos  &  F.  S81-387 ;  Com.  Dig 

"Foley  V.  Addenbrooke,  13  M,  tit.  Chancery  (D.ll). 
&  W.  174. 


1268  Fixtures.  [§  532. 

landlord  cannot  maintain  an  action  of  trepass  for  entering 
the  premises  during  the  occupation  of  the  tenant,  because 
occupation  is  necessary  to  maintain  that  form  of  action, 
yet  immediately  upon  the  severance  of  the  fixtures  from 
the  realty  they  become  mere  chattels,  and  he  may  main- 
tain an  action  of  trespass  for  taking  them  away,  for  the 
property  is  vested  in  him  from  the  time  of  severance  ;' 
or  where  the  fixtures  have  been  unlawfully  severed  from 
the  freehold  and  carried  away,  or  otherwise  converted  or 
disposed  of,  he  may  maintain  of  trover  for  their  value." 
In  trespass  for  taking  the  plaintiff's  "goods,  chattels  and 
effects,"  it  was  held,  that  the  value  of  fixtures  might  be 
recovered  under  those  words.' 

Sec.  532.  Eemedies  to  recover  the  value  of  fixtures.— 
Fixtures  being  often  the  subject  of  contracts,  actions  may 
be  brought  for  any  breach  of  such  contracts  by  either  of 
the  parties. '  These  actions  generally  arise  either  from  the 
breach  of  contracts  respecting  the  care  and  disposition  of 
fixtures  during  the  existence  of  a  tenancy,  or  upon 
contracts  for  the  sale  of  fixtures.  With  respect  to  the 
latter  description  of  actions,  it  has  been  held— upon  the 
often  repeated  principle  that  fixtures  are  not  chattels 
until  severance — that  the  price  of  fixtures  to  a  house 
cannot  be  recovered  in  an  action  for  goods  sold  and 
delivered  merely  : "  but  their  price  or  value  may  be  recov- 
ered under  a  count  for  fixtures  sold  and  given  up  by  the 
plaintiff  to  the  defendant  :  °  and  where  the  defendant 
agreed  verbally  with  the  plaintiff  to  take  a  house,  and 
purchase  the  fixtures  at  a  valuation  to  be  made  by  two 
brokers  :  and  an  inventory  of  the  furniture  and  fixtures 
was  accordingly  made,  generally  described  as  an  "inven- 
tory of  the  fixtures,  &c,,  "  with  the  gross  amount  placed 
at  the  foot  thereof ;  in  an  action  for  goods  sold  and  deliv- 
ered, with  a  count  on  an  account  stated,  it  was  held,  that 

'  Farrant  y.   Thompson,  5  B.  &  *  Martyr  v.  Bradley,  9  Bing.  24 

A.  826  ;  Amos.  &  F.  352.  Watson  v.  Lane,  11  Exchq.  769. 

^Hitohman  v.  Walton,  4  M.  &  'Lee  v.   Risdon,  7  Taunt.  188 

W.  409 ;  Sheen  v.  RioMe,  5  M.  &  Nutt  v.  Butler,  5  Esp.  176. 

W.  175.  ^Hallen  v.  Runder,  1  C.  M.  &  R, 

s  Pitt  V.  Shrew,  4  B.  &  Aid.  306  ;  266  ;  GoflE  v.  Harris,  5  M.  &  G.  573, 
Twigg  Y.  Potts,  1  C.  M.  &  E.  89. 


CHAP.  XLvm.]  Eemedies  for  Recovery.  1269 

the  defendant,  having  taken  possession  of  and  enjoyed 
the  furniture  and  fixtures,  and  paid  part  of  the  sum  deter- 
mined by  the  brokers  to  be  due  for  the  sarnej  was  liable 
on  the  account  stated  "  for  the  remainderj  and  could  not 
afterwards  object  to  the  plaintiff's  defective  title  to  the 
house.'  A  tenant  who  had  occupied  a  house  in  which 
there  were  certain  fixtures,  which  he  had  purchased  on 
entering  the  house,  and  which  he  had  a  right  to  remove 
during  his  tenancy,  agreed  at  his  landlord's  request,  a 
few  days  before  the  expiration  of  his  tenancy,  to  forbear 
to  remove  the  fixtures,  the  landlord  agreeing  to  take  them 
at  a  yalaution  to  be  made  by  two  brokers.  The  tenant, 
at  the  expiration  of  his  tenancy,  dehvered  up  possession 
of  the  house,  leaving  the  fixtures  on  the  premises.  On 
the  following  day  the  fixtures  were  valued  by  two  brokers, 
and  the  valuation  was  signed.  It  was  held,  that  an  action 
of  indebitatus  assumpsit  was  maintainable  for  the  price 
and  value  of  the  fixtures,  and  that  no  writing  was  neces- 
sary, the  contract  not  being  for  the  sale  of  an  interest  in 
land  within  the  frauds,  nor  for  the  sale  of  goods  and 
chattels."  The  plaintiff,  tenant  of  a  house,  for  a  term  of 
years,  being  possessed  of  shelves,  stoves,  ranges,  ovens, 
boilers  and  other  articles  of  household  use,  his  own  prop- 
erty, but  annexed  to  the  freehold,  requested  the  landlord 
to  purchase  them  at  the  expiration  of  the  tei-m,  or  let  them 
remain  for  purchase  by  the  incoming  tenant,  but  to  be 
taken  away  by  the  plaintiff  if  the  tenant  should  refuse 
them.  The  landlord  wrote  an  answer ;  declining  to  pur- 
chase, but  adding,  "I  have  no  objection  to  your  leaving 
them  on  the  premises,  and  making  the  best  terms  you  can 
with  the  incoming  tenant."  The  articles  remained  un- 
severed  from  the  freehold  till  the  entry  of  the  new  tenant 
who  came  in  under  demise  from  the  same  landlord,  but 
who  decUned  to  take  them.  The  plaintiff  then  (after  the 
tenant  had  been  two  months  in  possession)  demanded 
liberty  to  enter  and  remove  the  fixtures,  but  the  tenant 

1  Salmon  v.  Watson,  4  Moo.  73 ;         sHaJlen  v.  Eunder,  1  C.  M.  &  B. 
Neal   V.    Viney,    1    Camp.    471;     266. 
Cocking  V.  Ward,  1  C,  B.  858  ;  5  id. 
586. 

II. -38 


1270  Fixtures.  [§532o 

refused  permission  ;  the  plaintiff  thereupon  brought  case 
for  the  hindrance  and  trover  against  the  tenant :  it  was 
held,  that  if  the  landlord's  letter  to  plaintiff  amounted  to 
a  license  to  take  away  the  articles,  yet,  not  being  under 
seal,  it  was  no  vaUd  gi'ant  of  such  privilege,  as  against  a 
new  lessee  in  possession  of  the  premises  and  not  party  to 
the  license,  and  that  trover  would  not  lie  for  the  articles.' 
A  lessee  cannot,  even  during  his  term,  maintain  trover  for 
fixtures  attached  to  the  freehold/  If  a  landlord,  during 
the  term,  severs  fixtures  from  the  freehold  and  distrains 
them,  the  tenant  may  maintain  trover  for  them.°  But 
where  a  tenant  leaves  fixtures  at  the  end  of  his 
term,  and  the  landlord  afterwards  severs  them,  the 
tenant  cannot  remain  trover  for  them/  Where  a  ten- , 
ant  assigned  his  lease  by  way  of  mortgage,  but  con- 
tinued in  possession  and  became  bankrupt,  whereupon 
the  assignees  removed  fixtures,  which  by  the  lease  were 
to  be  yielded  up  at  the  end  of  the  term  to  the  lessor  ; 
it  was  held,  that  the  mortgagee  might  maintain  trover 
against  the  assignees."  If  a  lessee,  who  is  possessed  of 
tenant's  fixtures,  morgage  his  term  with  the  fixtures  and 
afterwards  becomes  bankrupt,  the  mortgagee  may  recover 
in  trover  the  value  of  the  fixtures  from  the  assignees,  who 
have  removed  and  converted  them. "  'WTiere  the  assignees , 
of  a  bankrupt  mortgagor  who  had  vested  in  his  mortgagee 
an  immediate  interest  in  fixtures,  severed  and  sold  them ; 
it  was  held,  that  the  mortgagee  was  entitled  to  recover 
from  the  assignees  the  value  of  the  fixtures  estimated  as 
between  outgoing  and  incoming  tenant/  A  lessee  of  a 
house  containing  fixtures  executed  an  assignment  of  the 
premises  by  way  of  mortgage,  not  mentioning  the 
fixtures  ;  he  afterwards  assigned  the  premises  and  all  his , 
estate  and  effects  to  trustees  ;  the  trustees  being  in  treaty 
for  a  sale  of  the  fixtures,  the  mortgagee,  whose  principal 

'Eoffey  T.  Henderson,  17  Q.  B.  'Hitckman  y.   Walton,  4   M.  & 

574 ;  Wilde  v.  Waters,  16  C.  B.  637.  W.  409. 

2  Mackintosh  v.  Trotter,  3  M.  &  "Boydell  v.    liTMickael,  1  C.  -M. 

W.  184 ;  Eoffey  v.    Henderson,  17  &  R.  177  ;  Thompson  v.  Pettit,  10 

Q.  B.  574  Q-  B.  101 ;  Horsf aU  v..  Hey,  3  Exchq. 

'  Daltou  V.  Whittem,  3  Q.  B.  961  ;  778. 

Clarke  v.  Holford,  2  C.  &  K.  540.  '  Thompson  v.  Pettit,  ante. 

•*  Lyde  v.  BusseU.  1  B.  &  Ad.  394. 


CHAP.  XLVin.]     Eembdy  for  Recovery.  1271 

and  interest  were  due,  took  forcible  possession  of  the 
house,  and  refused,  on  demand,  to  deliver  up  the  fixtures ; 
the  trustees  brought  trover  ;  and  it  was  held,  that  they 
could  not  recover  for  them. '  A  lessee  mortgaged  tenant's 
fixtures,  and  afterwards  surrendered  his  lease  to  the  lessor 
who  granted  a  fresh  term  to  the  defendant :  — held,  that 
the  mortgagees  had  aright  to  enter  and  sever  the  fixtures 
it  not  being  competent  to  the  tenant  to  defeat  his  grant 
by  a  subsequent  voluntary  act  of  surrender.'' 

Sec.  533.  Eemedies  to  recover  damages  for  an  improper 
sale  of  fixtures.— If  an  incoming  tenant  purchase  as 
fixtures  from  the  outgoing  tenant  property  which  in 
fact  belongs  to  the  landlord,  he.  may  recover  back  the 
money  he  paid  for  it  in  an  action  against  the  outgoing 
tenant  for  money  he  had  received  ;  and  in  such  action  it 
will  be  no  defence  that  the  outgoing  tenant  was  not 
aware  that  the  articles  belonged  to  the  landlord,  having 
bought  them  himself  from  a  preceding  tenant ;  he,  how- 
ever, has  his  remedy  against  such  preceding  tenant.' 
But  there  is  no  implied  warranty  of  title  in  the  contract 
of  sale  of  a  personal  chattel,  the  maxim  being  caveat 
emptor ;  and  therefore,  in  the  absence  of  fraud,  a  vendor 
is  not  liable  for  a  defect  of  title,  unless  there  be  an 
express  warranty,  or  an  equivalent  to  it,  by  declaration 
or  conduct.*  But  slight  evidence  of  a  false  warranty, 
may  be  sufficient  for  a  jury."  Where  the  owner  of  the 
good  will  and  fixtures  of  a  public-house  allowed  another 
person  to  represent  himself  as  such  to  the'  landlord, 
whereupon  they  let  the  house  to  him  and  he  sold  the 
house  and  fixtures  to  a  bona  fide  purchaser  :  it  was  held, 
that  the  real  owner  of  the  fixtures  had  estopped  himself - 
from  recovering  the  fixtures  of  the  purchaser." 

'Longstafl  v.  Meagoe,  3  Ad.  &         'Snell  v.  Bickley,  3  F.  &  F.  56.    ' 
El.  167.  'Gregg  v.   Wells,  10  Ad.  &  El. 

2  The  London,  &c.,  Co.  (Limited)  90;  Pickard  v.  Sears,  6  Ad.  &  EI. 

T.  Drake,  6  C.  B.  N.  S.  798.  469 ;  Freeman  v:  Cooke,  3  Exchq. 

2  Robinson v.AndertOQ.Peake,  94.  654;  Dunston  v.  Paterson,  3  C.  B. 

*Morlev     v.     Attenborough,     3  N.  S.  503  ;  Clarke  v.  Hart,  6  H.  L. 

Exchq.  500 ;  Ormrod  v.  Huth,  14  Cas.  633 ;  Waller  v.   Drakeford,  1 

M.  &  W.  651 ;  Burnby  v.   Bollett,  E.  &  B.  749 ;  Richards  v.  Johnson, 

16  M.  &  W.  644  ;  Sims  v.  Marryat,  4  H.  &  N.660  ;  Fletcher  v.  Fletcher, 

17  Q.  B.  381.  -  1 E.  &  E.  433. 


1272  Fixtures.  [§  534. 

Sec.  534.  Bmldings  erected  by  tenant  upon  leased  lands.— 
Where  a  tenant' erects  a  building  upon  leased  lands,  the 
question  as  to  whether  it  remains  personalty  and  can  be 
removed  by  him,  or  whether  it  becomes  a  part  of  the 
realty,  is  to  be  largely  ascertained  from  the  intention  of 
the  parties,  which  may  be  gathered  from  the  manner  of 
its  construction,  the  materials  of  which  it  is  composed, 
or  any  facts  and  circumstances  that  tend  to  indicate 
whether  or  not  it  was  intended  to  become  a  part  of  the 
realty.'  Thus,  where  the  building  leased  by  the  defend- 
ant was  burned,  and  his  lease  had  two  years  to  run,  and 
he  went  on  and  erected  a  new  building  upon  the  site  of 
the  old  one,  it  was  held  competent  to  S'how,  as  bearing 
upon  the  question  of  the  right  of  the  tenant  or  his 
assignee  to  remove  the  building,  that  the  tenant,  before 
he  erected  the  building,  told  the  landlord  that  he  intended 
to  erect  a  new  building ;  that  he  knew  that  it  would 
belong  to  the  landlord,  and  that  he  did  not  intend  to  re- 
move it.  The  building  was  built  of  brick,  one  story 
high,  with  a  glass  front,  and  was  built  on  the  old 
foundation,  except  the  rear,  which  was  an  unbroken 
brick  wall  from  the  cellar  bottom.  It  was  held  that 
this  fact,  in  connection  with  what  the  tenant  said 
as  to  his  intention,  was  sufficient  to  show  that  the 
building  was  a  part  of  the  realty."  Where  the  lessor 
covenants  in  his  lease  to  pay  the  tenant  for  improve- 
ments made  by  him  on  the  land  during  the  term,  as, 
for  buildings  erected  by  him,  &C.,  or  to  renew  the  lease 
for  a  certain,  defined  term,  he  is  bound  to  exercise  this 
option  before  the  end  of  the  term,  or  the  tenant  may 
bring  an  action  to  compel  him  to  pay  for  the  buildings, 
or  renew  the  lease.     And  if  there  is  a  provision  in  the 

•Capen  v.  Peckham,  35  Conn,  stantly   becomes    a   part   of  the 

88 ;   Onabony  y,  Jones,  19  N.  Y.  realty,  and  the  tenant  cannot  re- 

234 ;  Curtis  v.  Hoyt,  19  Conn.  154  ;  cover  its  value  of  the  lessor  or 

Shepherji    v.    Spaul(Jing,    4   Met.  remove     it ;    and,    even    though 

(Mass.)  416.   Linahan  y.  Baxr,  41  the  lease  provides  that  the  lessee 

Conn.  473.  shall  erect  a  building  worth  a  cer- 

2  Linahan  v.  Barr,  41  Conn.  47J.  tain  sum,  as  $1000,  yet  if  he  goes  on 

If  the  tenant  erects  a  permanent  and  puts  up  a   building  of  much 

building  upon  the  premises,  and  greater  value,  as  $50,000,  the  rule 

there  is  no  covenant  on  the  lessor's  is  not    changed.       Woodware  v. 

part  to  pay  for  the  same,  it  jji'  I'syne,  16  Cal.  444. 


CHAP.  XLViii.]        Buildings  Erected. 


1273 


lease  against  underletting,  yet,  if  the  tenant  erects  an 
apartment  house  upon  the  land  and  lets  part  of  it  to 
tenants,  the  lessor  knowing  the  facts,  by  accepting  rent 
from  him  waives  any  forfeiture  resulting  from  the 
breach  of  such  covenant.' 


"  In  Smith  v.  Rector,  etc. ,  of  St. 
PhiUp's  Church,  (N.  Y.  Ct.  of  App.) 
10  Centl.  Rep.  468,  a  lease  for  23 
years  contained  a  covenant,  on  the 
part  of  the  lessee,  his  administrators 
and  assigns,  to  erect  on  the  demised 
premises  within  six  years  from  the 
date  of  ihe  lease,  a  substantial  brick 
dwelling-house  of  at  least  four 
stories  in  height, — followed  by  a 
provision  that  "in  default  of  the 
erection  of  such  dwelling-house 
these  presents  and  the  estate  here- 
by granted  shall  henceforth  cease 
and  be  void."  The  lease  further 
provided  that  if  the  lessee,  his  ad- 
ministrators or  assigns,  should 
"  within  the  time  aforesaid,"  erect 
such  dwelling-house,  the  lessor 
would,  at  the  expiration  of  the 
term,  at  its  option,  either  grant  a 
new  lease  for  the  further  term  of 
twenty  years,  at  such  annual  rent 
as  should  be  agreed  upon  or  ascer- 
tained by  arbitration  (on  the  basis 
of  a  vacant  lot),  or  then  pay  the 
value  of  the  dwelling-house.  The 
lessee,  before  the  expu-ation  of  the 
six  years  provided  for  the  erection 
of  the  house,  assigned  the  lease, 
with  the  consent  of  the  lessor ;  and 
thereupon  the  lessor  executed  to 
such  assignee  an  agreement  by 
which  it  released  him,  his  heirs  and 
assigns,  "from  the  said  covenant 
and  agreement  to  build  in  said 
lease  contained,"  and  provided  that 
the  lease  should  thereafter  be  acted 
upon  "the  same  as  though 
such  covenant  had  not  been  in- 
serted therein,  and  all  other  parts 
of  said  lease  shall  be  interpreted 
accordingly,"  etc.  Thereafter,  and 
after  the  expiration  of  the  said  six 
years,  the  said  assignee  of  the  lease 
erected  a  dwelling-house  on  the 
premises,  of  the  description  men- 
tioned in  the  lease,  and  before  the 
expiration  of  the  term  took  steps 
for  an  arbitration  to  settle  arenewal 
rental  ;  but  the  lessor  declined  to 
join  in  the  arbitration  or  to  renew 
the  lease,  claiming  that  the  said 
release  had  annulled  the  covenant 
for  renewal  and  also  the  alternative 


obligation  to  pay  for  any  building 
'  erected  on  the  premises.  It  was 
held  that  the  release  wholly  dis- 
charged the  assignee  of  the  lease 
from  any  obligation  to  build,  and 
that  thereafter  the  lease  stood  as 
though  no  covenant  to  build  had 
been  inserted ;  but  that  the  right 
to  build  during  the  term  was  pre- 
served, and  the  assignee  having 
built  he  becomes  entitled  to  the 
exercise  by  the  lessor  of  the  option 
provided  by  the  lease,  to  pay  the 
value  of  the  building  or  renew  the 
lease.  The  lease  also  contained  a 
covenant  by  the  lessee,  his  ad- 
ministrators and  assigns,  that  he 
or  any  of  them  should  not  lease  the 
whole  or  any  part  of  the  demised 
premises,  nor  assign  the  lease  or 
any  renewals,  without  the  written 
consent  of  the  lessor.  The  lessor 
consented  to  an  assignment  of  the 
lease  by  the  original  lessee,  and  the 
assignee  erected  an  apartment 
house  on  the  premises,  and  occupied 
one  set  of  apartmente  himself  and 
let  out  the  others  to  tenants  by  the 
month,  and  for  eight  years,  from 
the  time  of  the  erection  of  the 
building  up  to  the  last  year  of  the 
term  the  assignee  paid  the  lessor, 
the  rent  under  the  lease,  which  was 
received  without  objection  and,  as 
the  evidence  tended  to  show,  with 
a  full  knowledge  of  the  character 
of  the  house  and  that  it  was  oc- 
cupied as  an  apartment  house. 
The  last  year's  rent  under  the  lease 
was  not  received  (suit  being  then 
pending  between  the  parties)  and 
the  lessor  claimed  that  it  was  en- 
titled to  insist  that  the  lease  was 
forfeited  by  the  underletting  of 
apartments  after  the  date  to  which 
rent  had  been  received  by  it,  and 
that  the  receipt  of  rent  up  to  that 
date  did  not  operate  to  waive  a 
subsequent  breach  of  the  condition. 
It  was  held  that  it  would  be  in- 
equitable to  permit  the  lessor  to 
insist  upon  a  forfeiture,  when  by 
its  conduct  it  had  sanctioned  the 
construction  which  the  plaintiff 
had   placed    upon    the   covenant 


1274 


FlXTUEES. 


[§  534. 


'  If  there  is  a  provision  in  the  lease  that  the  tenant  may 
remove  the  buildings  during  the  terra,  and  there  is  also 
a  provision  for  the  renewal  of  the  lease,  the  lessee 
should  see  to  it  that  the  renewal  lease  contains  the  same 
clause  as  to  the  removal  of  the  buildings,' as,  otherwise, 


against  subletting.  The  lease  also 
provided  for  the  appointment  of 
appraisers  to  value  the  house  and 
to  determine  the  reasonable  yearly- 
rent  for  the  lot  during  the  renewal 
term,  each  party  to  nominate  one 
and  to  signify  such  nomination  to 
the  other  at  least  one  year  before 
the  expiration  of  the  then  current 
term,  and  in  default  of  such  nom- 
ination by  either  party  for  thirty 
days  after  the  time  so  limited,  the 
nominee  of  the  other  party  vpas 
authorized  to  associate  veith  him- 
self another  person  for  the  purpose 
of  the  valuation,  and  in  case  of  the 
disagreement  of  the  appraisers, 
they  to  appoint  an  umpire,  the 
decision  of  the  majority  to  be  final 
and  conclusive.  The  assignee  of 
the  lease  having-  nominated  an 
appraiser  in  due  time,  before  the 
expiration  of  the  term,  the  lessor 
refused  to  nomiiiate  an  appraiser, 
or  otherwise  exercise  its  option 
under  the  lease  to  grant  a  new  lease 
or  pay  for  the  house.  Thereupon 
the  assignee  of  the  lease  brought 
this  action  to  compel  the  lessor  to 
exercise  its  option.  Tlie  judgment 
obtained  authorized  the  lessor  to 
name  an  appraiser,  and  if  it  failed 
so  to  do,  authorized  the  appraiser 
named  by  the  assignee  to  associate 
with  himself  another  appraiser, 
and  to  proceed  in  the  manner 
provided  in  the  lease.  Held,  that 
the  judgment  did  not  compel  the 
lessor  to  appoint  an  arbitrator,  and 
was  not  open  to  the  objection  that 
equity  will  not  compel  specific  per- 
formance of  an  agreement  for 
arbitration.  On  refusal  of  the 
lessor  to  make  a  new  lease,  held, 
that  the  assignee  of  the  original 
lease  was  not  confined  to  an  action 
to  recover  the  value  of  the  building 
erected  by  him,  but  could  compel 
the  lessor  to  perform  its  contract 
to  either  pay  the  value  of  the  build- 
ing or  make  a  new  lease. 

'  In  Marks  v.  Bryan,  63  Cal.  107  ; 
in  an  action  to  recover  the  value  of 
a  dwelling-house  and  bam  erected 
by  a  tenant  on  leased  premises,  it 


appeared  that  there  were  several 
successive  leases  and  that  the  build- 
ings were  erected  during  the  first 
lease  and  remained  upon  the  land 
when  the  subsequent  leases  were 
executed.  No  provision  for  their 
removal  was  contained  in  either  of 
the  leases,  nor  were  they  referred 
to  except  in  a  covenant  on  the  part 
of  the  tenant  as  set  forth  in  the 
opinion  of  the  court.  The  com- 
plaint alleged  that  the  buildings 
were  the  personal  property  of  the 
plaintiff,  and  that  the  defendant 
had  taken  possession  of  them  and 
prevented  their  removal.  On  the 
trial  of  the  case  the  plaintiff  pro- 
duced a  conveyance  from  the  ten- 
ant as  evidence  of  his  title.  The 
conveyance  was  executed  during 
the  term  created  by  the  last  lease. 
Afterwards,  and  before  the  expira- 
tion of  the  term,  the  landlord  con- 
veyed the  premises  to  one  Crocker. 
The*  defendant  was  the  agent  of 
Ci'ocker  and  the  facts  rehed  on  as 
proof  of  a  conversion  by  the  former 
occurred  after  the  conveyance  to 
the  latter.  Held,  that  the  plaintiff 
could  not  recover  ;  that  the  build- 
ings were  a  part  of  the  realty  and 
not  personal  property,  that  the 
evidence  failed  to  establish  any 
right  on  his  part  to  remove  them. 
InHiU  V.  Beatty,  61  Cal.  293,  action 
was  brought  for  rent  upon  a  re- 
newed lease.  The  original  lease 
contained  a  covenant  for  renewal, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  lessors 
contracted  in  writing  to  construct 
certain  buildings  on  the  leased 
premises  and  that  if  they  failed  to 
do  so,  no  rent  after  the  first  in- 
stalment should  be  paid  until  such 
improvements  were  completed. 
The  buildings  were  not  constructed ; 
but  all  the  instalments  for  rent 
were  paid,  except  the  last  instal- 
ment for  the  second  year.  The 
answer  besides  denying  that  any 
rent  was  unpaid,  set  up  as  afiirma- 
tive  matter  the  failure  of  the  plaint- 
iffs to  construct  the  buildings  con- 
tracted for,  and  also  that  the  plaint- 
iffs had  failed  to  repair ;  but  the 


CHAP.;xLvin.J     .  BuiiiDmGs  Erected.  1275 

it  ia  held,  that  the  buildings  becpme  a  part  of  the  realty,        ^ .    ':<:;!4^.;" 
and  the  tenant's  right  of  removal  is  lost.  •        '  i^' 

court,  on  motion,  struck  out  all  of     either  lease,  and  the  covenant  for 
the  answers,  except  the  denial,  and     improvements    on    the    premises 
it  was  held  that  there  was  no  error.  ^  ended  with  the  original  lease. 
There  is  no  covenant  to  repair  in 


1276  Eights,  Eemedies,  &c.  [§  535: 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

RIGHTS,   BEMEDIES  AND  LIABILITIES  OF  THE  PARTIES. 

Sec.  535.  Of  the  landlord. 

Sec.  636.  Landlord's  liability  to  third  persons. 

Sec.  537.  Eight  of  entry. 

Sec.  538.  Eights  of  tenant. 

Sec.  539.  Eemedies  for  recovery  of  rent  by  distress. 

Sec.  540.  What  may  be  distrained. 

Sec.  541.  Where  and  when  must  be  made. 

Sec.  542.  How  may  be  made. 

Sec.  543.  Sale  of  distress. 

Sec.  544.  When  distress  is  illegal,  and  remedy  for. 

Sec.  545.  Irregular  distress. 

Sec.  535.  Of  the  landlord.— As  has  been  previously  stat- 
ed, when  the  tenant  enters  into  possession  of  premises 
under  a  lease,  the  landlord,  during  the  term,  parts  with 
all  his  rights  of  control  over  the  same,  except  as  to 
injuries  affecting  his  reversionary  interest. '  He  has  no 
more  right  to  enter  upon  the  premises,  except  in  so 
far  as  he  has  reserved  that  right  in  the  lease,  than  a 
stranger  to  the  title,  even  though  he  has  covenanted  to 
repair ;  and  if  he  enters  without  license  from  the  tenant, 

'  Livingstone  v.  Eeynolds,  3  Hill  (N.  Y.)  105  ;  Eay  v.  Ayers,  5  Duer. 

(N.   Y.)  157 ;  Jackson  v.  Bronson,  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  494;  Dodd  v.  Hohne, 

7  John.  (N.  Y.)  327  ;  Bradford  v.  1  Ad.  &  Fl.  493 ;  Taylor  v.  Cole. 

Pratt,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y.)44.    An  in-  3  T.  E.  292,  or  that  dimmishes  the 

jury  that  permanently  affects  the  rental  value  of  the  premises,  Al- 

estate, — as    cutting    down     trees,  dridge  v.  Sturtevant,  1  Hall  (N.  Y. 

Schemerhom  v.  Buell,  4  Den.  (N.  Supr.  Ct.)  314,  is  an  injury  to  the 

Y.)  433;  Berwick    v.   Whitfield,  3  reversion  that  the  landlord  may  re- 

P.  Wms.  367  ;  Berry  v.  Heard,  Cro.  cover  for  by  action  ;  Ibut    for    a 

Car.  342,    breaking    windows    or  mere  trespass  upon  the  land,  or 

doors  in  a  house,  or  making  per-  other  act  simply  affecting  the  pos- 

manent  erections  upoji  the  land,  session,  the  tenant   alone    has   a 

or  doing  any  act  that  injuries  the  right  of  action.    Catlin  v.  Hayden, 

land  or  timber  growing  thereon,  1  Vt.  375 ;  Campbell  v.  Arnold,  1 

Anderson  v.  Dickie,  26  How.  Pr.  John.  (N.  Y.)  511. 


CHAP,  xux.]  Of  the  Landlord.  12YY 

he  is  liable  in  trespass  therefor.'  But  where  he  has 
covenanted  to  repair,  and  has  neglected  to  reserve  a 
right  of  entry  for  that  purpose,  the  refusal  of  the  tenant 
to  permit  him  to  enter  would  be  a  complete  defence  to 
an  action  upon  his  covenant  to  repair."  'The  tenant, 
during  the  term,  is  invested  with  all  the  right  of  con- 
trol over  the  premises  that  the  landlord  himself  would 
possess,  and  may  maintain  an  action  against  any  per- 
son who  interferes  with  his  right  of  possession,  whether 
by  a  trespass  thereon  or  a  nuisance  affecting  the  same.' 
The  tenant  alone  is  affected  by  a  mere  transitory  injury 
to,  or  one  that  merely  affects  the  present  right  of  en- 
joyment of,  the  premises  ;  but  a  continuous  injury,  or 
one  that  affects  the  estate  itself,  is  not  only  an  injury  to 
the  tenant,  but  also  to  the  landlord,  and  both  may  have 
their  actions  against  the  wrongdoer  for  the  injury  to 
their  respective  estates.*  Not  only  may  the  landlord 
maintain  an  action  against  a  stranger  for  an  injury  to 
the  reversion,  but  he  also  has  a  right  of  action  against  the 
tenant  or  his  assignee  therefor,  because  neither  has  a 
right  to  do  any  act  permanently  injurious  to  the  rever- 
sion.'   But  in  order  to  entitle  the  landlord  to  maintain  an 

'  Dixon  V.  Clow,  24  Wend.  (,N.  Y.)  maintain  an  action  for  an  injury 

188 ;  Hermance  v.  Vemoy.  6  John.  merely   affecting    the   possession, 

(N.  Y.)  5 ;  Parker  v.  Griswold,  17  but  may  maintam  an  action  for  an 

Conn.  388 ;  Neale  v.  WyUe,  1  B.  &  injury  to  the  reversion.     Austin  v. 

C.  8 ;  Shaw  v.  Cummiskey,  7 Pick.  Hudson  R.  R.  R.  Co.,  35  N.  Y.  334 ; 

(Mass.)  76 ;  Peterson  v.  Edmonson,  VanDusen  v.  Young,  29  Barb.  (N. 

5  Harr.  (Del.)  378  ;  Barker  v.  Bar-  Y.)  9;  Starr  v.  Jackson,  11  Mass. 

ker,  3  C.  &  P.  557 ;  Walker  v.  Hut-  519  ;  Robinson  v.  Wheeler,  25  N. 

ton,   10  M.  &  W.   349 ;  Penley  v.  Y.  352  ;  French  v.  Puller,  33  Pick. 

Watts,    7  id.    601 ;    Dockham  v.  (Mass.)  104 ;  Little  v.   Palhster,  3 

Parker,   9  Mo.    137 ;  Woodruff  v.  Me.  6 ;  Jesser  v.  Gifford,  4  Burr. 

Adams,  5  Blackf.  (Ind.)  317.    The  3141 ;  Ray  v.  Ayers,  5Duer.  (N.  Y.) 

tenant     can     maintain     trespass  441 ;  Baxter  v.  Taylor,  4  B.  &  Ad. 

against  the  landlord  for  a  forcible  72 ;  Bower  v.  Hill,  1  Bing.  N.  C. 

entry  upon  the  premises   during  555  ;  Geer  v.  Flemming,  110  Mass. 

the  term.    During  that  period  the  39 ;  Bedingford  v.   Onslow,    Lev. 

tenant's  right  of  possession  is  ab-  31,  309. 

solute.    Barneycastle  v.    Walker,  *Smith  v.  Martin,  8  Saund.  397  ; 

92  N.  C.  198.  Barrows  v.  Richards.  8  Paige  (N. 

2  White  V.  Mealis,  5  J.  &   S.  (N.  Y.)351 ;  Dodd  v.  Hohne,  1  Ad.  & 

Y.  Supr.   Ct.)  73 ;  Turner  v.   Mc-  El.   493 ;  Taylor  v.  Cole,  3  T.   E. 

Carthy,  4  E.  D.  S.   (N.  Y.   C.  P.)  292. 

347.  'Geer  v.  Fleming,  110  Mass.  39 ; 

'Day  V.  Swackhamer,  2  Hilt.  (N.  Jackson  v.  Pesked,  1  M.  &  S.  234 ; 

Y.)  4 ;  WiUard  v.  Tillman,  2  Hill  Fi-ench  v.  Fuller,  33  Pick.  (Mass.) 

(N.  Y.)  274;  Moffat  v.    Smith,  4  104;  Starr   v.  Jackson,  11    "" 

N.  Y.   126.    The  landlord  cannot  519. 


1278 


Eights,  Eemedies,  &c. 


[§  635. 


action  there  must  be  an  injury  to  the  reversion,  and  a 
mere  trespass  to,  or  disturbance  of,  the  possession,  al- 
though under  a  claim  of  right,  does  not  confer  upon  him 
a  right  of  action.' 


iQtto  V.  Grier,  4  Dev.  (N.  C.) 
'477 ;  CoUege  t.  HaUett,  14  East, 
489;  Anderson  v.  Nesmith,  7  N. 
H.  187 ;  Tobey  v.  Webster,  3  John. 
(N.  Y.)  468;  Catlin  v.  Hayden,  1 
Vt.  375.  A  reversioner  cannot  sue 
for  anything  as  an  injury  to  his 
reversion,  unless  it  permanently 
iajures  his  estate,  or  operates  in 
denial  of  his  right:  Hopwood  v. 
Schofleld,  3  Moo.  &  R.  34 ;  Baxter 
V.  Taylor,  4  B.  &  Ad.  72 ;  Mum- 
ford  V.  Oxford,  Worcester  and 
Wolverhampton  R.  Co.,  1  H.  &  N. 
34 ;  Simpson  v.  Savage,  1  C.  B.  N. 
S.  347 ;  Metropolitan  Association 
V.  Fetch,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  504 :  there- 
fore a  temporary  fixing  of  barges 
and  planks  in  a  part  of  a  river 
near  certain  premises,  thereby  ob- 
structing the  navigation  of  that 
part  and  hindering  persons  from 
passing  to  the  premises  and  the 
unloading  of  boats  thereon,  is  not 
an  injury  to  the  i-eversion.  Dob- 
son  V.  Blackmore,  9  Q.  B.  991. 
But  a  permanent  obstruction  of  a 
way  in  denial  of  the  right  is  an  in- 
juiy  to  the  reversioner.  Kidgill  v. 
Moor,  9  0.  B.  864;  Palk  v.  Shin- 
ner,  18  Q.  B.  568.  The  reversion- 
er may  sue  for  an  injury  done  to 
his  house  by  the  defendant's  neg- 
lect to  scour  a  watercourse  in  an 
adjoining  close,  whereby  the  wa- 
tercourse was  obstructed,  the  wa- 
ter thrown  back,  and  the  water 
from  the  course  ran  into  the  house 
and  damaged  it:  Bell  v.  Twenty- 
man,  1  Q.  B.  766 ;  Taylor  v.  Sten- 
dall,  7  Q.  B.  634 ;  or  for  an  injury 
done  to  it  by  mining  under  it ; 
Raine  v.  Alderson,  4  Bing.  N.  C. 
702;  Backhouse  v.  Bonomi,  9  H. 
L.  Gas.  503 ;  or  for  an  injury  done 
to  it  by  raising  the  pavement  so 
much  in  front  of  it  as  to  block  up 
the  entrance  and  the  lower  win- 
dows of  it.  Leader  v.  Moxon,  3 
Wils.  461.  The  reversioner  may 
maintain  an  action  for  the  erec- 
tion of  a  wall,  whereby  his  Ughts 
are  obstructed.  Jesser  v.  Gifford, 
4  Burr.  2141 ;  ShadweU  v.  Hutch- 
inson, 2  B.  &  Ad.  97 ;  4  0.  &  P. 
383 ;  Turner  v.  Sheffield  and  Roth- 


eram  R.  Co. ,  10  M.  &  W.  425 ;  Met- 
ropohtan  Association,  &c.,  v. 
Fetch,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  504.  The 
erection  on  the  defendant's  house 
of  eaves  and  a  pipe  overhanging, 
and  conducting  water  on  land  in 
the  occupation  of  a  tenant,  is  a 
permanent  injury,  which  gives  a 
right  of  action  to  the  reversioner. 
Tucker  v.  Newman,  11  Ad.  &  El. 
40;  Fay  v.  Frentice,  1  C.  B.  838; 
BattishiU  v.  Reed,  18  C.  B.  696. 
Where  two  houses  were  connected 
by  a  party  wall,  and  the  owner  of 
one  of  them  puUed  down  his 
house,  without  shoring  up  that  of 
his  neighbors,  in  consequence  of 
which  the  latter  house  was  injured 
and  partly  fell  down ;  it  was  held, 
that  the  landlord  of  the  latter 
could  not  maintain  an  action  on 
the  case  against  the  owner  of  the 
former,  to  recover  damages  for 
this  injury,  without  proving  that 
he  had  a  right  to  have  his  house 
supported  by  the  defendant's 
house,  or  that  he  was  entitled  to 
previous  notice  of  the  pulling 
down  of  the  house,  in  order  that 
he  might  have  an  opportunity 
himself  of  shoring  up  the  house 
in  the  occupation  of  his  tenant. 
Peyton  v.  Mayor  of  London,  9  B. 
&  C.  735.  An  action  is  maintain- 
able by  a  reversioner  against  the 
surveyor  of  a  highway  for  cutting 
away  part  of  a  bank  adjoining  a 
public  road,  though  the  premises 
are  thereby  in  fact  improved. 
Alston  V.  Scales,  6  Bing.  3. 
Where  a  lease  reserved  a  limited 
power  to  the  lessors  to  make  a 
way  across  the  land  for  certain 
purposes,  in  an  action  on  the  case 
by  the  lessee  as  a  reversioner  for 
making  a  way  across  the  land  for 
other  purposes,  it  is  not  a  ground 
of  complaint  that  the  intention  of 
the  defendants  was  to  use  the  way 
for  other  purposes  than  they  had  a 
right  to  use  it;  but  the  question 
is,  whether  at  the  time  it  was 
made  it  had  become  necessary  or 
expedient  for  the  defendants  to 
make  a  way  for  the  purposes  for 
which    they    were    entitled,    and 


CHAP.  xLix.]       Landlord's  Liabiuty. 


1279 


The  landlord  has  no  right  to  make  any  changes  or  al- 
terations in  the  buildings  or  estate  without  the  consent 
of  the  tenant/  and  it  makes  no  difference  whether  such 
■change  is  productive  of  damage  to  the  tenant  or  not,  as 
such  change  is  an  injury  to  his  right  for  which  the  law 
imports  damages."  The  landlord's  rights  as  to  possession 
are  suspended  from  the  time  when  the  tenant  takes 
possession  under  his  lease,  and  no  right  of  entry  on  his 
part  is  implied  for  any  purpose,  unless  specially  reserved,* 
except  it  may  be  to  prevent  waste,  or  to  save  himself 
from  liability  for  leaving  an  exposed  opening  in  a  high- 
w^ay,*  nor  can  he  license  any  other  person  to  enter  upon 
the  premises.' 

Sec.  536.  Landlord's  liability  to  third  persons.— The  land- 
lord's right  to  possession  being  suspended  during  the  / 
term,  it  follows  that  his  liabilities  in  respect  to  the 
possession  are  also  suspended,  except  as  to  such  matters 

■whether  the  road  made  was  a 
proper  road  for  that  purpose. 
Durham  and  Sunderland  E.  Co. 
V.  Walker,  3  Q.  B.  940.  The 
declaration  must  allege  the  injury 
to  have  been  done  to  the  damage 
of  the  reversion,  or  must  state  an 
injiiry  of  such  a  permanent  na- 
ture as  to  be  necessarily  inJTirious 
to  the  reversion ;  otherwise  the 
want  of  such  allegation  wUl  be 
cause  for  arresting  the  judgment. 
Jackson  v.  Pesked,  1  M.  &  S.  334 ; 
Dobson  V.  Blackmore,  9  Q.  B.  991. 
The  cause  of  action  does  not  ac- 
crue, nor  the  statute  of  limita- 
tions begin  to  run,  until  actual 
damage  is  sustained.  Backhouse 
V.  Bonomi,  9  H.  L.  Cas.  503.  A 
declaration  which  alleges  a  per- 
manent obstruction  to  a  right  of 
way  for  the  plaintiff  (a  reversion- 
er) and  his  tenants,  by  locking 
and  fastening  a  gate  across  it, 
whereby  the  jplaintiff  was  injured 
in  his  reversionary  estate,  is  suffi- 
cient after  verdict,  for  it  must 
then  be  assumed  that  the  allega- 
tions were  proved  at  the  trial. 
Kidgill  V.  Moor,  9  C.  B.  364.  So, 
upon  demurrer,  a  declaration  for 
an  injury  to  the  reversionary  in- 
terest of  thfe  plaintiff  by  obstruct- 
ing ancient  lights,  is  sufficient  if  it 
show  an  obstruction  which  may 


operate  injuriously  to  the  rever- 
sion, either  by  its  being  of  a  per- 
manent character,  or  by  its  oper- 
ating in  denial  of  the  right.  The 
objection  should  be  raised  at  the 
trial  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  evi- 
dence to  prove  the  alleged  injury 
to  the  reversion.  Metropohtan 
Association,  &c. ,  v.  Petch,  5  C.  B. 
N.  S.  504.  A  smoky  or  noisy  nui- 
sance may  be  an  actionable  injury 
to  the  tenant  in  possession,  but 
not  to  the  reversioner.  Simpson 
V.  Savage,  1  C.  B.  N.  S.  347; 
Mumford.  v.  Oxford,  Worcester 
and  Wolverhampton  R.  Co.,  1  H. 
&  N.  34.  But  where  a  nuisance  is 
in  its  nature  of  a  permanent  char- 
acter, such  as  will  continue  after 
the  tenancy  is  ended,  or  if  it 
affects  any  easement,  or  the  right 
and  title  to  the  estate,  the  land- 
lord may  sue.  BattishUl  v.  Reed, 
ante. 

■Klaiser  v.  New  Orleans,  14  La. 
An.  178. 

'Parker  v.  Griswold,  ante. 

^Dockham  v.  Parker,  9  Me.  137 ; 
Woodruff  V.  Adams,  5  Blackf. 
(Ind.)  317. 

••Anderson  v.  Dickie,  36  How. 
Pr.  (N.  Y.)  105. 

'  Brown  v.  Powell,  35  Penn.  St. 
329. 


1280 


Eights,  Remedies,  &c. 


[§  536. 


or  defects  in  the  premises  as  existed  when  the  premises 
were  let,  arising  from  the  manner  of  use,  or  defective 
construction.  If  a  nuisance  existed  upon  the  premises 
at  the  time  of  the  demise,  the  landlord  as  well  as  the 
tenant  is  liable  for  the  damages  resulting  to  third 
persons  therefrom,  although  it  becomes  a  nuisance  only 
by  the  act  of  the  tenant  in  using  it  for  ordinary  pur- 
poses.' And  if  the  tenant  creates  a  nuisance  upon  the 
premises  during  the  term,  by  an  unusual  or  extraor- 
dinary use  thereof,  although  the  landlord  cannot  be 
made  chargeable  for  the  consequences  in  the  first  instance, ' 


'  In  Joyce  v.  Martin,  (E.  I.)  4  N. 
Eng.  Rep.  796,  it  was  held  that 
where  the  owner  of  a  defective 
wharf  let  it,  knowing  of  the  defects, 
both  he  and  the  tenant  might  be 
jointly  sued  by  a  person  sustaining 
an  injury  therefrom.  See,  also, 
Daley  v.  Savage,  (Mass.)  4  N.  Eng. 
Bep.  863,  the  landlord  was  held 
liable  for  an  injury  resulting  from 
stepping  into  a  coal  hole  upon  the 
demised  premises,  which  was  de- 
fectively constructed.  See  also, 
Jackman  v.  Arlington  Mills,  137 
Mass.  377,  a  landlord  was  held  lia- 
ble for  the  acts  of  his  tenant  in 
polluting  the  waters  of  a  brook, 
which  is  a  natural  watercourse 
running  through  the  premises,  by 
discharging  sink  water  therein,  if 
the  building  leased  is  adapted  and 
intended  to  be  used  in  the  manner 
complained  of  whether  he  retains 
control  over  the  house  or  not.  In 
House  V.  Metcalf,  27  Qonn.  631, 
the  premises,  consisting  of  a  mill, 
were  in  the  possession  of  a 
tenant.  The  mill  stood  near  a 
highway,  and  had  an  overshot 
wheel  on  the  outside  of  the  mill, 
in  full  view  of  the  highway,  and 
w^as  uncovered,  and  was  an  object 
at  which,  when  in  motion,  horses 
would  naturally  be  frightened. 
The  plaintiff's  horse  became  fright- 
ened by  the  wheel  when  in  motion, 
and  running  away,  threw  the 
plaintiff  out  of  the  sulky  and  in- 
jured him.  The  court  held  that 
the  landlord  was  not  saved  from 
liability  for  the  injury  because  the 
premises,  at  the  time  of  the  acci- 
dent were  in  the  possession  of  a 
tenant,  because  the  tenant  was 
using  the  premises  in  the  manner 


contemplated  when  the  lease  was 
made.  Fish  v.  Dodge,  4  Den.  (N. 
Y.)  811  ;  Rex  v.  Pedley,  1  Ad.  & 
El.  837. 

« Fish  V.  Dodge,  4  D.  (N.  Y.)  411 ; 
Cobb  V.  Smith,  38  Wis.  21 ;  Rex  v. 
Pedley,  6  C.  &  P.  292  ;  In  Smith  v. 
Humbert,  2  Kerr.  (N.  B.)  602; 
Gandy  v.  Jubber,  5  B.  &  S.  485. 
In  an  action  for  personal  injuries 
occasioned  to  a  third  person  by  the 
fall  of  a  shed,  owned  by  the  de- 
fendent,  and  used  by  A,  with  the 
consent  of  the  defendant,  A  testi- 
fied that  the  defendant  said  he 
could  not  let  the  shed  to  him,  but 
he  might  keep  his  things  there  if 
he  would  look  after  the  premises 
tin  he  heard  from  him  again,  and 
that  he  was  to  pay  no  rent  and  re- 
ceive no  compensation.  The  de- 
fendant testified  that  he  told  A  he 
could  use  the  premises  and  take 
care  of  them,  but  need  pay  no  rent, 
and  make  what  repairs  were  nec- 
essary. Another  witness  testified 
that  the  defendant  told  A  that  he 
could  use  the  shed,  he  keeping  it  in 
shape  for  his  occupancy  such  as  he 
wanted.  It  was  held,  that  whether 
A  was  a  tenant  of  the  shed  and 
bound  to  keep  it  in  repair,  so  as  to 
exonerate  the  defendant  from  lia- 
bility for  its  fall,  was  a  question 
for  the  jury.  Cunningham  v. 
Cambridge  Savings  Bank,  138  Mass. 
480.  A  landlord  who  lets  tene- 
ments in  a  building  to  differeint 
tenants,  with  a  right  of  way  in 
common  over  an  uncovered  piazza 
annexed  to  the  rear  of  the  build- 
ing, and  extending  its  whole 
length,  and  over  steps  leading  from 
the  end  of  the  piazza  down  to  the 
street,  is  liable  to  a  tenant  injured. 


CHAP.  XLix.J      Landlord's  Liabilities. 


1281 


yet,  if  lie  subsequently  renews  the  lease  with,  the  nui- 
sance thereon,  he  becomes  chargeable  therefor  the  same 
as  though  the  nuisance  had  existed  at  the  time  of  the 
and  where  a  person  is  in  possession 


original  demise ; 


■while  in  the  exercise  of  due  care, 
by  faUing  upon  ice  acciimulated 
upon  the  piazza  and  steps  by  rear 
son  of  water  flowing  thereon  from 
a  defective  pipe  connecting  with 
the  roof  of  the  building.  Watkins 
V.  GoodaU,  138  Mass.  533.  The 
basement  of  a  building  in  a  city, 
extended  under  the  sidewalk  of  the 
street,  on  which  the  building  abut- 
ted, and  was  lighted  by  a  "  Hyatt 
Ught,"  the  iron  frame  of  which  was 
set  in  and  formed  a  part  of  the  side- 
walk. The  first  story  and  basement 
of  the  building  were  occupied  under 
a  lease  of  "the  store  and  cellar 
under  the  same"  containing  the 
covenants  that  the  lessees  would 
keep  the  premises  in  repair,  "  but 
the  lessees  are  not  bound  to  repair 
the  roof,"  and  that  the  lessor  might 
enter  to  view  the  premises  or  to 
make  repairs  if  he  should  elect  to  do 
so.  The  upper  stories  of  the  build- 
ing were  occupied  by  another  ten- 
ant under  a  lease,  containing  the 
covenant  that  the  lessee  should 
make  "  all  repairs  on  the  demised 
premises. "  A  traveler  on  the  side- 
walk was  injured  by  falling  there- 
on, solely  because  the  iron  frame  of 
said  light  had  worn  smooth  and  slip- 
pery from  long  use,  and  recovered 
judgment  against  the  city  which 
the  city  paid.  It  was  held,  that  the 
owner  of  the  building  was  not  lia- 
ble to  thecity.  Boston  v.  Gray,  144 
Mass.  53.  The  owner  of  a  building 
leased  to  A  the  first  floor  of  the 
building,  with  a  right  to  use  a 
hoistway  in  common  with  the 
other  occupants  of  the  building. 
This  hoistway  ran  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom  of  the  building  and  was 
enclosed,  but  communicated  with 
each  story  by  a  door.  The  hoist- 
way on  each  story  had  two  trap 
doors,  which,  when  down,  made  a 
continuous  floor  with  that  of  the 
rest  of  the  story.  The  owner  of 
the  building  subsequently  leased 
to  B,  "  all  the  chambers  in  the 
building  over  the  store  on  the 
street  floor,"  with  a  right  to  use 
the  hoistway  in  common  with 
the  occupant  of  tHe  store  below. 


It  was  held  that  B  had,  under 
his  lease,  a  right  to  use  of  the  trap 
doors  on  the  floors  leased  to  him 
for  the  purpose  of  storage  when 
not  required  by  A  for  hoisting  pur- 
poses. It  was  held,  also,  that  if 
the  tenants  made  an  agreement  by 
which  a^y  person  after  using  the 
hoistway  should  shut  the  trap 
doors,  B  had  a  right  to  expect  that 
A,  after  using  the  hoistway,  would 
shut  the  trap  doors,  although  B 
subsequently  went  to  the  hoistway 
to  get  something  he  had  stored 
there.  Kent  v.  Todd,  144  Mass. 
478.  The  allowing  of  an  old,  de- 
fective, and  decaying  plank  side- 
walk, along  one  side  of  a  private 
way,  to  remain  contiguous  to  the 
rear  of  the  premises  which  have 
been  under  lease  for  several  years, 
with  no  means  of  access  from  the 
premises  to  the  sidewalk,  wiU  not 
render  the  owner  of  the  premises 
and  of  the  land  under  the  sidewalk 
liable  to  an  action  for  personal  in- 
juries sustained  by  one  passing 
over  the  sidewalk,  in  consequence 
of  its  defective  condition  ;  and  the 
fact  that,  four  years  before  the  ac- 
cident, the  owner  of  the  premises 
removed  a  fence  and  a  portion  of 
the  sidewalk,  where  the  same  en- 
croached upon  liis  adjoining  land, 
on  the  fine  of  way,  is  immaterial. 
Bierbaum  v.  Crowninshield,  137 
Mass.  177.  The  owner  of  premises 
or  a  portion  of  them,  may  be 
liable  to  a  person  lawfully  there, 
by  request  of  a  tenant,  for  an  injury 
caused  by  a  defect  therein,  al- 
though there  is  an  unasserted  right 
in  the  premises  outstanding  in  an 
assignee  of  a  lessee  of  such  owner, 
if  the  owner  is  in  the  possession 
and  control  of  that  part  where  the 
accident  happened,  and  let  the 
premises  in  their  defective  condi- 
tion. Learoyd  v.  Godfrey,  138 
Mass.  315. 

'  State  V.  Williams,  30  N.  J.  L. 
112  ;  Eosewell  v.  Prior,  2  Salk.  460  ; 
Vedder  v.  Vedder,  1  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
257  ;  Wagoner  v.  Jermaine,  3  id. 
306  ;  Whalen  v.  Gloster,  4  Hun 
(N.  Y.  S.  C.)  24.   If  the  landlord  re- 


1282  Eights,  Remedies,  &o.  [§  536.' 

as  a  tenant  from  year  to  year,  each,  year  is  treated  as  a 
reletting,  so  that  the  landlord  becomes  chargeable  for  a 
nuisance  created  by  the  tenant  during  a  previous  year 
which  is  in  existence  at  the  commencement  of  the  new 
year.'  In  any  case,  both  the  landlord  and  tenant  may 
be  joined  in  an  action  for  a  nuisance  for  which,  the  land- 
lord would  be  liable  in  a  separate  action,  where  the 
tenant  continues  the  nuisance."  The  assignee  of  the 
landlord  is  liable  equally  as  the  landlord  himself.'  The 
liability  of  the  landlord,  however,  depends  upon  the 
circumstance  whether  the  nuisance  necessarily  arises 
from  the  use  of  the  thing  demised,  or  for  the  use  for 
which  it  was  demised,  or  from  the  improper  tise  of  the 
premises  by  the  tenant.  A  landlord  who  lets  premises, 
which,  without  his  consent,  are  used  as  a  bawdy  house 
is  not  liable  to  an  adjoining  owner,  for  a  consequent 
tenant  knowing  the  use  to  which  it  was  devoted.* 
In  order  to  render  him  liable  for  such  injuries,  it 
must  appear  either  that  he  let  the  premises  know- 
ing the  use  to  which  they  were  to  be  devoted,, 
or,  relet  the  house  to  the  injury  to  his  estate. 
In  the  former  instance  the  landlord  is  liable,"  while  in 
the  latter  the  tenant  alone  is  chargeable.'    The  rule  may 

news  a  lease  knowing  that  the  ten-  licensed  by  the  city  of  St.  Louis  to" 

ant   has    committed   a    nuisance  keep  a  bawdy  house,  henc3   the 

thereon,  he  becomes  thereby  re-  court  held  that  the  keeping  of  the 

sponsible    for    injuries    resulting  house  was  not  per  se  a  public  nui- 

therefrom.    Ingwersenv.  Rankin,  sance,  but  the  evidence  was  suoib 

47  N.  Y.  L.  18  ;  54  Am.  Rep.  109.  as  to  show  it  to  be  a  nuisance,  s» 

See  also  McCallum  v.  Hutchinson,  that  this  question  was  not  control- 

7  U.  C,  C.  P.  508  ;  Durant  v.  Pakn-  ing  in  the   case.    See  Marsan  v. 

er,  29  K.  Y.  L.  544 ;   Clancey  v.  French,  61  Tex.  1736  ;  48  Am.  Eep. 

Bryne,  56  N.  Y.  129.  272. 

'  Gandy  v.  Jubber,  5  B.  &  S.  24.  '  Gandy  v.  Jubber,  ante  ;  Fish  v. 

'  Irvine  v.  Wood,  51  N.  Y.  224 ;  Dodge,  ante. 
Plummer  v.  Harper,  3  N.  H.  88  ;  ^  Mahoney  v.  Atlantic  &  St.  Law- 
Rogers  V.  Smith.  5  Vt.  215  ;  Sta-  rence  R.  R.  Co.,  68  Me.  68 ;  Satton- 
ples  V.  Spring,  10  Mass.  72.  And,  staU  v.  Banker,  6  Gray  (Mass.)  195  ; 
where  the  statute  authorizes  such  Felton  v.  Deall,  22  Vt.  170  ;  Ditch- 
a  judgment,  not  only  may  dama-  ett  v.  E.  E.  Co.,  67  N.  Y.  425  ;  Tay- 
ges  be  recovered  of  either  or  both,  lor  v.  Mayor,  &c.,  4  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.. 
but  in  an  action  against  either  a  C.  P.)  559.  A  person  who  rebuilds 
judgment  for  the  removal  of  the  and  maintains  a  dam  originally 
nuisance  may  be  had.  Hutching  buUt  by  another  is  liable,  without 
V.  Smith,  73  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  251.  a  demand,  to  an  action  by  a  town 

*  Rex  V.  Pedley,  ante.  for  damages  caused  by  the  dam 

■•  Givens  v.  Van  Studdiford,  86  Betting  the  water  back  upon  a  high- 
Mo.  149.  In  this  case  however,  it  way  therein,  aad  may  continue 
appeared    that    the    tenant  was  liable,  notwithstanding  a  subsfii- 


CHAP.  XLix.J      .Landlord's  Liability. 


1283 


be  stated,  as  the  result  of  the  authorities,  to  be,  that  in 
order  to  charge  the  landlord  the  nuisance  must  neces- 
sarily result  from  the  ordinary  use  of  the  premises  by 
the  tenant,  or  for  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  let ; 
and  where  the  ill  results  flow  from  the  improper  or  negli- 
gent or  improper  use  of  the  premises  by  the  tenant,  or, 
in  other  words,  where  the  use  of  the  premises  may  or 
may  not  become  a  nuisance,  according  as  the  tenant 
exercises  reasonable  care,  or  uses  the  premises  negli- 
gently, the  tenant  alone  is  chargeable  for  the  damages 
arising   therefrom."     The    landlord    is    not   liable    to 


quent  lease  to  or  occupation  by 
others.  New  Salem  v.  Eagle  MiU, 
138  Mass.  8. 

'  Gandy  v.  Jubber,  ante  ;  Leon- 
ard V.  Storer,  115  Mass.  86  ;  Fisher 
V.  ThirkeU,  21  Mich.  1  ;  White  v. 
Montgomery,  58  Ga.  204.  There 
seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  when  a 
landowner  creates  a  nuisance  upon 
his  estate,  or  purchases  an  estate 
with  a  nuisance  thereon,  he  cannot, 
by  demising  or  conveying  the  es- 
tate, divest  himself  of  the  liability 
for  the  ill  results  to  others,  arising 
from  the  nuisance.  He  cannot 
say  that  he  has  parted  with  all 
control  over  the  prernises,  and  con- 
seqnently  is  not  responsible  for  the 
nuisance.  The  court  in  Eosewell 
T.  Prior,  12  Mod.  639,  state  the  rule 
and  tiie  reason  for  it  thus  :  "Be- 
fore Ibis  assignment  over  he  was 
liable  for  all  consequential  dam- 
ages ;  and  it  is  not  in  his  power  to 
■discharge  himself  by  granting  it 
■over,  more  especially  where  he 
grantsit  over  reserving  rent,  where- 
lay  he  agrees  with  the  grantee  that 
the  nuisance  should  continue,  and 
ias  a  recompense,  viz.,  the  rent 
lor  the  same,  for  surely  where  one 
«rects  a  nuisance,  and  grants  it 
■over  in  that  manner,  he  is  a  con- 
linuor  with  a  witness.  Suppose 
the  lessor  or  assignor  had  been 
■seized  in  fee,  and  had  erected  this 
nuisanoe  and  then  enfeoffed  an- 
■other  over,  he  had  conveyed  this 
as  a  nufeance  and  causa  causae  est 
causa  eausati.  And  if  a  wrong- 
doer conveys  his  wrong  over  to  an- 
other, whereby  he  puts  it  out  of 
his  power  to  redress  it,  he  ought  to 
answer  for  it.  And  it  is  a  funda- 
mental prindple  of  law  and  of  rea- 


son, that  he  that  does  the  first 
wrong  shall  answer  for  all  conse- 
quential damages  ;  and  the  origi- 
nal erection  does  influence  the  con- 
tinuance, and  it  remains  a  contin- 
uance from  the  very  erection,  and 
until  it  be  abated."  If  a  landlord 
erects  privies  in  such  a  situation 
that  the  very  use  of  them  must 
necessarily  create  a  nuisance,  he  is 
responsible.  Rex  v.  Pedley,  1  Ad. 
&  El.  832  ;  Marshall  v.  Cohen,  44 
Ga.  488  ;  Cook  v.  Montagu,  36  L. 
T.  N.  S.  471.  But  where  a  privy 
becomes  a  nuisance  because  of  the 
negligence  of  a  tenant  in  its  use, 
the  tenant  alone  is  liable.  White 
V.  Montgomery,  58  Ga.  204.  And 
generalljr  where  the  very  existence 
of  the  thing  constitutes  a  nuisance, 
the  landlord  is  responsible, — as 
where  a  wall  or  other  permanent 
impediment  is  erected  so  as  to  im- 
pede access  to  a  pubhc  market  or 
to  adjoining  premises.  Thompson 
V.  Gibson,  7  M.  &  W.  456.  Or  ob- 
structing a  watercourse  by  a  dam 
or  other  impediment.  Rosewell  v. 
Prior,  ante.  Or  leaving  a  danger- 
ous excavation  near  a  highway. 
RoUe's  Abr.  Nuisance  (K.)  3  ;  Ir- 
vine V.  Wood,  51  N.  Y.  324  ;  Dor- 
man  V.  Ames,  13  Minn.  451.  But 
if  by  the  ordinary  use  of  the  prem- 
ises, or  by  their  use  for  the  purpose 
for  which  they  are  let,  a  nuisance 
does  not  necessarily  arise,  the  land- 
lord is  not  responsible  for  a  nui- 
sance that  results  from  the  act  of 
the  tenant.  The  mere  fact  that  he 
has  enabled  the  tenant  to  create  a 
nuisance  does  not  render  him 
chargeable.  The  question  is, 
whether  the  purpose  for  wliich  the 
premises  are  used  was  contemplat- 


1284 


Eights,  Eemedies,  &c. 


[§  586. 


third  persons  for  injuries  resulting  to  them  from  the 
fall  of  an  awning  belonging  to  the  building,  which  is  in 
the  possession  of  tenants,  if  the  fall  was  attributable  to 
the  improper  and  negligent  use  of  the  awning  by  the 
tenant  for  a  purpose  for  which  it  was  not  intended  or, 
and  not  from  any  defects  therein,  existing  at  the  time 
of  the  demise.'     In  the  case  last  cited  McKee,  J.,  in  a 


ed  by  the  landlord,  and,  whether 
such  use  necessarily  created  a  nui- 
sance ;  or,  whether  the  nuisance 
results  from  the  negligence  of  the 
tenant.  Rich  v.  Basterfleld,  4  C. 
B.  405  ;  Brown  v.  Russell,  L.  R.,  3 
Q.  B.  351.  Strictly  speaking,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  a  nuisance  per 
se,  except  where  the  act  is  one 
which  is  contrary  to  law  or  is  im- 
moral. Wood  on  Nuisances,  543 
et  seq.  Therefore  the  fact  that 
premises  are  let  to  be  used  for  the 
purpose  of  slaughtering  cattle. 
Catiin  V.  Valentine,  9  Paige  Ch, 
(N.  Y.)  575;  Swinton  v.  Pedie, 
McL.  &  Robt.  1018,  or  for  any  pur- 
pose that  does  not  necessarily  cre- 
ate a  nuisance,  does  not  prima/aae 
render  the  landlord  hable  because 
a  nuisance  actually  results  from 
such  use.  Wood  on  Nuisances,  543 
et  seq. 

1  Kalo  V.  Shattuck,  (Cal.)  11  Pac. 
Rep.  346.  In  this  case  McKee,  J., 
said  :  "  The  awning  feU,  not  from 
any  inherent  defect  in  its  original 
construction,  or  from  an  unsound 
condition  which  rendered  it  unfit 
for  the  ordinary  use  for  which  it 
was  constructed,  but  from  an  un- 
reasonable and  improper  use  of  it 
for  a  purpose  for  which  it  was  not 
constructed;  for  the  uncontro- 
verted  facts  are  that  a  great  num- 
ber of  people  were  crowded  upon 
it  to  witness  the  march  of  a  public 
procession  through  Broadway,  and 
they  got  onto  the  awning  thi-ough 
a  hall  in  the  second  story  of  the 
building  to  which  it  was  attached. 
The  hall  was  then  occupied  and 
controlled  by  a  political  club  to 
whom  it  had  been  rented,  and  the 
janitor  of  the  club  permitted  the 
public  to  go  through  the  haU,  and 
out  of  the  windows,  onto  the  awn- 
ing, taking  with  them  the  chairs 
and  benches  of  the  hall.  Thelower 
story  of  the  building  was  also  at 
the  time  rented  to  different  tenants 
in   possession.     The   exact   time 


when  the  premises  were  demised  to 
the  tenants  in  possession  does  not 
appear.  The  only  evidence  upon 
the  question  is  the  following  by 
the  defendant  Shattuck  :  "  Pre- 
vious to  the  9th  of  September,  1880, 
I  leased  the  haU  to  the  EepubHcan 
Central  Club  of  Oakland.  From 
July  to  November,  1880,  I  had  no 
control  over  the  hall  in  any  way 
whatever."  Nor  is  it  made  to  ap- 
pear by  any  evidence  what  was 
the  condition  of  the  awning  at  the 
time  the  building,  or  any  part  of 
it,  was  let  to  the  tenants.  The  sole 
ground  upon  which  the  verdict  and 
judgment  seems  to  be  founded  is 
that  the  relation  of  landlord  and 
tenant  existed  between  the  appel- 
lants and  the  occupants  of  the 
building,  and  that  it  was  the  duty 
of  the  landlords  to  prevent  the  fall 
of  the  awning,  although  the  build- 
ing was  in  possession  of  their  ten- 
ants at  the  time.  Therefore  it  is 
contended  that  they,  as  owners 
and  landlords,  are  liable  to  the 
plaintiff  for  the  consequences  re- 
sulting to  her  from  the  fall  of  the 
awning.  As  to  the  defendant 
Shattuck  the  only  question  is 
whether,  as  owner  and  landlord  of 
the  building,  he  is  hable  for  the 
consequences  to  the  plaintiff  of  a 
nuisance  in  connection  with  the 
building,  in  the  possession  and 
control  of  his  tenants.  It  is  well 
settled  that  a  landlord  is  not  liable 
for  such  consequences  unless  (1) 
the  nuisance  occasioning  the  injury 
existed  at  the  time  the  premises 
were  demised  ;  or  (3)  the  structure 
was  in  such  a  condition  that  it 
would  be  likely  to  become  a  nui- 
sance in  the  ordinary  and  reason- 
able use  of  the  same  for  the  pur- 
pose for  which  it  was  constructed 
and  let,  and  the  landlord  failed  to 
repair  it  (Jessen  v.  Sweigert,  4 
Pac.  Rep.  1188;  Rector  v.  Buck- 
hart,  3  HiU  (N.  Y.)  193  ;  Mullen  v, 
St.  John,  57  N.  Y.  567 ;  Hussy  v. 


CHAP.  XLix.J       Landlord's  Liability. 


1285 


very  able  and  carefully  considered  opinion,  reviews  tlie 


Eyan,  3  Atl.  Rep.  728 ;  Wood  Nuis. , 
§§  295y  676  ;  Wood  Landl.  &  Ten. 
918),  or  (8)  the  landlord  authorized 
or  permitted  the  act  which  caused 
it  to  become  a  nuisance  occasion- 
ing the  jury.  The  rule  of  law  on 
the  subject  is  thus  stated  by  the 
English  courts  :  "  To  bring  liabihty 
home  to  the  owner  of  real  prop- 
erty," says  Ceompton,  J. ,  in  Gaudy 
V.  Jubber,  5  B.  &  8.  73,  485,  "  the 
nuisance  must  be  one  which  is,  in 
its  very  essence  and  nature,  a  nui- 
sance at  the  time  of  the  letting, 
and  not  something  which  is  capa- 
ble of  being  thereafter  rendered  a 
nioisance  by  the  tenant."  "  The 
nuisance,"  says  Blackburn,  J.,  in 
the  same  case,  "must  be,  if  I  may 
so  term  it,  a  normal  one."  To  the 
same  effect  wiU  be  foimd  the  law 
in  cases  in  the  courts  of  the  United 
States.  In  Owings  v.  Jones,  9  Md. 
108,  the  defendant,  a  landlord,  was 
held  hable  to  the  plaintiff  for  the 
consequences  of  an  unlawful  act, 
in  the  original  construction  of  the 
sidewalk  in  front  of  the  building, 
committed  by  him  before  he  de- 
mised the  buUding.  The  unlawful 
act  was  the  malting  of  a  hole  in  the 
sidewalk,  which  he  covered  with  a 
suflBcient  grating,  but  without  ob- 
taining the  requisite  license  from 
the  city  authorities.  The  plaiatiff 
fell  through  the  hole,  and  was  in- 
jured, and  the  court  held,  that 
although  the  premises  were  at  the 
time  of  the  accident  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  defendant's  tenant,  the 
defendant  was  liable  for  the  con- 
sequences of  his  unlawful  act ;  and 
while  it  is  true,  says  the  court,  if 
property  not  then  a  nuisance  is  de- 
mised, but  becomes  so  only  by  the 
act  of  the  tenant,  the  landlord  is 
not  liable,  yet  where  the  owner 
leases  premises  which  are  a  nui- 
sance, or  must  in  the  nature  of 
things  become  so  from  their  user, 
and  receives  rent,  he  is  liable.  On 
like  ground,  in  Bellows  v.  Sackett, 
15  Barb.  96,  a  landlord  was  held 
liable  for  injury  from  the  drip  from 
a  roof  buUt  of  defective  materials, 
where  the  injury  arose  from  the 
ordinaryuserofthepremises.  And 
in  Godley  v.  Hagerty,  20  Penn.  St. 
387,  and  Carson  v.  Godley,  26  Penn. 
St.  Ill,  a  landlord  was  held  liable 
for  injuries  from  the  fall  of  build- 
ings defectively  constructed  for 
II.— 22 


storage,  for  which  purpose  they 
had  been  let  to  tenants  in  posses- 
sion. The  liability  of  the  owner 
was  made  to  turn  upon  the  ques- 
tion :  "  Did  the  landlord  permit  the 
buildings  to  pass  from  his  posses- 
sion deficient  in  some  particular, 
essential  to  their  future  safety 
when  reasonably  used  in  the  busi- 
ness and  for  the  purposes  for  which 
they  were  constructed?"  It  was 
admitted  that  if  a  building,  con- 
structed with  ordinary  care,  falls 
from,  the  tenant's  misuse,  or  if  the 
tenant  had  ordered  the  construc- 
tion, inspected  and  accepted  it, 
then  he  alone  would  be  liable  for 
injuries  from  its  fall.  ' '  But,"  says 
the  coiirt,  "if  the  catastrophe  re- 
sults from  occult  defect,  *  *  * 
as  if  the  materials  be  inferior,  etc., 
the  landlord,  and  not  the  tenant, 
would  be  liable.  *  *  *  Xhe 
wrong  consisted  *  *  *  in  build- 
ing and  rentmg  a  store  for  a  spe- 
cific purpose  for  which  it  was  un- 
fit." So  in  Swords  v.  Edgar,  59  N. 
Y.  28  ;  17  Am.  Rep.  295,  a  lessor 
was  held  hable  for  injuries  to  a 
third  person,  caused  by  the  fall  of 
a  wharf  which  was  unsafe  and  de- 
fective at  the  time  he  leased  it,  al- 
though it  was  in  the  possession  of 
the  tenant  at  the  time  of  the  acci- 
dent. But  it  is  maintained  that, 
whatever  m.ay  have  been  the  time 
of  the  demise  to  the  tenants  in  pos- 
session, the  awning  was  a  nuisance 
per  se,  because  it  was  constrpcted 
over  the  sidewalk  without  license 
or  leave  of  the  corporate  authori- 
ties, and  without  the  sanction  of 
the  legislature.  DUl.  Mun.  Corp., 
§  521 ;  Wood.  Nuis.,  §  602.  That 
however  is  the  assumption  of  a 
fact  which  nowhere  appears  in  the 
case.  No  such  issue  was  raised  by 
the  pleadings,  or  proved  at  the 
trial.  The  complaint  contains  no 
allegation  which  expresses,  or  from 
which  it  could  be  impUed,  that  the 
awning  was  constructed  without 
license  or  authority.  On  the  con- 
trary, seemingly  assuming,  that  it 
had  been  lawfully  constructed, 
liabihty  for  the  injuries  occasioned 
by  its  fall  was  sought  to  be  enforced 
against  the  defendants  on  the  sole 
ground  of  negUgence-on  their  part 
in  suffering  it  to  be  in  such  an  un- 
sound and  unsafe  condition  that  it 
fell  and  injured  the  plaintiff.    To 


1286 


Eights,  Remedies,  &c. 


[§  5S6. 


autliorities  and  adopts  the  doctrine  advanced  in  this 
section.  He  is  liable  to  third  persons  for  injuries  result- 
ing to  them  from  defects  in  the  premises  which  resulted 
from  his  negligence,'  and,  although'  the  injury  results 
in  part  from  the  faulty  construction  of  the  building,  yet 
if  the  injury  is  not  necessarily  the  result  of  such  faulty 
construction,  and  would  not  have  occurred  if  the  tenant 
had  not  omitted  to  do  an  act  which  it  was  his  duty  to 
do,  the  landlord  cannot  be  held  responsible  therefor. 
Thus,  in  a  Massachusetts  case "  an  action  was  brought  for 
injuries  done  to  the  plaintiff  by  the  fall  of  snow  from 
the  roof  of  a  house  owned  by  the  defendant  in  the 
possession  of  a  tenant.  It  appeared  that  the  defendant 
was  the  owner  of  a  block  of  three  story  buildings, 
abutting  on  a  public  street,  and  constructed  with  a  steep 


the  maintenance  of  that  allegation, 
as  the  ground  of  her  cause  of  ac- 
tion, aU  the  evidence  given  for  the 
plaintiff  was  directed.  We  must 
therefore  presume  that  those  who 
constructed  the  awning  acted  un- 
der authority  of  law.  Yet  even 
upon  that  assumption,  the  law 
would  impose  upon  them  the  obli- 
gation to  keep  in  repair  what  they 
were  authorized  to  erect  and  main- 
tain ;  and  if  they,  by  neglect,  un- 
skillfully  constructed  it,  or  negh- 
gently  maintained  it,  so  that  it  was 
or  became  a  nuisance,  they  would 
be  answerable  civiliter  in  damages 
to  a  person  injured  by  their  neglect 
to  perforin  their  obhgation  to  prop- 
erly erect  and  sufBciently  maintain 
it.  It  was  upon  that  principle  that 
the  plaintiff 's  cause  of  action  was 
founded  and  tried.  But  there  was 
no  such  cause  of  action  made  out 
against  the  appellants;  for  there 
was  no  evidence  that  the  avming 
was  defectively  constructed,  or 
that  it  was  in  such  a  condition,  at 
the  time  of  the  demise  of  the  build- 
ing, that  it  constituted  a  nuisance, 
or  would  be  likely  to  become  such 
in  the  ordinary  uses  for  the  pur- 
poses for  which  the  awning  was 
constructed.  On  the  contrary,  it 
was  shown  by  evidence,  in  which 
there  was  no  substantial  conflict, 
that  the  fall  of  the  awning  was 
attributable  to  en  improper  and 
negligent  use  of  the  awning  by  the 


tenant.  It  did  not  fall  in  conse- 
quence of  the  negligence  of  the 
owner  to  keep  in  repair,  as  in  the 
cases  of  Jessen  v.  Sweigert,  4  Pac. 
Eep.  1188,  and  Burke  v.  Schwerdt, 
6  Pac.  Eep.  381.  It  would  not 
have  fallen  if  it  had  not  been  for 
the  people  that  crowded  upon  it  by 
the  permission  of  the  tenant.  It 
broke  down  because  subjected  to  a 
weight  too  heavy  for  it  to  bear. 
Permitting  it  to  be  used  in  that 
way  was  the  wrongful  act  which 
made  of  it  a  nuisance,  and  as  a 
nuisance  it  was  created  by  the  ten- 
ant, and  the  tenant  alone  is  liable ; 
the  landlord  is  not,  unless  he  is 
shown  to  have  participated  in  the 
wrongful  act  by  authorizing  or 
permitting  it  to  be  done.  ' '  A  land- 
lord," says  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Massachusetts,  "is  not  responsible 
to  other  parties  for  the  misconduct 
or  injurious  acts  of  his  tenants  to 
whom  his  estate  has  been  leased 
for  a  lawful  and  proper  purpose, 
when  there  was  no  nuisance  or  il- 
legal structure  upon  it  at  the  time 
of  the  lease.  Saltonstall  v.  Banker, 
8  Gray  (Mass.)  195.  See  also  Mel- 
len  V.  Merrill,  126  Mass.  545; 
Leonard  v.  Storer,  115  Mass.  86 ; 
S.  C.  15  Am.  Rep.  76  ;  Wood  Nuis. 
79,  80,  143." 

iQdell  V.  Solomons,  99  N.  Y. 
635. 

« Clifford  V.  Atlantic  Cotton 
Mills,  5  N.  Eng.  Eep.  566. 


OHA.P.  XLix.]       Landlord's  Liability.  1287 

slate  roof  slanting  toward  the  side-walk,  the  ridge-pole 
of  the  house  being  parallel  therewith,  and  that  there  was 
nothing  to  prevent  the  snow  from  falling  off  upon  the 
side  walk.  The  plaintiff  was  injured  while  passing 
along  the  street,  by  a  quantity  of  snow  falling  from  the 
roof  upon  her.  In  an  action  to  recover  for  the  in- 
jury the  court  held  that  the  action  could  not  be  main- 
tained. Holmes,  J.,  in  a  very  carefully  considered 
opinion  said :  "  The  whole  house  was  let  at  the  time  to  a 
tenant  and  the  only  difference  between  this  case  and  (one 
formerly  decided  in  this  court) '  is,  that  there  the  tenant 
had  agreed  to  ihake  all  needful  repairs,  while  in  the 
case  at  bar  there  was  no  contract  on  either  side,  but  the 
landlord  reserved  the  right  to  enter  the  premises  to 
repair  the  same,  or  to  ascertain  if  the  same  were  properly 
used,  etc.  This  difference  cannot  affect  the  result, 
because  the  damage  was  not  caused  in  either  case  by  a 
want  of  repairs,  but  by  the  original  character  of  the 
structure  ;  and  therefore  the  presence  or  absence  of  a 
covenant  to  repair  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question, 
and  because  the  landlord's  reservation  of  a  right  to  enter, 
in  the  lease  before  us,  did  not  include  the  control  of  the 
roof." 

It  may  be  that  the  tenant  had  a  right  to  put  a  guard 
upon  the  roof  in  Leonard  v.  Storer,  but  if  so,  his  right 
was  independent  of  his  covenant  to  repair,  and  the 
tenant  had  the  same  right  in  the  present  case.'  On  the 
other  hand,  if  the  landlord  had  the  right  to  put  up  a 
guard,  in  the  present  case,  during  the  tenancy,  it  is  not 
clear  that  he  did  not  have  it  also  in  the  other.  In  either 
case,  of  course,  a  guard  might  have  been  put  up  before 
the  lease  was  made.  The  decision  in  Leonard  v.  Storer 
was  on  the  ground  that  "  it  does  not  appear  that "  (the 
tenant)  "  might  not  have  cleaned  the  roof  of  snow  by  the 
exercise  of  due  care,  or  that  he  could  not,  by  proper  pre- 

'  Leonard  v.  Stoner,  115  Mass.  See  also  LoweU  v.  Spaulding,  4 

86.  Gush.  (Mass.)  377  ;  Payne  v.  Rogers, 

s.Korby  v.  Boylston  Market  Asso.  2  H.  BI.  350. 

14  Gray  (Mass.)  349;  Shipley  v.Mfty  «  Boston    v.     Worthington,    10 

Associates,  10  Mass.  251,  354  ;  S.  Gray  (Mass.)  496,  500.    See  Swords 

C.  106  Mass.  194,  200.    See  Larue  v.  Edgar,  59  N.  Y.  28,  36  ;  Coup- 

V.  Farren  Hotel  Co.,  116  Mass.  67.  land  v.  Hardingham,  3  Camp.  398, 


1288  Eights,  Remedies,  &c.  [§  536, , 

cautioiis,  have  prevented  tlie  accident."  The  same  is 
true  here. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  a  man  sometimes  may  be  liable 
in  tort,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  danger  was 
attributable  in  part  to  the  concurrent  or  subsequently 
intervening  misconduct  of  a  third  person.'  But  the 
general  tendency  has  been  to  look  no  further  back  than 
the  last  wrongdoer,  especially  when  he  has  complete  and 
intelligent  control  of  the  consequences  of  the  earlier 
wrongful  act.' 

In  the  case  of  landlords  who  have  given  up  to  the 
tenant  control  of  the  premises  in  the  matter  out  of  which 
the  damage  arises,  this  court  has  never  gone  further 
than  to  hold  them  liable  when  the  use  from  which  the 
damage  or  nuisance  necessarily  arises  was  plainly  con- 
templated by  the  lease.' 

It  is  true  that,  if  the  nuisance  exists  when  the  prem- 
ises are  let,  the  landlord  can  be  held,  although  the 
tenant  may  be  liable  also  to  the  person  injured  ;  for  the 
landlord  is  taken  to  have  contemplated  the  premises 
remaining  in  the  condition  in  which  he  let  them.* 

But  courts  have  differed  when  the  nuisance,  existing 
at  the  time  of  the  lease,  was  due  to  want  of  repairs,  and 
the  tenant  had  covenanted  to  make  repairs."  And  the 
landlord  will  not  be  liable  for  the  use  of  the  premises  in 
such  a  way  as  to  do  harm,  merely  because  there  was  a 
manifest  possibility  of  their  being  used  in  such  a  way. 
The  liability  will  stop  with  the  tenant  whose  intervening 

1  Elmer  v.  Locke,  135  Mass.  575,  126  Mass.  329  ;  Clarke  v.  Morgan, 

576 ;  Lane  v.  Atlantic  Works,  111  38  L.  T.  N.  S.  854  ;  Carter  v.  Towne, 

Mass.  186 ;  Walker  v.  Cronin,  107  103  Mass.  507. 

Mass.  555 ;  Newman  v.   Zachary,  '  Jackman    v.   Arlington  Mills, 

Aleyn,  3 ;  Scott  v.  Shepherd,  2  W.  137  Mass.   277  ;  Harris  v.   James, 

Bl.  892 ;  S.  C.  3  Wils.   407  ;  Dixon  45  L.  J.  Q.  B.  D.  545. 

V.  BeU,  5  Maule  &  S.  198  ;  Clark  v.  *  Dalay  v.  Savage,  4  New  Eng. 

Chambers,  L.  R.,  3  Q.  B.  D.  327  ;  Rep.  863  ;  145  Mass.  38,  41 ;  Todd  v. 

Winsmore  v.   Greenbank,  Willes,  Hight,  9  C.  B.  N.  S.  377  ;  Swords 

577  ;  See  31  Am.  L.  Rev.  765,  769  ;  v.  Edgar,  59  N.  Y.  38,  34  ;  Joyce  v. 

Lynch  v.  Knight,  9  H.  L.  C.  677,  Martin,  4  New  Eng.  Rep.  796. 

590,  600  ;  Limiley  v.  Gye,  2  El.  &  '  Pretty  v.  Brickmore,  L.  R.  8  C. 

Bl.   216.   See  1  Hale,  P.   C.   428 ;  P.  401  ;  Gwinell  v.  Earmer,  L.  R. 

Riding  v.  Smith,  L.  R.,  1  Exchq.  10  C.   P.   658;  Swords  v.  Edgar, 

Div.  91,  94.  supra, 

^Lane   V.  Atlantic    Works,    11 
Hi :  Hastings   v.   Stetson, 


CHAP.  XLix.J       Landlord's  Liability.  1289 

•wrong  is  the  immediate  cause  of  the  damage.'-  In  such 
cases  it  cannot  matter  whether  the  wrong  on  the  part  of 
the  tenant  is  an  act  which  makes  the  premises  a  nuisance, 
or  an  omission  which  allows  them  to  become  so.  It  is  as 
much  his  duty  to  act  in  the  latter  case  as  it  is  to  abstain 
in  the  former.  In  either,  as  against  the  public,  the  land- 
lord, unless  he  has  assumed  the  duty  himself  by  cove- 
nant, has  a  right  to  rely  upon  the  tenant  managing  the 
premises  in  his  occupation  in  such  a  way  as  to  prevent 
their  being  a  nuisance." 

The  defendant's  house  was  not  a  nuisance  in  itself. 
If  it  was,  half  the  householders  in  Boston  are  indictable 
at  the  present  moment.  It  was  certain  to  become  so  at 
times  by  the  mere  workings  of  nature  alone,  unless  the 
tenant  cleaned  the  roof  or  took  other  steps  to  prevent  it. 
But,  so  far  as  appears,  the  tenant  could  have  done 
so  by  using  reasonable  care.  If  he  could,  it  was  his 
duty  to  do  so,  and  the  landlord  was  not  liable,  for  the 
reasons  which  we  have  stated.  In  the  case  of  injuries 
resulting  from  defective  coal  holes,  gratings,  and  other 
excavations  in  a  public  street  belonging  to  demised 
premises,  which  existed  at  the  time  of  the  demise,  the 
doctrine  is  conflicting.  In  some  of  the  States  it  is  held 
that,  inasmuch  as  the  opening  existed  at  the  time  of  the 
demise,  and  the  duty  of  protecting  the  public  against 
the  possibility  of  its  becoming  defective  so  as  to  rendei' 
the  street  or  highway  unsafe,  devolves  upon  the  owner 
of  the  premises,  he  cannot  direst  himself  of  this  liability 
by  demising  the  premises  to  a  tenant."    While  in  Eng-. 

'Mellen  v,  Morrill,  136  Mass.  the  court  considered  the  respon- 
545 ;  Eioh  v.  Basterfried,  4  B.  C.  sibiUty  of  the  occupant  of  a  build- 
783  ;  Grandy  v.  Jubbers,  5  B.  &  8.  ing  in  a  city  for  damages  resulting 
78,  90  ;  9  B.  &  S.  15,  16  ;  Nelson  v.  from  a  fall  on  the  ice  on  the  side- 
Liverpool  Brewery  Co. ,  L.  E. ,  3  C.  walk  in  front  of  the  building.  The 
P.  D.  311  ;  Edwards  v.  New  York  action  was  based  on  the  neglect  of 
&  H.  E.  Co.,  98  N.  Y.  345.      -  the  occupants  of  the  building  to 

*  Stewart  v.  Putnam,  137  Mass.  clean  the  sidewalk  in  compUanoe 

403,  406 ;   Lowell  t.  Spaulding,  4  with    a    city    ordinance,    which 

Cush.  (Mass.)  377  ;  Eussel  v.  Shen-  imposed  a  penalty  of  two  dollars 

ton,  3  Q.  B.  449 ;  1  Chitty,  P.  7th  for  every  neglect,  besides  the  ex- 

ed.  94.  pense  of   clearing  the  walk.      It 

=  Irvine  v.  Wood,  51  N.  Y.  334 ;  was  held  that  the  action  would  not 

Portland  V.  Eichardson,  54  Me.  46  ;  he,  and  that  the  only  liability  rest- 

Stephani  v.  Brown,  50  111.  438.    In  ing   upon   the   occupants   of   the 

ilynn  v.  Canton  Co.,  40  Md.  313,  building  was  that  imposed  by  the 


1290  Eights,  Eemedies,  &o.  [§  536, 

land,"  and  several  of  the  States  of  this  country/  it  is 


ordinance  itself.  It  is  a  well 
settled  principle  that,  whenever  a 
party  causes  or  creates  a  nuisance 
or  obstruction  in  a  public  street  or 
highway,  he  is  responsible  in 
damages  to  one  who  receives 
special  injury  therefrom  ;  but  in 
this  case  the  court  held  that  the 
nuisance,  if  any,  was  not  caused 
or  created  by  act  of  the  defendants. 
The  ice  was  not  placed  on  the  side- 
walk through  their  instrumentali- 
ty ;  it  was  formed  solely  and.  exclu- 
sively by  the  action  of  the  elements. 
MlLLEE,  J. ,  deUvered  an  elaborate 
opinion,  at  the  close  of  which  he 
said:  "The  only  case  discover- 
able by  the  researches  of  coun- 
sel and  our  own,  in.  which  the 
very  question  now  before  us  has 
aiisen  and  been  adjudicated,  is 
that  of  Kirby  v.  Boylston  Market 
Association,  14  Gray,  249.  There 
the  accident  occurred  in  the  city  of 
Boston,  in  the  same  way  and  from 
the  same  cause.  The  suit  was 
against  the  property-owner,  and 
the  same  ordinance  was  in  force, 
and  there  was  the  same  neglect  on 
the  part  of  the '  defendant.  The 
court  held  that  the  action  would  not 
lie  against  the  property-owner,  and 
that  the  remedy  for  all  damages 
sustained  in  this  was  exclusively 
against  the  inhabitants  of  the  city 
in  their  corporate  capacity."  The 
decision  in  this  case  was  in  accord- 
ance with  this  view. 

"Pretty  v.  Bickmore,L.  R.,  80. 
P.  401 ;  In  Tarry  v.  Ashton,  34  L. 
T.  R.  97,  the  Queen's  Bench  Divis- 
ion held  that  the  duty  of  him  who 
occupies  a  house  abutting  on  the 
highway  is  to  repair  all  known  de- 
fects of  the  house  and  its  appur- 
tenances, the  non-repair  of  which 
may  result  vin  danger  to  the  pas- 
sers-by ;  and  that  duty  is  not  dis- 
charged by  the  employment  of  a 
contractor  to  repair  such  defects. 
If  danger  results  from  the  negli- 
gence of  a  contractor  so  employed 
the  householder  is  liable.  In  that 
case  A  occupied  a  house  abutting 
on  a  street.  Projecting  from  the 
front  wall,  about  fifteen  feet  oyer 
the  pavement  was  a  lamp,  which 
A  had  employed  a  contractor  to 


repair,  along  with  his  other  lamps. 
The  contractor  did  his  work  badly. 
Another  contractor,  being  .  after- 
wards employed  by  the  defendant 
to  examine  the  lamp,  placed  a  lad- 
der against  the  bracket  which 
joined  it  to  the  wall.  The  weight 
of  the  ladder  and  the  rotten  state 
of  the  bracket  caused  the  lamp  to 
fall  and  injure  T,  a  passer-by  in  the 
street,  and  it  was  held  that  A  was 
responsible  to  T  for  the  injury  so 
caused,  and  a  rule  to  set  aside  a 
verdict  entered  for  T  at  the  trial 
discharged.  Whether  A  would 
have  been  liable  if  he  had  never 
known  the  decayed  condition  of 
the  lamp,  qucere.  The  defendant's 
counsel  relied  upon  Nichols  v. 
Marsland,  L.  R.,  10  Ex.  265,  where- 
in it  was  held  that  the  defendant 
was  not  hable  to  an  action  for  an 
escape  of  water  caused  by  an  agent, 
beyond  his  control,  as  he  had  used 
all  reasonable  care  to  keep  the  wa- 
ter on  his  own  land ;  and  upon 
Searle  v.  Laverick,  L.  R.,  9  Q.  B. 
123,  wherein  it  was  held  that  a  liv- 
ery-stable keeper  was  not  liable 
for  injury  caused  to  carriages 
placed  in  his  keeping  by  the  fall  of 
the  building,  in  a  case  where  the 
careless  conduct  of  the  builder  was 
the  real  cause  of  the  accident.  But 
the  court  based  its  decision  on  Rex 
V.  Watson,  1  Ld.  Rayd.  856,  .al- 
though QUAIN,  J.,  upon  the  argu- 
ment referred  to  Francis  v.  Cock- 
erell,  L.  R.,  5  Q.  B.  184  ;  affi'd  on 
appeal,  L.  R.,  5  Q.  B.  501,  in  which 
it  was  hfeld  that  the  person  who 
had  employed  a  contractor  to  erect 
a  stand  upon  a  race-course  was  re- 
sponsible for  injuries  occasioned 
by  the  defective  construction  of 
the  stand.  In  Gwinnell  v.  Eamer. 
L.  R.,  10  C.  P.  658,  A  was  injured 
by  the  giving  way  of  a  grating  in 
a  pubUc  footway,  which  was  used 
for  a  coal  shoot  and  for  letting 
Ught  into  the  lower  part  of  premi- 
ses adjoining.  These  premises 
were  at  the  time  of  the  accident 
under  lease  to  B,  who  covenanted 
to  repair  and  keep  in  repair  all  ex- 
cept the  roofs,  main  walls,  and 
main  timbers.  At  the  time  of  the 
demise  the  grating  was   unsafe  ; 


!>  Clark  V.  Fay,  8  Ohio  St.  358  ; 
Fisher   v.  Thirkell,  31   Mich.   1 ; 


Leonard  v.   Storer,   115  Mass.  86 
Bears  v.  Ambler,  9  Penn.  St.  193. 


CHAP.  XLix;]       Landlord's  Liabiuty, 


1291 


held  that  the  landlord's  liability  is  suspended  during  the 
existence  of  the  tenancy,  and  that  the  obligation  and 
hability  respecting  the  same  rest  solely  upon  the  ten- 
ant,'unless  the  landlord  has  covenanted  to  keep  the  prem- 


but  there  was  no  evidence  that  O, 
the  landlady,  had  any  knowledge 
of  its  unsafe  state  ;  and  the  jury 
found  that  no  blame  was  attribut- 
able to  her  for  not  knowing  it. 
Held,  upon  the  authority  of  Pretty 
V.  Bickmore,  L.  E.,  8  C.  P.  401, 
that  no  action  was .  maintainable 
against  C.  At  the  time  of  the  ac- 
cident, A  was  not  gassing  along 
the  way,  but  was  standing  on  the 
grating  to  talk  with  a  person  at  a 
window  above  it.  ,JSeld,  that  A 
was  not  making  an  improper  use 
of  the  grating.  Gwinnell  v.  Earn- 
er, L.  R.,  10  C.  P.  658. 

'  See  last  note.  Prima  fade,  as 
to  third  persons,  the  duty  of  keep- 
ing premises  in  repair  and  in  a  safe 
condition  devolves  upon  the  occu- 
pant ;  but  this  rule  does  not  .apply 
if  the  dangerous  condition  results 
from  causes  beyond  his  control, 
Chicago  V.  O'Brennan^eS  lU.  160, 
nor  where  the  landlord  has  express- 
ly agreed  to  keep  ..the  premises  in 
repair,  or  the  nuisance  existed 
when  the  premises  were  demised, 
Gridley  v.  Bloomington,  68  El.  47 ; 
Whalen  v.  Gloucester,  7  T.  &  C.  (N. 
Y.)  135,  or  results  from  the  negli- 
gence of  the  landlord,  either  in  the 
construction  or  repair  of  the  build- 
ing or  premises.  But,  except 
where  the  defect  is  such  as  amounts 
to  a  nuisance,  in  the  absence  of  a 
covenant  on  his  part  to  repair,  the 
landlord  is  liable  neither  to  the 
tenant,  or  third  persons  upon  the 
premises  by  the  tenant's  invitation, 
for  injuries  sustained  by  reason  of 
any  disrepair.  Clancy  v.  Bryne, 
56  N.  Y.  129.  In  Jaffe  v.  Harteau, 
56  N.  Y.  398,  certain  premises  of 
the  defendant  were  sublet  to  the 

ElaintifiE's  husband  and  occupied 
y  him  as  a  residence  for  himself 
and  family.  The  plaintiff  was  in- 
jured by  the  explosion  of  a  boiler 
used  in  the  kitchen,  and  which  was 
put  there  by  the  defendant.  It  ap- 
peared that  the  explosion  resulted 
from  the  fact  that  there  was  no 
safety-valve  to  the  boUer,  but  it 
did  not  appear  that  the  defendant 
knew,  or  had  any  reason  to  suspect, 


that  such  a  defect  existed,  or  that 
any  danger  was  to  be  apprehended 
from  the  use  of  the  boiler  for  the 
pm'poses  intended.  It  was  held 
that  the  defendant  was  not  liable 
for  the  damages.  The  question  of 
the  UabUity  of  a  landlord  for  inju- 
ry happening  to  a  stranger  during 
a  tenancy,  caused  by  the  defective 
repair  of  the  demised  premises, 
was  considered  in  the  case  of  Nel- 
son V.  Thei  Liverpool  Brewery  Co., 

^  L.  R.,  2  C.  P.  311.  The  defendant 
let  to  one  Farragher  a  house  by  an 
agreement  in  writing,  by  which 
the  tenant  agreed  "  to  do  all  neces- 
sary repairs  to  the  said  premises, 

i  except  main  waUs,  roof  and  main 
timbers."    There  was  no  agreement 

■  by  the  defendant  to  repair,  and  the 
house  was  in  good  condition  at  the 
time  of  letting  it.  Owing  to  defend- 
ant's negUgence  in  not  repairing 
a  part  of  the  main  walls,  a  chimney 

Eot,  during  the  tenancy  of  Farrag- 
er,  fell  upon  plaintifiE,  who  was 
Farragher's  servant,  and  injured 
him.  The  court  of  Common  Pleas 
held  that  the  plaintifiE  was  not  en- 
titled to  recover  compensation 
from  the  defendant  for  the  injury, 
saying  that  there  are  only  two  in 
which  landlords  or  owners  can  be 
made  liable  in  the  case  of  an  injury 
to  a  stranger  by  the  defective  repair 
of  premises  let  to  atenant,  the  occu- 
pier and  the  occupier  alone  being 
vrima  facie  Uable.  The  first  way 
is  in  case  of  a  contract  by  the  land- 
lord to  do  repairs  where  the  tenant 
can  sue  him  for  not  repairing. 
Secondly,  in  the  case  of  a  misfea- 
sance by  the  landlord,  as,  for  in- 
stance, when  he  lets  premises  in  a 
ruinous  condition.  See,  as  sup- 
porting this  doctrine,  Payne  v. 
Rogers,  2H.  Bl.  349 ;  Todd  v.  Fhght, 
9  C,  B.  (N.  S.)  377 ;  RusseU  v.  Shen- 
ton,  3  Q.  B.  349 ;  Pretty  v.  Bick- 
more, L.  R.,  8  C.  P.  491 ;  GwenneU 
V.  Earner,  L.  R.,  10  C.  P.  658;  see 
also  Gwathney  v.  Little  Miama  E. 
R.  Co.,  13  Ohio  St.  93.  But  in  Al- 
len V.  Mack,  Hay,  45,  a  lessor  was 
held  liable  for  injuries  suffered  in 
consequence  of  the  lessee  having 


1292 


Eights,  Remedies,  &o. 


[§  536, 


ises  in  repair,  or  retains  possession  over  part  of  the 
demised  premises.'  To  the  tenant,  the  landlord  is  not 
liable  for  a  nuisance  existing  on  the  premises  at  the  time 
when  the  lease  was  made,  nor  for  defect  therein,"  unless 
the  defect  is  latent,  and  the  landlord  has  been  guilty  of 
fraud  or  actual  concealment  or  deceit  in  the  letting.'  In 
one  case,  the  fact  that  the  landlord  did  not  fairly  state 
the  condition  of  the  drains  was  held  actionable.*    But, 


opened  and  negligently  kept  a  pit 
on  the  land.  But  see  also  as  sus- 
taining the  principal  case,  Pickard 
Y.  Collins,  23  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  444; 
Taylor  v.  Mayor  of  New  York,  4  E. 
D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  559  ;  Kahn  v.  Levi,  3 
Oreg.  206 ;  Mayor  of  New  York  v. 
Corliss,  2  Sandf.  (N.  Y.)  301. 

'  Priest  V.  Nichols,  116  Mass.  401 ; 
Lome  V.  Farren  Hotel  Co.,  116  id. 
67. 

2  Cleves  V.  Willougby,  7  HiU  (N. 
Y.)  83;  Erskine  v.  Adeane,  L.  R., 
8  Ch.  756  ;  O'Brien  v.  Capwell,  59 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  477;  Bobbins  v. 
Mount,  4  Eobt.  (N.  Y.)  453  ;  West- 
lake  V.  DeGraw,  85  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
669;  Academy,  &c.,  v.  Hackett,  3 
HUt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  4 ;  ChappeU  v. 
Gregory,  34  Beav.  250 ;  Welles  v. 
Castles,  3  Gray  (Mass.)  323:  Hart 
T.Windsor,  12  M.  &W.  68;  Libbey 
V.  Talford,  48  Me.  316 ;  Foster  v. 
Peyser,  8  Cush.  (Mass.)  243 ;  Coe  v. 
Vodges,  71  Penn.  St.  383 ;  Jaffe  v. 
Harteau,  56  N.  Y.  398. 

3  In  Miner  v.  Sharon,  112  Mass. 
477,  the  fact  that  the  landlord 
failed  to  disclose  the  fact  that  the 
premises  were  infected  with  small- 
pox, was  held  to  amount  to  such 
fraud  as  rendered  the  landlord 
liable  to  the  tenant  for  damages. 
See  note  5,  page  624.  The  tenant 
may  rescind  the  lease  immediately 
upon  discovering  the  fraud,  but  if 
he  continues  to  occupy  after  he 
becomes  cognizant  thereof  he  must 
pay  the  rent.  Herron  v.  Abbey, 
36  Me.  350  ;  Rosenbaum  v.  Gunter, 
3  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.)  303. 

■'Wilson  V.  Pinch  Hatton,  L.  R., 
2  Exchq,  236  ;  Scott  v.  Simons,  54 
N.  H.  426  ;  Hazlett  v.  Powell,  30 
Penn.  St.  293 ;  Christopher  v.  Aus- 
tin, 11  N.  Y.  316 ;  Rosenbaum  v. 
Gunter,  3  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
203 ;  Westlake  v.  DeGraw,  26 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  669.  The  difficulty 
arises,  and  the  conflict  in  the  au- 


thorities, upon  the  question 
whether  the  landlord  has  been 
guilty  of  concealment,  or  active  de- 
ceit. If  the  defect  is  visible,  or  one 
that  might  have  been  ascertained 
upon  reasonable  inspection  or  in- 
quiry, the  landlord  is  not  liable,  be- 
cause the  tenant  is  bound  to  look 
and  inquire  ;  Comfort  v.  Fowkes, 
6  M.  &  W.  308 ;  Keates  v.  Cadogan, 
10  C.  B.  591 ;  but  if  by  words  or 
acts  he  misleads  the  tenant,  or 
prevents  inquiry,  he  is  hable. 
Staples  V.  Anderson,  3  Robt.  (N.  Y. 
S.  C.)  337.  But  where  the  defect 
is  not  visible,  and  is  not  such  as 
would  be  likely  to  be  anticipated, 
or  is  prejudioal  to  life  or  health, 
the  landlord  is  bound  to  disclose  it. 
McGlasham  v.  Talmage,  37  Barb. 
(N.  Y.  S.  C.)  813  ;  Ceasar  v.  Kountz, 
60  N.  Y.  229  ;  Minor  v.  Sharon,  112 
Mass.  477  ;  Wallace  v.  Lent,  1  Daly 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  481.  If  the  landlord 
erects  or  continues  a  nuisance  upon 
leased  premises,  or  in  their  vicinity, 
he  is  liable  to  the  tenant  for  the 
resulting  damages,  Center  v.  Davis, 
39  Ga.  310 ;  Robbins  v.  Mount,  4 
Robt.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  553 ;  Marshall 
V.  Cohen,  44  Ga.  489,  if  the  nuisance 
results  without  any  fault  on  the 
part  of  the  tenant,  and  as  a  con- 
sequence of  the  landlord's  acts  or 
neghgence.  Thus,  in  a  Georgia 
case,  Marshall  v.  Cohen,  44  Ga.  489, 
the  defendant  was  the  owner  of  a 
tenement  which  he  leased  to  sever- 
al families.  Upon  the  upper  floor 
there  was  a  water-closet  which  was 
used  by  all  the  tenants,  and  was 
also  open  night  and  day  for  the  use 
of  outsiders,  and  was  at  times  in  a 
very  bad  condition.  The  land- 
lord's attention  had  been  called  to 
it,  and  a  plumber,  who  had  been 
employed  to  repair  it,  advised  clos- 
ing it  up.  This,  however,  the  land- 
lord neglected  to  do.  Previous  to 
the  infliction  of  the  damage  sued 


CHAP.  iLix.]       Landlord's  Liability. 


1293 


although  a   tenant  may  abandon  the  premises  upon 


for  a  leakage  had  occurred  in  the 
pipes,  and  the  landlord  had  prom- 
ised to  repair  them,  but  neglected 
to  do  so.  Finally  the  water-closet 
overflowed  and  the  water  injured 
the  goods  of  the  plaintiff,  who  was 
a  tenant  and  occupied  one  of  the 
lower  floors.  It  was  held  that  the 
landlord  was  responsible  for  the 
damage.  LOCHRA.M,  C.  J.,  in  de- 
livering the  judgment  of  the  court 
upon  the  question,  said  "There  is 
nothing  clearer  as  a  principle  of 
law,  than  that  a  party  is  liable  for 
damages  done  by  himself,  his  serv- 
ants or  agents  in  maintaiuing  and 
keeping  up  a  private  nuisance. 
The  evidence  in  this  case  shows 
that  this  closet  was  at  times  in  very 
bad  order  and  condition,  and  that 
it  was  kept  in  this  condition.  *  * 
And  it  appears  that  previous  to  the 
damage  complaiaed  of  there  was 
a  leakage,  of  which  she  was  notifi- 
ed, and  she  promised  to    fix   it. 

*  *  A  general  principle  may 
be  recognized,  that  one  who  per- 
mits a  wrong  to  be  done  is  as 
liable  as  he  who  does  it.  One  who 
erects  anything  upon  his  land, 
which  by  ignition  burns  down  the 
house  of  one  adjoining,  is  hable. 

*  *  In  this  case  the  damage 
was  produced  by  a  water-closet, 
which,  if  not  kept  clean  and  in 
proper  order,  was  per  se  a  private 
nuisance,  and  the  natural  and  or- 
dinary consequence  of  which  was 
to  produce  a  m  usance  as  the  inher- 
ent consequence  of  the  thing  itself. 
And,  when  there  is  proof,  as  iu 
this  case,  of  the  defect  being  known 
to  the  defendant,  by  information, 
and  by  actual  notice  of  a  previous 
leak,  we  think  the  reasons  of  this 
liability  appear."  A  similar  doc- 
trine was  held  in  a  case  heard  in 
the  Superior  Court  of  New  York 
city.  Robbins  v.  Mount,  4  Robt. 
553.  In  that  case  also  the  building 
was  occupied  by  several  tenants, 
and  the  landlord  employed  a  jan- 
itor to  take  charge  of  the  building, 
who  was  paid  for  his  services  by 
the  tenants,  who  paid  for  his  ser- 
vices according  to  the  space  that 
each  occupied.  A  faucet  was  left 
open  in  the  room  of  an  upper  ten- 
ant one  night  and  the  water  left 
running  into  a  urinal,  which,  being 
choked  up  with  tobacco,  over- 
flowed, and  damaged  the  tenants 


below.  Upon  the  trial  in  the  isourt 
below,  the  judge  charged  the  jury 
that  if  the  overflow  was  caused  by 
the  negligence  of  the  defendant; 
or  if  the  fixture  was  improperly 
constructed,  or  should  not  have 
been  there  at  all ;  or  that  if  all  the 
safeguards  that  (xmlA  possibly  have 
been  placed  there  were  not  placed 
there,  and  the  fixture  was  unsafe, 
the  defendant  was  responsible  ir- 
respective of  the  question  of  negli- 
gence, and  his  ruUng  was  fully  sus- 
tained upon  appeal.  That  a  ten- 
ant may  maintain  an  action  against 
any  person  for  an  injury  to  his  en- 
joyment of  leased  premises  by  the 
erection  or  maintenance  of  a  nui- 
sance is  well  settled ;  Booth  v. 
Wilson,  1  B.  &  Aid.  59  ;  Wood  on 
Nuisances,  p.  864 ;  and  the  land- 
lord is  no  more  exempt  from  ha- 
bility  to  him  in  this  respect  than  a 
mere  stranger  to  the  title.  During 
the  existence  of  the  tenancy  he 
has  parted  with  all  right  to  inter- 
fere with  or  control  the  premises, 
except  to  the  extent  that  exceptions 
in  that  respect  have  been  made  in 
his  favor  in  the  lease,  and  he  is 
equally  liable  with  a  stranger  for 
any  interference  therewith.  Kim- 
mel  V.  Burf  eind,  3  Daly  (N.  Y.  O. 
P.)  155.  If  the  landlord  negli- 
gently leaves  the  premises  in  a  con- 
dition that  by  the  act  of  one  ten- 
ant a  nuisance  may  be  created  as 
to  another  tenant,  he  is  responsible 
to  the  tenant  injured,  although 
the  nuisance  was  mainly  caused  by 
the  negUgence  of  the  other  tenant. 
Thus,  in  a  New  York  case,  Kimmel 
V.  Burnfeind,  2  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.), 
155,  the  landlord  leased  a  room  to 
the  plaintiff  that  had  open  gas  pipes 
in  it,  and  leased  a  lower  room  to 
another  tenant,  and  gave  him  per- 
mission to  introduce  gas  into  the 
house.  The  tenant  of  the  lower 
room  introduced  the  gas,  and  it 
escaped  through  the  open  pipes  in- 
to the  plaintiff'sroom  and  exploded 
and  injured  him.  The  landlord 
was  held  responsible  for  the  dam- 
ages, although  the  lower  tenant 
was  neghgent  in  introducing  the 
gas.  So  where  a  landlord  suffers 
a  building,  or  any  part  of  it,  as  a 
chimney,  to  go  to  ruin  and  fall 
upon  the  tenant's  goods,  he  is  lia- 
ble for  all  the  damages  that  ensue. 
Eagle  V.  Swayne,  3  Daly  (N.  Y.  C. 


1294  Rights,  Remedies,  &c.  [§  536. 

discovery  of  the  fraud,  and  is  absolved  from  the  payment 
of  rent,  yet  if,  after  discovering  the  fraud,  he  continues 
to  occupy  the  premises,  he  cannot  set  up  such  fraud 
either  in  discharge,  or  by  way  of  reduction  of  the  rent.' 
Where  the  landlord  has  been  guilty  of  fraud  in  the 
letting  of  premises,  the  tenant  must  exercise  his  election 
to  rescind  the  contract  within  a  reasonable  time  after 
discovering  the  bad  character  of  the  house,  and  by  re- 
maining in  possession  and  paying  rent  for  several 
months  he  waives  his  right  to  rescind."  Where  vaults, 
coal  holes  &c.,  are  built  under  a  pubMc  street  or  high- 
way without  authority  from  the  proper  authorities, 
is  held  to  be  an  obstruction,  a  nuisance,  rendering 
the  owner  of  the  premises  is  liable  for  injuries  resulting 
to  third  persons  therefrom,  irrespective  of  the  question 
of  negligence.  °  But  when  the  vault  or  coal  hole  is  put 
in,  under  a  license  from  the  proper  authorities,  and  the 
work  is  well  and  securely  done  in  the  first  instance, 
the  landlord  cannot  be  held  responsible  for  injuries  result- 
ing therefrom  because  of  defects  which  arose  while  the 
premises  were  in  the  possession  of  a  tenant,"  unless  h(} 
is  guilty  of  negligence. " 

The  owner  of  a  building  is  not  liable  to  a  subtenant  who 
is  in  possession,  without  his  knowledge  or  consent,  of  a 

p.)   149.    But   no  action   can    be  from  the  relation  of  landlord  and 

maintained  by  the  tenant  against  tenant,  nor  will  it  ever  be  pre- 

the  landlord  for  personal  injuries,  sumed,butmust  be  both  stated  and 

or  injury  to  his  goods,  by  reason  proved.    Klum  v.  Lauez,  3  Oregon, 

of  the  defective  condition  of  the  206.    See  ante,  Sec.  286,  for  a  full 

biiilding  or  premises ,  although  they  review  of  this  question, 

existed  when  the    tenancy   com-  •  Izon  v.  Gurton,  5  Bing.  N.  C. 

menced,    iinless    the   landlord    is  501.    See  ante,  Chap,  on  Rent  and 

chargeable  with  some  aflSrmative  on  Eviction.     Herrin  v.  Libbey,  36 

misfeasance  or  neglect  of  positive  Me.    350  ;  Eosenbaum  v.    Gunter, 

duty,  or  has  contracted  to  make  3  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  203. 

repairs.     O'Brien  v.   CapweU,    59  =  Conklin  v.  White,  17  Abb.  N.  C. 

Barb.  (iST.  Y.)  497.    And  in  actions  (N.  Y.)  325  ;  Carhart  v.  Eyder,  11 

brought  against  a  landlord  for  in-  Daly  (N.  Y.  Ct.)  101  ;  SchiefHin  v. 

juries  resulting  from   the    unsafe  Dietz,  83  N.  Y.  300. 

condition  of  the  building  leased,  'Cliflford  v.  Dam,  81  N.   Y.  52; 

or  any  of  its  appendages,  the  de-  Anderson  v.  Dickie,  1  Robt.  (N.  Y.) 

claration  or   complaint  must    af-  238 ;  Congreve  v.  Morgan,  18  N.  Y. 

firmatively  state  facts  which  show  75. 

that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  land-  *Walf  t.  Kilpatrick,  101  N.  Y. 

lord  to  make  repairs,    or  that  the  146 ;  see  also,  Clanoey  v.  Bryne,  56 

the  particular  injury  resulted  from  N.  Y.  129. 

the  neglect  by  him  of  a  positive  '  Edwards  v.  N.  Y.  Hud.   River 

duty.    This  duty  does  not  spring  R.  R.  Co.  98  N.  Y.  245. 


CHAP,  xLix.]  Right  of  Entkt.  1295 

part  of  a  building,  for  injury  caused  to  his  goods  by  the 
falling  of  a  wall  by  reason  of  a  want  of  repairs.  It  is 
well  estabhshed  that  the  owner  of  lands  is  liable  in  dam- 
ages to  those  coming  thereon,  using  due  care  at  his  in- 
vitation or  inducement,  express  or  implied,  on  any  busi- 
ness to  be  transacted  with  or  permitted  by  him,  for  an 
injury  occasioned  by  the  unsafe  condition  of  the  premi- 
ses, which  is  known  to  him  and  not  to  them,  and  which 
he  has  suffered  negligently  to  exist,  and  of  which  they 
have  received  no  notice.  But  this  liability  is  not 
extended  in  favor  of  persons  who  are  wrongfully  on  the 
premises,  or  who  are  there  without  his  invitation  express 
or  implied.' 

Sec.  537.  Eight  of  entry.— Generally,  except  in  the  case 
of  tenancies  at  will  and  by  sufferance,  the  landlord  can- 
not re-enter  forcibly  during  the  term  for  a  breach  of  any 
of  the  covenants,  except  where  the  lease  contains  an  ex- 
press provision  to  that  end,  nor  then,  with  a  strong 
hand,  involving  a  breach  of  the  peace."  In  order  to  en- 
title the  landlord  to  re-enter  for  a  breach  of  any  con- 
dition in  the  lease,  he  must  first  comply  with  all  the 
common  law  and  statutory  requirements,  and  also  with 
all  the  provisions  of  the  lease  to  that  end.'  And  a  tenant 
who  has  been  expelled  by  the  landlord  before  his  estate 
is  legally  determined  may  maintain  trespass  against  the 
landlord  for  such  entry,  and  also  an  action  for  a 
recovery    of  possession,   and    this    is  the    rule    as   to 

'  White  V,  France,  3  C.  P.  Div.  of  a  covenant ;  his  only  remedy  is 
308;  Railway  Co.  v.  Slatterly,  3  for  damages  for  the  breach.  John- 
App.  Cas. ;  Hartwig  v.  Chicago  &  son  v.  Gm-ley,  53  Tex.  333,  and 
N.  W.  Ry.  Co.,  49  Wis.  858  ;  Hay-  this  applies  to  the  covenant  to  pay 
ward  V.  Merrill,  94  lU.  389  ;  Camp  rent  as  well  as  to  other  covenants. 
V.  Wood,  76  N.  Y.  93  ;  Beck  y.  In  the  case  cited  there  was  a  pro- 
Carter,  68  id.  388  ;  Davis  v.  Ceh-  vision  as  to  the  use  of  timbers  by 
tral  Cong.  See. ,  139  Mass.  367 ;  the  tenant  which  was  neither  of 
Nickerson  v.  Tirrell,  137  id.  336  ;  limitation  or  condition.  It  was 
Carlton  v.  Franconia  Iron,  etc.,  held  that  the  lessor's  only  remedy 
Co.,  99  id.  316  ;  Burnett  y.  R.  Co.,  was  an  action  for  damages.  A 
103  U.  S.  577  ;  Samuelson  v.  Cleve-  landlord  must  not  forcibly  dis- 
land  Iron  Min.  Co.,  49  Mich.  170.  possess  the  tenant  during  his 
Donaldson  v.  Wilson,  Mich.  absence,  without  a  legal  warrant, 

^Rich  V.  Keyser,  54  Penn.   St.  Mason  v.  Hawes,  53  Com.  13. 

86.     Except   where   there   is  an  *  Jackson  v.  Kip,  3  Wend.  (N. 

express  provision  to  that  effect,  the  Y.)  380. 
landlord  can  re-enter  for  a  breach 


1296 


Eights,  Remedies,  &o. 


[§  537. 


tenancies  at  will,  by  sufferance,  or  otherwise, 
where  the  statute  imposes  certain  duties  upon 
the  landlord  in  reference  to  their  termination.'  But 
where  an  estate  under  a  lease  has  terminated  by  the 
effluxion  of  time  and  express  limitation  or  otherwise,  ac- 
cording to  the  better  class  of  cases  the  landlord  may  im- 
mediately re-enter,  and  the  burden  is  upon  the  tenant 
to  show  that  he  has  acquired  the  rights  of  a  ten- 
ant at  will ; '  and  in  such  case,  the  landlord  may  enter 
forcibly  to  expel  the  tenant,  without  subjecting  himself 
to  any  other  liability  than  that  of  indictment  for  undue 
or  excessive  force.'  But  in  England,  and  some  of  the 
States  of  this  country,  a  doctrine  opposed  to  that  held  in 
the  Enghsh  and  American  cases  cited  in  the  last  note 
has  been  held,  and,  if  the  re-entry  of  the  landlord  is  re- 
sisted, it  is  held  that  he  cannot  enter  forcibly,  but  must 
resort  to  his  remedy  at  law  to  gain  possession ;  *  and  if  the 


'  Dickinson  v.  Goodspeed,  8  Cush. 
(Mass.)  119.  In  Jackson  v.  Har- 
rison, 17  John.  (N.  Y.)  66,  it  was 
held  that  the  landlord  could  not  re- 
enter for  a  bi-each  of  a  covenant 
on  the  tenant's  part  of  a  covenant 
to  pay  all  taxes,  and  a  provision 
for  re-entry  in  case  of  breach,  un- 
less he  shows  that  a  demand  for 
the  payment  of  the  tax  had  been 
made  upon  the  tenant  within  the 
time  required  by  law. 

■'  Chesley  v.  Welch,  37  Me.  106. 

» 1  Hawkin's  P.  C.  495  ;  Butcher  v. 
Butcher,  7  B.  &  C.  399.  The  stat- 
utes against  Forcible  Entry  and 
Detainer  took  away  the  defence  of 
entry  under  title  so  far  as  an  in- 
dictment for  such  entry  was  con- 
cerned, but  does  not  effect  the 
right  of  forcible  entry  so  far  as 
any  civil  remedy  by  the  tenant  is 
concerned,  and,  except  where  un- 
due or  excessive  force  is  concerned, 
the  landlord  may  justify  under  liis 
title.  Dustin  v.  Cowdrey,  23  Vt. 
681 ;  Taylor  v.  Cole,  3  T.  R.  293 
Turner  v.  Meymott,  1  Bing.  158 
Argent  v.  Durant.  8  T.  R.  403  ;  Co. 
litt.  357,  a.  "  Statutes  of  Forcible 
Entry  and  Detainer,"  says  Nelson, 
C.  J.,  in  Jackson  v.  Farmer,  9 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  201,  "punish  crimi- 
nally the  force,  and  in  some  cases 
make  restitution  of  possession  :  but 


so  far  as  civil  remedy  goes,  there  is 
none  whatever.  Law  v.  Elwell, 
131  Mass.  309 ;  Todd  v.  Jackson, 
26  N.  J.  L.  535  ;  Jackson  v.  Can- 
tiUon,  1  John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.)  133  ;  Ives 
V.  Wood,  13  John.  (N.  Y.)  235; 
Hyatt  V.  Wood.  4  id.  150  ;  Jackson 
V.  Morse,  16  id.  167;  Curtis  v. 
Galvin,  1  Allen  (Mass.)  215 ;  Com. 
V.  Haley,  4  id.  318  ;  Tribbsv.  Frame, 
7  J.  J.  Marsh.  (Ky.)  599 ;  Sampson 
V.  Henry,  13  Pick.  (Mass.)  36 ; 
Curl  V.  Lowell,  19  id.  35  ;  Com.  v. 
McNeil,  8  Phila.  (Penn. )  438 ;  Adams 
V.  Adams,  7  id.  160 ;  Overdur  v. 
Lewis,  1  W.  &  S.  (Penn.)  90  ;  Rich 
V.  Kevser,  54  Penn.  St.  86  ;  Ster- 
ling Warden,  51  N.  H.  217  ;  John- 
son V.  Hannahan,  1  Strobh.(S.  G.) ; 
Stearns  v.  Sampson,  59  Me.  568; 
Mason  v.  Holt,  1  Allen  (Mass.)  46  ; 
Pratt  V.  Farrar,  10  id.  519  ;  Moore 
V.  Mason,  1  id.  407  ;  Livingston  v. 
Tanner,  14  N.  Y.  64  ;  Mayford  v. 
Richardson,  6  Allen  (Mass.)  76 ; 
Walton  V.  File,  1  Dev.  &  B.  (N.  C.) 
567. 

^Hilary  v.  Gray,  6  C.  &  P.  284 ; 
Newton  v.  Harland,  1  M.  &  G.  644  ; 
Dustan  v.  Cowdrey,  23  Vt.  531 ; 
Noel  V.  McCrary,  7  Cold.  (Tenn.) 
623  ;  Doty  v.  Burdick,  83  111.  478  ; 
Larkin  v.  Avery,  23  Conn.  808, 
The  English  doctrine  seems  to  be, 
that  where  at  the  time  of  the  ex- 


CHAP.  XLIX.J 


Eight  of  Entry. 


1297 


landlord  enters  forcibly,  his  entry  being  unlawful,  the 
tenant  may  have  not  only  an  action  against  him  for 
damages,  but  also  for  a  recovery  of  possession.'  But 
even  in  the  States  where  the  latter  rule  prevails,  it 
is  held  that  the  landlord  may  re-enter  if  he  can  do  so 
peaceably, — as,  if  the  tenant  is  absent, —  and  having  thus 
obtained  possession,  he  may  use  all  the  force  reasonably 
necessary  to  remove  the  tenant's  goods  and  retain  pos- 
session ; '  and  if  undue  or  unreasonable  force  is  used,  it  is 
said  that  the  landlord  is  to  be  treated  as  a  trespasser  ab 
initio.'  It  is  competent  for  the  parties,  by  express  con- 
tract, to  provide  for  a  forcible  re-entry  by  the  landlord 
either  for  a  breach  of  any  covenant  or  condition  in  the 
lease  or  at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  and  in  such  case 
the  tenant  has  no  remedy.'    The  mere  fact  that  the  prem- 


piration  or  determination  of  the 
tenancy  there  is  no  person  in  pos- 
session of  the  premises, — the  ten- 
ant having  wholly  abandoned  them 
without  any  intention  of  returning, 
— the  landlord  may  enter  and  take 
possession.  Lacey  v.  Lear,  Peake'a 
Add.  Cas.  310.  See  Wildbor  v. 
Eainf  orth,  8  B.  &  C.  4,  6.  If  the 
tenancy  of  a  house  is  determined, 
and  the  tenant  and  his  family 
have  gone  away,  and  the  house  is 
locked  up — ^no  one  being  in  pos- 
session— ^the  landlord  is  justified  in 
breaking  in  and  obtainmg  posses- 
sion, although  some  articles  of 
furniture  may  remain.  Hilary  v. 
Gray,  6  C.  &  P.  384 ;  Taunton  v. 
Cosar,  7  T.  E.  431 ;  Turner  v. 
Meymott,  1  Bing.  158.  Even 
where  the  tenant  is  in  possession, 
the  landlord,  after  the  expiration 
of  the  tenancy,  may  enter  peace- 
ably on  the  premises.  He  may 
also  acquire  lawful  possession  by 
entering  forcibly,  Harvey  v. 
Bridges,  14  M.  &  W.  437,  443; 
Pollen  V.  Brewer,  7  C.  B.  N.  S.  871 ; 
and,  after  requesting  the  tenant  to 
leave  the  premises,  may,  in  case  o£ 
his  refusing  or  neglecting  to  do  so, 
expel  him,  using,  however,  only 
so  much  force  as  may  be  necessary 
for  that  purpose.  In  this  case  he 
will  not  be  liable  to  an  action  of 
trespass,  or  to  damages  for  the 
expulsion  of  the  tenant,  Davison 
V.  Wilson,  11  Q.  B.  890 ;  Burling 


V.  Read,  11  Q.  B.  904.  But 
see  Newton  v.  Harland,  1  M. 
&  Gr. ;  but  he  may  subject  himself 
to  an  indictment  for  a  forcible 
entry.  See  Archbold's  Pleading 
and  Evidence  in  Criminal  Cases,  p. 
736  (15th  ed.). 

'  Hilary  v.  Gray,  ante ;  Dustan 
V.  Cowdrey,  ante;  Daly  v.  Bur- 
dick,  ante ;  Moore  v.  Boyd,  34  Me. 
343 ;  Eeeder  v.  Purdy,  41  111.  371 ; 
Noel  V.  McCrary,  7  Cold.  (Tenn.) 
633.  The  landlord  is  also  liable 
for  assault  if  an  assault  is  made 
upon  the  tenant.  Sampson  v. 
Henry,  13  Pick.  (Mass.)  36 ;  Hally 
V.  Brown,  14  Conn.  355. 

"Mussey  v.  Scott,  33  Vt.  83; 
Brook  V.  Berry,  31  Me.  398;  HU- 
bourn  v.  Fogg,  99  Mass.  11 ;  Clark 
V.  Kilcher,  107  id.  406;  Esty  v. 
Wihnot,  15  Gray  (Mass.)  168. 
Where  the  landlord  and  owner  in 
fee,  claiming  ■  that  the  term  has 
expired,  enters  without  process 
and  without  force,  during  the 
temporary  absence  of  the  tenant, 
the  latter  has  no  right  to  take  the 
law  into  his  own  hands  and  at- 
tempt to  dislodge  the  former  by 
force.  The  landlord,  being  in  ac- 
tual possession,  has  a  right  to 
maintain  it,  and  to  use  force  for 
that  purpose,  if  necessary.  Sage 
V.  Harpending,  49  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  166. 

«  Whitney  v.  Sweet,  20  N.  H.  10. 

*  Feltmaii  v.  Cartwright,  7  Scott, 
C95  ;  Paige  v.  Dupuy,  40  111,  506 


1298  BiGHT^,  Eemedies,  &0.  t§  537. 

ises  are  vacant  during  the  term  does  not  warrant  a  re-en- 
try by  the  landlord,'  but  he  may  re-enter  if  he  chooses 
where  the  tenant  has  abandoned  the  premises ;  but  in 
such  case  the  rent  will  cease  from  the  time  of  such  entry," 
unless  his  entry  can  be  shown  to  have  been  merely  for 
the  purpose  of  taking  proper  care  of  the  premises,'  or  as 
agent  of  the  tenant.*  So,  too,  if  a  lessee  fraudulently 
alters  the  lease  in  a  material  matter,  after  its  execution, 
his  estate  under  the  lease  is  forfeited,  and  the  landlord 
may  re-enter."  In  Illinois"  it  has  been  held,  that  a  land- 
lord entering  upon  premises  and  harvesting  crops  sowed 
by  the  tenant  acquires  no  title  thereto,  unless  he  can 
establish  a  f oi'feiture  of  the  lease. 

While,  as  has  been  stated,  in  many  of  the  States, 
where  the  lease  is  terminated,  either  by  effluxion  of  time 
or  otherwise,  the  landlord  may  re-enter  forcibly  and  expel 
the  tenant ;  yet  he  may,  if  he  chooses  to  do  so,  waive  this 
right,  arid  proceed  under  the  statutes  to  regain  possession 
summarily,  or  by  an  action  of  ejectment,  and  in  most 
cases  the  remedy  by  legal  process  is  not  only  the  safest, 
but  also  the  best,  enabling  the  landlord  to  avoid  all  the 
liabilities  and  dangers  incident  to  a  forcible  expulsion. 
After  the  tenancy  is  determined  by  the  landlord's  entry, 
or  by  the  act  of  the  tenant,  he  may  go  upon  the  premises 
within  a  reasonable  time  to  take  away  such  goods  and 
property  belonging  to  him  remaining  thereon  as  are 
legally  removable  ; ''  but  a  contrary  rule  is  held  in  the  case 

Fifty   Associates   v.   Howland,    5  unlawfully,  the  tenant  was  enti- 

Cush.  (Mass.)  314.  tied  to  be  restored  to  the  posses- 

'  Shannon  v.   Burr,  1  Hilt.   (N.  sion.     In  Missouri,  by  statute,  the 

Y.  C.  P.)  39 ;  Brown  v,.   Kite,  3  tenant  who  is    forcibly   expelled 

Overt.  (Tenn.)  333.    And  especial-  may  have  restitution  of  possession, 

ly  is  this  the  case  where  the  ten-  but  no  action  for  damages.     Fahr 

ant's   estate  is  not  legally  deter-  v.   Dean,  36  Mo.  116 ;  Krevet  v. 

mined.    In  Larkin  v.   Avery,   38  Meyer,  34  id.  107. 
Conn.  308,  the  tenant  was  forcibly        *  Schaisler  v.  Ames,  16  Ala.  73. 
removed  from  a  house   under  a        'State  v.  MoClay,  1  Harr.,(Del.) 

warrant  issued  under  a  statute  re-  630. 

lating  to  the  removal  of  persons        *  Hackett  v.  Richards,  18  N.  Y. 

suspected  of  having  the  smaU-pox.  138. 

The  landlord  re-entered  and  kept        '  Bhss  v.  Mclntyre,  18  Vt.  466. 
the  tenant  out  of  possession  forci-        *  Cheney  v.  BonneU,  58  lU.  268. 
bly.     The  court  held,  that  by  such         'Cornish  v.  Stubbs,  L.  E.,  5  C. 

removal  the  tenant  could  not'  be  P.  884  ;     Ellis  v.   Paige,   1  Pick, 

held  to  have  relinquished  posses-  (Mass.)  48 ;  Moore  v.  Boyd,  34  Me. 

sion,  and,  the  landlord  being  in  243. 


CHAP.  XLix.]  Eights  of  Tenant.  1299 

of  a  tenant  at  will,  and  after  demand  of  possession  he  is 
held  not  entitled  even  to  a  reasonable  time  in  which  to 
enter  to  remove  his  goods,  unless  he  can  do  so  without 
excluding  the  landlord ; '  nor  can  a  tenant  for  a  term 
remain  in  possession  after  his  term  has  expired  for  the 
purpose  of  removing  his  goods  ;  he  must  do  this  during 
his  term.' 

Sec.  5B8.  Bightsoftenant.— Immediately  upon  the  com- 
riiencement  of  the  term,  unless  special  reservation  in  cer- 
tain particulars  is  made,  the  tenant  succeeds  to  all  the 
rights  of  the  landlord  that  are  annexed  to  the  estate,  so  far 
as  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  premises  are  con- 
cerned and,  even  if  the  term  is  to  commence  infuturo,  he 
immediately,  upon  the  delivery  of  the  lease,  acquires  an 
interest  in  the  term,  which  is  assignable  °  and  passes  to 
his  executors.'  If  the  landlord  :withholds  possession  he 
may  maintain  ejectment,  or  an  action  for  damages,  at 
his  election,^  and  he  may  also  bring  ejectment  against 
any  other  person  who  is  in  possession  of  the  premises  and 
refuses  to  give  it  up  to  him."  In  case  the  landlord  with- 
holds possession,  the  tenant  may,  if  he  elects  to  do  so, 
repudiate  the  contract,  and  by  such  act  is  absolved  from 
all  liability  under  the  lease,'  or  he  may,  as  previously 
stated,  proceed  against  him  for  damages.  But  the  fact 
that  stranger  is  in  possession  does  not  have  this  effect,  but 
the  tenant  must  take  proper  measures  to  obtain  posses- 
sion.'' But  in  England,'  and  in  some  of  the  States  of 
this  country,  a  different  rule  prevails,  and  the  landlord 
is  bound  to  put  the  tenant  into  possession."    It  makes  no 

'Doe  V.  Jones,  10  B.  &  C.  718;  'Clark  v.    Burt,    26    Ind.   336; 

Witt  V.  New  York,  5  Eobt.  {N.  Y.  Trull  v.   Granger,   9   N.   Y.   115  ; 

Sup.  Ct.)  248.  Spencer  v.  Burton,  5  Blackf.  (Ind.) 

*  Witt  V.  New  York,  ante.  57  ;  Hay  v.  Cumberland,  25  Barb. 
'Whitney  v.   Allaine,   1  N.   Y.  (N.  Y.)594. 

S05  ;  Meeting  House  Co.  v.  Hilton,  ^  Cozens  v.  Stevenson,  5  S.  &  E. 

11  Gray  (Mass.)  407.  (Perm.)  424 ;  Gardner  v.  Keteltas,  3 

*  State  V.  Mcaay,  1  Harr.  (Del.)  Hill  (N.  Y.)  330;  GozoUo  v. 
530  ;  3  Rolle's  Abr.  850 ;  Bruerton  Chambers,  73  111.  75  ;  Becker  v. 
T.  Eainsford,  Cro.  El.  15.  Foresty  21  N.  H.  334  ;  Sigmund  v. 

^Chappell  V.  Gregory,  34  Beav.  ^Howard  Bank,  39  Md.  334, 

250 ;  OUendorf  v.  Cook,  1  N.  Y.  S.  » Jenks  v.  Edwards,  11   Exchq. 

C.  37.  775  ;  Coe  v.  Clay,  5  Bing.  440. 

'Chappell    T,     Gregory,    ante;  '» Hughes  v.  Wood,  50  Mo.  350 ; 

Eemingtott  t.  Casey,  78  III.  317.  L'Hussier  v.  Fallee,  24  id,  13. 


1300 


Rights,  Eemedies,  &c. 


[§  538. 


difference  whether  the  tenant  occupies  personally  or  by 
another.  If  he  lets  a  stranger  ofccupy  he  assumes  all  the 
liabilities  to  the  landlord  that  he  would  be  subjected  to  if 
he  occupied  himself.'  He  is  bound  to  use  the  premises  in 
a  husbandlike  manner,  and,  if  the  use  is  restricted  to  a 
certain  purpose,  he  has  the  right  only  to  use  them  for 
that  purpose ; '  but  if  the  use  is  not  restricted,  he  may 
use  them  for  any  ordinary  purpose.'  He  is  not  respon- 
sible for  an  accidental  injury  to  the  premises,*  but  he  is 
responsible  for  an  injury  thereto  that  results  either  from 
his  carelessness,  or  that  of  a  servant  engaged  in  the 
tenant's  business."  He  is  invested  in  all-  the  rights  of  the 
landlord  so  far  as  the  estate  conveyed  to  him  by  the  lease 
extends,  and  may  sue  either  the  landlord  or  a  stranger 
for  any  species  of  injury  thereto  that  effects  his  estate," 
and  it  makes  no  difference  whether  his  lease  is  in  writing 
or  by  parol.'  If  the  tenant  is  injured  in  his  possession  by 
the  taking  of  any  portion  of  the  estate  for  public  purposes, 
he  is  entitled  to  recover  compensation  of  the  corporation, 
municipal  or  otherwise,  taking  it ;  °  and  this  applies  to 


'  Bacon  v.  Bacon,  9  Conn.  338  ; 
Howard  v.  Ellis,  4  Sandf.  (N.  Y. 
Sup.  Ct.)  369  ;  Birkhead  v.  Cum- 
mins, 36  N.  J.  L.  44;  Eaton  v. 
Jaques,  Doug.  461  ;  Becar  v.  Flues, 
64  N.  y.  518 ;  BeUasls  v.  Burbriche, 
Holt.  199 ;  Kendall  v.  Carland,  5 
Cush.  (Mass.)  74. 

2  In  Brooks  v.  Clifton,  23  Ark. 
54,  a  tenant  who  hired  premises  for 
the  storage  of  furniture,  and  placed 
other  heavy  articles  therein  which 
caused  the  destruction  of  the  buUd- 
ing,  he  was  held  Uable  for  the 
damages.  See  Chap,  on  MispEL- 
LANEOUS  Covenants.  Manly  v. 
Pearson,  1  N.  J.  377. 

a  Nave  v.  Berry,  22  Ala.  382. 
Where,  however,  the  possession 
is  expressly  or  impliedly  restricted, 
the  tenant  has  no  right  to  use  the 
premises  for  any  other  purpose,  and 
if  he  does  the  landlord  may  enjoin 
such  use,  and  may  recover  such 
damages  as  he  sustains  by  reason 
thereof.  Thus,  where  premises 
were  let  for  the  storage  of  furni- 
ture, and  the  tenant  put  other 
heavy  articles  therein  whereby  the 
building  was  destroyed,  he  was 
held    Imble     for    the    damages. 


Brooks  V.  Clifton,  22  Ark.  54.  A 
lease  granting  the  license,  right, 
and  privilege,  of  gauging,  getting 
out,  working,  and  carrying  away 
granite  stone,  does  not  confer  the 
right  of  carrying  away  rubble  stone. 
Emery  v.  Owings,  6Gill(Md.)  191. 
And  so  generally  where  premises 
are  let  for  a  specified  purpose,  there 
is  an  implied  agreement  that  they 
shall  not  be  used  for  a  purpose  in- 
consistent therewith. 

*In  Wainscott  v.  Silvers,  13  Ind. 
497,  he  was  held  not  liable  for  the 
destruction  of  the  premises  by  an 
accidental  fire. 

'  In  Mason  v.  Stiles,  374,  the  ten- 
ant was  held  responsible  where  his 
clerk  wantonly  fired  a  can  of 
powder  near  the  building,  causing 
its  destruction. 

*  Dickinson  V.  Goodspeed,  8  Cush. 
(Mass.)  119  ;Haywardv.  Sedgeley, 
14  Me.  439 ;  Leader  v.  Moxon,  2 
W.  Bl.  924 ;  Barker  v.  Barker,  3  C. 
&  P.  557  ;  Bedingfield  v.  Onslow, 
3  Lev.  209  ;  Harrison  v.  Blackburn, 
17  C.  B.  N.  S.  678 ;  Shadwell  v. 
Hutchinson,  2  B.  &  Ad.  97. 

'  Wilbur  V.  Paine,  1   Ohio,  251. 

*  Governor  v.  Meredith,  4  T.  E. 


CHAP.  XLix.]         Eights  OP  Tenant.  1301 

cases  -where  the  buildings  are  torn  down  to  prevent  the 
spreading  of  a  fire  in  cases  where  it  does  not  appear  that 
the  buildings  would  inevitably  have  been  destroyed  by 
the  fire  if  not  demolished,'  and  the  burden  of  showing 
that  the  demolition  was  wholly  unnecessary  is  upon  the 
plaintiff."  The  tenant  is  liable  either  to  the  landlord  or 
third  persons  for  any  improper  use  of  the  premises  pro- 
ducing damages/  as  well  as  for  any  negligence  in  their 
use.*  A  tenant  at  will  of  a  part  of  a  building,  the  other 
part  being  occupied  by  the  landlord,  and  in  each  part  of 
which  personal  property  of  the  landlord  is  contained,  is 
liable  for  the  destruction  of  the  part  in  the  possession  of 
the  landlord  and  its  contents  by  fire,  caused  by  the  neg- 
ligence of  himself  or  his  servants  in  kindling  or  guarding 
fires  in  stores  used  for  heating  the  pai-t  of  the  premises  let 
to  him ;  but  he  is  not  liable  for  the  d^truction  of  the 
part  so  let  from  the  same  cause,  if  the  burning  is  not 
intentional,  and  the  neghgence  is  not  so  gross  as  to 
amount  to  recklessness.  The  liability  of  the  tenant  for 
the  landlord's  chattels  in  the  possession  of  the  tenant 
depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  bailment.'  And  as  the 
duty  of  keeping  premises  in  repair  prima  facie  rests  upon 
the  occupant,  he  is  prima  facie  responsible  for  injuries 
resulting  to  a  stranger  from  a  failure  to  properly  repair 
such  defects  in  the  premises  as  are  liable  to  injuriously 
affect  the  public  or  third  persons,  °  and  this  includes  repairs 
to  fences,  party  walls,  drains,  &c.,'  as  well  as  highways, 
sidewalks,  &c.,  where  the  duty  of  their  repair  is  imposed 
upon  the  occupant ;  °  and  the  fact  that  the  defects  existed 

797  ;  Mayor  v.  Lord,  17  Wend.  (N.  v.  Monroe,  44  Me.  195  ;  KiUon  t. 

Y.)  285.  Power,  57  Penn.  St.  429 ;  Warren 

>  Corlies  v.  City  Fire  Ins.  Co.,  v.  Kauffman,  2  Phila.  (Penn.)  359 ; 

21  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  367  ;  Pentz  v.  Moor  v.  Goedel,  44  N.  Y.  637. 

Mtaa.  Ins.  Co.,  9  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  '  Lothrop  y.  Thayer,    138  Mass. 

568.  466. 

3  Marriott  v.  Stanley,  1  M.  &  G.  '  Russell  v".  Shenton,  3  Q.  B.  449 ; 

668;  Regina  v.  Watts,  1  Salk.  357.  Althorp  v.  Wolfe,  82  N.  Y.  355; 

*  Payne  v.  Rogers,  2  H.  Bl.  349  ;  Cheetham  v.  Hampton,  4  T.  R. 

Sybrey  v.  White,  1  M.  «fe  W.  435  ;  318;    Regina  v.  Buskside,  2  Ld. 

Pickard  v.  Collins,  23  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  Rayd.  792 ;  Chicago  v.  Brennan, 

444 ;   LesUe  v.   Pounds,  4  Taunt.  65  lU.  160. 

649 ;  Mayor  v.  Corlies,  2  Sandf.  s  Lowell  v.  Spaulding,  4  Cush. 

(N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  301 ;  Laugher  v,  (Mass.)   277 ;     Payne   v.   Rogers, 

JPointer,  5  B.  &  C.  551 ;  Stickney  ante. 

11,-30 


1302  _  Rights,  Eemedies,  &c.  [§  538. 

when  his  right  to  possession  attached  is  no  defence.'  If 
other  tenants  occupy  the  premises  he  is  bound  to  respect 
their  rights,  and  is  Uable  to  them  for  any  improper  or 
negligent  use  of  the  premises  occupied  by  him  injurious 
to  the  possession  of  such  cotenants,"  but  he  is  not  Hable 
to  them  for  injuries  resulting  from  inevitable  accidents.' 
If  repairs  are  necessary  to  prevent  waste,  and  are  of  such 
a  character  that  his  cotenants  ought  to  contribute  thereto, 
if,  upon  request,  they  refuse  to  do  so,  he  may  make  such 
repairs  and  recover  of  them  their  proper  proportion  of  the 
expense,  but  he  cannot  compel  them  to  contribute  towards 
improvements  made  by  him."  The  tenant  is  also  bound 
to  respect  the  landlord's  title,  and  cannot  ordinarily  deny 
it ;  and  if  efforts  are  made  to  dispossess  him  by  a  person 
not  in  privity  with  the  landlord's  title,  he  is  bound  to 
notify  the  landlord  thereof.  He  cannot,  by  his  acquies- 
cence as  against  the  landlord,  encumber  the  estate  with  an 
easement,"  nor  in  any  way  bind  the  landlord,  so  far  as 
the  reversion  is  concerned,  by  any  unlawful  act  of  a 
stranger."  The  lessee  of  agricultural  lands  has  no  right 
to  remove  manure  made  upon  the  premises,  although 
made  by  his  own  cattle  and  from  his  own  fodder  ; '  but 
this  rule  does  not  prevail  where  the  premises  do  not  come 
under  the  head  of  agricultural  lands,  and  the  manure  is 
not  made  from  the  produce  of  the  premises.  ° 

'  Coupland  v.   Hirrdrmgham,   3  of  a  proper  proportion  of  the  ex- 

Cowp.  398.  pense.     Duff  v.  Wilson,  72  Penn. 

'■^  Keay  v.  Goodwin,  16  Mass.  3  ;  St.  443  ;  Burhaus  v.  Van  Zandt,  7 

Warren  v.  Kauffman,  ante ;  Kil-  N.  Y.  528 ;   Dubois  v.  Campan,  25 

lion  V.  Power,  51  Penn.  St.  429 ;  Mich.  390 ;  Van  Horn  v.  Fonda,  5 

Weston  V.   The    Incorporation  of  John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  388,  if  under  the 

Tailors,  Hay,  69  ;  Moore  v.  Goedel,  circumstances  the  cotenants  ought 

34  N.  Y.  227.  to  be  let  in.     Frentz  y.  Klotch,  28 

=  Ross    V.  Fedden,  L.  E.,  7  Q.  B.  Wis.  313  ;   Buchanan  v.  King,  2Z 

661.  Gratt.     (Va.)  14;    MandevUle    v. 

*  Coffin  V.  Heath,  6  Met.  (Mass.)  Solomon,  39  Cal.  135. 

80  ;  Calvert  v.  Aldrich,  99  Mass.  ^  Daniel  v.  North,  11  East,  373 ; 

74 ;  Converse  v.  Ferre,   11  Mass.  Jesser  v.  Giflord,  4  Burr.  3141. 

335  :  Taylor  v.  Baldwin,  10  Barb.  « Id. 

(N.  Y.)  626 ;  Mumford  v.  Brown,  '  Plumer  v.   Plumer,  30  N.  H. 

6  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  475  ;  Van  Orman  558 ;  Lassell  v.  Reed,  6  Me.   333 ; 

V.   Phelps,  9  Barb.   (N.   Y.)   500;  Middlebrook  v.  Corwin,  15  Wend. 

Doane    v.  -Badger,  13    Mass.    96.  (N.  Y.)  169 ;  Pen-y  v.  Carr,  44  N. 

One  tenant  may  purchase  an  out-  H.  118;  Gallagher  v.  Shipley,  34 

standing  title  or  claim  upon  the  Md.  418. 

common   estate,   but    equity  will  *  Needham  v.  Allison,  24  N.  H. 

compel  him  to  give  his  cotenants  355.    Manure  made  in  a  livery  sta- 

the  benefit  thereof  upon  payment  ble  belongs  to  the  tenant.    Daniels 


CHAP.  SLIXj 


Eights  of  Tenant, 


1303 


As  previously  stated,  the  tenant  must  respect  the  land- 
lord's title,  and  he  cannot  attorn  to  a  person  who  is  not 
in  privity  with  such  title,  and  if  he  does,  it  has  no  vaUdity 
as  against  the  landlord  or  his  grantee."  By  the  statute 
quia  emptores,"  after  an  estate  for  years,  &c.,  had  been 
conveyed,  it  was  necessary  that  the  tenant  should  attorn 
to  the  grantee  before  he  could  maintain  an  action  against 
the  tenant  upon  the  lease.  But  after  the  statute  27  H.  8, 
chap.  10,  this  necessity  was  in  a  measure  remedied,  and 
by  the  statute  4  Ann.,  chap.  16,  sec.  0,  attornments  are 
rendered  unnecessary  ;  and  after  notice  to  the  tenant 
of  the  conveyance  the  grantee  of  the  reversion  of  assignee 
of  the  lease  may  recover  the  rent  of  the  tenant  and 
stands  in  the  landord's  place  as  to  all  remedies  under  the 
lease."    He  may  distrain  for  the  rent.* 


V.  Pond,  31  Pick.  (Mass.)  367 ;  Gal- 
lagher V.  Shiplay,  ante. 

'  MagiU  V.  Hinsdale,  6  Conn.  464 ; 
Fuller  V.  Sweet,  30  Mich.  337. 

3  18  Edward  I.,  Chap.  1. 

'  Kendall  v.  Carlaiid,  5  Cush. 
(Mass.)  74 ;  Scott  v.  Lunt,  7  Pet. 
(XJ.  S.)  506  ;  Abercrombie  v.  Eed- 
path,  1  Iowa,  HI ;  Newall  v.- 
Wright,  3  Mass.  153  ;  Montague  \. 
Gay,  17  id.  439.  A  lessor  may 
grant  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the 
premises  out  of  which  i-ent  issues, 
and  the  lessee  will  be  bound  to  pay 
the  whole  or  a  proportionate  share 
of  the  rent  to  the  grantee,  and  the 
latter  has  all  the  remedies  to  en- 
force payment  which  the  lessor 
had.  Qrosby  v.  Loop,  13  lU.  625. 
Or  he  may  assign  his  interest  in  a 
lease  by  an  indorsement  on  it,  so 
as  to  pass  the  equitable  right  to  his 
assignee  to  receive  the  rent  when 
it  becomes  due.  Dixon  v.  Buell, 
21  lU.  303.  If  no  reservation  is 
made,  the  sale  of  leased  land  car- 
ries with  it  the  accruing  rent. 
Dixon  V.  Nichols,  39  lU.  373 ;  Gale 
Edwards,  53  Me.  853.  Where  land 
is  conveyed,  with  fuU  covenants, 
but  is  at  the  time  in  possession  of 
a  tenant,  a  parol  agreement  to  ac- 
cept the  deed  and  the  tenant's  pos- 
session, as  the  possession  of  the 


purchaser,-  is  valid  and  may  be 
shown ;  and  such  an  agreement 
will  be  inferred,  nothing  appear- 
ing to  the  contrary,  where  the  pur- 
chaser has  full  knowledge  of  the 
tenancy  and  the  rights  of  the  ten- 
ant. Page  V.  Lashley,  15  Ind.  153. 
A  conveyance  of  premises  and  all 
appurtenant  thereto,  made  with- 
out any  reservation,  carries  with 
it  the  grantor's  rights  in  a  lease  of 
the  premises  previously  made  by 
him.  Hatfield  v.  Lockwood,  18 
Iowa,  396.  A  tenancy  at  will  is, 
by  alienation  of  the  estate  of  the 
landlord,  changed  into  a  tenancy 
at  sufferance;  and  although  the 
tenant  had  occupied  the  premises 
for  a  series  of  years,  by  consent  of 
successive  owners,  the  last  aliena- 
tion would  effect  the  same  change. 
Esty  v.  Baker,  59  Me.  335.  A  con- 
veyance of  leased  premises  by  the 
lessor  makes  the  grantee  landlord 
of  the  lessee,  with  the  right  to  pos- 
session of  the  premises  upon  for- 
feiture for  breach  of  conditions  in 
the  lease.  Page  v.  Esty,  54  Me. 
319.  But  until  notice  is  given  to 
the  tenant  payment  to  the  landlord 
is  good.  Farley  v.  Thompson,  15 
Mass.  18.  Eent  to  arrear  does  not 
pass  as  an  incident  of  the  reversion. 
Gibbs  V.  Ross,  3  Head.  (Tenn.)  437. 


■*  Lloyd  V,  Davies,  2  Exchq.  103  ; 
Lumley  v.  Hodgson,  16  East,  99; 
Eivis  V.  Watson,  5  M.  &  W.  355. 
Even  though  the  tenancy  is  from 


year  to  year.  Rogers  v.  Hum- 
phreys, 4  Ad.  &  El.  313  ;  Evans  v. 
Elliott,  9  id.  343;  Partington  v. 
Woodcock,  7  id.  690, 


1304  Eights,  Eemedies,  &c.  [§  538. 

An  attornment  generally  estops  the  party  making  it 
from  denying  the  title  of  the  person  to  whom  the  attorn- 
ment is  made.  Thus  were  an  attornment  was  made  to  the 
claimants  in  an  ejectment,  who  derived  their  title  under  a 
will,  the  tenant  was  held  to  be  estopped  from  contending 
in  a  subsequent  action  that  upon  the  true  construction  of 
the  wiU  the  claimants  had  no  title, '  although  on  a  previous 
occasion  it  had  been  decided  that  the  tenant  might  show  the 
attornment  to  have  been  made  by  mistake  and  under  sus- 
picious circumstances,  and  that  it  had  not  been  acted  on  for 
seven  years,  and  a  conveyance  to  himself  made  by  the  real 
owner."  Where  a  tenant  had  attorned  and  paid  rent  to  a 
devisee  of  the  landlord,  and  no  fraud  or  misrepresentation 
had  been  practised  towards  him  ;  held,  that  he  could  not 
afterwards  dispute  the  devisee's  title  by  evidence  showing 
that  the  testator  was  incompetent  to  make  a  wiU.° 
Attornment  by  a  tenant  to  the  heir  upon  threat  of 
eviction  is  tantamount  to  entry  by  the  heir,  and  prevents 
the  tenant  from  afterwards  disputing  his  title.*  Some- 
times a  tenant  who  has  attorned  will  be  allowed  to  prove 
that  such  attornment  was  procured  by  fraud  or  misrep- 
resentation, or  that  it  was  made  by  mistake  and  in  ignor- 
ance of  material  facts,  and  that  the  person  to  whom  he 
attorned  really  had  no  title.  °  Thus,  where  a  tenant  to  a 
landlord,  who  died,  afterwards  attorned  to  his  heir,  in 
ignorance  that  his  title  as  heir  was  disputed,  it  was  held, 
that  the  tenant  was  not  thereby  estopped  from  showing 
that  the  heir  really  had  no  title  to  the  property,  and  that 
the  attornment  to  him  was  a  mistake."  Where  a  person 
having  possession  of  land  under  a  good  title  became  ten- 
ant and  paid  rent  to  a  stranger,  it  was  held,  that  he  was 

A  tenant  who  plants  a  crop  to  ripen  '  Gravenor     v.     Woodhouse,    1 

after  the  expiration  of  the  period  of  Bing.  38. 

redemption  has  expired  under  a  'Marlow  v.    Wiggins,  4  Q.   B. 

levy  of    an   execution   upon    the  367. 

land,  cannot  hold  the  land  for  the  *  Hill  v.  Saunders,  4  B.  &  C.  539  ; 

purpose  of  raping  the  crop,  and  Cooke  y.  Loxley,  5  T.  R.  4. 

in  such  a  case,  a  statute  in  aid  of  '  Rogers  v.  Pitcher,  6  Taunt.  303 ; 

tenants  who  plantin  the  belief  that  Cornish  v.  Searall,  8B.  &  C.  471; 


they  can  reap,  has  no  application.  Plevin  v.  Brown,  7  Ad.  &  El.  447  ; 

Wheeler  v.  Kirlsiendoll,  fi7  Iowa,  Brook  v.  Biggs,  2  Bmg.  N.  C.  573 ; 

612.  Hughes  v.  Hughes,  15  M.    &  W. 

» Gravenor     -w.    Woodhouse,    3  703  ;  Cole  Ejec.  218,  331. 

Bing.  71.  "  Gregory  v.  Doidge,  3  Bing.  474. 


CHAP.  XLix.]  Eights  of  Tenant.  1305 

not  estopped,  after  such  tenancy  had  determined  and  be- 
fore he  had  given  up  possession,  from  setting  up  his  own 
prior  title  in  an  ejectment  by  his  lessor.'  But  in  all  such 
cases  the  onus  of  proof  as  to  the  title  is  thrown  upon  the 
person  who  attorned,  and  he  must  disprove  the  title  of 
the  person  to  whom  such  attornment  was  made. 

Payment  of  rent  by  a  tenant  to  his  landlord,  after  the 
title  of  the  latter  has  expired,  and  after  the  tenant  has 
received  notice  of  an  adverse  claim,  does  not  amount 
to  an  acknowledgment  of  title  in  the  landlord,  or  to  a 
virtual  attornment ;  unless  at  the  time  of  such  pay- 
ment the  tenant  heard  the  precise  nature  of  the  adverse 
claim,  or  how  the  landlord's  title  had  expired!" 

Sec.  639.  Bemedics  for  recovery  of  rent  by  distress. — In 
most  of  the  States  of  this  country  the  common  law  remedy 
of  distress  for  the  recovery  of  rent  as  well  as  most  of  the 
old  English  statutes  relating  thereto,  have  been  adopted," 
although  in  the  New  England  States  this  remedy  is  super- 
seded by  their  attachment  laws,*  and  in  New 
York,  North  Carolina,  Mississippi,  Missouri,  Wisconsin, 
and  some  of  the  other  States,  the  remedy  is  abol- 
ished by  statute,  or  is  held  not  to  exist.'  In  some  of  the 
States,  while  this  remedy  has  been  abolished,  yet  the 
landlord  is  so  far  protected  that  the  tenant's  property  can- 
not be  taken  on  excution  on  the  premises,  unless  a  year's 
rent  if  due,  is  first  tendered  or  paid  to  the  landlord.'  By 
'  the  Louisiana  code '  the  landlord  may,  any  time  within 
fifteen  days,  follow  the  tenant's  furniture,  or  if  removed 
without  his  consent,  may  take  the  goods  wherever  he 

'  Accidental  Death  Insurance  Co.  110;    Burkett  v.  Baude,  3  Dana 

V.  Mackenzie,  9  W.  E.  713.  (Ky.)  209  ;    Biddle    v.    Biddle,    3 

-  Fenner  v.  Duploc,  2  Bing.  10  ;  Harr.  (Del.)  539  ;  Hoskins  v.  Paul, 

England  v.  Slade,  4  T,   E.   632  ;  9  N.  J.  L.  110  ;  Charleston  v.  Price, 

Gregory  v.  Doidge,  3  Bing.  474 ;  1  McCord  (S.  C.)   299  ;   Bearinger 

Claridge  y.  Mackenzie,  4  M.  &  G.  v.  O'Hare,  26  Iowa,  259  ;  Bradley 

143 ;   Meredith  v.  Gilpm,  6  Price,  v.  Pigott,  Walk.  (Miss.)  348. 

146  ;  Cornish  v.  Searall,  8  B.  &  C.  "  Patten  v.  Hall,  3  Pick.  (Mass.) 

471 ;  but  see  HaU  v,  Butler,  10  Ad.  368. 

&  El.  204.  'Denner  v.  Eice,  4  Dev.  &  B.  (N. 

8  Terrell  V.  Legion,  1  Miss.  170;  C.)431. 

Hartshome  v.  Kiernan,  7  N.  J.  L.  "  Wisconsin  Laws,  1866,  p.   77  ; 

29;  Hale  V. .  Burton,  Dudley  (Ga.)  Arbuckle  v.  Nelous,  50  Miss.  556. 

105  ;  Hoskins  v.  Paul,  9  N.  J.  L.  '  Articles  2675,  267»,  3185. 


1306  Eights,  Eemedies,  &c.  [§  539. 

can  find  them,  unless  the  tenant  has  parted  with  his  prop- 
erty in  them.  In  Alabama  the  remedy  is  confined  to  the 
city  of  Mobile.'  But  it  will  not  be  profitable  to  point 
out  in  detail  the  statute  law,  or  practice  in  particular 
States,  as  it  will  be  understood  that  in  many  of  the  States 
statutes  exist  dispensing  with,  or  modifying,  this  remedy 
and  the  practitioner  will  always  find  it  necessary  to  con- 
sult the  statute.  In  this  chapter  only  the  common  law 
rules  relating  to  the  subject  are  given.  In  order  to 
entitle  a  person  to  this  remedy,  the  relation  of  landlord 
and  tenant  must  exist  upon  an  actual  demise  of  premises 
either  verbal  or  written,  at  a  fixed  rent ; "  but  it  is  not 
essential  that  the  rent  should  be  payable  in  money ; '  it  is 
sufficient  if  the  amount  of  rent  is  fixed,  or  is  of  such  a 
character  that  it  can  be  reduced  to  a  certainty,  although 
it  is  payable  in  labor*  or  in  specific  property. '  If  the  rent 
is  fixed,  although  fluctuating,  it  may  be  distrained  for,— 
as  where  the  landlord  is  to  have  as  rent  one-third  the 
tolls  of  a  grist  mill,"  or  so  much  per  square  for  slate  quar- 

'  Dumas  v.  M'Loskey,  5  Ala.  339.  Bush.  (Ky.)  213.    If  the  rent  is  so 

-Smith  V.  Sheriff,  &c.,  1  Bay.  fixed  that  it  may  be  ascertained 

(S.  C.)443;  Bevaisv.  SoUee,  IBrev.  with  certainty,  by  calculation  or 

(S.  C.)  351.  otherwise,     a     distress     lies, — as, 

^  But  it  must  be  reduced  to  a  cer-  where  it  is  to  be  fixed  by  arbitra- 

tainty — that,  is,  a  certain  sum,  pay-  tion,  Myers  v.  Mansfield,  ante,  or 

able  in  money  or  other  valuable  whereitis  payable  in  United  States 

thing,  as  in  labor.    Spencer  v.  Mc-  gold  coin,  Kaufman  v.  Myers,  38 

Govern,   13    Wend.   (N.    Y.)  256.  Ga.  133,  or  where  the  rent  is  to  be 

Thus,  rent  of  a  grist  mill,  payable  proportioned  to  the  improvements 

in  one-third  the  tolls,  may  be  dis-  put  upon  the  place.    Detweller  v. 

trained  for.    Foy  v.  Jones,  3  Rawle  Cox,  75  Penn.  St.  200.    So  it  has 

(Penn.)  11.  been  held  that  an  agreement  to 

■*  Spencer    v.    McGovern,  ante  ;  shear  all  the  sheep  pastured  in  the 

Smith  V.  Fyler,  3  HiU  (N.  Y.)  648  ;  landlord's  pasture  was  sufficiently 

Regnart  v.   Porter,  7  Bing.   454;  susceptible  of  computation  as  to  be 

Dunk  V.  Hunter,  5  B.  &  Aid.  325.  the  ground  of  a  distress,  because 

^  Jones  V.  Gurdrim,  3  W.  &  S.  the  number  could  be  readily  ascer- 

(Penn.)531.    The  rent  must  be  fixed  tained.    Co.  Litt.  96,  a.    Butinln- 

with  precision,  Knight  v.  Bennett,  diana  it  is  held  that  a  distress  will 

3    Bing.   361;    or   the    landlord's  not  lie  where  the  rent  is  payable  in 

remedy  is  for  use  and  occupation,  a  certain  share  of  the  crops  raised. 

Dunk  V.  Hunter,  ante.    Rent  pay-  although  it  is  confined  to  a  certain 

able  in    anything    susceptible    of  species  of  crop, — as  corn,  wheat, 

valuation  may  be   distrained  for.  &c.    Clark   v.   Fraley,  3  Blackf. 

Frazer  v.  Davie,  5  Rich.  (S.  C.)  59.  (Ind.)  264.    And  in  South  Carolina 

*  Foy  V.  Jones,  2  Rawle  (Penn.)  it  is  held,  that  there  must  be  a  res- 

11 ;  Daniel  v.  Gracie,  6  Q.  B.  145  ;  ervation  of  a  specific  sum  as  rent. 

Valentine  v.  Jackson,  9  Wend.  (N.  Marshall  v.  Giles,  2  Const.  (S.  C.) 

Y.)  302 ;  Dunk  v.  Hunter,  5  B.  &  637.    Upon  the  general  question, 

Aid.  322  ;  Jacks  v.  Smith,  1  Bay.  see  Cornell  v.  Lamb,  2  Cow.  (N. 

(S.  C.)  315  ;  Myers  v.  Mansfield,  7  Y.)  652  ;  Smith  v.  Calson,  10  John. 


CHAP.  XIIX.] 


Eecoveey  of  Eent. 


1307 


ried,  or  so  much  per  yard  for  clay,  or  so  much  per  thou- 
sand for  bricks  made,  &c.'  And  the  parties  may  by 
express  agreement,  extend  the  remedy  to  payments  that 
are  not  strictly  rent."  Liquidated  damages,  or  forfeit- 
ures because  of  a  violation  of  the  condition  of  the  lease, 
although  the  lease  is  not  under  seal,  may  be  distrained  for 
if  BO  specially  agreed  in  the  lease."  Double  rent  which 
becomes  payable  under  11  Geo.  2,  chap.  19,  sec.  18,  may 
be  distrained  for."  But  where  the  tenant  occupies  as 
licensee  merely — as,  where  the  the  owner  of  a  factory 
lets  standing  room  for  machinery  and  supplies  the  power 
and  there  is  no  demise  of  the  room, — there  can  be  no 
distress.^  But  under  a  lease  of  furnished  apartments 
there  may  be  a  distress  for  the  whole  rent,  because,  al- 
though a  part  of  the  payment  is  for  the  use  of  personalty, 
yet  in  law  the  entire  rent  issues  out  of  the  land."  A  dis- 
tress can  be  made  only  where  the  relation  of  landlord  and 
tenant  exists,  and  in  general  the  person  who  distrains 
must  possess  a  reversion,'  either  actually  or  by  estoppel, 
and  the  fact  that  the  tenant  has  attorned  to  a  grantee, 

mere  agreement  for  a  lease  not 
amounting  to  an  actual  demise, 
Dunk  V.  HunteSr,  5  B:  &  Aid.  332 ; 
Hegan  v.  Johnson,  3  Taunt.  148, 
unless  by  the  terms  of  the  agree- 
ment the  same  remedies  are  to  be 
enforced  as  if  the  lease  was  actu- 
ally executed.  Eollason  v.  Leon. 
7  H.  &  N.  73  ;  Pinero  v.  Judson,  6 
Bing.  306  ;  AJidersori  v.  Midland 
E.  E.  Co.,  7  Jur.  N.  S.  411.  But  a 
tenancy  may  be  implied  from 
slight  circumstances,  and  where 
the  person  in  possession  has  paid 
rent,  and  thereby  axjknowledged  a 
tenancy  at  a  fixed  rent,  a  distress 
lies.  Cox  V.  Bent,  5  Bing.  185  ; 
Vincent  v.  Godson,  34  L.  J.  Ch. 
138  ;  Bridges  v.  Smyth,  5  Bing. 
410 ;  Jones  v.  Carter,  15  M.  &  W. 
718  ;  Frankhn  y.  Carter,  1  C.  B. 
750;  Eegnant  v.  Porter,  7  Bing. 
451 ;  M'Leish  v.  Tate,  Cowp.  781 ; 
Gladman  v.  Plummer,  10  Jur.  109  ; 
Eagleton  v.  Guttridge,  11  M.  &  W. 
465.  And  where  a  tenancy  has  ex- 
isted; and  the  tenant  still  continues 
to  occupy,  the  landlord  may  dis- 
train, as  this  right  continues  until 
the  surrender  of  the  term  is  com- 
plete.   Coupland  v.  Maynard,  13 


(N.  Y.)  91 ;  Watkins  v.  Taliaferro, 
53  Qu.  308  ;  Eeeves  v.  McKenzie, 
1  BaUey  (S.  C.)  500  ;  Grier  v.  Cow- 
an,'Addis.  347;  Eoberts  v.  Termell, 
4  J.  J.  Mar.  (Ky.)  166 ;  Dailey  v. 
Grimes,  36  Md.  440.  A  void  lease 
may  be  referred  to,  to  make  the 
rent  certain..  Edwards  v.  dem- 
ons, 24  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  480. 

'  r)aniel  v.  Gracie,  ante.  But  in 
Kentucky  a  distress  lies  only  when 
the  rent  is  payable  in  money. 
Paer  v.  Peebles,  1  B.  Mon.  (Ky.) 
1. 

sPolUtt  Y.  Forrest,  11  Q.  B.  549 ; 
Eoulston  V.  Clark,  3  H.  B.  568. 

» Pollitt  V.  Forest,  11  Q.  B.  949. 

*  Johnstone  v.  Huddlestone,  4  B. 
&  C.  933  ;  Humberstone  v,  Dubois, 
10  M.  &  W.  756. 

5  Edmundson  v.  NuttaU^  17  C.  B. 
N.  L.  380 ;  Hancock  v.  Austin,  14 
id.  634. 

« Newman  v.  Anderton,  3  B.  &  P. 
234. 

'  Buckley  v.  Taylor,  3  T.  E.  600 
WilUams  v.  Hohnes,  8  Exchq.  861 
Harrison  v.  Barry,  7  Price,  690 
Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  663  ;  Hale 
V.  Burton,  Dud.  (Ga.)  105.    There 
can  be  no  distress  for  rent  undpr  a 


1308 


Eights,  Remedies,  &c. 


[§  539. 


assignee,  or  mortgagee,  enables  such  persons  to  pursue 
this  remedy.'  In  order  to  render  this  remedy  available 
the  rent  must  be  in  arrear,'  and  if  payable  in  advance,  it 
is  in  arrear  and  may  be  distrained  for  the  day  after  it  be- 


East,  134.  But  where  the  landlord 
has  given  notice  to  quit,  and  the 
tenant  holds  over,  a  distress  will 
not  lie  for  rent  accruing  after  the 
time  when  the  notice  expires. 
WiUiams  v.  Stiven,  9  Q.  B.  14; 
Alford  V.  Vickery,  1  C.  &  M.  280. 
1  Morton  v.  Woods,  L.  R.,3  Q.  B. 
658.  But  the  distinction,  so  far  as 
distress  is  concerned,  was  abolished 
by  4  Geo.  3,  chap.  28,  and  where- 
as, prior  to  that  statute,  a  rever- 
sionary interest  was  necessary  to 
support  a  distress,  yet  after  the 
adoption  of  this  statute  the  right 
of  distress  was  separated  from  the 
reversion,  and  a  grantor  who  has 
reserved  rent  may  distrain  for  it 
whether  he  has  any  reversion  or 
not.  Schuyler  v.  Leggett,  2  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  660 ;  Bradbury  v.  Wright, 
Doug.  624.  But  the  question 
whether  this  right  exists  or  not  in 
the  different  States  of  this  country 
depends  upon  the  circumstance 
whether  this  statute  has  been 
adopted  or  not.  Upon  the  general 
proposition  stated  in  the  text,  see 
Evans  v.  ElUott.  9  Ad.  &  El.  343  ; 
Alchorne  v.  Gomnie,  3  Bing.  54 ; 
Rogers  v.  Humphrey,  4  Ad.  &  El. 
299.  A  receiver  appointed  by  a 
mortgagor  and  mortgagee  to  re- 
ceive rents  of  the  laortgagor  may 
distrain  the  mortgagor's  goods  on 
the  premises.  Dancer  v.  Hast- 
ings, 4  Bing.  3 ;  Jolly  v.  Arburth- 
not,  4  DeG.  &  J.  324.  So  may  re- 
ceivers appointed  by  courts  of 
chancery,  &c. ,  on  a  special  leave  of 
the  courts.  Brandon  v.  Brandon,  5 
Madd.  473 ;  Pitt  v.  Snowden,  8  Atk. 
750  ;  Bennett  v.  Robins,  5  C.  &  P. 
379.  But  a  person  who  is  author- 
ized to  receive  and  receipt  for  rents 
has  no  such  power.  Ward  v. 
Shrew,  9  Bing.  608.  A  husband 
may  distrain  for  rent  which  be- 
came due  during  the  life  of  the 
wife  if  he  had  in  the  right  of  the 
wife  an  estate  in  the  lands,  either 
in  fee  simple,  tail,  or  for  life. 
Stat.  33  Hen.  8,  chap.  37,  sec.  3. 
And  imder  this  statute  he  may  dis- 
train as  well  for  rent  accruing  he- 
fore  marriage  as   during  its    con- 


tinuance. Ognel's  Case,  4  Coke,51 ; 
Co.  Litt.  163,  h,  851,  h.  But  if  the 
tenant  is  tenant  only  by  curtesy  he 
can  distrain  for  rents  accruing  only 
dmlng  coverture.  4  Bacon's  Abr. 
(C.  1)  17  ;  Woodfall's  L.  &  T.  338 
Home  V.  Scarrott,  4  H.  &  N.  723 
Hill  V.  Saunders,  4  B.  &  C.  535 
Blake  v.  Foster,  8  T.  R.  487.  Un 
der  this  statute,  and  3  &  4  Will.  4, 
chap.  43,  sees.  37,  38,  executors  and 
administrators  may  distrain  for 
rent  due  the  landlord  in  his  life- 
time any  time  within  six  calendar 
months  after  the  determination  of 
the  term  or  lease.  An  executor 
may  distrain  before  probate.  1 
Williams  on  Executors,  256 ; 
Whitehead  v.  Taylor,  10  Ad.  &  El.', 
310.  Tenants  in  common  are  en- 
titled to  separate  distresses,  Whit- 
tey  V.  Roberts,  McCl.  &  G.  107,  or 
they  may  join,  Woodafll's  L.  &  T. 
384 ;  BuUen  on  Distresses,  48,  but 
they  must  avow  separately.  Id. 
One  joint  tenant  or  coparcener 
may  distrain  for  all,  eithei:  with  or 
without  authority  from  the  others 
Robinson  v.  Hoffman,  4  Bing.  S62 
PuUen  V.  Palmer,  3  Salk.  307 
Leigh  V.  Shepherd,  2  B.  &  B.  465 
but  he  must  avow  in  his  own  right 
as  baiUff  of  the  others.  Id.  And 
if  there  has  been  a  severance  by  a 
conveyance  of  one  or  more  who 
has  demised  at  a  single  rent  there 
can  be  no  distress  for  rent  accruing 
before  severance.  Staveley  v.  All- 
cock.  16  Q.  B.  636.  A  tenant  from 
year  to  year  underletting  from 
year  to  year  may  distrain.  Curtis 
V.  Wheeler,  Mas.  &  M.  493 ;  Oxiey 
V.  James,  13  M.  &  W.  209.  And 
a  right  to  distrain  exists  against  a 
tenant  at  will  where  a  fixed  rent 
is  reserved.  Morton  v.  Woods,  87 
L.  J.  Q.  B.  2. 

*  Fry  V.  Breckenridge,  7  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  31.  A  demand  for  the  rent 
is  unnecessary.  Garrett  v.  Hugh- 
lett,  1  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  3.  A  distress 
cannot  be  made  on  the  day  when 
the  rent  becomes  due.  Gane  v. 
Hart,  Hard.  (Ky.)  297  ;  Johnson  v, 
Owens,  3  Cr.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  160. 


CHAP.   XLIX.]  EeCOVERY  OF  ReNT. 


1309 


comes  due  according  to  the  lease.'  The  taking  of  a  bill 
or  note  for  rent  due  does  not  defeat  this  remedy,  but  sus- 
pends it  until  the  note  becomes  due  and  payable."  An 
unsatisfied  judgment  for  the  rent  does  not  defeat  this 
remedy/  nor  does  a  bond  for  the  rent/  nor  an  unaccepted 
order  drawn  upon  a  third  person/  nor  an  agreement  to 
take  interest/  nor  can  the  tedant  defeat  the  remedy,  be- 
cause the  landlord  is  indebted  to  him  upon  other  matters  ; ' 
and  even  a  court  of  equity  will  not  relieve  the  tenant 
from  a  distress  because  of  a  set-off." 

A  distress  cannot  be  made  after  a  valid  tender  of  the 
rent,  whether  made  on  or  off  the  premises,"  and  a  tender 
may  be  made  at  any  time  before  the  distress  is  completed.'" 


'  Buckley  v.  Taylor,  8  T.  R.  600  ; 
Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  663 ;  Witty 
V.  WiUiams,  13  W.  R.  755  ;  Har- 
rison V.  Barry,  7  Price,  690 ;  Con- 
way V.  Starkweather,  1  Den.  (N, 
Y.)  113. 

« Giles  V.  Elsworth,  10  Md.  333 
Snyder  v.  Kunkleman,  3  Penn. 
487  ;  Fife  v.  Irving,  1  Rich.  (S.  C 
336  ;,  Atkins  v.  Bryne,  71  111.  336  \ 
Peters  v.  Newkirk,  6  Cow.  (N.  Y.' 
103 ;  Walgamott  v.  Brunner,  4  H, 
&  McH.  (Md.)  70.  Unless  the  note 
was  taken  in  absolute  payment,  in 
which  case  it  discharges  the  rent 
and  consequently  tms  remedy. 
BaUey  v.  Wright,  3  McCord  (S.  C.) 
484  ;  Dent  v.  Hencock,  5  Gill  (Md.) 
130.  And  the  fact  that  security  is 
given  does  not  defeat  the  remedy, 
Bailey  v.  Wright,  ante,  nor  does  a 
chattel  mortgage,  Loftsky  v. 
Manjer,  SSandf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)69 ;  nor 
the  reservation  of  a  lien  upon  crops, 
&c.,  Lewis  V.  Lozee,  3  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  79  ;  Smith  v.  Meaner,  16  S.  & 
R.  (Penn.)  375,  nor  of  aright  to  re- 
enter for  non-payment,  or  that  he 
may  charge  interest.  Skerry  v. 
Preston,  3  Chitt.  345. 

"Bates  V.  Welles,  5  HiU  (N.  Y.) 
651;  Snyder  V.  Kunkleman,  3  Penn. 
490;  Bartleon  v.  Smith,  3  Binn. 
(Penn.)  146  ;  Chipman  v.  Martin, 
13  John.  (N.  Y.)  340. 

■>  Warren  v.  Forney,  13  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  53. 

"Warren  v.  Forney,  13  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  53. 

« Sherry  V.  Preston,  3  Chitt.  345. 

'  Wilson  V.  Davenport,  5  C.  &  P. 
531 ;   Absalom  v.   King,    Barnes. 


450  ;  Stubbs  v.  Parsons,  3  B.  &  Aid. 
531 ;  Andrew  v.  Hancock,  1  B.  & 
B.  46. 

8  Pratt  V.  Keith,  10  Jur.  (N.  S.) 
305. 

9  Bennett  v.  Bayes,  5  H.  &  N.  391 ; 
Branscombv.  Bridges,  3  Stark.  171 ; 
Holland  v.  Bird,  10  Bing.  15.  And 
even  after  a  warrant  is  taken  out, 
if  the  tenant,  before  an  entry  has 
been  made  under  it,  tenders  the 
rent  and  expenses,  the  warrant 
cannot  lawfully  be  served,  and  any 
person  acting  under  it  becomes 
liable  either  in  trespass  or  trover. 
Bennett  v.  Bayes,  ante ;  Hatch  v. 
Hale,  15  Q.  B.  10 ;  Ladd  v.  Thomas, 
13  Ad.  &E1. 117 ;  Vertue  v.  Beasley. 
1  M.  &  R.  31 ;  Evans  v.  ElUott,  5 
Ad.  &  El.  143.  But  a  tender  made 
after  the  warrant  has  been  exe- 
cuted is  too  late  to  enable  the  ten- 
ant to  maintain  either  detinue, 
trover,  trespass,  or  replevin,  be- 
cause the  property  is  then  in  the 
custody  of  the  law.  3  Inst.  107  ; 
Six  Carpenters,  8  Coke,  433 ;  Ellis 
V.  Taylor,  8  M.  &  W.  415 :  Thomas 
V.  Hames,  1  M.  &  G.  175  ;  Tennant 
V.  Field,  8  C.  &  B.  336  ;  Wilbraham 
v.  Snow,  3  Wm.  Saund.  47  a ;  Rex 
V.  Cotton,  Parker,  131 ;  Tiarner 
V.  Ford,  15  M.  &  W.  313.  But  if, 
after  a  sufficient  tender,  the  land- 
lord proceeds  to  sell  the  distress  a 
special  action  on  the  case  lies 
founded  on  3  Wm.  &  M 1. ,  chap.  5, 
sec  3.  Johnson  v.  Upham,  3  E.  & 
E.  350. 

'» Hunter  v.  Le  Conte,  6  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  738 ;  Brown  v.  Powell,  4 
Bing.  33^. 


1310  Eights,  Eemedies,  &c.  [§  540. 

The  tender  may  always  be  made  to  the  landlord  in  per- 
son,' or  to  an  agent  who  has  either  express  or  implied 
authority  to  receive  the  rent."  In  order  to  make  the  ten- 
der available  it  must  be  sufficient  in  amount  °  and  coupled 
with  no  conditions."  If  the  landlord  accepts  the  tender 
he  must  deliver  up  the  goods  or  he  will  be  liable  in  trover 
therefor,  but  cannot  thuS  be  treated  as  a  trespasser.' 
"The  property  in  the  goods  distrained  remains  in  the  tenant 
until  they  are  sold,  and  he  may  sell  or  assign  his  inter- 
est therein  so  as  to  enable  a  purchaser  to  maintain  trover 
against  the  landlord  therefor  when  the  distress  is  deter- 
mined.' 

Sec.  540.  What  may  be  distrained.— At  the  common 
law  a  distress  is  treated  as  a  mere  pledge,  and  conse- 
quently nothing  can  be  taken  that  cannot  be  returned  in 
the  same  good  plight  that  it  was  when  taken. '  This  rule, 
of  course,  exempts  fixtures  and  perishable  property, 
such  as  milk  and  the  flesh  of  animals  lately  slaughtered  ; " 
and  previous  to  the  statute  2  Wm.  &  M.,  chap.  5,  corn 
in  sheaves  or  cocks  was  exempt.  But,  except  the  class 
of  property  that  cannot  be  returned  in  specie  and 
undamaged,  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  general  rule,  that 
all  movable  property  upon  the  premises,  whether  belong- 
ing to  the  tenant  or  a  stranger,  may  be  taken,  the  reason 
being  that  the  landlord  has  a  lien  upon  them  in  respect 
of  the  place  where  they  are  found,  rather  than  the  person 

'  Smith  V.  Goodwm,  4  B.  &  Ad.  tender  inv^Udated  by  a  demand 

413.  for  a  receipt,  if  it  is  refused  upon 

"  Bennett  v.  Bayes,  ante  ;  Hatch  other     grounds.      Richardson    v. 

V.  Hale,  ante.    But  a  tender  made  Jackson,  8  M.  &  W.  398  ;  Cole  v. 

to  a  person  in  charge  of  the  goods,  Blake,  Peake  N.  P.  C.  179. 

Boulton  V.  Reynolds,  2  E.   &  E.  '  West  v.  Nibbs,  4  C.  B.  172. 

309,  or  to  a  servant,  Pilkington  v.  «Kjng  v.  England,  4B.  &  S.  782 

Hastings,  Cro.  Eliz.  813,  or  in  fact  Turner  v.  Ford,  15  M.  &  W.  213 

to  any  person  who  has  no  author-  '  Moore  v.  Drinkwater,  1  F.  &  F, 

ity  to  receive  the  rent,  express  or  134  ;  Pitt  v.  Shaw,  4  B.  &  Aid.  207 

imphed,  is  bad.    Id.  Simpson  v.  Hartopp,  WiUes,  515 

^Absalom  v.  King,   ante;    An-  Darby  v.    Harris,  "1    Q.   B.    895 

drew  V.  Hancock,  ante.  Thompson  v.   Pettitt,  10  id.  101 

^Bennett  v.  Bayes,    ante.       In  Dalton   v.    Whittem,   3    id.    961 

Finch  V.   Miller,  5  C.    B.   428,  a  Gilbert  on  Distresses,  34  Co.  Litt. 

tender  coupled  with  a  demand  for  47,  h. 

a  receipt  was  held  bad,  but  merely  *  Brown  v.  Shevill,  2  Ad.  &  El. 

requesting  a  receipt  does  not  in-  138;  Morleyv.  Pincombe,  SExchq. 

validate  the  tender ;  Jennings  v.  101. 
Major,   8  C.   &  P.   61 ;  nor  is  the 


CHAP.  XLIX.J 


Distress. 


1311 


to  whom  they  belong.'  But  so  far  as  the  right  to  take 
the  goods  of  a  stranger  are  concerned,  it  seems  to  be  con- 
fined to  goods  in  the  use  of  the  tenant  with  the  owner's 
consent,  and  does  not  extend  to  goods  in  his  hands  under 
such  circumstances  as  to  put  the  landlord  upon  inquiry 
as  to  the  title.  Therefore  property  belonging  to  a  boarder,  * 
unless  imise  by  the  tenant  with  the  boarder's  consent, 
cannot  be  taken.'  The  fact  that  the  landlord  knows 
that  the  property  does  not  belong  to  the  tenant  does  not 
relieve  it  from  liability  to  distress.  The  decisive  ques- 
tion is,  whether  the  tenant  had  such  a  possession  of  the 
property  as  indicates  ownership.*  The  property  of  a 
stranger  cannot  be  taken  when  it  is  in  the  possession  of 
the  tenant  in  the  way  of  his  trade,' — as  corn  sent  to  a 
miller  to  be  ground,"  cattle  sent  to  a  butcher  to  be 
slaughtered,'  materials  sent  to  a  mechanic  or  manufac- 
turer to  be  worked  up,"  or  sent  to  a  commission  merchant. 


1  Himely  v.  Wyatt,  1  Bay.  (S.  C.) 
102 ;  Blanche  v.  Bradford,  38 
Penn.  St.  344 ;  CadwaUader  v. 
Tindall,  20  id.  422  ;  Price  v.  Mc- 
Allister, 8  Grant's  Cas.  (Penn.)  820  ; 
Elford  V.  Clark,  2  Brew.  (S.  C.)  88  ; 
Matthews  v.  Stone,  1  HUl  (N.  Y.) 
565 ;  Keller  v.  Webber,  27  Md. 
660 ;  Spencer  v.  McGovem,  13 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  256;  Howard  v. 
Ramsay,  7  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  118; 
Kessler  v.  McConachy,  1  Rawle 
(Penn.)  435 ;  Davis  v.  Payne,  4 
Rand.  (Va.)  332;  Reeves  v.  Mc- 
Kenzie.  1  Bailey  (S.  C.)  497; 
O'DonneU  v.  Sybert,  13  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  57. 

2  Riddle  v.  Walden,  5  Whart. 
(Penn.)  9. 

3  Matthews  v.  Stone,  1  HiU  (N. 
Y.)  565. 

*  Reeves  v.  McKenzie,  1  Bailey 
(S.  C.)  497. 

*  Simpson  v.  Hartopp,  WiUes, 
512  ;  Wood  v.  Clark,  1  C.  &  J.  484  ; 
Gibson  v.  Iveson,  3  Q.  B.  39.  A 
horse  In  a  blacksmith's  shop  to  be 
shod,  Gibson  v.  Hurst,  1  Salk. 
249  ;  Co.  Litt.  47,  a ;  materials  in  the 
hands  of  a  person,  to  be  manu- 
factured, or  the  article  when  manu- 
factured, are  exempt.  Wood  v. 
Clarke,  ante ;  Haskins  v.  Pond,  9 
N.  J.  L.  110.  So  are  goods  in  the 
hands  or  a  warehouseman,  or  of  a 


person  who  takes  goods  to  store, 
Briggs  V.  Large,  30  Penn.  St.  287, 
or  in  the  hands  of  a  commission 
merchant  to  be  sold  or  stored, 
Bevan  v.  Crooks,  7  W.  &  S.  (Penn.) 
452  ;  Connah  v.  Hale,  23  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  462,  and  a  horse  sent  to  a 
livery  stable  to  be  fed  and  oared 
for.  Youngblood  v.  Lowry,  2  Mc- 
Cord  (S.  C.)  89.  Goods  pledged 
with  a  pawnbroker,  Swire  v. 
Leach,  18  C.  B.  N.  S.  479,  and 
generally  it  may  be  said  that,  when 
the  tenant  exercises  a  public  trade, 
property  in  his  possession  in  the 
way  of  his  trade,  belonging  to  a 
customer,  cannot  be  disti'ained  for 
rent,  the  rule  being  that,  where 
goods  are  in  the  hands  of  a  tenant 
for  his  use,  or  to  remain  there,  they 
are  distrainable ;  but  not  when 
they  are  in  his  possession  for  a 
particular  purpose,  and  his  pos- 
eession  of  them  is  a  necessary  in- 
cident to  the  completion  of  the 
.object.  Parsons  v.  Gingell,  4  C. 
B.  545 ;  Lewis  v.  Gingell,  id.  561, 
n. 

«  Co.  Litt.  47,  a. 

'  Brown  v.  ShevHl,  2  Ad.  &  El. 
138. 

8  Hoskins  v.  Paul,  9  N.  J.  L.  110 ; 
Wood  V.  Clark,  1  Cr.  &  J.  484 ; 
Gibson  v.  Iveson,  3  Q.  B.  39. 


1312 


Eights,  Eemedies,  &c. 


[§  540. 


auctioneer  or  factor  to  be  sold,"  or  goods  sent  to  a  carrier 
to  be  transported,"  or  brought  to  an  inn  by  a  guest,' 
and  generally  when  property  of  any  kind  is  in  the 
hands  of  a  tenant  in  the  way  of  his  trade,  and  his  posses- 
sion of  them  is  a  necessary  incident  to  the  consummation 
of  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  left  with  him,  they 
are  exempt  from  distress.*  Animals  fercR  naturce  are 
not  distrainable,'  nor  growing  crops,"  beasts  of  the 
plough,  cattle  which  gain  the  land,  nor  sheep,  if  there 
is  other  sufficient  ,property  subject  to  distress.'  Things 
in  actual  use  are  exempt,'  so  are  goods  in  the  custody 
of  the  law."  Raw  materials  furnished  to  a  tenant  to  be 
manufactured  for  the  owner  thereof,  as  well  as  the 
fabric  or  articles  made  therefrom,  are  exempt  from  a 


'  Mathias  v.  Mesnard,  2  C.  &  P. 
353 ;  Gilman  v.  Elton,  3  B.  &  B. 
75;  Findon  v.  McLaren,  6  Q.  B. 
891;  Williams  v.  Holmes,  8 
Exchq.  861 ;  Adams  v.  Greene,  1 
Cr.  &  M.  80;  Brown  v.  Armider, 
10  C.  B.  54. 

">  Gisbourn  v.  Hurst,  1  Salk.  249. 

^  Crozier  v.  Tomki risen,  2  Ld. 
Ken.  439. 

■*  Parsons  v.  GingeU,  ante ; 
Hoskins  v.  Paul,  ante ;  Connah  v. 
Hale,  23  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  462. 

'  Co.  Litt.  47  a,  such/  as  cats, 
wUd  rabbits,  &c.  But  deer  kept 
in  a  park  or  private  enclosure, 
Davies  v.  Powell,  Willes,  46 ; 
Morgan  v.  Abergavenny,  7  C.  B. 
768 ;  Ford  v.  Tynte,  3  J.  &  H.  150  ; 
birds  in  cages,  dogs  domesticated, 
and  all  animals  that  are  kept  in. 
the  custody  of  the  tenant  for  gain 
or  profit  are  distrainable.  Bunch  v. 
Kennington,  1  Q.  B.  679 ;  Davis 
V.  Powell,  ante. 

'  Simpson  v.  Hartopp,  Willes, 
512 

'51  Hen.  3,  chap.  4;  2  Inst. 
133. .  Young  colts  and  steers  not 
broken  are  not  exempt  as  being 
beasts  which  gain  the  land,  Keen 
V.  Priest,  4  H.  &  N.  286;  and 
cattle  taken  for  agistment  may  be 
distrained.  RoUe's  Abr.  666; 
Fawkes  v.  Joyce,  3  Vent.  50; 
Tate  V.  Gleed,  2  Wms.  Saund.  290. 
So  may  cattle  that  are  upon  the 
land  as  trespassers;  EoUe's  Abr. 
668  ;  Kemp  v.  Crawes,  1  Ld.  Eayd. 
168  ;  but  not  cattle  that  escape  on- 


to the  land  by  reason  of  defects  in 
fences  which  the  tenant  is  bound 
to  repair.  Poole  v.  Longueville, 
3  Saund.  289;  Singleton  v.  Wil- 
liamson, 7  H.  &  N.  410. 

•*Woodf  all's  L.  &  T.  405; 
Storey  v.  Robinson.  5  T.  R.  188  ; 
Co.  Litt.  47,  a ;  Field  v.  Adams,  13 
Ad.  &  El.  649 ;  Read's  Case,  Cro. 
EUz.  594.  Tools  of  the  tenant's 
trade,  in  actual  use,  are  exempt, 
although  there  is  no  other  suffi- 
cient distress.  Gorton  v.  Faulk- 
ner, 4  T.  R.  565.  And  if  not  in 
actual  use  they  are  exempt  if 
there  is  other  sufficient  distress  on 
the  premises.  Nargett  v.  Nias,  1 
E.  &  E.  439 ;  Attack  v.  Bramwell, 
3  B.  &  S.  530 ;  Davies  v.  Aston,  1 
C.  B.  746;  Harvey  v.  Pocock,  11 
M.  &  W.  740 ;  Fenton  v.  Logan,  9 
Bing.  676 ;  Simpson  v.  Hartopp, 
ante. 

9  Eaton  V.  Southby,  WiUes,  131 ; 
Co.  Litt.  47, a;  Wharton  v.  Tay- 
lor, 12  Q.  B.  673;  Wright  v. 
Dewes,  1  Ad.  &  El.  644.  But  by- 
statute  8  Ann.,  chap.  14,  sec.  1,  it 
is  provided  that  no  goods  on  any 
lands  leased  for  life,  years,  or  at 
will,  shall  be  taken  on  execution, 
unless  the  creditor,  before  the 
goods  are  removed,  shall  first  pay 
or  tender  the  landlord  the  arrears 
of  rent  due,  unless  more  than  one 
year's  rent  is  due,  in  which  case 
one  year's  rent  shall  be  paid. 
Where  goods  are  taken  under  a 
fraudulent  execution  they  may  be 
distrained.     Smith   V.  RusseU,  3 


CHAP.  XLLX.]  Distress.  1313 

distress.'  So  are  the  goods  of  a  boarder  in  a  boarding 
house  in  actual  use  by  Mm.'  But  goods  consigned  to 
a  tenant,  to  be  sold  by  him  on  account  of  the  consignor, 
at  not  less  than  a  certain  fixed  price,  and  the  tenant  to 
have  all  he  can  obtain  for  the  goods  beyond  that  price, 
th.e  tenant  to  make  no  charge  for  storage,  on  goods 
held  subject  to  distress.'  Goods  of  the  tenant,  levied 
on,  but  not  removed  from  his  possession,  are  liable  to  a 
distress  for  rent ;  and  in  order  to  constitute  a  distress,  it 
is  sufiicient  if  entry  is  made  upon  the  })remises,  an  inven- 
tory of  the  goods  is  made,  a  notice  of  the  distress  posted 
there,  and  a  notice  of  the  distress  is  served  upon  the 
tenant.*  He  need  not  actually  seize  the  goods.  If  he 
declares  that  certain  goods  named  shall  not  be  removed, 
this  is  a  suflS.cient  seizure.'  Where,  however,  as  is  the 
case  in  many  states,  the  statute  provides  how  and  when 
a  distress  may  be  made,  the  provisions  in  respect  thereto 
must  be  substantially  complied  with.' 

Sec.  541.  Where  and  when  must  be  made.— By  the  stat- 
ute of  Marblebridge,  52  Hen.  3,  chap.  15,  it  was  provided 
that  no  person  should  take  a  distress  out  of  Ms  fee,  and 
except  as  hereinafter  stated  no  distress  can  be  taken  off 
the  demised  premises.'    Of  course,  this  proposition  does 

Taunt.  400.    So  if  the  execution  671;  Burr  v.  Van  Buakirk,  3  Cow. 

has  been  waived,  Leven  v.  Mlhel,  (N.  Y.)  269  ;  Mosby  v.  Leeds,  3  Call. 

1  Ld.  Ken.  370,  or  the  levy  is  ir-  (Va.)  439  ;  Brown  v.  Duncan,  Har- 

regular.   Blades  v.  Arundel,  1  M.  per  (S.  C.)  338.    Where  the  lease 

&  S.  711,  or  where  the  judgment  was  of  premises  with  a  right  of 

is  void.     St.    John's    College    v.  way  or  passage  appurtenant,  it  was 

Murcott,  7  T.  R.  259.  hold  that  a  distress  could  not  be 

'  Knowles  v.  Pierce,  5  Del.  178.  made  of  goods  in  the  passage-way. 

^JoneB    V.  Goldbeck,   14  Phila.  5  Hill  (N.  Y.)  481;  Capel  v.   Buz- 

(Penn.)  173.  zard,  7  Bing.  150.    But  in  GilUng- 

*  Goodrich  v.  Bodley,  35  La.  An.  ham  v.  Dwyer,  ante,  the  tenant 
535.  rented  a  stable,  and  was  in  the 

*  Newell  V.  Clark,  46  N.  J.  L.  habit  of  keeping  the  cart  on  a  part 
363.  of  the  road  adjoining  the  stable, 

5  Furbush     v.     ChappeU,     105  which  the.  landlord  had  paved  for 

Penn,  St.  187.  him  for  that  purpose,  and  it  was 

« Craig  V.  Mevime,  16   111.  App.  held  that  the  paved  part  must  be 

314 ;    Biesenbach  v.  Key,  63  Tex.  treated   as   part  of   the   demised 

79 ;  Blanchard  v.   Raines,  20  Fla.  premises,  and  that  a  distress  made 

467.  there   was   lawful.      Where    two 

'  GiUingham  v.  Dwyer,  16  L.  T.  pieces  of  land  are  let  by  separate 

N.   S.  740 ;    Buzzard  v.   Capel,   4  demises,  although  both   are  con- 

Bing.  140  ;  Capel  v.  Buzzard,  7  id.  tained  in  one  "deed,  a  joint  distress 

l50 ;  Co.  Litt.  161,  a ;  1  Rolle's  Abn  cannot  be  made  for  them  ;  as  that 


1314 


Eights,  Remedies,  &c. 


[§  541. 


not  apply  where,  as  in  some  of  the  States,  the  landlord's 
right  to  make  distress  is  extended  to  any  property  be- 
longing to  the  tenant  in  the  county. ' 

By  the  statute  of  11  Geo.  2,  chap.  19,  sec.  1,  where  the 
tenant  fraudlently  or  clandestinely  carries  away  his 
goods,  &c. ,  off  from  the  demised  premises  to  prevent  the 
landlord  from  distraining  them  for  arrears  of  rent,  the 


would  make  the  rent  of  one  issue 
out  of  the  other.  Rogers  v.  Bu-k- 
mire,  2  Stra.  1040.  Where  a  single 
rent  issues  out  of  land  in  the  occu- 
pation of  several  tenants,  a  distress 
may  be  made  for  the  whole  amount 
upon  the  land  of  any  one  of  them. 
1  Roll.  Abr.  671;  BuUen,  135; 
"Woodcock  V.  Titterton,  12  W.  R. 
685,  Q.  B.  The  distress  may  be 
made  upon  any  part  of  the  land, 
as  the  entire  rent  issues  out  of  the 
whole  and  every  part.  Com.  Dig. 
tit.  Distress  (A.  8) ;  Bullen,  125  ; 
Woodcock  V.  Titterton,  12  W.  R. 
865.  Where  the  tenant  of  a  farm 
holds  over  part  of  it  after  the  ex- 
piration of  the  term,  pursuant  to 
some  clause  in  the  lease  or  the  cus- 
tom of  a  country,  a  distress  may 
be  made  on  that  part  for  all  the 
arrears  within  six  months  after  the 
expiration  of  the  tenancy.  Nut- 
tall  V.  Staunton,  4  B.  &  C.  51  ;  Bea- 
van  V.  Delahay,  1  H.  Bl.  5 ;  Lewis 
V.  Harris,  id.  7,  n.  a;  Knight  v. 
Bennett,  3  Bing.  361 ;  Bullen,  121, 
125.  WTiere  A  demised  to  B  a 
wharf,  next  the  River  Thames,  de- 
scribed by  abutments,  together 
with  all  ways,  paths,  passages, 
easements,  profits,  commodities 
and  appurtenances  whatsoever  to 
the  said  wharf  belonging  ;  and  by 
the  indenture  the  exclusive  use  of 
the  land  of  the  River  Thames  op- 
posite to  and  in  front  of  the  wharf 
between  high  and  low  water  mark, 
as  well  when  covered  with  water 
as  dry,  for  the  accommodation  of 
the  tenants  of  the  wharf,  was  de- 
mised as  appurtenant  to  the  wharf, 
but  the  land  itself  between  high  and 
low  water  mark  was  not  demised  ; 
it  wa?  held,  that  the  lessor  could 
not  distrain  for  rent  in  arrear, 
barges,  the  property  of  B,  lying 
in  the  space  between  high  and  low 
water  mark  and  attached  to  the 
wharf  by  ropes.  Capel  v.  Buzzard, 
8  C.  &  C.  141.  The  owner  of  a  fac- 
tory consisting  of   several  rooms 


was  in  the  habit  of  letting  "  stand- 
ings "  therein  for  lace  machines, 
and  supplying  the  power  for  work- 
ing them,  there  being  no  demise  of 
the  room  ;  held,  that  the  weekly 
payments  could  not  be  distrained 
for  as  "rent."  Hancock  v.  Austin, 
14  C.  B.  N.  S.  634 ;  Edmondson  v. 
Nuttall,  17  O.  B.  N.  S.  280.  Where 
lands  lying  in  different  counties 
are  held  under  one  demise,  at  one 
entire  rent,  a  distress  may  be  law- 
fully taken  in  either  county  for  the 
whole  rent  in  arrear,  and  pursuing 
a  distress  over  is  a  continuance  of 
the  taking ;  but  where  the  counties 
do  not  adjoin,  a  distress  cannot  be 
pursued  out  of  one  county  into  the 
other.  Walter  v.  Rumball,  1  SaDc. 
247.  No  person  can  make  a  dis- 
tress on  the  highway  ;  Co.  Litt. 
160,  &,-  Gilb.  Distr.  51 ;  but  it  would 
seem  that  where  a  farm  joins  a 
highway,  goods  standing  in  the 
highway,  within  the  middle  of  it, 
and  on  that  part  of  it  next  to  the 
demised  premises,  may  be  dis- 
trained. Hodges  V.  Lawrence,  18 
Just.  Pea.  347,  Exchq.  If  the  land- 
lord or  his  agent  come  to  distrain 
cattle  which  he  sees  upon  the  land, 
and  the  tenant  or  any  other  per- 
son drives  the  cattle  off  the  land, 
the  landlord  or  his  agent  may  then 
follow  and  distrain  them,  even  on 
the  highway ;  but  if  he  have  no 
view  of  the  cattle  whilst  on  the 
land,  although  the  tenant  drive 
them  ofE  purposely  to  prevent  a 
distress ;  or  if  the  cattle  themselves, 
after  the  view,  go  out  of  the  fee, 
or  the  tenant  or  any  other  person, 
after  the  view,  remove  them  for 
any  other  purpose  than  that  of  pre- 
venting a  distress  ;  in  these  cases 
the  landlord  or  his  agent  cannot 
distrain  them.  Co.  Litt.  161,  a ;  2 
Inst.  132;  Clement  v.  Mihier,  3 
Esp.  95  ;  Smith  L.  &  T.  212. 

'Uhl  V.  Dighton,  25  111.  154; 
Longee  v.  Colton,  9  Dana  (Ky.) 
133.  . 


CHAP.  XLix.J  Distress.  1315 

landlord  may,  within  thirty  days  after  such  removal, 
seize  them  wherever  they  can  be  found.  In  order  to 
enable  the  landlord  to  pursue  the  goods  under  this  statute 
the  burden  of  proving  that  they  were  removed  fraudu- 
lently or  clandestinely,  is  upoh  him.'  If  the  goods  have 
been  removed  and  sold  to  a  bona  fide  purchaser  they  can- 
not be  distrained  ; "  nor  does  this  statute  apply  to  goods 
not  belonging  to  the  tenant.  °  If  goods  are  fraudulently, 
&c.,  removed,  the  landlord  may  call  upon  the  constable 
and  without  previous  request  may  break  open  any  build- 
ing, or  enter  any  premises  where  they  are  concealed ; 
but  if  they  are  concealed  in  a  dwelling-house  oath  must 
first  be  made  of  a  reasonable  ground  of  suspicion  that 
the  goods  are  therein,  and  such  entry  can  be  made  only 
in  the  daytime.*  By  section  4  of  the  statute,  the  tenant, 
or  any  person  privy  to  the  removal,'  or  knowing  of  the 
fraudulent  intent,"  who  aids  or  assists  in  the  removal, 
although  no  distress  was  at  the  time  being  made  or  con- 
templated,' forfeits  to  the  landlord  double  the  value  of 
the  goods  removed,  which  may  be  recovered  by  an  action 
of  debt ;  or,  where  the  value  of  the  goods  does  not  exceed 
£50,  by  complaint  before  two  or  more  of  the  nearest 
justices  of  the  peace  who  may  adjudge  the  offender  to 
pay  double  the  value  of  such  goods  within  such  time  as 
they  shall  appoint.  But,  before  seeking  to  avail  him- 
self of  either  of  the  remedies  under  this  statute,  the  land- 
lord should  first  ascertain  whether  the  goods  removed 
belonged  to  the  tenant,  for  a  stranger  or  lodger  has  a 
right  to  remove  his  goods  off  the  premises  at  any  time, 
or  under  any  circumstances,  before  the  commencement 
of  a  distress.'  He  should  also  be  sure  that  the  goods 
were  carried  off  with  a  view  to  deprive  the  landlord  of 
his  remedy  by  distress,  and  that  no  sufficient  goods  re- 

'  Perry  v.  Duncan,  M.  &  "W.  533.  '  Brooke  v.   Noakes,   8  B.  &  C. 

'  Williams  v.  Robercs,  7  Exchq.  537. 

618.  ■"  Stanley  v.  Wharton,  10  Price, 

^Martin  t.  Black,  9  Paige  Ch.  138. 

(N.  Y.l  641 ;  Frisbey  v.  Thayer,  25  «  poulger  v.  Taylor,  5  H.  &  N. 

Wend!  (N.  Y.)  39.  210  ;  Thornton  v.  Adams,  5  M.  & 

"  Sec.  7.  Stat.  11  Geo.  3,  chap.  19.  S.  38  ;  Postman  v.  Harrell,  6  C.  & 

See  also,  Williams  v.  Roberts,  ante.  P.  235 ;  Fletcher  v.  Marillier,  9  Ad. 

<■  Lyster  v.  Brown,  1  C.  &  P.  131 ;  &  El.  457  ;  Wood  v.  Nvmn,  5  Bing, 

sec.  4,  Stat.  11  Geo.  2,  chap.  19.  10. 


1316 


Eights,  Eemedies,  &c. 


[§  541. 


mained  on  the  premises  to  satisfy  the .  rent  then  due.' 
The  mere  removal  of  goods  by  the  tenant  from  the  de- 
mised premises,  when  rent  is  in  arrear,  is  not  of  itseE 
fraudulent  as  against  the  landlord,'  nor  is  every  convey- 
ing away  of  the  goods  of  a'tenant  penal,  although  it  may 
operate  to  defeat  the  landlord's  right.  To  constitute  a 
fraudulent  removal,  the  fraud  must  be  that  of  the  tenant, 
or  person  removing  the  property  for  his  benefit."  The 
statute  was  never  meant  to  extend  to  a  creditor  who  is 
seeking  payment  of  his  debt  bona  fide  ;  ami  such  cred- 
itor may,  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  such  debt  and 
with  the  assent  of  the  debtor,  take  possession  of  his 
goods  and  remove  them,  although  he  knew  that  the 
tenant  apprehended  a  distress.*  So,  too,  the  removal 
must  have  been  made  after  the  rent  became  due.'  As 
to  whether  or  not  this  rule  prevails  in  a  given  State  de- 
pends upon  the  question  whether  it  has  been  changed  by 
statute." 

A  distress  cannot  be  made  at  night ; '  and  if  made  be- 
fore sunrise  in  the  morning  or  after  sunset  at  night  it  is 
illegal,  although  there  may  be  ample  daylight."  At  the 
common  law,  a  distress  could  not  be  made  after  the  lease 


1  Parry  v.  Duncan,  7  Bing.  243 
John  V.  Jenkins,  1  Cri  &  M.  327 
Opperman  v.  Smith,  4  D.  &  R.  33 
Parry  v.  Duncan,  7  Bing.  243, 
But  see  Gilham  v.  Arkwright,  16 
L.  T.  88;  Woodfall,  L.  &   T.  433, 

*  Parry  v.  Duncan,  7  Bing.  243. 
'Bach  V.  Meats,  5  M.  &  S.  300, 
"Bach  V.  Meats,  5  M.  &  S.  200. 
"Rand  v.   Vaughan,  7  Bing.  N 

C.  767  ;  Watson  V.  Main,  3  Esp.  15 
Furneaux  v.  Fotherby,  4  Camp. 
136 ;  Grace  v.  Shively,  13  S.  &  R, 
(Penn.)  217. 

*  Schenley's  Appeal,  70  Penn.  St. 
98.  In  Maryland  the  goods  may 
be  distrained  thirty  days  after  their 
removal,  although  the  lease  has 
expired  and  the  tenant  has  quit  the 
premises.  Dorsey  v.  Hays,  7  H.  & 
J.  (Md.)  370.  In  Kentucky  the 
landlord  may  attach  the  goods 
where  the  tenant  is  about  to  re- 
move them,  whether  the  rent  is 
due  or  not,  ijf  it  is  payable  in  money. 
Paer  v.  Peebles,  1  Ky.  1.  In  New 
Jersey  they  may  be  pursued  any 


time  within  thirty  days  after 
removal  for  rent  which  accrued 
subsequent  to  the  removal.  Weiss 
V.  John,  37  N.  J.  L.  93.  And  in 
Louisiana,  if  a  tenant  removes  his 
goods  and  quits  the  premises  he  at 
once  becomes  Uable  for  the  rent 
for  the  whole  term,  both  that  which 
is  due,  and  that  which  is  to  become 
due,  but  execution  issues  only  as 
the  rent  becomes  due.  Reynolds 
V.  Swam,  13  La.  193. 

'Aldenburgh  v.  People,  6  C.  & 
P.  213 ;  Tutton  v.  Darke,  5  H.  & 
N.  647  ;  Keen  v.  Priest,  4  id.  34u. 

*  Aldenburgh  v.  People,  ante. 
It  is  doubtful  whether  sunrise  be- 
gins with  the  first  beams  of  the 
sun  above  the  horizon,  or  when  the 
middle  of  the  sun  is  upon  the 
horizon,  or  when  the  sun  has  com- 
pletely emerged,  Tutton  v.  Darke, 
ante ;  and  an  almanac  is  not 
evidence  of  the  time  when  the  sun 
rises  or  sets.  Collier  v.  Nokes,  3 
C.  &  K.  1013.  Where  a  distress  is 
made  in  the  night  the  tenant  is  en- 


CHAP.  xLix.]  Distress.  1317 

had  terminated;  but  by  statute  8  Anne,  chap,  li,  sec- 
tions 6  and  7,  a  distress  can  be  made  any  time  within  six 
calendar  months  after  the  lease  is  ended,  if  the  landlord 
still  retains  the  title.  This  statute  was  necessary  to  pro- 
tect the  landlord,  because,  prior  to  its  passage,  the  last 
year's  rent,  when  the  rent  was  payable  annually,  could 
not  be  distrained  for,  as  it  did  not  become  due  until  the 
last  second  of  the  tenant's  term.'  Eent  is  not  in  arrear 
on  the  day  u^n  which  it  becomes  due  ; '  but  the  custom 
of  a  place  or  sua  express  agreement  of  the  parties  may 
empower  the  landlord  to  distrain  on  the  day  when  the 
rent  becomes  due.'  So,  too,  by  agreement,  the  right  to 
distraia  may  be  postponed  or  suspended  *  until  the  land- 
lord has  done  certain  acts,  as  where  the  rent  is  payable 
upon  request,  until  after  he  has  requested  payment,  or 
until  he  has  personally  demanded  it ;  but  if  rent  is  pay- 
able "on  demand,"  the  distress  itself  is  a  sufficient 
demand.' 

Where  the  tenant  is  allowed  to  hold  over  part  of  the 
demised  property,  the  landlord  may  distrain  on  that 
part.'  So  where  the  term  is  prolonged  as  to  part  by  the 
custom  of  the  country.'  Where  the  original  tenant  dies 
and  his  representative  enters,  the  landlord  may  distrain 
upon  the  latter  within  six  months  after  the  end  of  the 
term.'  But  where  a  tenant  at  wiU  dies  and  his  widow 
remains  in  possession,  no  distress  can  be  made,  because 
not  only  the  tenancy  but  also  the  possession  of  the  ten- 
ant from  whom  the  arrears  became  due  has  ceased.' 
Where  the  tenant  of  a  farm  remained  a  few  days  after 
the  expiration  of  his  term,  and,  after  entry  by  a  new 
tenant,  went  away,  leaving  a  cow  and  some  pigs,  but 

titled  to  recover  the  full  value  of  *  Giles  v.  Spencer,  1  C.  B.  N.  S. 

the  goods.      Attack  v.  Bromwell,  244. 

3  B.    &  S.   530  ;    Edmondson    v.  »  Kind    v.   Ammery,  Hutt.   33 ; 

Nuttall,  17  C.  B.  N.  S.  280 ;  Dibble  Browne  v.  Dunnery,  Hob.  308. 

V.  Bowater,  3  E.  &  B.  564.  « Nuttall  v.  Staunton,  4B.  &  C.  51. 

"  Co.  Litt.  47,  b.  '  Beavan  v.  Delahay,  1  H.  Bl.  5  ; 

2  Duppa  V.  Mayo,  3  Salt.  578 ;  Knight  v.  Bennett,  3  Bing.  364 ; 

Dibble  v.  Bowater,  3  E.  &  B.  564.  Griffiths  v.  Puleston,  13  M.  &  W. 

«Jenner  v.   Clegg,  1  M.   &  R.  358. 

313 ;  Lee  v.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  663 ;  «  Braithwaite  v.  Cooksey,  1  H. 

Tracy    v.    Talbot,    6    Mod.    314;  Bl.  465. 

Buckley  v.  Taylor,  3  T.  R.  600 ;  '  Turner  v .  Barnes,  3  B.  &  S. 

McLeish  v.  Tate,  Cowp.  781.  435. 
11,-31 


1318  Rights,  Eemedies,  &o.  [§  542. 

giving  no  further  intimation  of  a  purpose  to  return  or  to 
continue  holding  any  part  of  the  farm ;  it  was  held,  that 
the  landlord  could  not  justify  a  distress  thereon  for  the 
arrears  of  rent.' 

Sec.  542.  How  may  be  made.— The  landlord  at  common 
law  may  distrain  in  person,  or  by  a  person  authorized  by 
warrant  signed  by  him.  If  he  authorizes  a  bailiff  to  make 
the  distress  he  is  liable  to  the  tenant  for  all  irregularities 
committed  by  the  bailiff  in  carrying  out  his  instructions," 
but  not  for  acts  done  by  him  in  excess  of  his  authority, 
unless  he  subsequently  ratifies  such  acts,'  or  takes  the  risk 
by  adopting  the  bailiff's  acts  without  inquiry."  The 
landlord  is  liable  to  the  baihff ,  upon  an  implied  indemnity, 
for  acts  properly  done  by  him  in  executing  the 
warrant.'  The  baiUff  at  his  peril  is  bound  to  ascertain 
whether  the  distress  can  be  safely  made,"  and  is  liable  to 
the  landlord  for  damages  resulting  from  his  negligence  or 
misconduct .' 

In  this  country  it  is  generally  required  by  statute,  that 
the  landlord  shall  make  affidavit  specifying  the  time 
during  which  the  rent  accrued.'  If  the  rent  is  payable  in 
specific  articles,  the  value  of  the  article  at  the  time  when 
the  rent  became  due  should  be  stated .'  In  a  word,  it  must 
set  forth  the  contract  as  it  is,  and  not  merely  its  legal 

'  Taylor  v.  Peters,  7  Ad.  &  El.  8  Jenkins  v.  Pell,  17  Wend.  (N. 

210.  Y.)  417 ;  but  it  is  sufficient  if  it 

*  Haseler  v.  Lemoyne,  6  C.  B.  sets  forth  the  amount  claimed, 
N.  S.  530.  In  this  country  it  is  and  that  it  is  for  rent  falling  due 
generally  provided  by  statute  that  for  a  quarter's  rent,  &c.  Mar- 
warrants  of  distress  shall  be  quissee  v.  Ormston,  15  id.  368. 
served  by  a  legal  officer,  and  the  As  to  the  sufficiency  of  a  distress 
landlord  cannot  himself  distrain,  and  the  requirements  under  stat- 
"WeUs  V.  Hornish,  3  Penn.  3 ;  utes  of  the  different  states,  see 
Ferguson  v.  Moore,  3  "Wash.  (Va.)  Cadmus  v.  Barney,  43  N.  J.  L. 
4 ;  Smith  v.  Ambler,  1  Munf .  (Va.)  346 ;  Yoomer  v.  Mann,  63  Ga.  735 ; 
596 ;  Flury  v.  Grimes,  53  Ga.  341.  Eppinger  v.   Habersham,  63   Ga. 

'  Moore  v.  Drinkwater,   1  F.  &  634 ;  McCullough  v.  .Good,  68  Ga. 

F.  134.  519 ;  Lathrop  v.  Clews,  63  Ga.  383 ; 

« Freeman  v.  Rosher,  13  Q.   B.  Carter   v.    Walters,  63   Ga.    164 ; 

780 ;  Lewis  v.  Read,  13  M.  &  W.  Central  Land  Co.  v.   Calhoun,   16 

834.    See  Gauntlett  v.  King,  3  C.  W.  Va.  361 ;  Whiting  v.  Lake,  91 

B.  N.  S.  591.  Penn.  St.  349 ;  Gilliam  v.  Tobias, 

5  Bullen  V.  Leake's  PI.  153,  n.  11  Phila.  (Penn.)  318. 

« Taplis  V.  Grane,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  '  Jones  v.  Gundrim,  3  W.  &  S. 

651.  (Penn.)  581;   Williams  v.   Talliar 

'  WoodfaU's  L.  <S  T,  413,  fero,  53  Ga.  308. 


CHAP,  xux,]       How  May  be  Made.  1319 

effect.'  All  arrears  of  rent  accruing  during  the  tenancy 
may  be  included  in  the  same  warrant,  although  it 
embraces  the  rent  for  several  years,'  and  even  though  a 
part  of  it  is  for  rent  accruing  after  the  term  has  expired, 
but  the  tenant  holds  over  ;  °  but  the  distress  can  embrace 
only  rent,  and  not  damages.* 

In  going  to  distrain,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  officer 
may  lawfully  gain  access  to  the  tenant's  house  by  chmb- 
ing  over  a  fence.'  If  the  door  of  the  house  is  shut,  the 
officer  has  authority  by  law  to  open  it  in  the  ordinary 
vfay  in  which  other  persons  can  do  it,  when  it  is  left  so  as 
to  be  accessible  to  all  who  have  occasion  to  go  into  the 
premises  ;  as,  for  instance,  by  lifting  a  latch  or  puUing 
out  a  staple  which  serves  to  keep  the  door  closed.'  An 
entry  may  be  lawfully  made  through  an  open  window,' 
but  it  is  illegal  to  open  a  window  for  the  purpose  of 
entering,  whether  such  window  is  fastened  with  a  hasp ' 
or  shut  and  not  fastened."  If  the  outer  door  is  open, 
the  person  distraining  may  break  open  an  inner  door  or 
lock."  But  the  outer  door  "  or  window"  of  the  tenant's 
house  or  stable "  must  not  be  forcibly  broken  open,  or 
the  officer  who  has  entered  to  distrain,  and  has  sold  the 
goods  distrained,  will  be  Uable  to  an  action  of  trespass, 
in  which  the  tenant  may  recover  the  full  value  of  such 
goods,  although  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  have  been  apphed 
in  satisfaction  of  the  rent." 


'  Motdton  V.  Norton,  5  Baxb.  (N.  this  case,  in  L.  E.,  2  Q.  B.  594 

Y.)  S86.  See  also  Curtis  v.  Hubbard,  1  Hill 

s  Wright  V.  Williams,  5  Cow.  (N.  (N.  Y.)  336. 

Y.)  501 ;  Braithwaite  v.  Cooksey,  1  '  Pollocjk,  C.  B.^  ia  Nixon   v. 

H.  BI.  465;  Blake  v.  Delisselme,  4  Freeman,  5   H.  &   N.  653.     See 

McCord  (S.  C.)  496.  Gould  v.  Bradstock,  4  Taunt.  563. 

'  Vecht  V.  Brownell,  8  Paige  Ch.  *  Hancock  v.  Austin,  14    C.  B. 

(N.  Y.)  212;  Sherwood  v.  PhiUips,  N.  S.  634. 

13  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  479.  »  Nash  v.  Lucas,  L.  E.,  2  Q.  B. 

*  Skerry  v.  Preston,  2  Chitt.  245 ;  590. 

LansingT.  Eattoon,  6  John.  (N.  Y.)  '"Browning  v.  Dann,   Bull.  N. 

43;  Dennifion  v.  Lee,  6  G.  &  J.  P.  81. 

(Md.)  383 ;  Bantleon  v.  Smith,  2  "  Semayne's  Case,  5  Coke,  91. 

Binn.  OPenn.)  153.  '«  Attack  v.  BramweU,  3  B.  &  S. 

»  Scott  V.  Buckley,  16  L.  T.  N.  S.  520 ;  Hancock  v.  Austin,  14  C.  B. 

573.    But  see  Eldridge  v.  Stacey,  N.  S.  634. 

15  C.  B.  N.  S.  458.  '»  Brown  v.  Glenn,  16  Q.  B.  254. 

«Eyan   v.  Shilcock,  7  Ex.   72.  "Attack  v.  BramweU,  3  B.  &  S. 

See  the  observations  of  CocKBtJiiN,  520. 
C.  J.,  on  the  doctrine  laid  down  in 


'  1320  Eights,  Remedies,  &c.  [§  542. 

If,  however,  a  lawful  entry  has  once  been  effected,  but 
the  person  distraining  is  forcibly  turned'  or  kept  out  of 
possession,"  there  being  no  evidence  of  an  abandonment 
of  the  goods,  he  is  justified  in  breaking  open  the  outer  door 
in  order  to  regain  possession.  But  when  a  person  has 
merely  got  his  foot  and  arm  between  the  door  and  the 
lintel,  or  by  putting  a  pairof  shears  between  the  door  and 
the  lintel  has  prevented  the  door  from  being  closed,  he 
has  not  such  a  possession  as  will  entitle  him  to  break  open 
a  door  or  window  in  order  to  gain  admission  to  the 
house ; "  but  after  the  person  distraining  has  lawfully 
entered,  he  may  break  open  the  outer  door  in  order  to 
remove  the  goods  distrained.* 

An  actual  entry  upon  the  premises  by  the  person  dis- 
training is  not  in  all  cases  necessary.  Where  the  article 
seized  is  just  inside  the  door,  the  tenant  at  the  door,  and 
the  agent  of  the  landlord  in  such  a  position  as  to  be  able 
in  one  moment  to  put  her  foot  into  the  room,  it  will  be 
taken  that  she  is  constructively  in  the  room.' 

Entry  having  been  made,  the  next  step  is  to  seize  the 
goods.  For  this  purpose,  any  distinct  expression  of  an 
intention  to  distrain  will  suffice. "  It  is  not  necessary  that 
an  actual  formal  seizure  should  be  made  ;  it  is  enough  if 
the  landlord  takes  sufficient  means  to  prevent  the  articles 
on  the  premises  from  being  taken  away.  A  refusal  by 
the  landlord  to  allow  the  goods  of  the  tenant  to  be  taken 
away  until  the  rent  is  paid  may  amount  to  a  seizure.'  A 
seizure  of  some  goods  as  a  distress,  in  the  name  of  all.  the- 
goods  in  the  house,  will  operate  as  a  vahd  seizure  of  all 
the  goods  in  the  house.' 

In  making  the  seizure  the  landlord  must  see  that  the . 
goods  distrained  do  not  greatly  exceed  in  saleable  value 

'  Eagleton  v.  Gutteridge,  11  M.         *  Bullen  on  Distress,  131 ;  Swann 

&  W.  465  ;  Eldridge  v.  Stacey,  15  v.    Falmouth,    8   B.     &  C.    456  ; 

C.  B.  N.  S.  458.  Hutchins  v.  Scott,  2  M.  &W.  809 ; 

2  Bannister  v,  Hyde,  3  E.  &.  E.  Thomas  v.  Harris,  3  M.  &  Gr.  695  ; 
627.  Tennant  v.  Field,  8  E.  &  B.  336 ; 

3  Boyd  V.  Profaze,  16  L.  T.  N.  S.  Spice  v.  Webb,  3  Jur.  948. 

431.  'Wood  V.   Nunn,    5    Bing,   10; 

^Pugh  V.  Griffith,  7  Ad.  &  El.  Cramer  v.  Mott,  L.  E.,  5  Q.  B.  857. 

827.                  "  *  Cramer  v.  Mott,  ante;  Dod  v. 

'  Cramer  v.  Mott,  39  L.  J.  Q.  B,  Monger,  6  Mod.  215. 
178. 


CHAP.  XLix.J        How  May  be  Made.  1321 

the  amount  of  the  arrears  of  rent  and  costs  of  the  distress.^ 
He  is  not  bound  to  calculate  very  nicely  the  value  of  the 
property  seized ;  but  he  must  take  care  that  some  pro- 
portion is  kept  between  that  and  the  sum  for  which  he  is 
entitled  to  take  it." 

While  the  landlord  must  avoid  an  excessive  distress  yet 
at  the  same  time  he  must  be  careful  to  take  sufficient  to 
satisfy  the  rent,  because  he  cannot  distrain  twice  for  the 
same  rent  when  he  might  have  taken  sufficient  at  first/ 
unless,  perhaps,  where  the  value  of  the  goods  cannot  be 
readily  estimated.  If  a  man  bona  fide  mistake  the  value 
of  the  goods  seized  (which  may  be  of  uncertain  or  imag- 
inary value,  as  pictures,  jewels,  race-horses,  &c.),  he  may 
make  a  future  seizure.'  The  landlord  may  also  distrain 
again  if  he  is  prevented  by  the  unlawful  act  of  the  tenant 
from  realizing  the  distress ;  as,  for  instance,  if  the 
tenant  prevents  a  purchaser  from  taking  away  an 
article  sold  under  the  distress.  °  If  the  landlord  is  induced 
to  withdraw  the  distress  by  a  false  assurance  by  the 
tenant  that  a  particular  debt  has  been  satisfied,  the 
landlord,  on  the  creditor's  proceeding  to  judgment  and 
execution,  is  entitled  to  a  year's  rent,  under  stat.  8  Ann., 
c.  14.° 

After  seizing  the  goods,  the  person  distraining  must 
impound  them.  In  order  to  constitute  an  impounding  it 
is  not  necessary  that  the  whole  of  the  goods  distrained 
should  be  put  together  or  removed  from  the  premises,' 

^  See  Wells  v.  Moody,  7  C.  &  P.  this  would  also  be  the  case  where, 

59  ;  stat.  52  Hen.  3,  chap.  4.  if  any  one  of  the  articles  were  left 

^  Willoughby    v.   Backhouse,  2  out,  the  distress  would  be  insufll- 

B.  &  C.  823.    It  has  been  held  that  oient.   Avenell  v.  Croker,  M.  &  M. 

in  determining  this  question  the  173. 

fact  that  the  goods  at  a  fair  sale  '  Baggs  v  Muxby,  8  Exchq.  641 ; 

did  not  bring  sufficient  to  pay  the  Lear  v.   Caldicott,   3  Q.    B.   133  ; 

rent  is  not  a  decisive  test  as  to  Dawson  v.  Cropp,  1  C.  B.  961. 

whether  the  distress  was  excessive.  *Hutchins  v.  Chambers,  1  Burr. 

Smith  V.  Ashforth,  29  L.  J.  Exchq.  589.    See  Lingham  v.  Warren,  3 

359.    See  WeUs  v.  Moody,  7  C.  P.  B.  &  B.  36. 

59,  where  it  was  held  that  the  true  *  Lee  v.  Cooke,  3  H.  &  N.  584  ;  3 

criterion  is,  what  the  goods  would  H.  &  N.  303  ;  27  L.  J.  Ex.  337. 

sell  for  at   broker's  sale.    Where  « Woollston  v.  Stafford,  15  C.  B. 

only  one  article  can  be  found  upon  378. 

which  to  distrain  the  landlord  is  'Johnson  v.  TJpham,  3  E.  &  E. 

not  guilty  of  an  excessive  distress,  255.     See  Washborn  v.  Black,   11 

although  it  seUs  for  much  more  East,  405,  note  (a),  stat.  11  Geo.  2, . 

than  enough  to  pay  the  rent,  and  chap.  19,  sec.  10. 


1322  Eights,  Eemedies,  &;c.  [§542. 

although  upon  this  point  the  statute  generally  makes 
special  provisions,  which  should  be  followed.  Furniture, 
with  the  tenants  permission,  may  be  left  upon  the 
premises  in  their  ordinary  position.'  It  is  generally  the 
safest  course  to  remove  the  goods,  or  to  leave  a  person  in 
charge.'  An  inventory  of  the  goods  taken  should  be 
made,  and  notice  of  the  distress  served  upon  the  teliant. 
If  the  tenant  or  other  person,  after  a  distress  is  made, 
forcibly  removes  the  goods,  he  is  guilty  of  a  pound  breach 
and  liable  to  the  party  grieved  for  treble  damages.  ° 

When  a  distress  is  abandoned,  the  tenant  may  retake 
the  goods  without  becoming  liable  for  a  rescue,*  and  if 
goods  distrained  are  taken  from  the  distrainor  by  force, 
he  may  retake  them  wherever  he  can  find  them,  if  he 
can  do  so  without  being  guilty  of  a  breach  of  the  peace." 

The  goods  distrained,  unless  provision  is  otherwise 
made  by  statute,  may  either  be  sold  or  kept  as  a  pledge 
until  both  the  rent  and  the  costs  of  the  distress  are  paid. 
Before  the  property  is  sold  an  inventory  should  be  made, 
stating  clearly  and  precisely  what  goods  are  taken  and 
describing  them  with  certainty,"  and  a  notice  of  the  dis- 
tress should  be  served  upon  the  tenant  with  an  inven- 
tory of  the  goods  taken,  together  with  the  reason  for 
taking ; '  and  if  the  distress  is  made  under  the  provisions 
of  the  statute  11  Geo.  2,  chap.  2,  sec.  19,  the  pZace  where 
the  goods  are  kept  should  be  stated.  If  notice  of  the  dis- 
tress is  not  given  the  proceedings  are  not  thereby  ren- 

'Coxv.  Paiator,  7  C.  &  P.  767;  question  as  to  whether  the  distress 
Washburn  v.  Black,  11  East,  405,  has  been  abandoned  is  one  of  fact 
note  a ;  Tenant  v.  Field,  8  E.  &  B.  for  the  jury.  Russell  v.  Ryder,  6 
336.  But  if  the  tenant  does  not  C.  &  P.  416 ;  Eldridge  v.  Stacey,  15 
consent  the  goods  must  be  put  iato  C.  B.  N.  S.  458,  and  an  abandon- 
one  room,  or  moved  out  of  the  ment  will  not  be  inferred  from  a 
house,  Woods  v.  Durrant,  16  M.  merely  temporary  absence  of  the 
&  W.  158  ;  Smith  v.  Ashf  orth,  29  keeper  or  person  in  charge.  Ban- 
L.  J.  Exchq.  359 ;  Ethertonv.Pop-  nister  v.   Hyde,  ante;    Eerby  v. 

EleweU,  1  East,   139,  although  it  Harding,  6  Exchq.  234. 

as  been  held  that  the  whole  house  *  Stat.  2  W.  &  M.  chap.   5,  sec. 

may  be  locked  up  when  necessary  4. 

to  the  safe-keeping  of  the  goods.  *Dod  v.  Monger,  6  Mod.  216. 

Cox  V.   Pajntor,  ante;  Woods  v.  'Rich  v.  Wooley,  7Bing.  651. 

Durrant,  ante.  '  Wakeman  v.  Landsay,  14  Q.  B. 

2  Bannister  v.  Hyde,  2  E.  &  E.  625 ;  Kerby  v.  Harding,  6  Exchq. 

631.    The  fact,  however,  that  the  334. 

possessionof  the  goods  is  quit,  does  'Wilson  v.  Nightingale,  8  Q.  B. 

not  necessarily  amount  to  an  aban-  1034 ;  stat.  2  W.  &  M,,  chap.  5,  sec. 

donment    of    the    distress.     The  3. 


CHAP.  XLix.]         Sale  op  Distress,  1323 

dered  invalid,  bat  the  goods  cannot  be  sold."  The  inven- 
tory and  notice  should  be  served  as  provided  by  statute,  but 
if  there  is  no  provision  relative  thereto,  at  the  common 
law,  it  should  either  be  served  upon  the  tenant  personally 
or  left  at  the  house  occupied  by  him,  or  other  notorious 
place  on  the  premises.'  By  the  statute  2  W.  &  M.,  chap. 
5,  sec.  2,  before  the  property  is  sold  it  should  be  appraised 
by  two  sworn  appraisers  appointed  by  the  sheriff,  under- 
sheriff  of  the  county,  or  the  constable,  who  by  law  might 
be  required  to  aid  in  making  the  distress.  But  the 
appraisal  may  be  dispensed  with  if  the  tenant  so 
requests.'  Neither  the  landlord  or  his  bailiff  can  be 
appraisers,'  and  the  persons  appointed  must  be  reason- 
ably competent.'  The  appraisers,  before  the  appraisal  is 
made,  must  be  sworn  by  the  constable  of  the  place  where 
the  distress  is  made,  and  who  must  be  present  with 
them  at  the  appraisal.'  And  it  seems  that  the  fact  that 
the  constable  cannot  be  found  at  the  time  when  he  is 
wanted  does  not  warrant  the  interference  of  any  other 
ofiBcer.' 

Sec.  543.  Sale  of  distress.— Generally,  in  this  country, 
provision  is  made  as  to  the  sale  of  goods  distrained  by 
statute,  but  where  no  such  provision  is  made  the  statute 
2  W.  &  M.,  chap.  5,  sec.  2,  prevails,  under  which,  after 
five  clear  days  exclusive  of  the  day  of  seizure,  if  the  rent 
and  costs  are  not  paid  or  tendered,  or  the  goods  replev- 
ied, the  goods  may  be  sold  at  the  best  price  that  can  be 
got  for  them.'  If  there  is  any  surplus  it  must  be  left  in 
the  hands  of  the  officer  selling.' 

If  the  goods  are  not  sold  for  the  best  price,  the  tenant 
may  bring  an  action  against  the  landlord,  and  go  into 
evidence  to  show  that  they  were  improperly  kept ; '°  but 

'Tenant  v.    Field,  ante  ;  Treat  'Kenneyv.  May,  1  M.  &Rob.  56. 

V.  Hunt,  9  Exchq.  14.  '  AverneU  v.  Croker,  M.  &  M. 

'Walter  v.  Kumbal,  1  Ld.  Rayd.  174. 

53.  "Harper  v.  Taswell,  6  C.  &   P. 

8  Bishop  V.  Byrant,  6  C.  &  P.  484.  166  ;  Robinson  v.  Waddington,  13 

4  Lyon  V.  Weldon,  3  Bing.  334;  Q.  B.  753;  WaUace  v.  King,  1  H. 

Andrews  v.  KusseU,  Bullen's  N.  P.  Bl.  13. 

81, d;  Westwoodv.Cowen,l Stark.  'Evans   v.  Wright,  2  H.  &  N. 

173.  537. 

»Roden  v.  Eyton,  6  C.  B.  N.  S.  '"Poynter  v.  Buckley,  5  C.  «&  P. 

437.  513. 


1324:  Eights,  Eemedies,  &c.  [§  643. 

goods  sold  at  the  appraised  value  are  presumed  to  have 
been  sold  for  the  best  price."  It  seems  that  there  is  no 
order  required  by  law  to  be  observed  in  the  sale  of  goods 
under  a  distress.  If  the  landlord  distrains,  among  other 
goods,  his  tenant's  cattle  and  beasts  of  the  plough,  it 
seems  that  he  is  not  bound  to  sell  the  other  goods  first ; 
and  although  it  turns  out  after  the  sale  (judging  by  the 
result)  that  there  would  have  been  sufficient  to  satisfy 
the  rent  and  expenses  without  selling  the  cattle,  the  dis- 
tress is  not  thereby  proved  to  be  illegal,  if  there  was 
ground  for  supposing,  from  the  appraisement  of  compet- 
ent persons,  made  at  the  time  of  the  seizure,  that, 
without  taking  the  cattle,  the  amount  of  the  rent  and 
expenses  would  not  be  reahzed."  Where  the  goods  of  a 
lodger  are  distrained  together  with  the  goods  of  the  ten- 
ant, and  are  sold  first,  after  notice  from  the  lodger,  and 
the  tenant's  goods  turn  out  to  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  ther^ 
rent  and  charges,  .the  lodger  is  entitled  to  sue  for  an 
excessive  distress.' 

A  landlord  who  has  distrained  hay  and  straw  prohib-, 
ited  by  covenant  from  being  carried  off  the  premises, 
will  render  himself  hable  to  an  action  for  not  selling  at 
the  best  price,  if  he  sells  such  distress  subject  to  a  con- 
dition that  the  purchaser  shall  consume  it  on  the  prem- 
ises, by  reason  whereof  it  produces  less  than  the  usual 
price.* 

The  sale  may,  in  general,  be  made  either  upon  the 
demised  premises,  if  the  goods  are  impounded  there,  or 
at  any  other  place.  But  corn,  grain  or  hay  must  not  be 
"removed  by  the  person  or  persons  distraining,  to  the 
damage  of  the  owner  thereof,  out  of  the  place  where  the 
same  shall  be  found  and  seized,  but  be  kept  there,  as 
impounded,  until  the  same  shall  be  replevied  or  sold." 
Until  the  goods  distrained  are  sold,  the  property  in  them 
remains  in  the  tenant,'  subject  to  the  right  of  the  landlord 

1  Walter  v.  Enmball,  ILd.  Eaym.  v.  Hamp,  cited  in  10  M.  &  W.  710. 

'55.  See  Abbey  v.  Fetch,  8  M.  &  W.  419  ; 

^  Jenner  v.  YoUand,  6  Price,  3.  Frusher  v.  Lee,  10  M.  &  W.  709. 

3  Wilkinson  v.  Ibbett,  3  F.  &  F.  ^King  v.  England,  4    B.  &  S. 

300.  782  ;  Turner  v.  Ford,  15  M.  &  W. 

"  Ridgway  v.  Stafieord,  6  Ex.  404 ;  313. 
Eoden  v.  Eyton,  6  C.  B.  437  ;  Jones 


CHAP.  XLix.]  Illegal  Distress.  1325 

to  detain  or  sell  them.  The  person  distraining  does  not  ac- 
quire even  the  possession  of  the  cattle  or  things  distrained.' 

Where  the  goods  distrained  aie  of  small  value,  the 
appraisers  sometimes  take  them  at  their  own  valuation, 
a  receipt  written  at  the  foot  of  the  inventory  being  con- 
sidered a  sufficient  discharge.'  But  this  practice  is  so 
obviously  unjust  to  the  tenant  that  it  should  not  be 
adopted  in  any  case  where  the  goods  can  be  profitably 
disposed  of  by  public  auction.  The  landlord  must  not 
take  the  goods  at  the  appraised  value.  If  he  does,  the 
transaction  will  not  be  considered  as  a  sale,  and  the  prop- 
erty in  the  goods  will  not  be  divested  from  the  tenant  or 
owner ;  unless  they  belong  to  the  tenant,  and  are  so 
taken  with  his  consent.' 

If  the  sale  is  made  before  the  expiration  of  five  clear 
days,  and  actual  damage  is  thereby  occasioned  to  the 
tenant,  he  may  maintain  an  action  against  the  landlord ; 
but  the  tenant  is  not  entitled  to  a  verdict  unless  he 
proves  actual  damage.*  It  is  lawful  for  the  landlord,  and 
those  acting  under  him,  to  remain  more  then  five  days 
on  the  premises  for  the  purpose  of  selling  the  goods  dis- 
trained." If,  however,  the  the  sale  is  not  made,  or  the 
goods  are  not  removed  from  the  premises,  within  a  rea- 
sonable time  after  the  expiration  of  the  five  days,  the 
landlord  will  be  liable  to  an  action  of  trespass  by  the 
tenant."  It  must  be  left  to  the  jury  to  say  what  is  a 
reasonable  time.  In  one  case,  where  the  distress  was 
made  on  April  14th,  and  the  sale  on  April  27th,  the  jury 
found  that  the  sale  was  made  within  a  reasonable  time.'' 

The  sale  is  often  postponed  at  the  request  of  the 
tenant,  from  whom  the  landlord  should  invariably  ob- 
tain a  written  consent  to  his  remaining  on  the  premises.' 

Sec.  644.  When  distress  is  Illegal  and  remedy  for.— A  dis- 
tress is  illegal  if  no  rent  is  due  at  the  time  when  it  was 

'Rex   V.    Cotton,    Parker,    121;  ' Pitt  v.  Shaw,  ante. 

Turner  v.  Ford,  15  M.  &  W.  313.  •>  Griffin    v.   Scott,  3  Ld.   Rayd. 

'See  BuUen  on  Distress,  160.  1424  ;  Wiaterbourne  v.  Morgan,  11 

"■  Eng  V.  England,  4  B.  &  S.  783.  East,  395. 

*  Lucas  V.  Tarleton,  3  H.  &  N.  '  See  Harrison  v.  Barry,  7  Price, 

116  ;R6dgersv.  Parker,  180.  B.  113.  690;  Fisher  v.  Algar,  3  C.  &  P.  374. 

'Pitt  V.  Shaw,  4  B.  &  Aid.  208. 


1326  Eights,  Remedies,  &c.  [§  545. 

made,'  or  where  no  tenancy  exists  between  the  owner  of 
the  goods  and  the  person  distraining,"  or  where  a  legal 
tender  has  been  made  of  the  rent  before  the  seizure,  or 
where  the  seizure  was  made  at  night,  or  where  the 
entry  was  unlawful,' — as  where  he  breaks  open  a 
window  or  an  outer  door,* — or  where  the  property 
seized  was  exempt  from  distress,"  or  where  tools  or  im- 
plements of  trade,  beasts  of  the  plough  and  sheep  are 
taken  where  there  was  sufficient  unprivileged  property 
which  might  have  been  taken,"  or  tools  and  beasts  of 
burden  when  in  actual  use,'  or  where  the  goods  are  not 
upon  the  demised  premises,  except  in  cases  where  they 
have  been  fraudulently  or  clandestinely  removed."  In 
such  cases  the  tenant  may  bring  replevin  and  recover 
the  goods,"  or  trespass,"  trover,"  or  case,"  aUd  in  either 
form  of  action  he  may  recover  the  full  value  seized 
without  any  deduction  for  the  rent  due "  unless  there 
are  mitigating  circumstances." 

Sec.  545.  Irregular    distress.— A   distress     is   irregular 
when  the  goods  are  sold  without  a  proper  notice  or  ap- 

'  Lockier  t.  Patterson,  1  C.  &  K.  cover  only  the  expenses  of  the  re- 

271.  plevin  bond;    Eoscoe's   Evidence, 

^  Yates  V.  Tearle,  6  Q.  B.  283.  683  ;  he  cannot  recover  substantial 

'  Attack  V.  BramweU,  3  B.  &  S.  damages  in  this  action,  nor,  after 

520;  Ireland  v.  Johnson,  1  Bing.  havingtaken  judgment  in  replevin 

N.  C.  165  ;  Branscomb  v.  Bridges,  can  he  have  any  other  remedy  re- 

1  B.  &  C.  145.  spectingthe  same  distress.    Wood- 

■>  Edmondson  v.     Nuttall,  17  C.  fall's  L.  &  T.  796  ;  Phillips  v.  Barry- 

B.  N.  S.  280.  more,  Doug.  286. 

^  Gisbourn  v.  Hurat,  1  Salk.  250  ;  ">  Rogers  v.  Birkmire,  2  Strange, 

Simpson  V.  Hartopp,  1  Willes,  513  ;  1040 ;  Yates  v.  Searle,  6  Q.  B.  383 ; 

Swire  v.  Leach,  18  C.  B.  N.  S.  579.  Field  v.  Adams,  12  Ad.  &  El.  649 ; 

« Davies   v.  Aston,  1  C.  B.  746  ;  Bennett  v.  Bayes,  5  H.  &  N.  691 ; 

Nargett  v.  Nius,  1  E.  «fc  E.  489 ;  Price  v.  Woodhouse,  1  Exchq.  559 ; 

Lear  v.   Caldecott,  4  Q.   B.   133;  Hoarev.Lee,5C.  B.  754;Gauntlett 

Harvey  v.   Pocock,"  11  M.  &  W.  v.  King,  3  C.  B.  N.  S.  59  ;  Coomber 

740  ;  Gorton  v.   FaUmer,  4  T.  E.  v.  Howard,  1  id.  440 ;  Freeman  v. 

565  ;  Fenton  v.  Logan,  9  Bing.  676.  Eoshier,  13  Q.  B.  780. 

' Simpson  V.  Hartopp,  ante.  "Carter  v.  Carter,  5  Bing.  409. 

«  Buzzard  v.  Capel,  4  Bing.  140.  Simpson  v.  Hortopp,  ante  ;  Single- 

»  Jacob  V.  King,  5  Taunt.  451 ;  ton  v.  Williamson,  7  H.  &  N.  410  ; 

Fenton  v.  Logan,  ante ;  Evans  v.  Shipwick  v.  Blanchard,  6  T.  R.  398  ; 

Elliott,  5  Ad.  &  El.  142.   This  rem-  Lewis  v.  Eead,  13  M.  &  W.  834  ; 

edy  isnot  applicable  to  cases  where  Mechelen  v.  Wallace,  7  Ad.  &  El. 

fixtures,   deeds  or    animals  ferce  54,  n. 

TiafwrcB  are  taken;  Derby  V.  Harris,  "Hutt  v.  Morrell,  IIQ   B   435 

L.  J.  Q.  B.  305  ;  Niblet  v.  Smith,  4  "Attack  v.  BramweU,  3  B.'  &  S. 

T.  E.  504 ;  but  if  the  goods  are  de-  580  ;  Edmondson  v.  Nuttall,  17  C, 

Uvered  to  the  tenant  on  the  reolev-  B.  N.  S.  280. 

in  he  is  generally  entitled  to  re-  "  Harvey  v.  Pocock,  11  M.  &  W. 


CHAP.  XLIX.]  IREEGTJLAB  DISTRESS. 


132  r 


praisement,"  or  for  the  best  price/  or  without  the 
required  notice,'  or  without  five  full  day's  notice,*  or  where 
the  surplus  arising  from  the  sale  is  not  left  in  the  hands 
of  the  officer,'  or  the  distress  is  taken  out  of  the  coun- 
try." When  a  distress  is  irregular  the  tenant  can  re- 
cover only  special  damages,'  and  unless  actual  dam- 
age is  proved  a  recovery  cannot  be  had  even  for  nominal 
damages  ;  °  and  the  measure  of  recovery,  where  special 
damage  is  shown,  is  the  value  of  the  goods  (not  the  sum 
for  which  they  were  sold)  less  the  amount  of  rent  in  ar- 
rear.° 


740  ;  Edmondson  v.  Nuttall,  ante. 

1  Knight  V.  Egerton,  7  Bxchq, 
407  ;  Biggins  v.  Goode,  3  Or.  &  J. 
364 ;  Knotts  v.  Curtis,  5  C.  &  P. 
323 

^Fawcett's  L.  &  T.  180;  Ridge- 
way  V.  Ld.  Stafford,  6  Exchq.  404 ; 
Poynter  v.  Buckley,  5  C.  &  P.  513. 

3  Wilson  T.  Nightingale,  8  Q.  B. 
1034 ;  Lucas  v.  Taxlton,  3  H.  &  N. 
116. 

^Wallace  v.  King,  1  H.  Bl.  13 ; 
Lucas  V.  Tarlton,  3  H.  &  N.  116. 

'Lyon  V.  Tomkies,  1  M.  &  W. 
603. 

« Fisher  v.  Algar,  3  C.  &  P.  374 ; 
"Woodcraft  v.  Thompson,  3  Lev, 
48 ;  Gimbart  v.  Pelot,  3  Strange, 
1373. 

•"Sec.  19,  chap.  19,  stat.  11  Geo. 
2,  provides  that,  "  Where  any  dis- 
tress shall  be  made  for  any  kind  of 


rent  justly  due,  and  any  irregular- 
ity or  unlawful  act  shall  be  after- 
wards done  by  the  party  distrain- 
ing, or  by  his  agents,  the  distress 
itself  shaU  not  be  deemed  to  be  un- 
lawful, nor  the  party  making  it  be 
therefore  deemed  a  trespasser  ab 
initio ;  but  the  party  aggrieved  by 
such  unlawful  act  or  irregularity 
may  recover  full  satisfaction  for 
the  special  damage  he  shall  have 
sustained  thereby,  and  no  more, 
in  any  action  of  trespass,  or  on 
the  case.  Where  the  plaintiff  shaU 
recover  in  such  action  he  shaU  be 
paid  his  fuU  costs  of  suit." 

8Rodgers  v.  Parker,  18  C.  B. 
113. 

'Biggins  V.  Goode,  2  Cr.  &  J. 
364 ;  Knight  v.  Egerton,  7  Exchq. 
407 ;  Whitworth  v.  Moden,  3  C.  & 
K.  617. 


1328 


Use  and  Occupation. 


[§  546. 


CHAPTER  L. 

USE  Am)    OCCUPATION. 

Sec.  546.  Use  and  occupation. 

Sec.  547.  Who  may  maintain  action  for. 

Sec.  548.  Defences  to  action. 

Sec.  549.  Premises  let  for  unlawful  purposes,  fraud,  &c. 

Sec.  550.  Damages  recoverable. 


Sec.  546.  TJse  and  oeeupation.— In  all  cases  where  the 
lease  is  not  under  seal  an  action  for  the  recovery  of  rent 
will  lie,  either  in  an  action  upon  the  special  contract  or 
for  use  and  occpation.'    But  if  the  lease  is  by  deed,  and 


'  Stat.  11  Geo.  3,  chap.  19,  sec. 
14,  provides  that,  where  premises 
have  been  entered  upon  and  occu- 
pied, see  Edge  v.  Strafford,  1  Cr. 
&  J.  391  ;  How  V.  Kennett,  3  Ad. 
&  El.  650  ;  Lowe  v.  Ross,  5  Exchg. 
553 ;  Towd  v.  D'Heinriche,  13  C. 
B.  892.  See  Smith  v.  Twoart,  3 
M.  &  Gr.  841,  by  one  person  as 
tenant  to  another,  under  a  con- 
tract, express  or  implied,  to  pay 
for  the  occupation,  Hall  v.  Bur- 
gess, 5  B.  &  C.  333;  Smith  v. 
Eldridge,  15  C.  B.  236,  "it  shall 
be  lawful  for  the  landlord,  where 
the  agreement  is  not  by  deed,  to 
recover  a  reasonable  satisfaction 
for  the  lands,  tenements  or  here- 
ditaments held  or  occupied  by  the 
defendant,  in  an  action  on  the 
case,  for  the  use  and  occupation 
of  what  was  so  held  or  enjoyed ; 
and  if  in  evidence  on  the  trial  of 
such  action  any  parol  demise  or 
any  agreement  (not  being  by  deed), 
whereon  a  certain  rent  was  re- 
served, shall  appear,  the  plaintiff 
shall  not  therefore  be  nonsuited, 
but  may  make  use  thereof  as  an 
evidence  of  the  quantum  of  the 
damages  to  be  recovered."  This 
statute  is  in  force  in  most  of  the 
States.    Perrine  v.  Hankinson,  11 


N.  J.  L.  181.  In  Massachusetts, 
however,  where  there  is  a  written 
lease,  whether  under  seal  or  not, 
use  and  occupation  does  not  he. 
Fuller  V.  Sweet,  6  AUen  (Mass.) 
319,  n.  Mann  v.  Bremer,  7  id.  203 ; 
Warren  v.  Ferdinand,  9  id.  857. 
The  statute  11,  Geo.  3,  did  not 
create  a  new  remedy,  as  this  rem- 
edy existed  before  its  passage  in 
all  cases  where  there  was  not  a 
strict  demise.  Dartnal  v.  Morgan, 
Cro.  Jac.  598,  but  its  object,  as  ex- 
pressed in  the  statute  itself,  was 
to  obviate  "  some  difficulties"  that 
occurred  in  the  recovery  of  rent 
•  where  the  lease  was  not  by  deed. 
Previous  to  that  statute,  where  a 
demise  at  a  fixed  rent  was  proved 
■the  plaintiff  was  nonsuited,  and  it 
was  to  relieve  parties  from  tha 
danger  that  the  statute  was  en- 
acted, and  thereafter,  unless  the 
demise  was  by  deed,  a  recovery 
would  be  had  in  this  form  of  ac- 
tion. Gibson  v.  Kirk,  1  Q.  B.  850; 
Reade  v.  Johnson,  Cro.  EUz.  243; 
Brett  V.  Bead,  Cro.  Car.  348; 
Symcock  v.  Payne,  Cro.  Ehz.  786; 
Clerk  V.  Palady,  id.  859.  The 
statute  did  not  extend  the  remedy, 
except  in  that  respect,  to  cases 
where  it  could  not  be  maintained 


CHAP.  L.] 


Use  and  Occupation. 


1329 


is  a  perfected  instrument,  an  action  for  use  and  occupa- 
tion does  not  lie,  but  the  remedy  must  be  sought  upon 
the  special  contract  in  an  action  of  debt,'  or  covenant," 
unless  the  character  of  the  demise  has  been  changed  by 
a  subsequent  agreement  of  the  parties  in  writing  not 
under  seal,  relating  to  the  contract  of  demise,  either  in- 
dorsed upon  the  lease  or  contained  in  a  separate  instru- 
ment, in  which  event  the  whole  instrument  is  changed 
from  a  specialty  to  a  simple  contract,  and  aU  the  remedy 
thereon  is  changed  from  debt  or  covenant  to  assump- 
sit.' 

An  action  for  use  and  occupation  cannot  be  maintained 
unless  the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  is  established. 
An  occupancy  under  some  contract,  express  or  implied, 
must  be  shown.'    The  mere  fact  that  a  person  has  occu- 


before.  Bkamwbix,  B.,  in 
Churchward  v.  Ford,  2  H.  &  N. 
449.  Debt  for  use  and  occupation 
lay  at  the  common  law  where  the 
demise  was  not  under  seal.  Gib- 
son V.  Kirk,  ante  ;  Curtis  v.  Spit- 
ty,  1  Ring.  N.  C.  17;  Egler  v. 
Mars(^en,  5  Taunt.  25;  King  v. 
Erazer,  6  East,  348. 

'  Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  C.  &  P. 
327 ;  Anworth  v.  Johnson,  5  id.  289 ; 
Hunt  V.  Thompson,  2  Allen  (Mass.) 
341 ;  Durgay  v.  Angone,  2  Ves.  Jr. 
307 ;  Kiersted  v.  Orange,  &c. ,  R. 
E.  Co.,  69  N.  Y.  849;  Burnham  v. 
Rogers,  108  Mass.  879.  While  in 
Michigan  it  is  held  that  assumpsit 
lies  whether  the  lease  is  under  seal 
or  not.  Dalton  v.  Lundahn,  30 
Mich.  348.  In  those  States  where 
the  distinction  between  forms  of 
actions  is  abolished,  jet  the  sub- 
stance of  them  remains  and  the 
same  rules  apply  as  though  the 
form  was  unchanged. 

*  See  j^revious  note. 

=  Hydeville,  &o.,  Co.  v.  Eagle  R. 
R.  &S.  Co.,40Vt.384. 

■■  Redden  v.  Barker,  4  Harr.  (Del.) 
179;  LaParge  v.  Park,  1  Edm.  Sel. 
Cas.  (N.  Y.)  223 ;  WUliams  v.  Hol- 
lis,  19  Ga.  313 ;  Marquette,  &c.,  R. 
R.  Co.  T.  Harlow,  37  Mich.  554; 
Dudding  v.  Hill,  15  111.  61  ;  Hurd 
V.  MiUer,  2  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  O.  P.)  540  ; 
Moore  v.  Harvey,  50  Vt.  297; 
Brewer  v.  Craig,  18  N.  J.  L.  314  ; 
Stewart  v.  Fitch,  31  id.  17  ;  Boston 
T.  Binney,  11  Pick.  (Mass.)  1 ;  Newr 


ly  v.-  Vestal,  6  Ind.  413  ;  Richmond, 
&c.,  R.  R.  Co.  V.  Rogers,  7  Bush. 
(Ky.)  533 ;  Scales  v.  Anderson,  26 
Miss.  94 ;  Cohen  v.  Kyler,  27  Mo. 
133.  The  action  is  founded  on 
privity  of  contract,  and  not  on 
privity  of  estate.  Henwood  v. 
Cheeseman,  3  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  500. 
The  action  does  not  necessarily 
presuppose  a  former  demise,  but 
there  must  be  an  occupancy  under 
such  circumstances  as  warrant  an 
inference  that  the  use  was  to  be 
paid  for.  Chambers  v.  Ross,  25  N. 
J.  L.  393,  as  where  a  person  occu- 
pies by  the  express  permission  of 
the  landlord.  Pierce  v.  Pierce,  35 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  348;  Osgood  v. 
Dewey,  13  John.  (N.  Y.)  340 ;  Steb- 
bins  V.  Peck,  8  Gray  (Mass.)  553. 
It  does  not  he  where  the  entry  and 
'holding  is  tortious.  Wiggin  v. 
Wiggin,  6  N.  H.  398 ;  Richey  v. 
Hinde,  6  Ohio,  371 ;  Name  v.  Alex- 
ander, 49  Md.  416 ;  Ryan  v.  Marsh, 
3  N.  &  M.  (S.  O.)  156  ;  Ackerman 
V.  Lyman,  20  Wis.  454  ;  McCloskey 
V.  Miller,  73  Penn.  St.  151 ;  Hen- 
wood  V.  Cheeseman,  ante;  Smith 
V.  Houston,  16  Ala.  Ill,  nor  where 
the  possession  is  adverse,  no  ten- 
ancy having  previously  existed. 
Watson  V.  Brainard,  33  Vt.  88; 
Home  V.  Russell,  41  Me.  446 ;  Cur- 
tis V.  Treat,  31  id.  525  ;  Sampson  v. 
Shaeflfer,  3Cal.  196  ;  Byrd  v.  Chase, 
10  Ark.  602 ;  Wharton  v.  Fitzger- 
ald. 3  Dall.  (Penn.)  503;  Edmondson 
V,  Kite,  43  Mp.  176  :  Cincinnati  v. 


1330 


Use  and  Occupation. 


[§  546. 


pied  premises  is  not  sufficient  to  create  the  relation  of  land- 
lord and  tenant.  Such  circumstances  must  be  estab- 
lished as  at  least  show  that  the  occupancy  was  with  the 
owner's  assent,'  and  the  question  as  to  whether  an  im- 
plied contract  of  tenancy  existed  is  for  the  jury."  Neither 
an  express  demise  nor  a  promise  is  necessary  ;  it  is  suffi- 
cient if  the  defendant  held  as  tenant  of  the  plaintiff,  or 
by  his  permission  or  sufferance,  recognizing  the  plantiffs 
■  htle,as  in  such  cases  the  law  will  imply  a  promise  to  pay 


Walls,  1  Ohio  St.  222,  nor  where 
there  was  an  entry  under  a  con- 
ti-act  to  purchase,  but  which  is  not 
performed,  Smith  v.  Stewart,  6 
John.  (N.  Y.)  46 ;  Stacey  v.  Vt. 
Central  E.  E.  Co.,  33  Vt.  551; 
Hough  V.  Birge,  11  id.  190  ;  Miles 
V.  Elkin,  10  Ind.  339  ;  Vandarheu- 
yel  V.  Storrs,  3  Conn.  203  ;  Little 
V.  Pearson,  7  Pick.  (Mass.)  801 ; 
Miles  V.  Elldn,  10  Ind.  329  ;  nor 
where  there  has  been  a  demise, 
but  the  lessee  never  entered  into 
possession,  Maitland  v.  Wilcox,  18 
Penn.  St.  331;  nor  where  the  owner 
never  consented  to  the  occupancy, 
Marquette,  &c.,  E.  E.  Co.  v.  Har- 
low, 37  Mich.  554,  or  where  the  oc- 
cupant is  a  mere  trespasser,Church- 
ward  V.  Ford,  3  H.  &  N.  449; 
Cripps  V.  Blank,  9  D.  &  K.  480  ; 
Litchfield  v.  Eeady,  5  Exchq.  939  ; 
Turner  v.  Cameron,  &c.,  Co.,  5  id. 
932  ;  Camden  v.  Batterbury,  5  C. 
B.  N.  S.  808,  or  where  the  occu- 
pancy is  under  a  third  person.  Tew 
V.  Jones,  13  M.  &  W,  12,  nor  where 
the  conduct  of  the  parties  is  such 
as  to  rebut  the  idea  of  a  tenancy, 
Greton  v.  Smith,  33  N.  Y.  245,  as 
where  the  tenant  repudiates  the 
landlord's  title,  Boston  v.  Binney, 
11  Pick.  (Mass.)  1  ;  Jackson  v. 
Mowry,  30  Ga.  143,  nor  does  this 
action  lie  w^here  the  rent  is  payable 
in  specific  articles,  the  value  of 
which  has  not  been  fixed,  and  no 
rule  by  which  to  calculate  the  value 
is  furnished  by  the  lease.  Eastland 
V.  Sparks,  22  Ala.  607  ;  Oswald  v. 
Godbald,  20  id.  811.  Nor  can  this 
action  be  maintained  after  an  ac- 
tion of  ejectment  has  been  brought 
to  turn  him  out  of  possession. 
Featherstonhaugh  v.  Bradshaw,  1 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  lU  ;  Strong  v.  Gar- 
field, 10  Vt.  503. 
.'Hallv.  Jacobs,  8  Bush.   (Ky.) 


596;  Mitchell  v.  Pendleton,  21 
Ohio  St.  664 ;  Nance  v.  Alexander, 
49  Ind.  516 ;  Dalton  v.  Landahn, 
80  Mich.  349  ;  Espy  v.  Fenton,  5 
Oregon,  428 ;  Lanlrford  v.  Green, 
52  Ala.  103 ;  Quimby  v.  Stebbins, 
55  N.  H.  420.  In  Georgia  a  con- 
tract for  use  and  occupation  will 
be  enforced  on  proof  of  title  in  the 
plaintiff  and  occupation  by  the 
defendant.  Clark  v.  Green,  35  Ga. 
92. 

'  Chamberlin  v.  Donahue,  44  Vt. 
57.  Biglow  v.  Eeynolds,  (Mich.) 
12  .West  Eep.  659;  Lankford  v. 
Green,  52  Ala.  108;  Espy  v.  Fenton, 

5  Oreg.  428  Nance  v.  Alexander,  49 
Ind.  516  ;  La  Farge  v.  Park,  1  Edm. 
Sel.  Cas.  (N.  Y.)  233.  In  an  action 
for  use  and  occupation  against  A 

6  B  it  appeared  that  A  took  no 
part  in  the  hiring  of  the  plaintifiE's 
premises  except  that  he  was  pres- 
ent when  B  made  the  agreement 
with  the  plaiutifE ;  that  B  hired 
the  premises  for  the  purpose  of 
carrmg  on  business  there  under 
the  name  of  A ;  that  the  plaintiff 
made  out  his  biUs  for  rent  to  B ; 

.and  that  the  plaintiff  afterwards 
proved  the  claim  which  is  the 
subject  of  this  action  against  the 
estate  of  A  in  insolvency.  The 
judge  ruled  that  there  was  no 
evidence  that  A  had  made  a 
contract  with  the  plaintiflE ;  in- 
structed the  jury  that  if  A  was  the 
agent  of  B  the  plaintiff  could  not 
recover  against  B  ;  and  refused  to 
rule  that  if  B  was  doing  busiuess 
imder  the  name  of  A  and  the 
premises  where  hired  in  further- 
ance of  said  business  the  plaintiff 
could  not  recover.  The  jury 
found  for  the  plaintiff  against  B. 
It  was  held  that  B  had  no  ground 
of  exception.  Gardner  v.  Peaslee, 
143  Mass.  382. 


CHAP.  L.J  Use  and  Occupation.  1331 

a  reasonable  sum  for  such  use  and  occupation/  and  this 
is  so,  even  though  there  is  a  lease  in  writing  containing 
a  condition  precedent,  which  has  not  been  performed 
by  the  plaintiff,"  or  which  is  void.'  So  this  action 
may  be  maintained  where  a  person  enters  under  an 
agreement  for  a  lease  for  a  term,  although  he  subse- 
quently refuses  to  accept  a  lease.*  This  action  lies 
against  a  tenant  who  holds  over  after  his  term  has 
expired,  the  law  presuming  that  he  holds  as  tenant  under 
the  same  terms  as  he  held  under  the  lease.'  But,  in  the 
absence  of  an  express  demise,  if  the  occupancy  can  be 
referred  to  any  other  ground  than  that  of  tenancy,  no 
promise  to  pay  rent  can  be  implied, — as  where  a  person 
goes  in  under  a  contract  to  purchase,  which  is  not  per- 
formed.' In  order  to  maintain  this  action  the  defendant 
must  have  actually  entered  into  possession  under  the 
lease,  either  by  himself  or  an  agent  or  subtenant.  It  is 
not  sufficient  in  this  form  of  action  to  show  that  there 
was  a  lease  or  an  agreement,  but  some  occupation  under 
it  must  be  shown.'    Where,  however,  the   lessee   has 

'Levi  V.  Lewis,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  766  ;  ard,  19  Mo.  435 ;  Eichmond  Co.  v. 

La  Farge  v.  Park,  1  Edm.  Sel.  Cas.  Treat,  7  Bush.  (Ky.)  532.    See  chap. 

(N.  Y.)  233 ;  Estep  v.  Estep,  23  Ind.  1,  where  this  matter  is  fully  con- 

114;  HaU  v.  Burgess,  5  B.  &  C.  sidered. 

533;    Gunn   v.     Scovill,    4    Day         '  Town  v.  De  Heinrich,  13  C.  B. 

(Ooim.)228:    Churchward  v.  Ford,  893;  Edge  v.  StrafiEord,  1  C.  &  J. 

3  H.   N.  &446  ;  Crouch  v.  BrUes,  391 ;  HaU  v.  Western  Trans.  Co., 

7  J.  J.  Mar.  (Ky.)  257  ;  Gibson  v.  34  N.   Y.   384 ;   Lowe  v.   Eoss,  5 

Kirk,  1  Q.   B.   850 ;    Stockett  v.  Exchq.  553 ;  Jones  v.  Reynolds,  7 

Watkins,  3  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  330.     But  C.  &  P.  335.    The  question  as  to 

in  North  Carolina  it  is  held  that  whether  an  entry  has  been  made 

use  and  occupation  wiU  not    lie  is  for  the  jury.  How  v.  Kennett,  3 

except  where  there  is  an  express  Ad.  &  El.  659,  and  where  a  lease 

promise    to   pay  rent.      Long   y.  is  made  to  two,  and  only  one  en- 

Bonner,  11  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  37.  ters,  ia  the  absence  of  any  proof  to 

'  Smith  V.  Twoart,  3  M.  &  G.  841 ;  the  contrary,  the  jury  may  find 

Smith  V.  Eldridge,  15  C.  B.  236.  that  he  entered  for  all.    Glen  v. 

'Stebbinsv.  Park,  8  Gray  (Mass.)  Durgay,  4  Exchq.  61.    But  where 

553  ;  Warner  v.  Hale,  65  111.  319  ;  an  entry  is  made  only  by  one,  and 

Crawford  v.  Jones,  54  Ala,  459  ;  he  holds  over,  he  alone  is  responsi- 

Smith  V.  Kinkard,  1  lU.  App.  630.  ble  for  the  rent  after  the  expiration 

*  Little  T.  Martin,  3  Wend.  (N.  of  the  term.  Theological  Institute 
Y.)319.  V.  Barbour,  4   Gray  (Mass.)   339. 

'Evertsen  v.   Sawyer,  3  Wend.  In  Delano  v.   Montague,  4  Cush. 

(N.  Y.)  507 ;  Russell  v.  Fabyan,  34  (Mass.)  42,  the  parties  to  a  written 

N.  H.  318 ;  Abeel  t.  RadcUffe,  13  lease  for  years,  before  the  expira- 

John.  (N.  Y.)  297.  tion  thereof,  entered  into  an  agree- 

*  Osgood  V.  Dewey,  13  John.  (N.  ment,  the  one  to  let  the  estate  and 
Y.)  280;  Curtis  v.  Treat,  31  Me.  the  other  to  hire  it,  for  another 
535  ;  Dennett  v.  Penobscot,  F.  Ins.  year,  on  the  same  terms ;  and  be- 
Co.,  57  Me.  425 ;  Coffman  v.  How-  fore  the   expiration  of  the  lease, 


1332 


Use  and  Occupation. 


[§  546. 


once  entered,  he  is  liable  for  the  rent  for  the  whole  term 
in  this  form  of  action,  although  he  quit  before  his  term 
expired,  and  thereafter  derived  no  benefit  therefrom.' 
This  action  is  predicated  on  privity  of  contract,  and  not 
on  privity  of  estate "  but  the  contract  need  not  be 
express,  it  is  enough,  if  the  circumstances  are  such  that 
a  contract  can  be  implied."  A  recovery  may  be  had  in 
this  action  upon  an  implied  agreement  where  there  is  a 
misunderstanding  between  the  parties  as  to  the  amount 
of  rent  to  be  paid,  although  both  parties  supposed  there 
was  an  express  agreement.*  Where  there  is  a  written 
lease,  an  action  for  use  and  occupation  will  not  lie  until 


the  lessee  verbally  notified  the  les- 
sor that  he  would  not  carry  the 
agreement  into  effect ;  but  the  les- 
see, nevertheless,  held  over  the  ter- 
mination of  the  lease,  although 
without  intending  to  occupy  under 
the  agreement,  or  under  any  other 
agreement,  and  left  within  the 
year.  It  was  held,  that  the  lessee 
was  not  liable  for  the  use  and  oc- 
cupation of  the  premises  beyond 
the  time  of  his  actual  occupation. 
In  Maitland  v.  Wilcox,  17  Peim. 
St.  231,  the  plaintiff  agreed  to 
lease,  and  the  defendant  to  hire,  a 
house  for  seven  years,  at  a  specified 
rent.  A  lease  was  prepared,  in 
conformity  with  the  engagement, 
but  the  defendant  soon  after  gave 
notice  that  he  would  not  take  the 
property,  and  being  requested,  ■  re- 
fused to  execute  the  lease,  and  to 
receive  the  key  when  tendered.  It 
was  held,  that  an  action  for  use 
and  occupation,  or  for  rent  as  due 
on  an  actual  lease,  could  not  be 
maintained. 

'Walker  v.  Furbush,  11  Cush. 
(Mass.)  366.  The  rule  is,  that  if  the 
lessee  has  once  entered  into  pos- 
session as  tenant,  he  "holds"  un- 
til the  term  is  legally  determined. 
Canaan  v.  Hartley,  9  C.  B.  634 ; 
Bishop  V.  Howard,  3  B.  &  C.  100  ; 
Jones  V.  Reynolds,  4  Ad.  &  El. 
405 ;  Berrey  v.  Lindley,  3  M.  &  G. 
498 ;  Bessel  v.  Landsberg,  7  Q.  B. 
688.  A  constructive  holding  or 
occupancy  as  tenant  is  sufficient 
after  entry,  Pinero  v.  Judson,  6 
Bing.  206 ;  Papillon  v.  Brunton,  5 
H.  &  N.  518 ;  Smith  v.  Twoart,  2 
M.  &  G.  841 ;  Pollock  v.  Stacey,  9 
Q.  B.   1033  ;  Atkins  v.  Humphrey, 


2  C.  B.  654,  but  a  mere  construc- 
tive occupancy  is  not  sufficient  he- 
fore  there  has  been  an  entry. 
Towne  v.  De  Heinrich,  13  C.  B. 
893. 

*  Henwood  v.  Cheeseman,  3  S.  & 
B.  (Penn.)  500  ;  Barren  v.  Marsh, 
68  N.  H.  107.  In  Mississippi,  by 
statute,  rent  may  be  recovered 
whether  there  is  an  express  or 
implied  contract  or  not.  New- 
berry V.  Cowan,  63  Miss.  570. 

3  AuU  Savmgs  Bank  v.  Aull,  80 
Mo.  199 ;  Pierce  v.  Pierce,  25  Barb. 
(N.  y.)  343  ;  Osgood  v.  Dewey,  13 
John.  (N.  Y.)  240 ;  Welcome  v. 
Labanter,  63  N.  H.  134 ;  Gunn  v. 
Scoville,  4  Day  (Conn.)  338 ;  Cranch 
V.  Briles,  7  J.  J.  Mar.  (Ky.)  357  ; 
Sargeant  v.  Ashe,  33  Mo.  301; 
Fitchburg,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Melven,  15 
Mass.  370.  If  a  person  enters  un- 
der a  lease  made  on  Sunday, 
although  the  contract  is  void,  yet 
he  is  liable  in  this  action  for  such 
sum  as  the  use  of  the  premises  is 
reasonably  worth,  Stebbins  v.  Peck, 
Gray  (Mass.)  553.  If  a  person 
enters  as  a  tenant  at  vidll  under  a 
contract  express  or  implied,  he 
wiU  be  Kable  for  the  rent  although 
he  leaves  the  premises  without 
notice  to  the  landlord.  Walker  v. 
Furbush,  11  Cush.  (Mass.)  336.  If 
a  person  in  possession  of  premises 
without  right,  is  notified  that  if  he 
continues  in  possession  he  will  be 
charged  rent  therefor,  and  he  re- 
mains, he  is  liable  for  the  rent 
thereaiter  accruing.  Horton  v. 
Cooley,  135  Mass.  589. 

*  Scranton  v.  Booth,  39  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  371. 


CHAP.  L.J 


Use  and  Occupation. 


1333 


the  termination  of  the  term  secured  by  it ; '  nor  can 
mesne  profits  he  recovered  in  this  form  of  action/  nor 
where  the  possession  is  tortious '  or  *  adverse  or  under 
a  contract  which  excludes  the  idea  of  a  tenancy.'  But 
where  a  person  who  has  entered  into  possession  for  a 
term  under  a  contract  to  pay  I'ent,  holds  over,  he  is  liable 
for  use  and  occupation  to  any  person  who  may  own  the 
lands  at  the  time  of  such  an  occupancy,  whether  it  be  the 
reversioner  or  the  grantor  of  the  person  under  whom  he 
entered.'  Where  a  corporation  has  taken  a  lease  which 
is  void  because  ultra  vires,  and  has  entered  into  posses- 
sion under  the  lease,  it  is  liable  for  the  use  and  occupa- 
tion of  the  premises  for  the  time  it  actually  occupied 
them  although  not  bound  by  the  terms  of  the  lease,  and 
the  measure  of  recovery  is  a  reasonable  and  just  com- 
pensation during  the  period  of  occupancy.' 

In  some  cases  an  action  of  debt  for  rent  may  be  main- 
tained where  an  action  for  use  aad  occupation  will  not 
lie.  For  instance,  a  lessee  who  has  never  entered  to  take 
possession  as  tenant  may  be  liable  on  his  contract  to  pay 
rent,'  but  not  to  an  action  for  use  and  occupation ; ' 
so  an  assignee  of  the  term  who  has  never  entered  to  take 
possession  as  assignee  may  be  liable  to  an  action  for  the 
rent,"  but  not  to  an  action  for  use  and  occupation."  So 
the  assignees  of  a  bankrupt  who  enter  and  take  posses- 


'Gage  V.  Smith,  14  Me.  466; 
Blame  v.  BTClarken,  10  Watts 
(Penn.)  380.  This  action  will  not 
lie  for  rent  accruing  nnder  a  lease 
imder  seal.  Smiley  v.  Lauthlin, 
138  Mass.  363. 

«Butlerv.  Cowles,  4  Ohio,  305; 
Walker  v.  Prescott,  6  N.  H.  98. 

^Wiggin  V.  Wiggin,  6  N.  H. 
298 ;  Ryan  v.  Marsh,  3  N.  &  M.  (S. 
C.)  156  ;  StringfeUow  v.  Curry,  76 
Ala.  304. 

*  Watson  V.  Brainard,  33  Vt.  88; 
Folsom  V.  Carli,  6  Miun.  430 ;  Home 
V.  Sussell,  41  Me.  446  ;  Craswell  v. 
Crane,  7  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  191 ;  Samp- 
son V.  ShaefEer,  3  Cal.  196  ;  Curtis 
V.  Treat,  21  Me.  535 ;  Eastman  v. 
Howard,  30  Me.  58 ;  Edmonson  v. 
Kite,  43  Mo.  176. 

5  Smith  V.  Stewart,  6  John  (N. 
Y.)  46  ;  Stacy  v.  Vt.  Centl.  R.  R. 
Co.,  33  Vt.  551  ;  Miles  v.  Elkins,  10 
II.— 33 


Ind.  339  ;  Bancroft  :9^.  Wadsworth, 
13  John,  (N.  Y.)  489 ;  O'Donnell  v. 
McMiurdie,  6  Humph.  (Tenn.)  134  ; 
Denver  Transfer,  &c., Co.  v.  Sween, 
8  Col.  HI, 

"Hoagland  v.  Cram,  113  HI. 
865  ;  55  Am.  Rep.  434. 

'Farmers  L.  &  T,  Co.  v.  St. 
Joseph,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  2  Fed.  Rep. 
117, 

«  Bull  V.  Stibbs,  8  T.  R.  327. 

« Edge  V.  Strafford,  1  0.  &  J.  391 
Lowe  V.  Ross,  5  Exchq.  553 
Towne  v,  De  Heinrieh,  13  C.  B.  893. 

'0  Ringer  V.  Cann,  8M.  &  W.  343 
Burton  v.  Barclay,   7  Bing.   745 
Williams  v.  Bosanquet,  1  B.  &  B, 
338  ;  Stone  v.  Evans,  Peake,  Add. 
Cas.  94. 

"How  V.  Kennett,  3  Ad.  &  El. 
659  ;  Lowe  v.  Ross,  5  Exchq.  556 ; 
Clark  v.  Webb,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  39  ; 
Jones  V.  Reynolds,  7  C.  &  P.  335, 


1334      ■  Use  and  Occupation.  [§  547.' 

sion  as  assignees  during  a  current  quarter,  or  half  year, 
and  continued  in  possession  until  the  rent  becomes  due, 
are  liable  to  an  action  of  debt  for  the  rent,  but  not  to 
an  action  for  use  and  occupation,  they  not  having  occu- 
pied during  the  whole  period.'  So  a  husband  is  not 
liable  in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation  to  pay  for  the 
enjoyment  of  a  house  by  his  wife  dum  sola,  such  occu- 
pation not  having  been  by  hini,  nor  at  his  request ;  but 
he  would  be  hable  to  an  action  for  the  rent,  the  declara- 
tion being  framed  specially  accoi-ding  to  the  facts." 

It  has  been  held,  that  an  action  for  use  and  occupation 
will  not  lie  where  the  title  is  in  dispute,  ejectment  being 
the  proper  remedy.' 

Sec.  547.  who  may  maintain  action  for.— The  fact  that 
the  plaintiff  has  a  good  and  sufficient  title  to  enable  him 
to  maintain  ejectment,  is  not  sufiScient ;  there  must  be 
some  agreement,  express  or  implied,  between  him  and 
the  defendant,  and  some  entry,  enjoyment  or  possession 
under  such  agreement.*  Therefore  this  action  will  not 
lie  against  a  person  whose  occupancy  was  under  another 
person  from  whom  he  obtained  possession "  nor  against  a 
trespasser."  To  maintain  this  action,  the  plaintiff  must 
prove  not  only  title  in  himself  and  occupancy  by  defend- 
ant, but  also  that  the  conventional  relatioil  of  landlord 
and  tenant  exists  between  the  parties.'  It  need  not  be 
created  by  a  written  instrument  or  express  agreement,  yet 
there  must  be  proof  of  circumstances  authorizing  an  infer- 
ence that  the  parties  intended  to  assume  such  relation. 
In  a  New  York  case"  the  defendant,  prior  to  June  7, 
1883,  as  assignee  for  the  benefit  of  creditors,  took  title  to 

'  Cole  Ejec.  539  ;  Hanson  v.  Stev-  » Richardson  v.  Hall,  1  B.  &  B. 

enson,  1  B.  &  Ad.  303  ;  Thomas  v.  50  ;  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  699. 

Pemberton,  7  Taunt.  206  ;  Clark  v.  *  Litchfield  v.    Read,  5  Exchq. 

Hume,  R.  &  Moo.  307  ;  Welch  v.  932 ;  Cripps  v.  Blank,  9  D.  &  K.  480. 

Myers,  4   Camp.  368 ;    Ansell   v.  '  Tew  v.  Jones,  13  M.  &  W.  12. 

Eobson,  2  C.  &  J.  610  ;  Wakefield  « Turner  v.  Cameron's,  &c.,  Coal 

V.  Brown,  9  Q.  B.  209  ;  Magnay  v.  Co.,  5  Exchq.  932. 

Edwards,  12  C.  B.  479  ;  Gudgen  v.  ^  Thompson  v.    Power,  60  Barb. 

Bessett,  6  E.  &  B.  986.  (N.  Y.)  47a ;  Sylvester  v.  Eawlston, 

=  Naish  V.  Tatlock,  3  H.  Bl.  319 ;  31  id.  286  ;  Hall  v.  Southmayd,  15 

Clarke  v.  Webb,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  29 ;  id.  36. 

Lambert  v.  Norris,  2  M.  &  W.  333.  *  Benjamin  v.    Benjamin,  5  N. 

But  see  Gibson  v.  Courthorpe,  1  D,  Y .  388. 

&  E.  305.  » Hawley  v.  Preston. 


CHAP.  L.]  Defences  to  Action.  1335 

a  factory  and  machinery  therein  contained,  and  on  that 
day  sold  the  premises  to  the  plaintiff,  and  on  June  21, 
1883,  gave  him  the  deed  therefor.  There  was  no  proof  of 
any  use  or  occupation  of  the  premises  by  the  defendant 
except  such  as  might  be  implied  from  his  omission  to  re- 
move certain  stock  belonging  to  him  as  assignee  which 
remained  on  the  premises  for  two  months  after  the  date 
of  the  deed.  It  was  held,  that  the  subsequent  possession 
of  the  vendor  continued  to  be  of  the  same  character  as 
that  which  attended  its  inception  unless  changed  by 
contract  entered  into  during  its  continuance.  And 
under  the  rule  that  a  vendor  who  remains  in  possession 
of  part  of  the,  property  after  the  execution  of  the  con- 
veyance does  not  thereby  become  tenant  to  the  purchaser 
nor  liable  to  him  in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation, 
it  was  held  that  he  was  not  hable  for  rent  in  this  action.' 

Sec.  648.  Defences  to  action.— An  'eviction  from  the 
whole  premises  by  the  landlord  is  a  good  ground  of  de- 
fence in  this  action ;  but  if  the  tenant  is  evicted  only 
from  a  part  of  the  premises,  such  eviction  is  defence 
only  pro  tanto"  if  he  remains  in  possession  of  the 
other  part  of  the  premises."    Under  the  general  issue 

'Tew  V.  Jones,  13  M.  &  W.  13  ;  perform  this  duty,  he  is  tobecom- 

Boston  V.  Birmey,  11  Pick.  (Mass.)  pelled  to  pay,  by  deduction  from 

1 ;  Greenup  v.  Vernon,  16  111.  26.  the  rent  to  the  extent  of  a  month's 

5  McGtmigle  v.  Blake,  3  Cranch  rental — or  at  the  option  of  the  ten- 
(17.  S.  C.  C.)  64  ;  Smith  v.  Ealeigh,  ant,  the  term  to  be  concluded  with- 
3  Camp.  513.  And  the  fact  that  the  out  redress  to  the  landlord, 
eviction  is  by  a  third  person  by  '  Stokes  v.  Cooper,  3  Camp.  515, 
paramount  title  is  sufficient.  New-  n.  In  Re  Ware,  9  Exchq.  403. 
port  V.  Hardy,  2  D.  &  L.  921.  Or  Where  a  lessee  is  evicted  for  breach 
where  the  premises  are  taken  for  of  a  covenant  to  pay  rent,  he  is  en- 
public  purposes  under  legal  pro-  titled  to  have  the  value  of  repairs, 
ceediugs.  Taylor  v.  Clemson^  11  made  by  him  under  an  agreement 
CI.  &  F.  610.  In  Van  Every  v.  that  the  cost  thereof  should  be  ap- 
Ogg,  59  CaL  563.  In  an  action  by  plied  in  the  payment  of  the  rent, 
a  landlord  against  a  tenant  for  un-  deducted  from  the  rent  due  at  the 
lawful  detainer,  the  defendant  set  time  of  the  eviction,  although  the 
up  a  counter-claim  for  damages  lessor  has  never  approved  them  nor 
resultiug  from  the  dilapidated  con-  had  any  settlement  oeen  made  as  to 
dition  of  the  leased  premises.  It  their  value.  Fillebrown  v.  Hoar, 
was  held  the  demurrer  to  the  124  Mass.  580.  A  lessee  who,  in 
counter-claim  was  rightly  sue-  an  action  against  his  lessor  for 
tained.  Under  the  Code,  the  obli-  breach  of  a  covenant  to  make  cer- 
gationof  the  landlord  is  limited  by  tain  additions,  has  recovered  the 
the  extent  of  the  privilege  con-  whole  value  of  the  use  of  the  prem- 
ferred  upon  the  tenant ;  that  is,  it  is  ises  of  which  he  was  deprived,  is 
the  duty  of  the  landlord  to  repair  liable  for  the  rent.  In  an  action 
upon  notice,  and  if  he  does  not  by  the  lessor  for  rent  in  such  case. 


1336 


Use  and  Occupation, 


[§548/ 


the  defendant  may  show  that  nothing  is  due,  or  that  no 
cause  of  action  ever  existed  against  him,  as,  that  the 
plaintiff's  title  was  defeasible,  and  was  in  fact  legally 
defeated  before  any  rent  accrued, '  but  if  the  plaintiff's 
title  was  not  defeated  until  after  the  rent  clainied  be- 
came due,  the  fact  that  it  was  subsequently  defeated  is 
no    defence    when    raised  either    under  the    general 


it  was  held  that  it  was  immaterial 
whether  the  covenant  to  pay  rent 
was  dependent  on  the  covenant  to 
complete  the  building  within  the 
time  agreed,  so  as  to  make  the  fail- 
ure to  perform  the  latter  a  defence 
for  an  action  for  rent  accruing 
"while  the  default  continued ;  the 
lessee  having  elected  in  his  action 
to  treat  the  covenant  as  independ- 
ent, must,  in  the  lessor's  action,  be 
held  to  that  construction.  Knox 
V.  Hexter,  71  N.  Y.  461.  The  les- 
see of  an  old  building  agreed  "to 
do  all  the  repairs  which  may  be  re- 
quired in  and  upon  said  premises  at 
his  own  cost  and  expense."  The 
weight  of  his  goods  caused  the 
floors  to  settle,  and  a  snow-storm 
afterwards  caused  the  floors  and 
roof  to  settle  still  more.  At  the  les- 
see's request  the  lessor  had  thereof 
made  secure,  9,nd  in  so  doing  re- 
moved a  portion  of  the  flooring,  the 
material  whereof  was  unfit  to  be  re- 
laid.  In  an  action  by  the  lessor  for 
rent,  his  refusal  to  relay  the  floor 
was  held  to  be  no  eviction  and  no 
bar  under  the  statute.  McMann  v. 
Autenreith,  17  Hun  (N.  Y.)  163. 
Evidence  that  the  defendant  was 
enjolaed  from  using  demised  prem- 
isesby  an  exparte  injunction,  issued 
at  the  instance  of  the  plaintiff,  is 
admissable  under  plea  of  "evic- 
tion "  in  an  action  for  rent.  Pf und 
V.  Herhnger,  10  PhUa.  (Pa.)  13. 
To  a  claim  for  ground  rent  a  con- 
structive eviction,  under  a  para- 
mount title,  is  an  answer,  although 
no  actual  ejectment  was  brought. 
Hulseman  v.  Griffiths,  10  Phila. 
(Pa.)  350. 

'  Newport  V,  HJardy,  3D.  &  L. 
931.  In  Farris  V.  Houston,  74  Ala. 
162,  as  a  general  rule,  when  a  ten- 
ant is  sued  for  rent,  or  for  the  pos- 
session on  the  expiration  of  his 
term,  he  cannot  dispute  the  title 
of  his  landlord,  nor  set  up  a  para- 
mount title  in  himgelf  or  a  third 


person  ;  but  he  may  show  that  the 
landlord's  title  has  expired  by  lim- 
itation, or  by  operation  of  law ;  or 
that  he  accepted  a  lease,  or  attorned 
to  the  plaintiff  as  landlord,  under 
a  mistake  of  fact,  and  in  ignorance 
that  the  title  was  in  himself,  or 
that  he  was  induced  to  attorn,  or 
to  accept  a  lease  through  fraud, 
imposition,  or  undue  advantage ; 
or  that  he  has  been  evicted  by  title 
paramount.  A  tenant  who  has  en- 
tered under  the  mortgagee  or  un- 
der an  assignee  of  the  mortgagee, 
cannot  defeat  the  recovery  by  his 
landlord  by  showing  the  subse- 
quent grant  of  letters  of  adminis- 
tration to  himself  on  the  estate  of 
the  deceased  mortgagor,  and  the 
insolvency  of  the  estate  and  claim- 
ing an  exnnguishment  of  the  mort- 
gage debt  by  the  rents  and  profits 
received.  In  Wright  v.  Graves, 
80  Ala.  416,  a  parol  gift  of  lands,  or 
an  unexecuted  parol  contract  of 
purchase,  accompanied  with  pos- 
session, creates  a  tenancy  at  wiU. 
A  lease  made  with  a  tenant  at  will 
constitutes  the  person  making  it, 
when  let  into  possession,  a  subles- 
see who  is  precluded  to  deny  the 
right  or  title  of  liis  lessor  at  the 
time  of  making  the  lease,  but,  if 
not  let  into  possession,  he  may 
show  that  the  contract  of  lease  is 
invaUd  because  unsupported  by  a 
sufficient  legal  consideration,  i  It 
is  an  invariable  rule  that  a  tenant 
for  life  cannot  make  a  lease  to  con- 
tinue longer  than  his  own  estate, 
unless  the  remainderman  joins. 
If  the  lessee  of  the  tenant  for  life 
is  in  possession  at  the  time  of  Ins 
death,  and  continues  to  hold  over, 
he  becomes  a  tenant  by  sufferance  ; 
but,  if  the  lessee  is  not  in  possession, 
or  does  not  hold  over,  a  mere  rec- 
ognition of  such  lease  previously 
made  does  not  constitute  such  ten- 
ancy. 


CHAP.  L.] 


Defences  to  Action. 


1337 


issue  or  by  special  plea."  So  it  has  been  held 
that  payment,  on  an  accord  and  satisfaction,"  a 
former  recovery/  infancy,*  coverture,'  duress,  or  any 
matter  which  shows  that  the  plaintiff  has  no  cause*  of 
action,  may  be  shown  under  the  general  issue.  But 
special  defences,  as  the  statute  of  limitations,'  set  off,' 
and  tender  must  be  specially  plead,"  unless  otherwise  pro- 
vided by  statute.  It  is  not  competent  for  the  defendant 
to  impeach  the  landlord's  title "  except  to  show  that  it 
was  defeated  before  any  rent  became  due."  It  may  be 
shown  that  there  was  a  lease  under  seal  under  which  he 
occupied,"  or  that  the  landlord  was  guilty  of  fraud  in  the 
letting,"  that  he  never  entered  into  possession  as  tenant," 
or  that  he  entered  and  occupied  as  a  purchaser,"  or  under 
an  agreement  for  a  future  lease  which  the  plaintiff  was 
not  able  to  grant,'"  or  that  the  plaintiff  accepted  another 
person  as  a  substituted  tenant,"  or  that  he  entered  as 


'  Waddilove  v.  Bamett,  2  Bing. 
N.  C.  538  ;  Hartshome  v.  Watson, 
4  Bing.  N.  C.  178  ;  Boodle  v.  Camp- 
beU,  7  M.  &  G.  386;  Selby  v. 
Browne,  7Q.  B.  620. 

=  Drake  v.  Drake,  11  John.  (N. 
Y.)  531 ;  Bird  v.  Carital,  2  id.  346  ; 
Martin  v.  Thornton,  4  Esp.  181. 
But  this  doctrine  is  questionable, 
and  it  is  safer  to  plead  payment 
and  accord  and  satisfaction  spec- 
ially. Indeed  such  would  seem  to 
be  the  rule.  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T. 
27;  Linley  v.  Palden,  3  Dowl. 
780. 

'  Warren  v.  Comings,  6  Cush. 
(Mass.)  103 ;  McDaniel  v.  Hughes, 
3  East,  378. 

*  Warning  V.  ToU,  9  John.  (N.  Y.) 
141. 

*  James  v.  Fowks,  12  Mod.  101. 

'  Gould  V.  Johnson,  3'Ld.  Eayd. 
838. 

'  Drake  v.  Drake,  ante. 

sWolcott  V.  Van  Sanford,  17 
John.  (N.  Y.)  253. 

9  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  736  ;  Lewis 
V.  WiUis,  1  Wils.  314;  Curtis  v. 
Spitty,  1  Bing.  N.  C.  15 ;  Lawes  v. 
Purser,  6  E.  &  B.  930;  Comyn's 
Dig.  tit.  Pleader  (3  W.)  50. 

'»  Newport  v.  Hardv,  ante. 

"  Gibson  v.  Kirk,  I'Q.  B.  850.  If 
the  deed  was  executed  merely  as 
an  escrow,  Gudgen  v.  Besset,  6  E. 


&  B.  986  ;  MiUership  v.  Brookes,  5 
H.  &  N.  797,  or  was  never  execut- 
ed by  all  the  lessors  it  wUl  not  de- 
feat the.  action.  Pitman  v.  Wood- 
bury, 3  Exchq.  4 ;  How  t.  Greek, 
3  H.  &  C.  391. 

i'  Day  V.  Crackvell,  1  F.  &  F.  59. 

'^  Cripps  V.  Blank,  ante  :  Tm-ner 
V.  Coal  Co.,  5  Exchq.  933. 

"  Hearm  v.  Tomlm,  N.  P.  C.  192. 
If  an  entry  is  made  on  land  under 
a  contract  for  a  deed,  the  relation 
of  landlord  and  tenant  does  not 
exist ;  and  on  his  refusing  to  per- 
form the  contract,  or  on  the  own- 
er's neglecting  to  execute  a  deed, 
he  is  not  liable,  in  assumpsit,  for 
use  and  occupation.  Smith  v. 
Stewart,  6  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  46  ;  Vah- 
darheuvel  v.  Storrs,  3  Conn.  203 ; 
Bell  V.  Ellis,  1  Stew.  &  P.  (Ala.) 
294;  Little  v.  Pearson,  7  Pick. 
(Mass.)  301 ;  Jones  v.  Tipton,  2 
Dana  (Ky.)  395.  But  see  Clough 
V.  Hosford,  6  N.  H.  234  ;  Mariner 
V.  Burton,  4  Harr.  (Del.)  69  ;  Miles 
V.  Elkin,  10  Ind.  329  ;  Bancroft  v. 
Wordell,  13  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  489; 
Stacy  V.  Vermont,  &o. ,  R.  E.  Co. , 
33  Vt.  551 ;  Hough  v.  Birge^  11  id. 
190 ;  Doe  v.  Cochran,  2  111.  209. 

«  Rumball  v.  Wright,  1  C.  &  P. 
589. 

'« Turner  v.  Hardy,  9  M.  &  W. 
770. 


1338 


Use  and  Occupation. 


[§  548. 


tenant  to  another/  or  as  a  trespasser  or  under  claim  of 
title  in  himself,"  or  any  fact  that  shows  that  no  tenancy 
ever  existed,  or,  that  he  was  never  tenant  to  the  plaintiff.' 

A  covenant  to  pay  rent,  and  to  repair,  are  independent 
covenants  and  a  failure  to  repair  by  the  landlord,  is  no  de- 
fence to  an  action  for  the  rent  *  although  the  tenant  may 
recoup  sueh  damages  as  he  has  sustained  by  non-repair " 
or  may  set  up  by  way  of  counter-claim,  such  sums  as  he  has 
expended  in  repairs  or  may  bring  a  cross  action '  and  if 
he  has  sustained  damages  by  being  deprived  thereby,  of  a 
part  of  the  premises,  these  may  be  included.' 

But  damages  arising  from  disrepair  cannot  be  set  off 
or  counter-claimed  against  the  rent.' 


1  Wyman  v.  Hook,  2  Me.  337 : 
Marwood  v.  Waters,  13  C.  B.  830 ; 
Churchward  v.  Ford,  2  H.  &  N. 
446. 

2  Wiggin  V.  "Wiggin,  6  N.  H.  298. 
In  case  of  an  adverse  possession, 
where  the  relation  of  landlord  and 
tenant  has  never  arisen,  assumpsit 
for  use  and  occupation  will  not  he, 
but  the  declaration  must  be  either 
in  ejectment  or  trespass.  Folsom 
V.  Carli,  6  Minn.  420;  Howe  v. 
Eussell,  41  Me.  446;  Sampson  v. 
Schaeffer,  3  Cal.  196  ;  O'Conner  v. 
Corbitt,  id.  370;  Cincinnati  v. 
WaUs,  1  Ohio  St.  222 ;  Wharton  v. 
Fitzgerald,  3  Dall.  503 ;  Edmonson 
V.  Kite,  43  Mo.  176 ;  Byrd  v.  Chase, 
10  Ark.  602 ;  Eastman  v.  Howard, 
30  Me.  58 ;  Curtis  v.  Treat,  21  Me. 
525;  Croswell  v.  Crane,  7  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  191 ;  Watson  v.  Brainard, 
33  Vt.  88. 

^  The  plaintifiPs  sued  for  rent  re- 
served in  a  lease  signed  by  "J.  E. 
Brown,  agent,  party  of  the  first," 
and  sealed  by  him,  and  also  signed 
and  sealed  by  the  defendant.  The 
plaintiffs  were  not  referred  to  in 
the  lease,  nor  was  it  shown  that 
the  defendant  had  knowledge  that 
the  agency  was  on  their  behalf. 
No  assignment  being  proved,  it  was 
held  that  the  plaintiffs  could  not 
recover,  even  though  the  lease 
would  have  been  equally  vahd 
without  a  seal.  Scha^flee  v.  Hen- 
kel,  57  How.  (N.  Y.  )  Pr.  97.  The 
landlord's  title  to  crops  grown  on 
rented  lands,  for  rent  payable  in 
kind,  wiU  not  support  a  statutory 
claim  suit,  until  there  has  been  a 


division,  and  his  share  has  been  set 
apart  to  him.  Treadway  v.  Tread- 
way,  56  Ala.  390.  In  an  action  for 
rent,  &c. ,  by  O. ,  the  heir  of  F. ,  who 
had  died  in  possession  of  land, 
under  color  of  title,  claiming  to  be 
its  owner,  against  M.,  who  had 
subsequently  taken  possession  of 
the  land  and  claimed  i  o  own  it, 
it  was  hold,  that  M.  could  not  be 
allowed  to  show  that  F.'s  title  was 
defective  at  the  time  of  her  death, 
or  that  there  was  a  paramouut 
outstanding  title  in  a  third  person. 
Mooney  v.  Olsen,  21  Kan.  691. 

"  AUen  V.  Culver,  3  Den.  (N.  Y.  ) 
284. 

'Whitbeck  v.  Skinner,  7  HiU 
(N.  Y.)  53. 

6  Kelsey  v.  Ward,  16  Abb.  Pr. 
(N.  Y.)  98 ;  38  N.  Y.  83. 

'  Myers  v.  Burns,  35  N.  Y.  269  ; 
HaUett  V.  Wyhe,  3  John.  (N.  Y.) 
44  ;  Cook  v.  Soule,  1 T.,  &c.,  (N.  Y.) 
116  ;  56  N.  Y.  420 ;  Hanger  v. 
Edwards,  4  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  256 ; 
Hexter  v.  Knox,  7  J.  &  S.  (N.  Y.) 
109  ;  Newman  v.  French,  52  Hun 
65. 

'  Non-repair  is  no  defence  to  an 
action  for  rent,  even  though  the 
lessor  covenanted  to  repair,  Wilkes 
V.  Steele,  14  Q.  B.  (Ont.)  570  ;  nor 
can  a  tenant  who  has  leased  land 
for  a  certain  purpose,  set  up  to  de- 
feat a  recovery  of  rent,  that 
through  the  act  of  a  third  person 
he  has  been  prevented  from  using 
the  land  for  such  purpose.  Lyman 
V.  Snurr,  9  C.  P.  (Ont.)  104.  In 
Wilkinson  v.  Clauson,  29  Minn.  91, 
an  action  for  the  rent  of  stores,  the 


CHAP.  L.J 


Defences  to  Action. 


1339 


A  lessor  cannot  recover  rent  of  a  lessee,  if  the  tenant 
was  induced  to  take  the  lease  by  the  false  and  fraudulent 
representation  of  the  lessor,  that  the  premises  were  ten- 
antable,  and  the  tenant  upon  learning  the  fact,  abondoned 
possession.' 


defendant  set  up  as  a  counter- 
claim for  damages,  that  previous 
to  the  execution  of  the  written 
lease  plaintiff  had  recommended 
said  stores  to  defendant  as  suitable 
for  his  business,  which  was  that 
of  merchandising,  and  stated  to 
him  that  there  was  an  excellent 
sewer  connected  with  the  stores, 
which  would  make  the  premises 
clean.  The  lease  itself  expressed 
no  covenants  on  plaintifiE's  part 
claimed  to  have  been  broken.  It 
contained  no  representations  on 
the  subject  of  the  sewer  or  the 
suitableness  of  the  tenement  for 
defendant's  use;  but  aside  from 
the  usual  covenants  for  letting,  its 
provisions  related  wholly  to  the 
matter  of  the  finishing  and  fitting 
up  of  the  rooms  to  be  occupied  by 
defendant,  including  the  base- 
ment, in  which  defendant  pro- 
posed to  store  goods.  At  the  time 
of  the  negotiations  the  sewer  had 
been  constructed  with  ordinary 
care  and  prudence  by  plaintiff, 
and  both  parties  believed  the  same 
sufficient,  though  it  was  not  exam- 
ined by  defendant;  and  the  same 
was  in  fact  sufficient  in  ordinary 
storms,  but  proved  insufficient  and 
Inadequate  m  a  heavy  rain  storm  of 
exceptional  severity,  which  occur- 
red while  defendant  was  occupying 
said  premises  in  July,  1879,  and  the 
sewer  was  broken  and  the  base- 
ment flooded  with  water  there- 
from, in  connection  also  with  a 
large  amount  of  surface  water, 
and  the  defendant's  goods  therein 
w^ere  greatly  damaged.  It  was 
held  that  the  defense  was  not  al- 
lowable. The  court  said :  "Lay- 
ing out  of  view  the  question  of 
'fraud  in  the  case,  the  plaintiff's 
obligation  and  duty  rest  wholly  in 
the  written  contract.  The  words 
'  demise  or  let,'  or  their  equivalent 
in  a  lease,  imply  a  covenant  for  ti- 
tle and  for  quiet  enjoyment,  but 
no  other  covenants  on  the  part  of 
the  lessor  are  implied  therein. 
Foster  v.  Peyser,  9*  Gush.  (Mass.) 
346.    There  is  no  impUed  covenant 


in  a  lease  that  stores  or  other  build- 
ings are  provided  with  drainage  f  a- 
cihtius  for  their  location,  or  that 
the  stores  are  suitable  for  defend- 
ant's business  for  that  or  for  any 
other  reason.  The  lessee  is  the 
party  most  deeply  interested  in 
protecting  himself  against  casual- 
ties of  storm  and  fire,  and  he 
should  see  to  it  that  proper  stipu- 
lations are  embraced  in  the  con- 
tract for  his  own  security. '  And  if 
he  really  means  a  lease  to  be  void 
by  reason  of  any  unfitness  in  the 
subject  for  the  purpose  intended, 
he  should  express  that  meaning. 
Wells  V.  Castles,  3  Gray  (Mass.)  323  ; 
McGlashan  v.  'Talmage,  37  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  815 ;  Jaflfe  v.  Harteau,  56 
N.  Y.  308.  There  may  be  one  or 
two  exceptions  to  this  rule,  as  in 
the  case  of  houses  or  rooms  rented 
ready-furnished,  not  however  ma- 
terial to  be  considered  here.  The 
case  of  Whittle  v.  Webster,  55  Ga. 
180,  turned  upon  the  statute  of  the 
State.  Swift  v.  East  Waterloo 
Hotel  Co.,  40  Iowa,  333,  was  an 
action  by  the  tenant  for  damages 
for  not  furnishing  a  hotel  as  cove- 
nanted. McAlpin  V.  Powell,  1 
Abb.  N.  C.  437,  was  an  action  for 
negligence  under  the  statute  for  a 
defective  fire-escape.  Scott  v. 
Simons,  54  N.  H.  436,  in  which 
the  court  strongly  support  the  doc- 
trine of  the  cases  above  cited,  was 
based  on  a  charge  of  negligence." 
In  Kreuger  v.  Farrant,  29  Mian.  385, 
it  was  held  that  there  is  no  implied 
promise  on  the  part  of  the  landlord 
to  repair,  nor  warranty  Of  suitable- 
ness and  that  this  applies  to  the 
case  of  distinct  tenements  under 
the  same  roof,  and  to  the  want  of 
repair  of  the  roof.  McCarthy  v. 
York  Co.  Savings  Bank,  74  Me. 
591 

'Jackson  v.  Odell,  14  Abb.  (N. 
Y.)  n.  Cas.  43.  In  N.  Y.  under  the 
statue,  it  would  not  seem  to  make 
any  difference  whether  the  lessor's 
representations  were  false  or  not, 
or  whether  he  made  any.  If  the 
premises  are  untenantable  the  lessee 


1340  Use  and  Occupation.  [§  548. 

If  a  house  is  let  to  a  tenant  who  has  no  knowledge  of 
the  fact,  which  has  recently  been  occupied  for  disrepu- 
table purposes,  as,  for  a  house  of  prostitution,  the  tenant, 
upon  discovering  the  fact,  may  abandon  the  lease, 
because  it  is  treated  as  having  been  induced  by  the  fraud 
of  the  landlord,  but  if  he  remains  in  possession,  he  cannot 
set  up  this  fact  either  to  defeat  or  diminish  the  rent.' 
A  tenant  cannot  escape  liability  for  rent  because  a  build- 
ing has  been  erected  on  adjoining  premises  by  third  per- 
sons, which  shuts  off  the  light  from  the  leased  premises 
and  renders  them  damp  and  unheal^thy."  Nor,  in  case 
of  a  lease  of  lands  for  quarrying  stone,  because  of  the 
destruction  of  a  lime  kiln  on  the  premises,  although  the 
latter  was  the  principal  inducement  to  the  taking  of  the 
lease.'  But,  where  a  tenant  is  a  lessee  of  a  single  room, 
or  of  a  single  floor,  or  of  the  upper  stories  of  a  building, 
as  he  acquires  no  interest  in  the  land,  a  destruction  of 
the  building  discharges  him  from  rent  from  that  time.* 
Where  mining  lands  are  let  with  a  provision  for  raising  a 
specified  quantity  of  ore,  or  to  pay  a  certain  rent,  it  is 
no  defence  to  an  action  for  rent,  that  the  mine  cannot 
supply  the  quantity  of  ore  specified.'  If  the  lease  makes 
no  provision  for  a  suspension  for  rent,  during  the  period 
occupied  by  the  landlord  in  making  repairs,  no  deduction 
of  a  rent  during  that  period  can  be  claimed."  If  the  rent 
was  to  be  fixed  by  appraisal,  which,  without  the  tenant's 
fault  has  never  been  made,  the  court  will    hear   the 


may  abandon  possession,  Lawrence  the  plumbing  is  in  good  order  is 
V.  Burrell,  17  Abb.  (N.  Y.)  N.  C.  the  mere  expression  of  an  opinion, 
313  ;  Bradely  v.  DeGoicouria,  14  id.  Caulson  v.  Whiting,  12  Daly  (N. 
53.  But  it  is  held  that  the  mere  Y.  C.  P.)  408. 
exifitenoe  of  a  bad  and  an  unwhole-  ^Carhart  v.  Eyde,  11  Daly  (N. 
some  smell  does  not  justify  the  ten-  Y.  C.  P.)  101  ;  Rhinelander  v.  Sea- 
ant  in  abandoning  the  premises,  man,  13  Abb.  (N.  Y.)  N.  C.  455. 
Sutphin  V.  Seebass,  14  Abb.  (N.  Y.)  « HiUiard  v.  N.  Y. ,  &c. ,  Gas,  &c. , 
N.  C.  67  ;  In  Franklin  v.  Brown,  Co.,  41  Ohio  St.  662  ;  52  Am.  Rep. 
53  N.   Y.   Superior    Ct.  474;  the  99. 

gases  and   noxious    smells   come  'Warren    v.   Wagner,   75  Ala. 

from   adjoining  premises.     Even  188  ;  51  Am.  Rep.  446. 

though    the    landlord    knevr    of  •'Harrington  v.  Watson,  11  Or. 

it  and  failed  to  disclose  the  fact  143  ;  50  Am.  Rep.  465. 

to  the  tenant  it  is  held  that  he  can-  '  Whanton    v.  Stanghtenburgh, 

not  abandon   possession,  Caulson  46  N.  J.  L.  151. 

V.  Whiting,  14  Abb.  (N.  Y.)  N.  Cas.  « McOlenahan  v.  New  York,  102 

Co.    The  landlord's  statement  that  N.  Y.  75. 


CHAP.  L.]  Defences  to  Action.  1341 

evidence  and  make  the  appraisal.'  So  it  may  be  shown 
that  for  a  good  consideration  the  landlord  agreed  to 
reduce  the  rent."  A  tenant  cannot  defeat  the  recovery 
because  he  apprehends  a  breach  of  the  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment/  nor  by  setting  up  damages  resulting  from 
sickness  brought  on  by  defective  plunibing,  even  though 
the  house  was  let  furnished,'  nor  because  the  building 
has  been  destroyed  by  fire  and  a  city  ordinance  prohibits 
the  erection  of  another  similar  building  on  the  premises.  ° 

Sec.  549.  Premises  let  for  unlawful  purposes,  fraud,  &c.— 
If  premises  are  let  for  an  unlawful  purpose — as,  for  the 
sale  or  manufacture  of  articles,  the  sale  or  manufacture 
of  which  is  prohibited  by  law — no  recovery  can  be  had  for 
the  rent  or  for  their  use.'  Thus  in  the  case  last  cited,  in 
an  action  of  covenant  for  rent,  it  was  held  a  good  plea,  that 
the  lease  was  entered  into,  and  the  premises  let  to  the 
defendant  for  the  express  purpose  of  being  used  by  it  in 
drawing  oil  of  tar,  and  boihng  oil  and  tar,  contrary  to  the 
provisions  of  the  building  act,'  and  that,  too,  even 
though  such  purpose  had  not  been  carried  i'hto  effect.' 
So,  too,  if  premises  are  let  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of 
gambling,  or  as  a  house  of  prostitution,  or  for  any  unlaw- 
ful or  immoral  purpose,  no  rent  can  be  recovered  there- 
for, and  the  lease  is  absolutely  void.'    But  the  fact  that 

•  Tabey  Furniture  Co.  v.  Eoure,  » In  Smith  v.  White,  L.  R.  1  Eq. 
18  IlL  App.  293.  636,  the  plaintiff  was  lessee  under 

'  Hastings  v.  Levering,  140  Mass.  a  lease  granted   in  1843,  by  the 

261 ;  64  Am.  Rep.  463.  Marquis  of  Exeter,  for  a  term  of 

'  Pickett  V.  Ferguson,  45  Ark.  twenty-one  years,  at   the  yearly 

177.  rent    of    150?.,  of    the    Fountain 

*  Chadwlck  v.  Woodward,  13  Tavern,  '  in  Catherine  Street, 
Abb.  (N.  T.)  N.  C.  441 ;  See  Kier-  Strand.  This  lease  contained  a 
nan  v.  Germain,  61  Miss.  498,  covenant  to  repair  and  yield  up 
where  damages  for  not  repairing  the  premises  in  good  repair  at  the 
were  held  to  be  a  proper  subject  end  of  the  term,  and  also  a  cove- 
of  recoupment  against  rent.  nant  not  to  suffer  the  house  to  be 

=  Harris  v.  Heackman,  63  Iowa,  used  as  a  brothel,  &c. ,  during  the 

411.  term    thereby    granted.      In  De- 

'  The  Gas  Light  Co.  v.   iSimer,  cember,  1845,  the  plaintiff  agreed 

5  Bing.  N.  C.  666 ;  Aff'd,  6  Bing.  to  seU  the  lease  of  the  Fountain 

N.  C.  324.  with    furniture    and   fixtures,  to 

'  35  Geo.  3,  c.  76.  Lacey,  for  HOOL;  but  as  Lacey  had 

8  TiNDAL,   C.  J.,  in  Gas    Light  not  sufHcient  capital,  in  order  to 

Co.  V.  Turner,  ante  ;  Langton  v.  secure  the  unpaid  purchase-money 

Hughes,  1  M.  &  S.  593 ;  Curran  v.  the  agreement  was  carried  out  by 

Bryce,  3  B.  &  Aid.  179 ;  Lightfoot  means  of  an  xmderlease,  the  rent 

V.  Tenant,  1  B.  &  P.  551.  reserved  for  the  first  four  years 


1342 


Use  and  Occupation. 


[§  549. 


they  are  used  for  such  purpose  will  not  defeat  a  recovery 


(in  addition  to  the  1501.  a  year) 
amounting  to  1400Z.,  and  interest, 
which  included  furniture,  &c.,  to 
the  value  of  lOOOZ.,  and  150?.,  the 
cost  of  repairs.  Tins  underlease 
contained  an  express  covenant 
that  the  premises  should  not  be 
used  as  a  brothel,  and  also  a 
proviso  for  re-entry  by  Smith  on 
default  in  payment  of  rent  or  on 
breach  of  covenant  by  Lacey.  It 
also  contained  a  covenant  on  the 
part  of  Smith,  that  if  Lacey 
should  duly  pay  the  rent  reserved 
during  the  first  four  years  of  the 
term,  then  Smith  would  assign 
the  premises  to  Lacey  for  all  the 
residue  of  the  term  granted  by  the 
original  lease.  The  underlease 
then  contained  a  recital,  that  bills 
of  exchange  should  be  given  to 
Lacey  as  collateral  security,  and  a 
covenant  by  Smith,  that  in  the 
event  of  the  demise  thereby  made 
being  avoided  before  the  bills  had 
become  due  and  payable,  he 
would  keep  Lacey  indemnified 
against  payment  of  such  parts  of 
them  as  should  fall  due  after  the 
avoidance  of  the  demise.  The 
rent  reserved  during  the  four 
years  having  been  paid.  Smith,  by 
an  indenture  dated  in  March,  1850, 
assigned  to  Lacey  the  premises  in 
question  for  all  the  residue  of  the 
term  granted  by  the  lease  of  1843  ; 
and  this  assignment  contained  a 
covenant  on  the  part  of  Lacey,  to 
pay  the  rent  and  observe  and  per- 
form the  lessee's  covenants  con- 
tained in  the  original  lease,  and  to 
save,  defend,  keep  harmless,  and 
indemnify  the  said  Henry  Smith 
of  and  from  the  same,  and  the 
payment,  and  observance,  and  per- 
formance thereof,  respectively. 
On  the  termination  of  the  term 
granted  by  the  lease  of  1843,  the 
Marquis  of  Exeter  apphed  to  Lacey 
for  65Z.,  for  dilapidations  under 
the  covenant  contained  in  the 
lease,  but  Lacey  not  paying  that 
accoimt,  he  apphed  to,  and  com- 
pelled, the  plaintiff  to  pay  that 
sum,  under  a  threat  of  proceed- 
ings ;  and  the  plaintiff  having 
paid  it,  now  sought  to  have  it  re- 
paid to  him  from  the  estate  of 
Lacey,  who  had  died,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  indemnity  clause  in 
the  assignment  to  Laoey.  The  evi- 
dence went  to  show  that  the  rent 


of  the  house  was  very  much 
larger  than  the  house  was  worth 
for  ordinary  purposes.  The 
plaintiff  in  his  examination  swore 
that  he  derived  no  benefit  from 
the  purposes  for  which  the  house 
was  used,  but  dechned  to  swear 
that  he  did  not  know  that  it  was 
used  for  an  immoral  purpose.  It 
will  be  seen  from  the  judgment 
that  upon  the  evidence  the  court 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the 
house  had  been  used  as  a  brothel 
for  many  years,  and  that  the 
plaintiff  was  aware  of  that  fact, 
and  knew  that  Lacey  intended  to 
continue  so  to  use  it.  Kindees- 
LEY,  V.  C,  said: — It  appears  to 
me  impossible  to  hold  that  the 
plaintiff  is  a  creditor  of  Lacey, 
his  claim  arising  out  of  an  illegal 
transaction ;  that  is,  a  transaction 
which  was  intended  to  carry  into 
effect  an  immoral  purpose.  The 
evidence  shows  that  for  the  last 
forty  years  the  house  in  question 
has  been  used  as  a  brothel  by  the 
persons  who  have  been  successive- 
ly lessees  or  occupiers  thereof ; 
audi  conclude  from  the  evidence 
that  the  plaintiff,  when  he  granted 
the  lease  to  Lacey,  and  agreed  to 
assign,  and  also  when  he  assigned, 
the  premises  to  Laoey,  perfectly 
well  knew  that  the  house  had  long 
been  so  used,  and  that  it  was  in- 
tended by  Lacey  to  be  used  for 
the  same  purpose.  Knowing  all 
this,  he  assigned  his  lease  to 
Lacey.  Now,  it  appears  to  me 
that  the  authorities  clearly  show 
that  out  of  such  a  transaction  as 
this  no  legal  right  can  be  created ; 
and  that  no  action  would  lie  for 
the  rent,  or  for  the  breach  of  any 
of  the  covenants,  or  for  anything 
else  arising  out  of  the  transaction. 
The  case  most  nearly  in  point  is 
that  of  Jennings  v.  Throgmorton, 
Ey.  &  Mood.  251,  where  rent  was 
sought  to  be  recovered  for  lodg- 
ings let  to  a  prostitute  on  a  week- 
ly tenancy.  In  that  case  it  sig- 
nified nothing  to  the  lessor  wheth- 
er the  woman  carried  on  the  busi- 
ness of  a  courtezan  or  any  most 
proper  business,  provided  only 
she  paid  her  rent ;  and  the  only 
difference  between  that  case  and 
the  present  is,  that  in  that  case 
there  was  a  weekly  tenancy,  so 
that  the  lessor  might  at  any  time 


CHAP.  L.] 


Unlawful  Purposes. 


1343 


of  the  rent,  unless  it  is  shown  that  they  were  let  for  that 
purpose,  or  that  the  landlord  knew  when  he  made  the 
lease  that  they  were  to  be  so  used.'    The  fact  that  the 

have  determined  the  tenancy  with- 
out the  impediment  of  any  existing 
lease;  but  knowing  the  purpose 
for  which  the  woman  hired  the 
lodgings  he  continued  to  let  to 
her;  and  it  was  held  that  the 
contract  was  so  tainted  with 
immoraUty  that  the  plaintifiE  could 
not  recover.  Another  case  cited 
Is  also  in  point,  namely,  Bowry 
V.  Bennet,  1  Camp.  348,  where  the 
plaintiff  knew  that  the  articles  of 
dress  suppUed  by  him  to  the  de- 
fendant were  intended  to  be  used 
by  her  in  carrying  on  her  voca- 
tion of  a  prostitute :  and  it  was 
held  that  he  could  not  recover. 
It  camiot  be  doubted  that  in  the 
present  case  the  plaintifif  knew 
that  the  means  of  paying  the 
high  rent  which  was  to  be  paid 
by  Lacey  for  the  premises  would 
be  derived  from  the  profits  of  the 
immoral  trade  to  be  carried  on  in 
the  house ;  and  although  he  had 
no  hen  on  those  profits,  he  ex- 
pected to  be  paid  out  of  them,  and 
knew  that  unless  Lacey  carried  on 
such  a  trade  he  would  not  be  able 
to  pay  the  rent.  It  has  been  ar- 
gued, on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff, 
that  his  claim  is  not  a  claim  for 
rent,  but  for  money  which  Lacey 
ought  to  have  paid,  and  which  the 
plaintiff  has  been  forced  to  pay 
under  his  covenant  with  the 
Marquis  of  Exeter,  contained  in 
the  original  lease ;  and  that  it  is  in 
effect  money  paid  by  plaintiff  to 
the  use  of  Lacey,  which  ought  to 
be  repaid  to  him  out  of  Lacey's 
estate.  But  it  appears  to  me  that 
this  claim  arises  just  as  much  out 
of  the  immoral  contract,  and  is 
just  as  much  affected  by  the  taint 
of  immoraUty  as  a  claim  for  rent. 
I  am  of  opinion  that  every  right 
and  obUgation  arising  out  of  this 
contract  is  affected  by  the  taint  of 
immoraUty,  and,  therefore,  that 
the  plaintiff  cannot  be  regarded 
as  a  creditor  of  Lacey.  See  also, 
Ealston  v.  Boady,  20  Ga.  449, 
where  the  same  doctrine  was 
held ;  but  it  was  also  held  that 
proof  that  the  landlord  knew  that 
it  might  be  so  used  would  not  de- 
feat   his    right    to  recover  rent. 


Actval  knowledge  that  the  pretri' 
ises  were  to  be  devoted  to  an  un- 
lawful purpose  must  be  shown- 
Gibson  v.  PearsaU,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N- 
Y.  C.  P.)  90.  In  Louisiana  it  has 
been  held  that  where  the  landlord 
leases  a  house  in  a  section  of  the 
city  where  the  keeping  of  houses 
of  prostitution  is  aUowed,  to  be 
used  as  a  house  of  prostitution, 
and  the  landlord  knows  the  fact, 
that  he  may  nevertheless  recover 
the  rent.  Lyman  v.  Townsend, 
.24  La.  An.  625.  As  to  the  neces- 
sity of  proof  that  the  landlord 
knowingly  let  the  premises  for  an 
unlawful  purpose,  see  Comargene 
V.  Brown,  27  La.  An.  314;  Zink 
V.  Grant,  25  Ohio  St.  852.  In 
Jennings  v.  Throgmorton,  Ey.  & 
M.  251,  where  the  premises  were 
let  by  the  week,  it  was  held  that, 
although  when  the  premises  were 
let  he  did  not  know  that  the  ten- 
ant intended  to  use  them  for  the 
purposes  of  prostitution,  j^et  that, 
if  he  permitted  her  to  remain 
after  he  knew  the  fact,  and  after 
the  original  term  had  ended,  he 
could  recover  no  rent.  In  this 
case  it  wUl  be  observed  that  the 
letting  in  the  first  instance  being 
for  a  week,  every  succeeding 
week  was  practically  a  renewal  of 
the  lease,  and  such  renewal  being 
with  knowledge  of  the  Ulegal  use 
to  which  the  premises  were  to  be 
devoted  would  invalidate  the  lease, 
and  place  the  lessor  in  pari  de- 
licto with  the  tenant.  Girardy  v. 
Richardson,  1  Esp.  13 ;  Howard  v. 
Hodges,  1  Selwyn's  N.  P.  68 ;  Gib- 
son V.  PearsaU,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  90;  Crisp  v.  ChurohiU, 
cited  id.  1  B.  &  P.  340 ;  Jennings 
V.  Throgmorton,  Ry.  &  Moo.  351 ; 
Trovinger  v.  McBurney,  5  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  353 ;  FeUows  v.  Emperor, 
18  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  93. 

'  Armstrong  v.  Taber,  11  Wheat. 
(U.  S.)  358  ;  Stockdale  v.  Onwhyn, 
5  B.  &  C.  173 ;  Fores  v.  Jones,  4 
Esp.  97 ;  Tracy  v.  Tahnage,  14  N. 
Y.  163.  In  Gibson  v.  PearsaU,  1 
E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  90,  it  was 
held,  that  in  order  to  estabUsh  a 
defence  to  an  action  for  rent,  on 
the  ground  that  the  agreement  un- 


1344 


Use  and  Occupation. 


[§  549. 


landlord  knew,  when  he  let  the  premises,  that  the  lessee 
was  a  gambler  or  a  prostitute,  will  not  defeat  a  recovery, 
nor  does  it  tend  even  to  establish  the  fact  that  he  knew 
that  the  lessee  intended  to  apply  the  premises  to  the 
purposes  of  gambhng  or  prostitution. '  Mere  knowledge  of 
an  illegal  intent  on  the  part  of  another  is  not  enough  in 


der  which  the  premises  were 
occupied  was  void,  because 
it  was  let  for  a  gambling 
house,  the  defendant  was  bound  to 
show  that  the  lessor  knew  when  the 
agreement  was  made  with  the  ten- 
ant that  the  premises  were  to  be 
used,  and  let  them  for  that  purpose. 
In  Ealston  v.  Boady,  ante,  it  was 
held  that,  if  the  landlord  knew  that 
the  premises  were  to  be  used  for 
the  purposes  of  prostitution  there 
could  be  no  recovery  for  rent,  but 
that  the  fact  that  he  knew  that 
they  might  be  so  used  is  not 
enough.  An  action  for  rent  is  not 
barred  by  the  failure  of  the  lessor 
fully  to  perform  his  contract, 
where  the  lessees  enter  into  pos- 
session, and  occupy  the  premises. 
lbs  remedy  of  the  lessees  is  by  re- 
couping from  the  rent  such  dam- 
ages as  they  have  sustained  by 
failure  of  the  lessor  to  fulfil  his 
contract,  or  by  bringing  a  separate 
action  for  the  recovery  of  such 
damages.  Kelsey  v.  Ward,  38  N. 
Y.  83.  Where  premises  are  leased 
to  be  used  as  a  boarding-house, 
there  is  no  impHed  covenant  that 
they  are  suitable  for  any  particular 
description  of  boarding-house, — 
such  as  a  "first-class"  boarding- 
house.  Roosevelt  v.  Abbatt,  3 
Eobt.  (N.  Y.)  156.  It  is,  however, 
a  subject  of  defence  and  recoup- 
ment, in  an  action  for  rent,  that 
premises  demised  for  the  purpose 
of  keeping  a  respectable  boarding- 
house  therein,  had  been  previously 
occupied,  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
lessor,  without  disclosing  it,  as  a 
house  of  Ul-fame,  and  continued 
after  such  demise,  in  consequence 
thereof,  to  be  subject  to  nightly 
visits  at  all  hours,  from  disrep- 
utable persons  of  both  sexes,  to 
the  annoyance  and  disturbance  of 
the  tenant,  thus  defeating  the 
purposes  and  uses  for  which  she 
rented  the  house,  and  forcing  her 
to  abandon  her  business  therein. 
Staples  v.  Anderson,  8  Eobt.  (N. 
Y.)  327. 


'  This  rule  was  well  illustrated  in 
a  Missouri  case,  Michaels  v.  Bacon, 
49  Mo.  474 ;  in  which  the  plaintiff 
brought  an  action  to  recover  for 
work  done  and  materials  furnished 
in  fitting  up  and  papering  a  house 
for  the  defendant,  knowing  that  it 
was  to  be  used  by  the  defendant  as 
a  gambling-house.  The  evidence 
did  not  disclose  that  the  plaintiff's 
purpose  in  supplying  the  materials 
and  performing  the  labor  was  that 
the  house  should  be  used  as  a  gam- 
bUng-house,  butthere  was  evidence 
that  the  defendant  intended  so  to 
use  it,  and  that  the  plaintiff  knew 
the  fact.  Adams,  J. ,  in  deUvering 
the  opinion  of  the  court,  said  : 
"  This  was  an  action  on  an  account 
for  work  and  labor  and  materials 
furnished,  and  fitting  and  papering 
a  house  on  Fourth  Street,  in  St. 
Louis.  The  main  defence  set  up 
and  relied  on  was,  that  the  paper 
was  furnished  and  work  done  with 
the  knowledge  on  the  part  of  plaint- 
iff, and  by  express  agreement  on 
his  part,  that  the  house  was  to  be 
used  by  the  defendants  as  a  gam- 
bling-house. There  was  no  evidence 
that  the  plaintiff's  purpose,  in  sup- 
plying the  materials  and  fitting  up 
the  house,  was  that  it  should  be 
used  as  a  gambling-house.  There 
was  evidence,  however,  conducing 
to  show  that  the  defendants  intend- 
ed to  use  the  house  as  a  gambling- 
liouse,  and  that  the  plaintiff  knew 
that  such  was  their  intention.  The 
case  seems  to  have  been  tried  on  a 
wrong  theory,  as  we  understand 
the  law.  The  instructions  on  both 
sides  base  the  defendants'  exemp- 
tion from  liability  on  the  simple 
fact  that  the  plaintiff  knew  the 
purpose  for  which  the  defendants 
intended  to  use  the  house.  While 
the  plaintiff  conceded  this  proposi- 
tion, in  the  instructions  asked  and 
given  for  him,  he  objected  to  the 
same  proposition  as  embodied  in 
instruction  given  for  defendants. 
If  gamblers  can  procure  work  and 
labor  to  be  performed,  and  houses 


CHAP.  L.] 


Unlawful  Purposes. 


1345 


all  cases  to  place  the  parties  in  pari  delicto  ;  there  must 
be  a  direct  furtherance  of  the  subsequent  illegal  act  in 
order  to  deprive  the  other  of  his  remedy.^  Thus,  where 
a  tenant  avowed  his  intention  to  keep  a  bawdy  house 
upon  the  premises,  it  was  held  not  to  be  a  sufficient 
ground  to  warrant  the  lessor  in  repudiating  his  contract 
to  lease,"  and  a  contract  for  the  sale  of  a  house,  the 
vendor  knowing  that  the  vendee  intended  to  use  it  as  a 
residence  for  his  mistress,  has  been  held  to  be  binding.' 
It  may  be  said  that,  in  order  to  defeat  a  recovery  upon  a 
lease  for  rent  upon  the  ground  of  illegality,  it  must 
appear  that  they  were  let  to  be  used  for  an  illegal  or 
immoral  purpose  ;  and  the  mere  fact  that  they  were  so 
used  does  not  operate  as  a  defence  unless  they  were  let 
for  such  purpose,  and  the  landlord,  before  the  lease  was 


to  be  built  and  furnished  at  a 
heavy  expense,  by  mechanics  and 
others  and  then  escape  all  responsi- 
bility, under  the  plea  that  the  labor- 
er, &c. ,  knew  that  such  houses  were 
intended  to  be  used  as  gambling- 
houses,  then  I  must  confess  that  the 
law,  sounderstood,instead  of  being 
a  shield,  is  a  trap  for  the  unwary. 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  principal  of 
law  which  compels  a  merchant, 
laborer  or  mechanic  to  overlook 
the  morals'  of  his  customers.  He 
is  not  the  keeper  of  their  morals 
in  any  sense  of  the  word.  If  he 
sells  goods  to  a  gambler,  the  sale  is 
perfect  on  the  delivery,  and  the 
gambler  must  pay  for  them,  what 
ever  his  purpose  may  have  been  in 
making  the  purchase.  If  the  mer- 
chant is  not  to  be  paid  out  of  the 
illicit  gains  of  a  gambler,  and  it  is 
not  connected  by  contract  with  the 
object  the  gambler  has  in  view, 
his  knowledge  of  the  ptirpose  does 
not  vitiate  the  sale.  I  know  there 
is  conflict  in  the  authorities,  in  re- 
gard to  the  question  under  consid- 
eration, and  some  hair-splitting 
distinctions  have  been  made,  some- 
times sustaining  and  sometimes 
setting  aside  such  sales  ;  but  in  my 
judgment  the  weight  of  authority 
and  reason  is  with  the  ruling,  as 
we  here  lay  it  down,  Fajkney  v. 
Eeynous,  4  Burr.  3070  ;  Holman  v. 
Johnson,  Cowp.  341 ',  Pellecat  v. 
Angell,  3  C.  M.  &  R.  311 ;  Hodgson 
V.  Temple,  5  Taunt.  181 ;  Tracy  v. 


Talmage,  14  N.  Y.  169 ;  Bowry  v. 
Bennett,  1  Camp.  848 ;  Cheney  v. 
Duke,  10  Gill.  &  J.  11  ;  Lightfoot 
V.  Tenant,  1  Bor.  &  Pul.  551 ;  Can- 
nan  V.  Bryce,  3  B.  &  Aid.  179 ; 
McKinnell  v.  Robinson,  8  M.  &  W. 
434.  The  case  of  Pearce  et  al.  v. 
Brooks,  1  L.  R.,  Exchq.  313,  so 
strongly  reUed  on  by  defendants' 
counsel  as  overruling  the  doctrine 
of  previous  English  cases,  does  not, 
in  terms,  profess  to  do  so.  The 
point  made  in  that  case  was,  that 
a  man  who  hired  a  brougham  to  a 
prostitute,  knowing  that  she  was  a 
prostitute,  and  knowing  that  she 
intended  to  use  the  brougham  for 
purposes  of  display  and  attraction, 
could  not  recover _for  the  hire,  be- 
cause such  knowledge  in  that  case 
amounted  to  an  intention  or  design 
on  his  hart  to  aid  the  prostitute  in 
her  illegal  calling.  The  court  of 
exchequer  does  not  profess  to  over- 
rule the  previous  cases,  but,  by  a 
sort  of  hair-splitting  distinction,  to 
agree  with  them.  We  doubt 
whether  the  point  was  properly 
ruled  in  that  case,  and  we,  there- 
fore, disregard  it  as  any  authority 
here." 

'  Tracy  v.  Talmage,  ante  ;  Trav- 
inger  v.  McBurney,  5  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
353. 

=  O'Brien  v.  Briestenbach,  1  HUt. 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  304. 

'  Armfield  v,  Tate,  7  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
573, 


1346  Use  and  Occupation.  [§  549. 

executed,  knew  that  the  lessee  would  devote  them  to  such 
use.'  A  lease  that  is  founded  upon  an  illegal  or  immoral 
consideration  is  void  ;— as,  where  it  is  founded  on  a  mar- 
riage brokerage  transaction,  or  upon  an  usurious  loan, 
and  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  evading  the  usury  laws." 

A  lessee  covenanted  to  restore  the  premises  at  the  end 
of  the  term  "  in  as  good  order  and  condition,  reasonable 
use  and  wearing  thereof,  fire  and  other  unavoidable 
casualties  excepted,  as  the  same  now  are  or  may  be  put 
into  by  the  lessor."  The  owner  of  adjoining  premises, 
while  erecting  a  building  thereon,  undermined  the  par- 
tition wall.  The  adjoining  owner  previously  gave  the  lessor 
notice  of  his  intention  to  excavate,  that  he  might  take 
measures  to  avoid  injury  to  the  wall,  but  he  neglected 
to  take  any  precautionary  measures  in  that  direction. 

It  was  held  that  the  tenant  was  not  only  bound  to  pay 
the  rent  but  also  to  restore  the  wall,  and  that  he  was  not 
excused  from  such  liabiUty  although,  by  the  custom  of 
the  place,  the  landlord  was  bound  to  secure  his  founda- 
tion and  walls  in  such  cases.'  Even  where  there  is  a 
clause  in  the  lease  excusing  the  tenant  from  rebuilding 
in  case  the  premises  are  destroyed  by  fire  or  other  casualty, 
he  is  not  excused  from  the  payment  of  rent  by  reason  of 
such  destruction.*  But  it  has  been  held  in  New  York 
that,  where  it  was  in  fact  agreed  by  the  parties  before 
the  lease  was  excuted,  that  there  should  be  a  suspension 
of  the  rent  in  such  a  case,  but  such  agreement,  through 
mistake  or  the  fraud  of  the  lessor,  was  omitted  from  the 

•  O'Brien  v.  Briestenbach,  ante  ;  Tiding  that  at  the  end  of  the  term 

Smith  V.  "White,  L.  E.  1  Eq.  Cas.  the  lessee  will  quit  and  deliver  up 

626.  the  premises   "in  as  good   order 

^  Doe  V.  Gaack,  3  B.  &  Aid.  664  ;  and  condition  (reasonable  use  and 

Brown  v.  O'Dea,  1  Sch.  &  L.  115  ;  wearing    thereof,  fire  and    other 

Drew  V.  Power,  3  id.  110.     But  the  unavoidable   casualties  excepted), 

doctrine  of  the  common  law  as  to  eis  the  same  now  are  or  may  be  put 

usury  has  no  application  except  in  into  "by  the  lessor,  and  that  the 

Arkansas,  North  and  South  Caro-  lessee  shall  keep  the  buildings  in- 

lina,  New  York,  and  the  territory  sured  against   loss  by    fire,    in  a 

of  Dakota.  specified  sum,  payable  to  the  les- 

3  Kramer  v.  Cook,  7  Gray  (Mass.)  sor,  the  lessee  is  not  liable  to  re- 

550.     If  a  lease  of  buildings  con-  pair  injuries  which  occur  though 

tains  a  written  clause  providing  that  ordinary  wear,  or  fire,  or    other 

they  "  are  to  be  kept  in  repair  and  unavoidable    casualties.    Ball    v, 

maintained  in  good  condition  by  Wyeth,  8  Allen  (Mass.). 

the  lessee,"  and  printed  clauses  pro-  •*  Beach  v.  Ferrish,  4  Cal.  339. 


CHAP.  L.J  Damages  Eecoverable.  1347 

lease,  upon  proof  of  the  fact  the  lessor  will  be  enjoined 
from  suing  for  the  rent,'  and  such  relief,  in  such  cases, 
may  always  be  had  in  equity  by  proceeding  to  reform  the 
lease  when  the  mistake  or  fraud  and  the  agreement  are 
clearly  established."  In  Pennsylvania,  upon  proof  of  a 
contemporaneous  parol  stipulation,  it  will  be  enforced  at 
law  ;°  but  generally,  at  law,  proof  of  a  contemporaneous 
parol  agreement  is  not  admissible  to  alter,  vary  or  dam- 
age the  effect  of  the  lease,^  as  the  lease  is  presumed  to 
embody  all  that  the  parties  agreed  upon,  and  this  pre- 
sumption is  irrebutable.* 

Sec.  550.  Damages  recoverable.— Where  there  is  a  special 
agreement  as  to  the  amount  of  rent  that  is  the  measure 
of  recovery,  and  if  the  defendant  holds  under  a  written 
lease,  or  a  void  lease,  such  lease  or  deed  is  admissible 
to  fix  the  amount  of  rent.'  But  if  the  tenant  has  never 
been  able  to  get  possession  of  the  whole  premises,  or  if 
he  has  been  evicted  from  a  part  of  them  either  by  the 
landlord  or  by  title  paramount,  the  recovery  is  hmited  to 
such  a  sum  as  the  jury  find  the  use,  &c.,  was  really 
worth,  irrespective  of  the  sura  reserved ;  °  and,  where  no 
sum  is  agreed  upon,  the  jury  are  to  say  how  much  is  a 
reasonable  satisfaction  therefor.' 

So  where  the  plaintiff  has  not  performed  a  condition 
precedent  on  his  part,  as  to  do  certain  repairs,'  or  to  fur- 
nish the  house  in  a  specified  manner,  or  the  like,  the 
jury  may  find  how  much  the  actual  occupation  by  the 

•  Wood  V.  HubbeU,  10  N.  Y.  476 ;  Y.)  83  ;  Erwin  v.  Saunders,  1  Cow. 

Gates  V.  Green,  4  Paige  Ch.  (N.Y.)  (N.  Y.)  349 ;  Thorpe  v.   Sughi,  55 

355 ;    Stevens  v.  Cooper,   1  John.  Ala.  530  ;  Brownell  v.  Haskell,  22 

Ch.  (N.  Y.)  425.  Pick.(Mass.) 310;  Spreckels  v.  Saxe, . 

'Turner  v.  Lucas,  13Gratt.  (Va.)  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  253  ;  John- 

705 ;  Ingham  v.  ChUd,  1  Br.  &  Ch.  son  v.  Oppenheim,  55  N.  Y.  280. 
93 ;  Portmore  v.  Morris,  2  id.  219  ;  ^  ^(Yoodf  g-U's  L.  &  T.  746  ;  Dane 

Dwight  V.  Pomeroy,  17  Mass.  303  ;  v.  KirkwaU,   8  C    &  P.   675  ;  Da- 

Nevins  v.  Dunlap,  33  N.   Y.  676  ;  Medina  v.  Poison,  Holt.  N.  P.  647  ; 

Rider  v.  Powell,  38  N.  Y.  313.  CoUett  v.  Curhng,  10  Q.  B.  785. 

8  Oliver     v.     Oliver,    4    Eawie  «  Tomhnson  v.  Day,  3  B.  &  B.  680. 

(Penn.)  141 ;  Thompson  v.  White,  •"  Mayor  v.  Tyler,  8  Q.  B.   100 

1    Dall.    (Penn.)   424;    Christ    v.  Parker  v.   Gibbins,   1   Q.   B.  431 

Diffenbech,  1  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  464.  Slack  v.  Sharpe,  8  Ad.  &  El.  378 

^People  V.    Bostwick,   33  N.  Y.  Kirkman  v.  Jervis,  7  Dowl.  678. 
448  ;  Wilson  v.  Dean,  74  id.  531 ;         sSmith  v.  Eldridge,  15  C.  B.  2S6. 
ClewB  V.  Waioughby,  7  Hill  (N. 


1348 


Use  and  OccupAnoN. 


[§  550. 


defendant,  in  the  then  state  and  condition  of  the  premises, 
is  reasonably  worth,  and  the  plaintiff  in  such  case  can- 
not recover  or  distrain /or  the  agreed  rent.' 

Where,  by  express  contract,  rent  is  reserved  payable 
yearly,  half-yearly  qu^irterly,  or  at  other  stated  periods, 
the  rent  accrues  at  the  expiration  of  those  periods  only, 
and  not  de  die  in  diem.'  Therefor  in  such  cases  no  rent  or 
"compensation  "  for  use  and  occupation  can  generally  be 
recovered  for   a  proportionable  part  of  a  less  period, 


'  Meclielin  v.  Wallace,  7  Ad.  & 
El.  54,  n.  Where  a  landlord  and 
tenant  made  a  written  agreement 
by  which  the  former  was  to  be  per- 
mitted to  enter  and  make  repairs 
necessary  to  render  the  building 
safe,  and  was  to  allow  a  stated  re- 
duction of  rent  to  compensate  the 
tenant  for  the  loss  from  the  incon- 
venience and  damages  ensuing 
from  such  repairs,  it  was  held,  in 
suit  for  the  rent,  that  the  tenant 
could  not  set  up  the  inconvenience 
and  loss  to  his  business,  unless  the 
completion  of  the  repairs  had  been 
unnecessarily  delayed,  and  that  to 
admit  evidence  tending  to  prove  the 
entire  extent  of  the  interference 
with  his  business  by  the  repairs 
and  the  entire  loss  sustained  by 
him,  instead  of  confining  the  in- 
quiry to  the  damages  caused  by  the 
delay,  was  error.  Reineman  v. 
Blair,  96  Penn.  St.  155.  That  a 
tenant  is  ousted  from  lawful  pos- 
session of  property  ip  not  alone 
sulHcient  to  make  the  landlord  re- 
sponsible; it  must  further  appear 
that  the  tenant  dissented,  and  that 
the  ouster  occurred  through  the 
landlord,  or  by  his  consent.  Perry 
V.  Wall,  68  Ga.  70.  An  actual 
physical  ouster  is  not  indispensably 
necessary  to  constitute  an  eviction. 
If  a  final  decree  of  a  competent 
court  establishing  title  in  a  third 
person  is  shown,  the  loss  of  the 
land  will  be  considered  certain. 
The  putting  such  decree  in  evidence 
by  the  party  against  whom  it  was 
rendered  is  a  virtual  dispossession, 
and  compulsory,  because  the  de- 
cree commands  eviction,  and  is 
enforceable.  De  St.  Eomes  v.  New 
Orleans,  S4La.  An.  1301.  If  wrong- 
ful acts  of  a  lessor  upon  the  de- 
mised premises  are  such  as  to  per- 
manently deprive  the  lessee  of  the 


beneficial  enjoyment  of  them,  and 
the  lessee,  in  consequence  thereof, 
abandons  them,  it  is  an  eviction  ; 
and  the  intent  to  evict  is  conclu- 
sively presumed.  Skally  v.  Shute, 
1.32  Mass.  367.  But  a  tenant  who 
continues  to  occupy  premises  under 
a  written  lease  cannot,  when  sued 
for  rent,  set  up,  by  way  of  counter- 
claim, that  he  was  so  disturbed  in 
the  enjoyment  of  the  premises  that 
he  would  have  been  justified  in 
considering  himself  evicted,  and  in 
abandoning  them.  There  can  be 
no  constructive  eviction  without 
an  abandonment  of  possession. 
Boreel  v.  Lawton,  90  N.  Y.  393  ;  43 
Am.  Eep.  170.  If  a  tenant  contin- 
ues to  occupy  the  leased  premises 
he  cannot  defend  against  a  suit  for 
rent,  on  the  ground  that  plaintiffs 
permitted  the  maintenaotice  of  a 
liquor  nuisance  in  another  part  of 
the  building,  whereby  defendant 
was  damaged.  Chicago  Legal 
News  Co.  V.  Browne,  103  111.  317. 
Where  in  an  action  for  rent  at  $20 
per  month  on  a  written  lease,  de- 
fendant set  up  a  subsequent  parol 
contract  for  the  payment  of  only 
|16,  it  was  held,  that  the  burden 
was  upon  him  to  establish  the  parol 
contract,  and  that  this  was  not 
done  by  showing  that  for  part  of 
the  time  plaintiff  accepted  $16. 
Wheeler  v.  Baker,  59  Iowa,  86. 
Rent  cannot  be  recovered  from  the 
United  States  by  the  real  owner  of 
property  in  the  possession  of  the 
United  States  under  a  claim  of  title. 
There  is  no  implied  contract  in 
such  a  case  to  pay  rent.  Kinkead 
V.  United  States,  18  Ct.  of  CI.  504. 
2  Slack  V.  Sharpe,  8  Ad.  &  El. 
373;  CoUett  v.  Curling,  10  Q.  B. 
785 ;  Coomber  v.  Howard,  1  C.  B. 
440. 


CHAP.  L.]  Damages  Recovekablb.  1349 

except  under  special  circumstances,  from  which  a  new- 
agreement  to  pay  rent  pro  rata  may  be  implied,  and  found 
as  a  fact  by  the  jury."  Thus  where  A-  demised  B  the  first 
and  second  floors  of  a  house  for  a  year,  at  a  rent  payable 
quarterly  ;  during  a  current  quarter,  some  dispute  arising 
between  the  parties,  B  told  A  that  she  would  quit 'immedi- 
ately. The  latter  answered  that  she  might  go  when  she 
pleased.  B  thereupon  quit,  and  A  accepted  possession  of 
the  apartment :  it  was  held,  that  A  could  neither  recover 
the  rent  which  by  virtue  of  the  original  contract  would  have 
become  due  at  the  expiration  of  the  current  quarter,  nor 
rent  pro  rata  for  the  actual  occupation  of  the  premises 
for  any  period  short  of  the  quarter."  So  where  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  at  a  rent  payable  semi-annually,  quit 
the  premises  at  the  expiration  of  the  current  year  with- 
out giving  any  notice  to  quit ;  and  before  the  next  half- 
year  expired  the  landlord  let  the  premises  to  another  ten- 
ant, who  occupied  the  same ;— theld,  that  the  landlord 
was  not  entitled  to  recover  rent  from  the  first  tenant, 
from  the  expiration  of  the  current  year  when  he  quit  the 
premises  to  the  time  when  the  landlord  relet  the  same 
to  the  second  tenant.' 

Where  it  is  mutually  agreed  to  put  an  end  to  a  tenancy 
during  a  current  quarter,  the  tenant  to  pay  pro  rata  to 
that  time,  and  the  landlord  accordingly  retakes  posses- 
sion, the  amount  so  agreed  to  be  paid  may  be  recovered 
in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation.*  So  where  the  ten- 
ant holds  over  for  a  week  after  such  an  agreement  has 
been  come  to,  and  then  quits  possession,  and  the  land- 
lord then  accept  possession,  the  rent  to  the  end  of  that 
week  may  be  recovered,  together  with  any  previous 
arrears  of  rent  pro  rata;"  but  the  landlord  cannot  re- 
cover as  for  any  subsequent  use  and  occupation." 

If  the  term  of  tenancy  as  agreed  on  has  commenced 
(the  tenant  having  entered),  the  lessee  or  tenant  will  be 
liable  to  all  the  rent  as  agreed,  notwithstanding  he  has, 

•  Grimman  v.  Legge,  8  B.  &  C.  *  Thomas  v.  Williams,  1  Ad.  & 

334  ;  HaU  v.  Burgess,  5  B.  &  C.  El.  478. 

333.  '  Kirkman  v.  Jervis,  7  Dowl.  678. 

«  Grimman  v.  Legge,  ante.  '  Whitehead  v.  ClifEord,  5  Taunt, 

"  Hall  V.  Burgess,  ante.  518. 
II.— 33 


1350  Use  and  Occupation.  [§  550. 

ceased  to  occupjj  unless  indeed  something  has  since  hap- 
pened to  put  an  end  tp  the  term  or  tenancy,  as  a  surren- 
der by  deed  or  by  act  and  operation  of  law.' 

Where  houses  or  other  buildings  are  demised  at  a  rent 
certain,  whether  orally  or  otherwise,  and  there  is  no 
stipulation  that  the  rent  shall  cease  in  the  event  of  the 
premises  being  destroyed  by  fire,  which  event  happens, 
the  landlord  may  recover  the  subsequently  accruing  rent 
in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation  ;  for  the  land  re- 
mains and  is  "held"  by  the  tenant,  although  the  houses 
and  buildings  are  uninhabitable  until  rebuilt."  The  ten- 
ant himself  may  rebuild  them  if  it  be  worth  his  while,  or 
he  may  give  due  notice  to  quit  but  he  must  continue  to 
pay  his  rent  until  his  term  expires,  or  is  duly  determined 
by  notice  to  quit,  or  otherwise.  If  there  be  a  special 
stipulation  that  the  rent  shall  cease  in  the  event  of  a 
fire,  which  happens,  a  proportionable  part  of  the  rent  to 
that  time  may  be  recovered  in  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation,  the  agreement  showing  a  contract  in  respect 
of  the  occupation  de  die  in  diem.'  Where  the  rent  is 
agreed  to  be  paid  quarterly,  "  damage  by  fire  excepted," 
and  the  demised  premises  are  to  be  kept  and  left  in 
repairs,  "damage  by  fire  excepted"  and  the  premises 
are  partly  destroyed  by  fire  during  the  term,  the  whole 
rent  is  not  thereby  suspended,  but  a  porportionate 
abatement  should  be  made." 

Where  a  tenancy  is  continued  beyond  the  time  for 
which  the  premises  were  originally  taken,  and  nothing 
is  arranged  respecting  the  amount  to  be  paid  on  the  new 
holding,  that  new  holding  is  not  of  necessity  to  be  on 
the  same  terms  as  the  former,  but  the  jury  may  give  the 
landlord  a  larger  sum  for  the  continued  occupation,  if 
there  are  circumstances  to  show  that  increased  rent  was 
expected  by  him  in  the  event  of  the  tenant  holding  over, 
and  that  such  expectation,  was  known  to  and  not  repu- 
diated by  the  tenant. ' 


'  Whitehead  v.  Clifford,  ante 
Grimman  v.  Legge,  8  B.  &  C.  334 
Hall  V.  Burgess,  5  B.  &■  0.  333 


45 ;  Izon  V.  Gorton,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  501- 
»  Packer  v.  Gibbins,  1  Q.  B.  431. 
*  Bennett  v.  Ireland,  E.  B.  &  E. 


Ward  V.  Mason,  9  Price,  291.  326. 

^  Baker  v.  HoltzapffeU,  4  Taunt.  *  Elgar  v.  Watson,  Car.  &  M.  494. 


CHAP,  L.]  Damages  Eecoverable.  1351 

If  during  a  term  of  years  the  landlord  agrees  to  do 
certain  repairs,  or  to  erect  additional  buildings,  or  other- 
wise to  improve  the  demised  premises;  in  consideration 
of  an  agreed  percentage  on  the  outlay  to  be  paid  him  by 
the  tenant  during  the  residue  of  the  term  in  addition  to 
the  rent  previously  reserved,  such  percentage  is  not  in 
the  nature  of  rent  and  cannot  be  distrained  for,  nor 
recovered  under  a  count  for  use  and  occupation.  It  is  a 
collateral  stipulation  which  must  be  declared  on  specially. ' 
A  mere  oral  agreement  to  reduce  the  rent  reserved  upon 
a  demise  does  not  create  any  new  demise  ;  and  notwith- 
standing such  agreement,  the  full  amount  of  rent  as 
originally  reserved  maybe  recovered." 

The  defendant  wiU  not  be  entitled  to  any  reduction  of 
rent  because  of  acts  done  by  a  third  person  which  reduced 
the  value  of  his  occupation,  but  which  were  done  v^th- 
out  the  authority  of  the  plaintiff.' 


•  Hoby  V.  Eoebuck,  7  Taunt.  157 
Danellan  v.  Bead,  3  B.  &  Ad.  899 
Lambert  v.  Norris,  3  M.  &  W.  333 
Foquet  v.  Moor,  7  Exchq.  870 ;  Mar- 
tyn  T.  Clue,  18  Q.  B,  661. 


«  Crowley  v.  Vitty,  7  Exchq.  319 
^  Drury   Lane   Theatre   Co.    v. 
Chapman,  1  C.  &  K,  14. 


1352  Debt  foe  Rent.  [§  551: 


CHAPTER  LI. 

DEBT   FOR  RENT. 

Sec.  551.  Wheii  maintainable. 

Sec.  553.  Remedies  in  Courts  of  Equity. 

Sec.  553.  Tenant  must  deliver  up  possession. —  Penalty  for  failure. 

I     Sec.  554.  Encroachments  by  tenants. 

'     Sec.  555.  Double  value. 

'     Sec.  556.  Double  rent. 

Sec.  551.  When  maintainable.— The  action  of  debt  for 
rent  is  founded  sometimes  upon  privity  of  contract,  ex- 
press or  implied,  and  sometimes  upon  privity  of  estate.' 
It  may  be  supported,  whether  the  contract  of  demise  is 
by  deed,  by  writing  not  under  seal,  or  by  parol;  but  an 
action  for  use  and  occupation  can  be  maintained  only 
where  the  demise  was  not  by  deed.'  At  common  law, 
rents  reserved  on  leases  for  years,  or  tenancies  at  will, 
were  at  all  times  recoverable  by  action  of  debt ; '  but  it 
did  not  lie  for  rent  reserved  upon  a  freehold  lease  during 
the  continuance  of  the  lease.'  Since  the  statute  abolish- 
ing real  actions,"  debt  wiU  lie  for  a  rent  in  fee  if  such  a 
rent  is  expressly  covenanted  to  be  paid."  By  8  Ann,.,  c. 
14,  s.  4:,  any  persons  entitled  to  rent  in  arrear,  on  a  lease 
for  life  or  lives,  may  have  an  action  of  debt  during  the 
existence  of  the  life,  as  on  a  lease,  for  years  during  the 
term.  Debt  does  not  lie  at  common  law,  nor  by  this  statute, 
for  the  arrears  of  an  annuity  or  yearly  rent  devised,  pay- 
able out  of  lands  to  A  during  the  life  of  B,  to  whom  the 
lands  are  devised  for  life,  B  paying  the  same  thereout,  so 

'  BuU.  N.  p.  167  ;  Lord  Ward  t.  Ld.  Eayd.  1056  ;  Kelly  v.  Oubbe, 

Lumley,  5  H.  «S5  N.  87,  656.  3  B.  &  B,  130. 

m  Geo.  3,  c.  19,  s  14 ;  Gibson  v.  =  3  &  4  Will.  4,  c  37,  s  36. 

Kirk,  1  Q.  B.  850.  « 4  Co. ».  49,  a ;  Varley  v.  Leigh 

^Esp.  N.  P.  188.  2  Exohq.  446. 

*Bp,  of  Winchester  v.  Wright,  3 


CHAP.  LI.]  When  Maintainable.  1353 

long  as  the  estate  of  freehold  continues.'  By  32  Hen.  8, 
c.  37,  s.  1,  the  executors  and  administrators  of  tenants  in 
fee,  fee-tail,  or  for  life,  of  rent-services,  rent-charges,  rent- 
seek,  and  fee-farms,  may  bring  debt  for  the  arrearages 
against  the  tenant  who  ought  to  have  paid  the  same.' 

•  Any  words  which  are  sufficient  to  create  a  privity  of 
contract  between  the  parties  will  enable  the  landlord  to 
maintain  an  action  of  debt ;  it  lies,  therefore,  for  non-pay- 
ment of  the  rent  on  the  words  "yielding  and  paying"  in 
a  lease  for  years  ;  for  it  is  an  agreement  to  pay  the  rent 
which  amounts  to  a  contract.'  As  between  the  parties  to 
the  contract,  an  entry  by  the  tenant  upon  the  land  de- 
mised by  deed  is  not  necessary  to  enable  the  landlord 
to  support  an  action  of  debt  for  rent ;  *  whereas  no  action 
for  use  and  occupation  lies  before  the  lessee  has  entered." 
Again,  the  action  of  debt  for  rent  lies,  though  the  defend- 
ant entered  before  his  title  began  ;  for  though  clearly  he 
is  a  disseizor  by  his  entry,  and  the  accruing  of  his  term 
shall  not  alter  his  estate,  yet  there  is  a  privity  of  contract, 
and  whether  the  entry  be  tortious  or  not,  it  cannot  dis- 
charge the  contract  for  payment  of  the  rent.' 

If  the  lessor  assigns  his  rent,  without  the  reversion, 
the  assignee  may  maintain  an  action  of  debt  for  the 
rent,  because  the  privity  of  contract  is  transferred ; ' 
but  if  the  lessor  grants  away  his  reversion  he  cannot 
have  an  action  of  debt  for  the  subsequent  rent,  because, 
being  incident  to  the  reversion,  it  passes  with  it."  The 
grantee  of  the  reversion  who  has  assigned  it  over  can- 

'Webbv.  Jiggs,  4  M.  &  S.  113;  "Alexander  v.  Dyer,  Cro.   EUz. 

Braithwaitev.  Skinner,  5  M.  &  W.  169. 

313.  ■"  Allen  v.  Bryan,  5  B.  &  C.  513  ; 

=  Bac.  Abr.  Debt  (C).  Eobins  v.  Cox,  1  Lev.  33  ;  Marie  v. 

3  Bower  V.  Hodges,  13  C.  B.  765,  Flake,   3  Salk.   118;  Williams  v. 

774 ;  Woodfall's  L.  &  T.  689-90.  Hayward,  1  E.  &  E.  1040 ;  38  L.  J. 

^  Bellasis  v.  Burbrick.  1  Salk.  309 ;  Q.  B.  374. 

Bull  V.  Stibbs,  8  T.   R.  337.    But  « Esp.  N.  P.  303.     A  tenant  who 

there  must  be  a  sufficient  contract  is  compelled  to  remove  from  prem- 

for  the  payment    of    such   rent,  ises    because    of    noxious    smells 

Clarke  v.  Fuller,  16  C.  B.  N.  S.  34 ;  and  gases  emitted  from  adjoining 

Harrison  v.  Blackburn,  17  C.  B.  N.  premises  of    which    both    parties 

S.   678;   Chitty   on  Contracts,  393,  were  ignorant  when  the  premises 

7th  ed. ;  Smith  L.  &  T.  13,  n.  (10)  were  let,  cannot  counter-claim  the 

(3d.  ed.).  damages  caused  thereby,  in  an  ac- 

*  Edge  V.  Strafford,  1C.&  J.  391,  tion  by  the  landlord  for  rent. 
398 ;  Lowe  v.  Ross,  5  Exchq.  553 ;  E'ranklin  v.  Brown,  53  N.  Y.  Su- 
Tbwne  v.  D'  Heinrich,  13  C.  B.  893.  perior  Ct.  474. 


1354  Debt  for  Eent.  [§  552. 

not  have  debt  against  the  lessee  for  subsequent  rent ; 
for  there  was  no  privity  between  them  but  by  reason  of 
the  privity  of  estate,  and  that  being  gone  by  the  assign- 
ment this  action  will  not  he.'  If  a  lessee  for  years  assign 
aU  his  interest  to  another,  the  lessor  may  still  have  an 
action  of  debt  against  him,  for  rent  in  arrear,  after  the 
assignment.'  The  lessor  may,  however,  either  tacitly  or 
expressly  accept  the  assignee  for  his  tenant,  and  so  dis- 
charge the  original  lessee  from  liability  to  an  action  of 
debt  for  rent ;  and  if  he  once  accept  rent  from  the 
assignee,  he  can  never  resort  to  this  particular  remedy 
against  the  lessee  ; '  but  he  may  maintain  an  action  of 
covenant.  Where  A,  being  lessee  for  years,  assigns  all 
his  term  to  B,  rendering  rent,  debt  lies  by  A  for  the  rent 
as  "'rent,"  for  it  is  not  a  sum  in  gross,  although  no  re- 
version remains  in  A."  So  if  A  demises  to  B  for  a 
longer  term  than  his  own,  A,  or  his  executor  or  admin- 
istrator, may  maintain  debt  for  the  rent  which  accrues 
during  the  continuance  of  A's  term.'  So  may  an  as- 
signee of  the  rent  for  such  rent  as  accrues  after  the 
assignment  and  during  the  continuance  ef  A's  term ;  ° 
were  it  otherwise  great. injustice  might  be  occasioned,  as 
the  tenant,  if  evicted,  would  have  no  answer  to  an  action 
on  his  covenant  for  the  payment  of  the  rent.' 

Sec.  652.  Eemedies  in  courts  of  equity.— In  those  States 
where  the  powers  of  a  court  of  equity  are  not  blended 
with  courts  of  law  it  may  often  be  necessary  for  a  person 
entitled  to  rents  to  resort  to  a  court  of  equity  for  a  re- 
covery thereof.  Especially  is  this  a  proper  and  efficient 
remedy  where  the  premises  are  occupied  by  an  under- 
tenant and  the  lessee  has  become  insolvent.  In  such 
cases  a  court  of  equity,  treating  the  rent  as  a  trust  or 
charge  upon   the  land,    wiU   upon   proper  application 

1  Humble  v.  Glover,  Cro.  Eliz.  328.         ^  Baker  v.  Gostling,  1  Bing.  N.  C. 

2  Auriol  V.  Mills,  4  T.  E.   98  ;  1     19. 

Smith  L.  C.  660,  673  (4tli  ed.).  « Williams  v.  Hayward,  1  E.  & 

"Esp.  N.  P.  201.  E.  1040  ;  28  L.  J.  Q.  B.  874. 

*  Newcombe  v.  Harvey,    Garth.  '  Baker  v.  Gostlmg,  1  Bing.  N.  C. 

161 ;  Com.     Dig.    tit.    Debt  (C.) ;  27. 

Clarke  v.  Couglan,  3  Ir.  C.  L.  Rep. 

427. 


CHAP,  u.]  Courts  of  Eqihty.  1355 

direct  the  rents  to  be  paid  to  the  lessor  direct,'  unless 
the  lessor  has  an  ample  remedy  at  law,  or,  by  his  own 
laches,  has  been  deprived  of  such  remedy."  So,  too,  a 
court  of  equity  may  be  called  upon  to  adjust  the  rights 
of  the  parties  where  the  lease  requires  expenditures  on 
one  side  and  an  allowance  therefor  on  the  other,  or 
where  there  are  accounts  against  the  lessor  in  favor  of 
the  lessee  which  ought  to  be  allowed  in  liquidation  of 
the  rent,  or  where  a  discovery  is  necessary,'  or  where  a 
judgment  in  ejectment  has  been  restrained  by  an  in- 
junction procured  by  the  tenant,  who  dies  before  the  biU 
is  disposed  of,  equity  will  reheve  the  tenant  by  compel- 
ling the  tenant's  representative  to  account  for  the  mesne 
profits.*  But,  unless  the  equities  of  the  case  demand  it, 
interest  wiU  not  be  allowed.'  Equity  will  not  interfere 
where  the  tenant  or  person  entitled  to  mesne  profits  has 
never  entered,  unless  in  behalf  of  a  trustee  or  an  infant, 
or  the  plaintiff  has  been  by  fraud  prevented  from 
asserting  his  title  ; "  nor  where  the  plaintiff  has  lost  his 
right  to  recover  at  law  by  reason  of  his  own  laches,' 
unless  such  laches  are  referable  to  fraud  on  the  part  of 
the  defendant.*  In  cases  where  the  plaintiff  is  entitled 
to  a  discovery  which  is  essential  to  the  protection  of  the 
plaintiff's  rights,  and  in  such  cases  will  give  such  relief 
as  is  consequent  upon  the  discovery.'  So  where  several 
persons  claim  the  rent,  equity  will  entertain  an  inter- 

'  Story's Eq.  Juris.,  sec.  687 ;  Fon-  with  the  tenant.     Bishop  of  Win- 

blanque's  Eq.  sec.  5  ;  Goddard  v.  Chester  v.  Knight,  1  P.   Wms.  407. 

Keats,  1  Vern.  87.  'Batten  v.   Earnly,  3  P.   Wms. 

^  BlackhaU  v.  Combs,  3  P.  Wms.  163 ;  Teer  v.  Winterton,  1  Ves.  451. 

70  ;  Pahner  v.  Whittenhall,  1  Cas.  « Haiton  v.  Simpson,  3  Vern.  734 ; 

in  Ch.  184 ;  Thorndek  v.  Allison,  1  Owen  v.  Aprice,  1  Ch.  R.  17.    In 

id.  79.  such  cases  the  account  wiU  be  de- 

'  O'Connor  v.  Spaight,  1  Sch.  &  creed  only  from  the  time  the  plaint- 

L.  305 ;  Rex  v.  Whitstable,  7  East,  iff 's    title     accrued     unless     the 

353  ;    Porter  v.    Spencer,  3  John.  equities  of  the  case  require  that  it 

Ch.  (N.  Y.)  171  ;  Armstrong  v.  GU-  should  commence  from  the  date  of 

Christ,  3  John.  Cas.    (N.  Y.)  434 ;  entry  or  of  the  filing  of  the  bill. 

Post  V.  Kimberley,  9  John.  (N.  Y.)  Dormer  v.  Fortescue,  8  Atk.  180. 

479  ;  Hawlejr  v.  Cramer,  4  Cow.  (N.  '  Davey  v.  Davey,  1  Cas.  in  Ch. 

Y.)  727  ;  Frietas  v.  Dos  Santas,  1  414  :  Lockey  v.  Lockey,  Prec.  Ch. 

Y.  &  J.  574;    Barker  v.  Dacie,  6  518. 

Ves.  687.  "  Cottrell  v.  Purchase,  Forrest,  63. 

^  Landsdowne  v.  Landsdowne,  1  '  Livingston    v.     Livingston,    4 

Madd.  116.    As  trespass  for  mesne  John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  387. 
profits,  being  a  tortious  action,  dies 


1356  Debt  foe  Rent.  [§  553.. 

pleader  in  behalf  of  the  tenant  to  determine  to  whom  it 
should  be  paid.'  So  where  a  trustee  has  become  bank- 
rupt or  insolvent,  equity  wiU  compel  the  cestui  que 
trust  who  takes  the  profits,  to  pay  the  rent.' 

Sec.  553.  Tenant  must  deliver  up  possession.— Penalty  for 
failure.— When  a  tenant  holds  over  after  the  expiration  of 
a  notice  to  quit,  the  landlord  is  entitled  to  recover  against 
him  the  reasonable  damages  and  costs  sustained  by  him 
in  an  action  at  the  suit  of  a  party  to  whom  he  had  con- 
tracted to  let  the  premises,  but  to  whom  the  tenant's 
wrongful  act  had  prevented  him  from  delivering  posses- 
sion.' If,  at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  the  tenant  and 
his  family  have  gone  away  from  the  house,  and  the  house 
is  locked  up,  no  one  being  in  possession,  the  landlord 
would  be  justified  in  breaking  into  the  house  forcibly  and 
obtaining  possession  ;  and  trespass  quare  clausum  fregit, 
at  the  suit  of  the  tenant,  could  not  be  maintained  against 
him.*  So  where  a  pauper,  who  was  not  a  tenant,  but 
had  been  permitted  to  occupy  a  parish  house,  went  away 
from  home,  it  was  held  that  the  overseers  might  lawfully 
resume  possession."  A  tenant  wrongfully  holding  over 
cannot  maintain  trespass  quare  clausum  fregit  against  his 
landlord  for  a  peaceable  entry,'  or  even  for  an  entry  with 
strong  hand  ; '  but  the  landlord  having  entered  may  main- 
tain trespass  quare  clausum  fregit  against  such  tenant  for 
i-emaining  in  the  possession.'  It  was  once  held  that  the 
landlord  could  not  acquire  lawful  possession  by  a  forcible 

•Badeau  v.  Tyler,  1  Sandf.  Ch.  Davison  v.  Wilson.  11  Q.  B.   890; 

(N.  Y.)  270.    As  in  such  a  case,  the  Burling  v.  Read,  id.  904. 

tenant  is  not  treated  as  disputing  '  WUdborv.  Rainforth,8B.  &C.4. 

the  landlord's  title,  but  as  merely  *  Taunton  v.  Costar,  7  T.  R.  431 ; 

taking  measures  to  protect  him-  Turner  v..  Meymott,  1  Bing.  158 ; 

self  against  the  embarrassment  of  Laceyv.  Lear,  Peake,  Add.  Cas.  210. 

an  uncertainty  as  to  his  liability  ■■  BurUng  v.  Read,  11  Q.  B.  904  ; 

and  the  consequences  ofanerrone-  Davison  v.  Wilson,  id.  890;  Meri- 

ous  payment.     Clarke  v.  Bojne,  13  ton  v.  Coombes,  1  L.  M.  &  P.  510; 

Ves.  383 ;  Crumshay  v.  Thornton.  Harvey  v.  Bridges,   14  M.  &  W. 

7  Sim.  391 ;  Durgay  v.  Angone,  3  437 ;  Jones  v.  Chapman,  2  Exchq. 

Ves.  304.  803  ;  Browne  v.  Dawson,  12  Ad.  & 

'  Claveringv.  Westley,  3P.  Wms.  El.  634  ;  Blades  v.  Higgs,  10  C.  B. 

1403.  N.  S.   713 ;  13  id.  844 ;  Cole  Ejec. 

'Bramley  v.  Chesterton,  3  C.  B.  67,  68,  689. 

N.  S.  592.  8  Butcher  V.  Butcher,   7  B.  &  C. 

"  Turner  v.  Meymott,  1  Bing.  158  ;  399  ;  Key  v.  Moorhouse,  6  Bing.  N. 

iHillary  v.   Gay,   6  C.   &  P.   284 ;  C.  52 ;  Co.  Litt.  345. 


CHAP.  LI.]  Encroachments.  1357 

entry  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  ; '  but  the  contary 
has  since  been  repeatedly  decided."  And  it  is  now  set- 
tled that  a  lessor,  at  the  determination  of  the  term,  may 
enter  forcibly  into  possession  of  the  demised  premises, 
and  after  civDly  requesting  the  tenant  to  depart,  may,  in 
case  of  his  refusal  or  neglect  to  comply  with  such  request, 
gently  lay  hands  upon  him  to  turn  or  push  him  out ;  and 
in  case  of  any  resistance  on  his  part,  may  use  such  force 
and  violence  as  may  be  negessary  to  overcome  such  resist- 
ance, but  no  more,  and  so  expel  the  tenant  from  the  pos- 
session without  being  liable  to  an  action  of  trespass  quare 
clausum  fregit,  for  assault,  at  the  suit  of  the  tenant ; 
although  he  may  have  made  himself  liable  to  an  indict- 
ment for  a  forcible  entry.'  But  excess  of  violence  must 
be  avoided,  and  that  creates  the  principal  difficulty  and 
danger  in  proceeding  to  expel  a  tenant  in  the  manner 
above  mentioned,  and  renders  it  more  advisable  to  pro- 
ceed by  action  of  ejectment  or  by  summary  proceedings 
under  the  statute,  where  the  statute  provides  a  summary 
remedy.  A  proviso  for  re-entry  may  be  so  framed  as 
expressly  to  justify  the  lessor,  on  breach  of  any  of  the 
covenants,  in  forcibly  resuming  possession  of  the  premises 
and  expelling  the  tenant ; '  but  in  framing  such  a  clause 
care  should  be  taken  to  provide  for  a.  waiver  of  all 
common  law  requirements,  otherwise  they  must  be 
comphed  with  before  the  right  attaches.  Thus,  where  a 
forfeiture  is  provided  for  a  breach  of  a  covenant  to  pay 
rent,  unless  a  legal  demand  is  expressly  dispensed  with, 
such  demand  must  be  made  according  to  the  strict  rules 
of  the  common  law  before  the  landlord  can  lawfully 
dispossess  the  tenant." 

Sec.    654.   Enoroaehments  by  tenants.— Encroachments 
made  by  a  tenant  from  the  adjoining  land  during  the 

'Newton  v.  Harland,  14M.  &  W.  ^Davison  v.  Wilson,  11 Q.  B.  890 ; 

644.  Burling  v.  Read,  id.  904. 

'Harvey  v.  Bridges,  1  M.  &  G.  *  Miller  v.  Myers,  15  L.  J.  Q.  B. 

437-443  ;  1  Exchq.  364 ;   Jones   v.  157 ;  Kavanaugh  v.  Gudge,  7  M.  & 

Chapman,  3  Exchq.  803 ;  Davis  v.  G.  316. 

Burrell,   10  C.   B.   831;  Pollen  v.  'Barry  v.    Glover,  10  Ir.   C.   L. 

Brewer,  7  C.  B.  N.  S.  371 ;  Apple-  118  ;  Acocks  v.  Phillips,  5  H.  &  N. 

ton  V.  Murray,  8  W.  R.  653.  183. 


1358  Debt  foe  Rent.  [§  555. 

term  axe  prima  facie  tor  the  benefit  of  the  tenant  during 
the  term,  and  afterwards  of  his  landlord,  unless  it 
appears  by  some  evidence  that  the  tenant  at  the  time  they 
were  made  intended  them  for  his  own  exclusive  benefit, 
and  not  to  hold  them  as  he  held  the  land  to  which  they 
were  adjacent,  and,  therefore,  he  is  bound  to  deliver  them 
up  at  the  end  of  his  term. '  The  landlord  may  afterwards 
maintain  ejectment  to  recover  possession  of  them  with 
or  without  the  other  premises  comprised  in  the  lease." 
The  covenants  to  repair,  &c.,  contained  in  the  lease  will 
be  held  to  extend,  by  implication,  to  the  encroachments 
and  the  buildings  thereon."  This  presumption  holds  only 
as  between  the  tenant  and  his  landlord,  and  will  not 
prevail  for  the  landlord's  benefit  against  third  persons.' 
A  conveyance  by  a  lessee  of  the  encroachments  to  his  son 
not  appearing  to  have  been  delivered,  and  not  followed 
by  possession,  does  not  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
lessee  made  the  encroachment  for  the  benefit  of  his  lessor. 
An  endorsement  on  a  lease,  by  which  the  lessee  agrees  to 
surrender  all  enclosures  made  by  him  at  the  end  of  his 
lease,  and  to  pay  a  certain  sum  annually  as  an  acknowl- 
edgment, is  an  admission  they  were  made  for  the  benefit 
of  the  lessor.' 

Sec.  555.  Double  value.— The  statute  °  providing  for 
the  recovery  of  double  the  yearly  value  of  the  premises, 
where  a  tenant  wilfully  holds  over  after  demand  and 
notice  iii  writing,  is  a  penal  statute,  and  therefore  is  con- 
strued strictly.'  It  extends  only  to  tenants  for  any  term 
"of  life,  Uves  or  years,"  and  does  not  embrace  weekly, 
quarterly  or  half-yearly  tenancies.'    In  order  to  main- 

1  Lewis  V.  Rees,  6  C.  &  P.  610  ;  s  White  v.  Wakley,  26  Beav.  17. 
Earl  of  Dunraven  v.  Williams,  7  O.  *  Baddeley  v.  Massey,  17  Q.  B. 
&  P.  322  ;  Harrison  v.  Murrell,  8  373  ;  Bluck  v.  Moyes,  13  L.  T.  325. 
C.  &  P.  134 ;  Doe  d.  Lloyd  v.  Jones,  =  Lloyd  v.  Jones,  15  M.  &  W.  580. 

'  15M.&W.  580  ;  Andrews  V.  Hailes,  '  Geo.  2,  chap.  28,  sec.  1. 

2  E.  &  B.  349;  Croft  v.   Tidbury,  'Lloyd  v.  Eosbee,  2  Camp. '453; 

14  C.  B.  304  ;  KingsmUl  v.  Millard,  Eobinson  v.  Learoyd,  7  M.  &  W. 

11  Exchq.  313 ;  Earl  of  Lisburne  v.  54. 

Davies,  L.  E.,  1  C.  P.  259.  'SuUivan  v.  Bishop,  2  C.  &  P. 

2  Andrews  v.  Hailes,  2  E.  &  B.  359 ;  Wilkinson  v.  Hall,  3  Bing.  N. 
349  ;  Croft  v.  Tidbury,  14  C.  B.  304 ;  C.  508 ;  Lloyd  v.  Eosbee,  ante. 
Earl  of   Dunraven  v.   Williams,  7 

C.  &  P.  332. 


CHAP,  uj  ■  Double  Value.  1359 

tain  an  action  for  double  value,  the  fact  must  be  estab- 
lished that  the  tenant  held  over  wilfully,  contumaciously, 
and  not  by  accident,  or  mistake  as  to  his  rights.'  So, 
too,  it  must  be  shown  that  a  demand  was  made  and 
notice  in  writing  given  pursuant  to  the  statute."  This 
demand  and  notice  may  be  served  before  the  term  is 
ended,  requiring  possession  to  be  given  up  when  the 
time  is  ended.  °  Or  the  notice  may  be  given  within  a 
reasonable  time  after  the  term  is  ended,  if  the  landlord 
has  done  no  act  in  the  mean  time  to  acknowledge  the 
continuance  of  the  tenancy,  or  rather  to  create  a  new 
one  ;  and  he  will  thereupon  be  entitled  to  double  value, 
calculated  from  the  time  of  such  demand,  and  not 
from  the  expiration  of  the  tenancy.  If  the  rent  was 
before  reserved  quarterly,  and  such  demand  is  made  in 
the  middle  of  a  quarter,  the  landlord  cannot  recover  any 
rent  or  compensation  for  use  and  occupation  for  the 
antecedent  fraction  of  such  quarter.*  The  demand  and 
notice  should  always  be  given  before,  or  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible after,  the  expiration  of  the  term.  Where  the 
tenancy  was  only  from  year  to  year,  the  usual  written 

1  Lake  v.  Smith,  IB.  &  P.  174  ;  agents    thereunto     lawfully     au- 

Wright  V.  Smith,  5  Esp.  303 ;  Hirst  thorized,  then  and  in   such  case 

V.  Horn,  6  M.  &  W.  393  ;  Soulsby  such  person  or  persons  so  holding 

V.  Neving,  9  East,  313.    But  only  over  shall,  for  and  during  the  time 

the  tenant  holding  over  is  liable,  he,  she  or  they  shall  so  hold  over,  or 

although  the  term  was  to  and  en-  keep  the  person  or  persons  entitled 

joyed  by  several  tenants.    Draper  out  of  possession  of  the  said  lands, 

V.  Crofts,  15  M.  &  W.  166 ;  Anony-  tenements  and  hereditaments    as 

mous,  5  Esp.  215 ;  Poole  v.   War-  aforesaid,  pay  to  the  person  or  per- 

ren,  8  Ad.  &  El.  582;  Swinfen  v.  sons  so  kept  out  of  possession,  their 

Bacon,  •O  H.  &  N.  184.  executors,   administrators    or   as- 

''The  statute  provides  that  "in  signs,  at  the  rate  of  double  the 
case  any  tenant  or  tenants  for  any  yearly  valueot  the  lands,  tenements 
term  of  life,  lives  or  years,  or  other  and  hereditaments  so  detained,  for 
person  or  persons  who  are  or  shall  so  long  time  as  the  same  are  de- 
come  into  possession  of  any  lands,  tained,  to  be  recovered  in  any  of 
tenements  or  hereditaments,  by,  his  Majesty's  courts  of  record,  by 
from  orunder,  or  by  collusion  with  action  of  debt,  whereunto  the  de- 
such  tenant  or  tenants,  shall  unl-  fendant  or  defendants  shall  be 
fully  hold  over  any  lands,  tene-  obliged  to  give  special  bail;  against 
ments  or  hereditaments  after  the  the  recovering  of  which  said  pen- 
determination  of  such  term  or  alty  there  shall  be  no  relief  in 
terms,  and  after  demand   made,  equity." 

and  notice  in  writing  given,  for  'Cutting  v.   Derby,  3    W.     Bl. 

delivering  the  possession  thereof  1075  ;  Messenger  v.  Armstrong,  1 

by  his  or  their  landlords  or  lessors,  T.  E.   53 ;  Wilkinson  v.  CoUey,  5 

or  ithe  person  or  persons  to  whom  Burr.  2694  ;  Booth  v.  Macfarlane,  1 

the  remainder  or  reversion  of  such  B.  &  Ad.  904 ;  Wright  v.  Smith,  5 

lands,  tenements  or  hereditaments  Esp.  203. 

shall  belong,  his  or  their  agent  or  *  Cobb  v.  Stokes,  8  Bast,  358. 


1360  Debt  foe  Rent.  [§  655. 

notice  to  quit  is  a  sufficient  demand  and  notice  whereby 
to  satisfy  the  statute,  and  no  further  demand  or  notice 
need  be  made  after  the  tenancy  has  ceased.'  But  the 
notice  must  amount  to  a  vahdand  binding  notice  to  quit." 
If  it  requires  the  tenant  to  .quit  on  the  wrong  day,  or  on  the 
right  day  at  twelve  o'clock  at  noon,  that  is  not  sufficient.' 
A  notice  requiring  the  tenant  to  quit  on  the  proper  day 
"  I  shall  insist  on  double  rent"  (instead  of  double  value) 
is  sufficient,  and  does  not  give  the  tenant  the  option  of 
holding  over."  A  second  notice,  given  after  the  expira- 
tion of  the  term,  to  quit  on  a  subsequent  day  or  to  pay 
double  rent,  is  no  waiver  of  the  first  notice  given  before 
the  expiration  of  the  term,  or  of  the  double  rent  which 
has  accrued  under  it."  A  notice  to  quit  lands  on  a  given 
day  "  or  at  such  time  as  your  holding  shall  expire  next 
after  the  expiration  of  half  a  year  from  the  receipt  of 
this  notice,"  is  sufficient  in  an  action  for  double  value." 
Where  a  sufficient  notice  to  quit  is  given  to  a  female 
tenant,  and  she  afterwards  marries,  no  further  notice 
need  be  given  to  the  husband  to  support  an  action  against 
him  for  double  value  for  holding  over.'  The  notice 
must  be  signed  by  the  landlord  or  his  agent  "thereunto 
lawfully  authorized.  "  A  receiver  or  agent  authorized  to 
let,  and  to  sue  or  distrain  for  rent,  has  sufficient  au- 
thority to  give  the  notice.'  So  a  receiver  in  chancery, 
with  the  usual  powers,  may  give  the  notice  in  his  own 
name.* 

Double  value  cannot  be  distrained  because  it  is  not  in 
the  Jiature  of  rent,  but  of  unliquidated  damages,  recover- 
able only  by  action  pursuant  to  the  statute.  But  it  is 
otherwise  with  respect  to  double  rent.  After  recovering 
the  possession  in  ejectment,  the  landlord  may  maintain 
debt  for  double  rent  for  the  time  the  tenant  held  over 

'Wilkinson  v.   CoUey,   5    Burr.  'Messenger  v.   Armstrong,  1  T. 

2694  ;  Cutting  v.  Derby,  3  W.  Bl.  R.  53. 

1075 ;  Hirst  v.  Horn,   6  M.  &  W.  «  Hirst  v.  Horn,  6  M.  &  W.  393. 

393  ;  Cole  Ejec.  646.  '  Lake  v.  Smith,  1  B.  &  P.  174. 

=  Johnstone  V.  Huddlestone,  4  B.  'Poole  v.   Warren,  8  Ad.  &  El. 

&  C.  933.  583. 

2  Page  V.  More,  15  Q.  B.  684.  'Wilkinson   v.   CoUey,   5  Burr. 

^  Matthews  v.   Jackson,  1  Doug.  2694.    See  Trent  v.  Hunt,  9  Exchq. 

175 :  Lyster  v.  Goldwin,   3  Q.   B.  14 
143. 


CHAP.  LI.]  Double  Rent.  1361 

after  the  expiration  of  the  notice  to  quit  until  possession 
is  obtained  in  the  ejectment  suit.  This  remedy  has  no 
reference  to  any  antecedent  remedy  for  the  recovery  of 
possession,  but  is  cumulative.'  This  amount  of  recovery 
in  this  action  is  double  the  yearly  value  of  the  premises, 
and  not  double  the  yearly  rent"  and  in  estimating  the 
value,  only  the  value  of  the  lands  and  tenements  can  be 
considered.' 

Sec.  556.  Double  rent.— The  statute  '  providing  for  the 
recovery  of  double  rent  in  certain  cases  applies  only 
vrhere  the  tenant,  having  the  power  to  put  an  end  to  the 
tenancy,  by  notice,  gives  notice  of  his  intention  to  quit 
at  a  certain  time,  and  neglects  or  refuses  to  give  up 
possession  at  the  time.  In  order  to  recover  under  this 
statute,  it  is  not  necessary  to  show  that  the  tenant  held 
over  wilfully  or  contumaciously,  as  the  act  does  not  so 
provide ; '  and  it  applies  to  all  species  of  tenancies, 
whether  weekly,  quarterly,  or  yearly,  and  whether  the 
lease  is  in  writing  or  by  parol.'  This  species  of  rent  is 
recoverable  in  the  same  way  and  at  the  same  time  as 
single  rent,  and  may  be  distrained  for,  or  recovered  by 
suit  at  law.' 

'  Soulsby  V.  Neving,  ante.    No        '  Eobinsou  v.  Learoyd,  7  M.  & 

previous  action   of    ejectment  is  W.  48. 

necessary,  and  it  may  be  brought        *11  Geo.  2,  chap.  19,  sec.  18. 
in  place  of,  or  after   ejectment.        'Woodf all's  L.  &  T.  584. 
Cutting  V.  Derby,  2  W,  BL  1077.  '  Timmins  v.  EawUnson,  ante. 

*SovdsbyT.  Neving,  ante.  'Wickham  v.  Lee,  12Q.  B. 


1362  Out-Going  Tenants.  [§  557. 


CHAPTER  LII. 

OUT-GOING  TENANTS. 

Sec.  557.    Eights  of. 

Sec.  558.    Right  to  crops,  &c.,  under  lease  or  custom. 

Sec.  55  T.  Rights  of.— It  is  very  generally  the  case,  that 
by  the  terms  of  the  lease  or  the  custom  of  the  country 
out-going  tenants  of  farms  leave,  and  the  in-coming 
tenants  enter  upon,  the  premises  at  different  periods  of 
the  year  :  as,  the  house  and  buildings  at  one  time,  the 
arable  land  at  another,  and  the  pasture  and  meadow- 
land  at  a  third.  Sometimes,  however,  the  general 
quitting  of  the  farm  takes  place  at  one  time  ;  and  there 
exists  the  privilege  for  the«  out-going  tenant  to  retian 
possession  of  the  land  upon  which  his  away -going  crops 
are  growing,  and  the  use  of  some  of  the  barns  and 
stables  for  the  purpose  of  threshing  and  conveying  them 
to  market.  This  privilege  is  occasionally  given  on  con- 
dition of  his  paying  the  rent  and  taxes  applicable  to  the 
premises  which  he  retains  ;  but,  prehaps,  more  com- 
monly without  any  such  stipulation.  The  in-coming 
tenant  has  also  the  privilege  of  entering  before  the  ex- 
piration of  the  existing  tenancy,  for  the  purpose  of 
ploughing  and  preparing  for  his  crops.  These  privileges 
of  partial  occupation  are  sometimes  expressly  given  by  ^ 
the  terms  of  the  lease  ; '  and,  where  that  is  not  the  case,  [ 

'  Exparte  Maundrell,  In  Be  Dark,  in  and  upon  the  farm  at  the  expir- 
3  Madd.  315,  316 ;  Buck,  83  ;  Earl  ation  of  the  term  at  a  valuatwn, 
of  St.  Germains  v.  WUlap,  3  B.  &  but  it  was  never  executed.  Be- 
C.  316 ;  Strickland  v.  MaxweU,  3  fore  the  expiration  of  the  term  the 
Cr.  &  M.  589.  An  owner  in  fee  of  landlord  died,  having  devised  the 
a  farm  entered  into  a  parol  agree-  farm  to  his  trustees  for  a  term  of 
meut  to  grant  a  lease  of  it  for  sev-  1,000  years  upon  trust  to  raise 
en  years,  and  the  tenant  entered  money  in  aid  of  his  personal  estate, 
into  possession.  The  lease  was  to  for  the  payment  of  his  debts,  fun- 
contain  a  covenant  by  the  landlord  eral  and  testamentary  expenses 
to  pay  the  tenant  for  his  property  and  legacies,  and  subject  thereto 


CHAP.  Ln.]  Eights  of.  1363 

frequently  may  be  supported  by  the  custom  of  the 
country.  The  proof  of  any  such  custom  lies  upon  the 
party  who  claims  under  it.'  If  the  terms  of  the  lease  or 
agreement  are  inconsistent  with  the  custom  it  will  ex- 
clude it."  But  so  far  as  such  terms  are  not  utterly  in- 
consistent with  the  custom  the  latter  will  prevail."  In 
one  case  it  was  held,  that  the  lease  must  in  express 
terms  exclude  the  custom."  But  that  case  went  too  far, 
and  it  is  clearly  sufficient  if  the  terms  of  the  lease  are 
inconsistent  with  the  custom.*  A  custom  that  the  tenant 
should  hold  over  for  half  a  year  after  the  expiration  of 
his  term  is  bad  ; '  but  a  custom  to  take  an  away-going 
crop,  and  house  the  same  in  the  barns  of  the  farm  for  a 
certain  time  after  he  has  quitted  possession  of  the  bulk 
of  the  farm,  is  good.'  Where  by  the  custom  of  the 
country,  or  by  the  terms  of  the  lease,  the  tenant  has  a 
right  to  retain  possession  of  any  part  of  the  demised 
premises  after  the  end  of  the  term,  ex.  gr. ,  a  right  to 
retain  the  barns  for  the  purpose  of  threshing  out  his 
crops,  &c.,  such  right  will  in  effect  operate  as  a  pro- 
longation of  the  term  as  to  such  part ;  and  therefore 

to  the  plaintiff  for  life,   with  re-  crop  of  the  tenant,  and  notified  the 

mainders  over.     On  the  expiration  landlord  thereof  and  the  landlord 

of  the  term  the  plaintiff  took  pos-  subsequently  settled  and  the  lease 

session  and  paid  the  Out-going  ten-  was  cancelled  and  possession  was 

ant  the  amount  of  the  valuation  of  surrendered,  it  was  held  that  the 

his  property  on  the  farm,  and  not  purchaser   was    not  thereby  pre- 

being  able  to  find  a  new  tenant,  eluded   from  entering  to  get  the 

claimed  to  be  paid  the  amount  out  crop.     Shaw  v.  Bowman,  91  Penn. 

of  the  testator's  estate.     It  was  held  St.  414. 

that  the  liability  to  pay  the  out-go-  '  Webb  v.  Plummer,  3  B.  &  Ad. 

ing  tenant  was  a  liability  attached  746  ;  Roberts  v.  Barker,  1  Or.  & 

to  the  land,  and  that  the  plaintiff,  M.  808  ;  Clark  v.  Eoystone,  13  M. 

being  in  receipt  of  the  rents  and  &  W.  752. 

profits,  was  the  landlord,  and  was  °  Holding  v.  Pigott,  7  Bing.  465 ; 

therefore  the  person  liable  to  pay  Hutton  v.   Warren,   1  M.   &  W. 

the  amount  of  the  valuation.    And,  466;  Faviell  v.  Gaskoin,  7  Exchq. 

that  the  plaintiff  had  no  claim  for  373  ;   Muncey  v.   Dennis,  1   H.  & 

the  money  against  the  testator's  N.  216. 

estate,  nor  against  the  remainder-  '  Senior    v.    Armytage,    Bart. , 

men.     Mansel  v.  Norton,  L.  J.  (48  Holt,  197. 

L.  T.  Rep.  (N.  S.)  654.)  "  Hutton  v.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W. 

i^Caldecott  v.   Smythies,  7  C.  &  476  ;  Sutton  v.  Temple,    12  M.  & 

P,  808.     In  Pennsylvania,  the  right  W.  63. 

of  an  out-going  tenant  to  the  way-  '  White  v.  Sayer,  Pabn.  311. 

going  crop  is  recognized,  and  it  is  '  Wigglesworth    v.   DaUison,    1 

held  that  he  may  sell  it,  as  he  may  Doug.   201 ;    1    Smith  L^   C.   453  ; 

any  other  personal  property  and  Beavan  v.   Delahay,  1  H.   Bl.   5  ; 

where  a  person  purchased   such  Boraston  v,  Green,  16  East,  71, 


1364  Out-Going  Tenants.  [§  558. 

during  that  period  the  landlord  may  distrain  thereon  ;' 
or  the  out-going  tenant,  or  his  assignees,  may  maintain 
trespass  ; '  or  defend  an  action  of  trespass  at  the  suit 
of  the  in-coming  tenant  ; "  or  defend  an  action  of  eject- 
ment at  the  suit  of  the  landlord  ;  but  he  should  confine 
his  defence  by  notice  to  the  particular  part ;  *  and  during 
such  period  the  out-going  tenant  cannot  remove  any  of 
the  straw,  &;c.,  which  he  has  covenanted  not  to  remove 
"  during  the  leased  term."  °  So,  where  there  is  a  right 
reserved  to  the  tenant  to  take  the  away-going  crop,  it 
operates  as  a  prolongation  of  the  term  on  which  such 
crop  grows,  and  the  possession  of  the  land  continues  in 
the  tenant  till  the  crop  is  or  might  be  cut  and  carried 
away."  He  also  retains  his  parliamentary  franchise  if 
the  part  held  over  is  of  sufficient  value.' 

Sec.  558.  Eight  to  crops.  &o.,  under  lease  or  custom.— 
When  the  lease  or  tenancy  of  a  farm  expiies  or  deter- 
mines otherwise  than  by  the  death  of  the  lessor,  the  ten- 
ant must  give  up  possession  of  the  whole  to  landlord 
or  his  assigns,  crops  and  everything  else,'  unless  there  be 
some  special  stipulation  to  the  contrary  in  the  leace,  or  some 
custom  of  the  country  for  the  tenant  to  hold  over  part 
of  the  demised  premises  or  take  some  of  the  crops.  If  the 
terms  of  the  lease  are  inconsistent  with  the  custom  they 
will  exclude  it:  and  in  such  case  the  tenant  must 
look  to  his  remedy  under  the  covenants  in  the  lease." 

But  where  the  custom  is  not  excluded  by  the 
terms  of  the  lease  the  out-going  tenant  may  maintain  an 
action  against  the  in-coming  tenant  for  the  value  of 
such  tillages,  manure,  &c.,  as  he  is  entitled  to  be  paid 
for  according  to  the  custom."    If  there  be  no  in-coming 

'  Beavan  v.  Delahay,  1  H.  Bl.  5  ;  '  Caldecott  v.  Smythies,  7  C.  & 

Knight  V.  Bennett,  4  Bing.  364.  P.     808  ;    Davies    v.     Connop,    1 

i*  Beaty  v.  Gibbons,  16  East,  116.  Price,  63. 

3  Griffiths  V.  Puleston,  13  M.  &  '  Earl  of  St.  Germains  v.  Willan, 

W.  858.  3  B.  &  C.  316  ;  In  Re  Dark,  3  Madd. 

^  Alcock  V.   WUshaw,  3  E.  &  E.  315  ;  Strickland  v.  Maxwell.  3  Cr. 

633.  &  M.  539  ;  Newson  v.  Smythies,  3 

5  Earl  of  St.  Germains  v.  Wil-  H.  &  N.  840  ;  Hyatt  v.  Griffiths,  17 

Ian,  3  B.  &  C.  316.  Q.  B.  505. 

*  Boraston    v.  Green,  16  East,  '"  Muncey  v.  Dennis,  1  H.  &  N. 

81 ;  Griffiths  v.  Puleston,  ante.  216. 

■>  Wythe's  Case,  1  Knapp  &  O.  53. 


CHAP.  Lii.J  Eight  to  Crops.  1365 

tenant  such  action  may  be  maintained  against  the  land- 
lord.' 

The  right  which  an  out-going  tenant  has  to  take  an 
away- going  crop — which  is  the  crop  sown  during  the 
last  year  of  his  tenancy,  but  not  ripe  until  after  the 
expiration  of  it — is  sometimes  given  to  him  by  the 
express  terms  of  the  lease  or  agreement,  and  sometimes 
by  the  custom  of  the  country :  such  custom,  or,  more 
properly  speaking,  usage,  has  been  held  to  be  reasonable 
and  valid,  and  to  apply  equally  to  tenants  by  oral  agree- 
ment or  by  writing,  or  even  by  deed.  Such  a  custom  is 
good  and  just,  and  for  the  benefit  and  encouragement  of 
agriculture;  for  that  it  is  but  reasonable,  that  he  who 
sows  should  reap  the  profit."  A  strictly  legal  custom, 
which  has  immemoriaUy  existed,  is  not  necessary ;  for  a 
common  usage  of  the  neighborhood  is  quite  sufficient  to 
confer  the  right,  in  the  absence  of  any  specific  agree- 
ment between  the  parties,  or  any  express  words  which 
would  exclude  the  custom  where  any  agreement  does 
exist ; '  but  the  custom  of  the  country  can  have  no  place 
where  the  off-going  tenant  holds  under  a  lease  expressly 
making  a  different  provision  in  respect  of  the  away- 
going  crop  ; '  or  where  he  continues  to  hold  over  after  the 
expiration  of  such  a  lease,  without  coming  to  any  fresh 
agreement  with  his  landlord,  by  which  he  must  be  taken 
to  hold  under  the  same  terms."  Where  the  lease  con- 
tains no  stipulations  as  to  the  mode  of  quitting,  the  off- 
going  tenant  is  entitled  to  his  away-going  crop  according 
to  the  custom,  even  though  the  terms  of  holding  may  be 
inconsistent  with  such  a  custom."  The  fact  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  usage  is  to  be  collected  not  only  from  what  is 
usually  done  in  cases  of  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  but 
from  the  usual  course  pursued  where  tenants  hold  under 
regular  leases.    The  principle  applies  equally  to  the  case 

'  FavieUv.  Gaskoin,  7  Exchq.273;  466  ;  Roberts  v.  Barker,  1  Cr.  &  M. 
Mousley  v.  Ludlam.  15  Jur.  1107.        808  ;  Clarke  v.  Roystone,  13  M.  & 

2  Wigglesworth   v.    Dallison,    1     W.  753. 

Doug.  301.  '  Boraston  v.  Green,  10  East,  71. 

3  Senior    v.    Armytage,     Bart.,         «  Holding  v.  Pigott,  7  Bing.  465 
Holt,  197.  Webb  v.  Plummer,  3  B.  &  Ad.  746 

«  Webb  V.  Plummer,  3  B.  &  Ad.     Hutton  v.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  466 
746  ;  Hutton  V.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W.     Muncey  v.  Dennis,  1  H.  &  N.  316 
II.— 34 


1366  OuT-Goma  Tenants.  [§  558. 

of  a  tfenancy  from  year  to  year  as  to  a  lease  for  a  longer 
term  with  respect  to  the  right  to  take  an  away -going  crop.' 

Where  the  out-going  tenant  is  entitled  to  take  an  away- 
going  crop,  he  may  avail  himself  of  that  right,  whether 
the  farm  revert  back  into  the  hands  of  his  landlord,"  or 
an  in-comiag  tenant  take  possession.'  An  agreement 
between  the  out-going  and  in-coming  tenants  with  respect 
to  crops  does  not  effect  any  existing  rights  of  the  land- 
lord.* If  it  refers  to  the  lease  the  lease  must  be  put  in.' 
By  a  clause  in  a  lease  it  was  agreed  that  the  tenant  should 
be  entitled  to  an  away-going  crop,  which  was  to  be  left 
for  the  landlord  or  his  in-coming  tenant  at  a  valuation  ; 
it  was  held,  that  this  clause  did  not  give  the  tenant  the 
right  of  possession  as  against  the  landlord,  after  the 
determination  of  the  tenancy,  but  that  the  tenant  at 
most  could  only  go  on  the  laud  for  the  purposes  of  an 
away-going  crop,  and  could  not  exclude  the  landlord. 
A  permission  by  a  landlord  to  an  out-going  tenant  to  sow 
more  than  by  the  custom  of  the  country  he  was  entitled 
to  on  quitting,  is  good  against  the  in-coming  tenant.' 

Where  an  out-going  tenant  has  no  right  to  an  away- 
goingcrop,  but  cuts  and  carries  it  away  after  the  expira- 
tion of  this  term,  an  action  of  trover  may  be  main- 
tained against  him  by  the  landlord,  although  the  crop 
was  sown  by  him  during  his  tenancy,  under  the  idea  that 
he  was  entitled  to  an  away-going  crop.'  It,  has,  how- 
ever, been  held,  that  trover  does  not  lie  by  an  in-coming 
tenant  to  recover  the  value  of  the  away-going  crops 
taken  by  the  off-going  tenant,  who  continued  to  hold  the 
land  as  tenant  from  year  to  year  after  the  expiration  of 
an  old  lease,  which  reserved  to  him  the  right,  after  the 
end  of  the  term,  "  to  fence  in  and  preserve  all  such  hard 
corn  as  should  be  sown  on  the  premises  the  winter-seed 
time  preceding,  so  as  the  same  exceeded  not  twenty-nine 
acres,  and  was  summer  fallowed  and  well  manured,  &c., 

'Onslow  V.   ,  16  Ves.  173;         "  Petrie  v.  Daniel,  3  Smith  R.  199 

Thorpe  v.  Eyre,  1  Ad.  &  El.  926.  «  Tanner  v.  Washbourne,  1  F.  & 

^  FavieU  v.  Gaskoin,7  Exchq.  273.  F.  330. 
Mousley  v.  Ludlam,  31  L.  J.  Q.  B.         «  Strickland  v.  Maxwell,  3  Cr.  & 

64;  15  Jut.  1107.  M.  539. 

'  Muncey  y.  Dennis,  1  H.  &  N.  '  Griffith  v.  Tombs,  7  C.  &  P.  810. 
216.  *  Davies  v.  Connop,  1  Price,  53. 


CHAP,  ui.]  Eight  to  Crops.  1367 

and  at  harvest  to  reap  and  carry  away  the  same  ; "  for 
neither  is  trover  the  proper  action  to  try  the  question  as 
to  the  right  to  the  land,  nor  does  the  proper  remedy  for 
any  mismanagement  of  the  land  during  the  former  time 
appertain  to  the  in-coming  tenant,  but  to  the  landlord." 
Where  there  was  an  agreement  between  an  out-going 
and  an  in-coming  tenant,  that  the  latter  should  buy  the 
hay,  &c.,  of  the  former  upon  the  farm,  and  that  the 
former  should  allow  to  the  latter  the  expenses  of  repairing 
the  gates  and  fences  of  the  farm,  and  that  the  value  of 
the  hay,  &c.,  and  of  repairs,  should  be  settled  by  third 
persons ;  it  was  held,  that  the  balance  settled  to  be 
due  to  the  out-going  tenant  for  his  hay,  &c.,  after 
deducting  the  value  of  the  repairs,  might  be 
recovered  by  him  under  a  common  count  for 
goods  sold  and  dehvered,  although  he  failed  upon  a 
special  count  on  the  agreement,  for  want  of  including  in 
it  that  part  of  the  agreement  which  related  to  the  valua- 
tion of  the  repairs.''  Where  A  agreed  with  B  to  let  him 
land  rent  free,  on  condition  that  A  should  have  a  moiety 
of  the  crops  ;  and  while  the  crop  was  on  the  ground  it 
was  appraised  for  both  parties ;  it  was  held,  that  A  might 
declare  in  indebitatus  assumpsit  for  a  moiety  of  the  value 
of  the  crop  sold  to  B,  without  stating  the  special  agree- 
ment :  as  the  special  agreement  was  executed  by  the 
appraisement,  and  the  action  arose  out  of  something  col- 
lateral to  it."  Where  the  plaintiff  gave  up  possession  of  a 
farm  to  the  defendant,  having  previously  sown  forty  acres 
of  it  with  wheat,  and  at  a  meeting  in  the  previous  month 
the  plaintiff  asked  the  defendant  if  he  would  take  the 
wheat  at  200Z.,  saying,  that  if  he  would  not,  he  should 
not  have  the  farm  ;  to  which  the  defendant  replied,  that 
he  would  take  the  wheat ;  and  being  asked  to  whom  the 
dead  stock  should  be  valued,  replied, "  to  me ; "  the  defend- 
ant afterwards  undertook  to  pay  for  the  wheat  and  dead 
stock  on  a  specified  day,  and  did  pay  T5Z.  on  account 
generally,  and  eventually  had  possession  of  the  farm,  the 
wheat,  and  the  dead  stock.     In  an  action  for  crops  bar- 

'  Boraston  v.  Green,  16  East,  71.         *  Poulter  v.   Killinbeck,   1  Bos. 
»  Leeds  v.  Burrows,  13  East,  1.         &  P.  397. 


1368  Out-Going  Tenants.  [§  558. 

gained  and  sold,  and  for  goods  sold  and  delivered,  it  was 
held,  1st,  that  the  contract  for  the  dead  stock  being 
distinct  from  the  contract  for  the  sale  of  the  wheat,  or 
the  giving  up  of  the  farm,  the  plaintiff  might  recover  for 
the  dead  stock  ;  2,  that  the  defendant  having  received 
the  wheat,  and  made  a  payment  on  account  of  it,  the 
plaintiff  might  also  recover  for  that.' 

A  contract  with  an  incoming  tenant  for  the  sale  of 
growing  crops,  connected  with  and  forming  part  of  a 
contract  for  taking  the  land  itself,  is  within  the  statute  of 
frauds ; '  but  in  one  case  it  was  intimated,  that  a  mere 
contract  between  out-going  and  in-coming  tenants  for 
such  a  sale  was  not,  because  the  contract  for  the  interest 
in  the  land  proceeded  from  the  landlord."  Where  the 
contract  refers  to  the  lease,  the  lease  must  be  put  in." 

'  Mayfield  v.   Wadsley,  3  B.   &         »  Mayfleld  v.  Wadsley,  ante. 
C.  357.  *  Tanner  v.   Washbourne,   1  F. 

^  Earl  of  Falmouth  v.  Thomas,      &  F.  330. 
1   Cr.  &  M.  89 ;    Harvey  v.  Grab- 
ham,  6  Ad.  &  El.  61. 


CHAP.  Lni.j 


Eight  of  Tenants  to. 


1369 


CHAPTER    LIIL 


EMBLEMENTS. 


Sec.  559.     Right  of  tenant  to. 

.  Sec.  659.  Right  of  tenant  to.—"  Emblements,"  as  a  legal 
term,  signifies  a  right  on  the  part  of  a  tenant  for  an  un- 
certain term,  which  has  terminated  without  fault  on 
his  part,  to  take  away  the  crops  growing  upon  the 
land,  although  the  estate  itself    has    ceased  to  exist. 


'WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  585.  The 
word  is  derived  from  the  French 
emblavence  de  bled,  which  means 
"corn  sprung  or  put  up  above 
ground,"  but  strictly  it  signifies 
"  the  growing  crops  of  sown  land," 
and  embraces  all  kinds  of  growing 
crops,  the  production  of  which  is 
aided  by  the  labor  of  the  tenant. 
Co.  Litt.  55,  b,  w.  1  ;  Latham  v.  At- 
wood,  Cro.  Car.  515.  Hops,  grow- 
ing out  of  old  roots,  are  held  to 
come  under  this  head,  because 
they  require  annual  cultivation ; 
but  grass,  apples,  grapes  and  fruit 
generally  that  grow  of  themselves, 
and  which  are  not  planted  annual- 
ly at  the  expense  of  the  tenant, 
do  not  come  under  this  head.  1 
Wms.  Executors,  631 ;  Co.  Litt.  55, 
b;  2  Blackstone's  Com.  123 ;  Com- 
yn's  Dig.  Biens  (G.  1).  Teazles  are 
held  to  be  subject  to  this  right,  and 
indeed  any  crop  that  requires  that 
the  labor  of  the  tenant  should  be 
expended  upon  it  for  its  produc- 
tion. Kingsbury  v.  Collins,  4 
Bing.  S02.  In  Henderson  v.  Card- 
well,  9  Baxt.  (Tenn.)  389.  A  ten- 
ant under  a  lease  for  an  indefinite 
period,  but  which  was  terminated 
September  1,  1873,  having  sowed  a 
crop  of  oats  in  November,  1873,  and 
harvested  it  in  June,  1873,  had 
plowed  in  the  stubble  in  the  lat- 
ter month,  and  the  crop  was  grow- 
ing when  he  left  in  November, 
1873.    It  was  held  that  he  could 


not  enter  afterward  and  harvest 
that  crop.  The  court  observed: 
"When  the  tenancy  is  of  uncer- 
tain duration  and  is  terminated  by 
the  landlord  after  the  crop  is  sown, 
but  before  it  is  severed  from  the 
freehold,  the  tenant  or  his  represen- 
tative shall  be  entitled  to  one  crop  of 
that  species  only  which  ordinarily 
repays  the  labor  by  which  it  is  pro- 
duced within  the  year  in  which 
that  labor  is  bestowed,  though  the 
crop  may  in  extraordinary  seasons 
be  delayed  beyond  that  period. 
But  he  is  not  entitled  to  all  the 
fruits  of  his  labor,  as  such  right 
might  be  extended  to  things  of  a 
more  permanent  nature,  such  as 
trees  or  more  crops  than  one,  since 
the  cultivator  very  often  looks  for 
a  compensation  for  his  capital  and 
labor  in  the  produce  of  succes- 
sive years.  Such  is  the  law,  as 
stated  in  Broom's  Leg.  Max.  236, 
394.  The  crop  claimed  in  this  case 
is  ordinarily  an  annual  crop,  but 
the  plaintiif  harvested  the  first 
year's  product  of  the  sowing,  and 
claims  a  second  year's  crop  of  the 
same  sowing.  True,  he  bestowed 
additional  labor  to  produce  this 
second  crop,  but  as  we  understand 
the  rule  as  above  stated,  it  goes  no 
farther  than  to  give  to  the  tenant 
the  benefit  of  the  law  of  emble- 
ments, so  as  to  secure  to  him  the 
benefit  of  the  annual  croj)  sown  by 
him  before  the  termination  of  his 


1370 


Emblements. 


[§  559. 


Those  only  are  entitled  to  emblements  who  have  an  un- 


term.  If  tliis  second  crop  of  oats 
had  grown  without  labor  by  the 
plaintiff,  he  could  not  have  been 
entitled  to  it  after  the  expiration 
of  his  term,  as  he  had  already  har- 
vested the  crop  sown  by  him,  and 
the  additional  labor  bestowed  upon 
it  does  not  change  the  result.  The 
crop  claimed  matured  in  1874,  was 
sown  in  November,  1873.  Plow- 
ing in  the  stubble,  we  think,  is 
not  equivalent  to  sowing  another 
crop,  though  it  produce  the  same 
result.  The  policy  of  the  rule  is 
the  encouragement  of  the  tenant 
in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  and 
is  satisfied  by  giving  him,  after  the 
termination  of  his  term,  the  prod- 
uce of  his  annual  crop  sown  by 
him."  In  Reiff  v.  Eeiff,  64  Penn. 
St.  134,  the  question  of  emblements 
arose  as  between  tenant  for  life  and 
remainderman,  in  respect  to  grass. 
The  court  said :  "At  the  time  of 
her  death  there  was  standing  vm- 
cut  on  the  premises  a  quantity  of 
mixed  timothy  and  clover  grass, 
a  quantity  of  grass,  part  meadow 
and  part  timothy,  and  a  quantity 
of  timothy  exclusively.  The  ques- 
tion was,  was  this  grass  emble- 
ments, belonging  to  the  tenants  of 
the  deceased  owner  of  the  Ufe-es- 
tate?  The  vegetable  chattels 
called  emblements  are  the  corn  and 
other  growth  of  the  earth  which 
are  produced  annually,  not  spon- 
taneously but  by  labor  and  indus- 
try and  thence  are  called  fruotiis 
industriales.  The  growing  crop 
of  grass,  even  if  grown  from  seed, 
and  though  ready  to  be  cut  for 
hay,  cannot  be  taken  as  emble- 
ments ;  because  as  it  is  said  the 
improvement  is  not  distinguisha- 
ble from  what  is  natural  product, 
although  it  may  be  increased  by 
cultivation  (1  Williams  on  Execu- 
tors, 670,  673)."  The  court  below 
said:  "It  may  be  admitted,  that 
Indian  corn,  wheat,  rye,  oats, 
buckwheat  and  potatoes,  and  even 
hemp,  Hungarian  grass,  flax  and 
millet  are  included  among  the  em- 
blements that  do  not  pass  to  the 
remainderman,  but  these  are  aU 
annual  products ;  when  cut  the 
root  dies."  In  Graves  v.  Weld,  5 
B.  &  Ad.  105,  a  tenant  for  a  term 
determinable  upon  a  life,  sowed 
the  land  in  spring,  first  with  bar- 


ley and  soon  after  with  clover. 
The  life  expu-ed  in  the  following 
summer.  In  the  autumn  the  ten- 
ant mowed  the  barley,  together 
with  a  Uttle  of  the  clover  plant 
which  had  sprung  up.  ■  The  clover 
so  taken  made  the"  barley  straw 
more  valuable  by  being  mixed 
with  it,  but  the  increase  of  the 
value  did  not  compensate  for  the 
expense  of  cultivating  the  clover, 
and  a  farmer  would  not  be  repaid 
such  expense  in  the  autumn  of  the 
year  in  which  it  was  sown.  The 
reversioner  came  into  possession  in 
the  winter,  and  took  two  crops  of 
the  same  clover  after  more  then  a 
year  had  elapsed  from  the  sowing. 
Held,  that  the  tenant  was  not  en- 
titled to  emblements  of  either  of 
these  two  crops ;  first,  because 
emblements  can  be  claimed  only 
in  a  crop  of  a  species  which  ordi- 
narily repays  the  labor  by  which  it 
is  produced  within  the  year  in 
which  that  labor  is  bestowed  ;  sec- 
ond, even  if  the  tenant  was  enti- 
tled to  one  crop  of  the  vegetable 
growing  at  the  time  of  the  cesser 
of  his  interest,  this  had  already 
been  taken  by  him  at  the  time  of 
cutting  the  barley.  Crude  turpen- 
tine which  has  formed  on  the  body 
of  the  tree,  and  usually  known  as 
'  scrape,'  is  personal  property,  and 
belongs  to  the  person  who  has  law- 
fully produced  it  by  cultivation. 
State  V.  Moore,  11  Ired.  (N.  C.)  70. 
It  it  an  annual  product  of  labor 
and  industry,  and  although  it  ad- 
heres to  the  body  of  the  tree  it  is  not 
a  part  of  the  realty.  The' turpen- 
tine crop  may  be  properly  classed 
-with,  fruetus  industriales,  for  it  is 
not  the  spontaneous  product  of  the 
trees,  but  requires  annual  labor 
and  cultivation.  Upon  a  similar 
principle,  hops  which  spring  from 
old  roots  have  long  been  regarded 
as  emblements.  A  lessee  of  tur- 
pentine trees,  even  after  the  ex- 
piration of  his  lease,  has  the  right 
of  '  entry,  egrees  and  regress '  to . 
remove  the  '  away-going  crops ' 
which  he  has  produced  by  his  la- 
bor, provided  he  does  so  within 
reasonable  time."  Lewis  v.  Mc- 
Natt,  65  N.  C.  63.  Eeeder  v.  Sayre, 
70  N.  Y.  180 ;  26  Am.  Rep.  567.  In 
Stewart  v.  Doughty,  9  Johns.  (N.  Y.) 
108,  Kent,  C.  J.,  said  ;  "  The  com- 


CHAP.  Lm.] 


Eight  of  Tenant  to. 


1371' 


certain  estate  or  interest  in  land,  which  is  determined 
either  by  the  act  of  the  law  or  of  God  between  the  period 
of  sowing  and  of  the  severance  of  the  crop,'  without 
any  fault  on  the  part  of  the  tenant.'  Tenants  at  will,"  for 
life,'  by  dower,'  or,  indeed,  any  tenants  who  hold  by  an 
indefinite  and  uncertain  tenure,  come  within  the  rule, 
and  are  entitled  to  emblements."  A  tenant  for  years, 
whose  term  depends  upon  a  certainty,  is  not  entitled  to 
emblements,  for  it  is  his  folly  to  sow  when  he  knows 
that  his  term  wiU  expire  before  he  can  reap.'    Emble- 


mon  law  has  established  a  distinc- 
tion in  respect  to  this  very  subject 
of  emblements,  between  the  right 
to  emblements  and  the  costs  of 
ploughing  and  manuring  the 
groimd,  so  that  the  determination 
of  an  estate  at  will  would  give  to 
the  lessee  his  emblements,  but  not 
any  compensation  for  these  im- 
provements. He  might  be  ousted  ■ 
of  the  possession  before  the  crop 
was  in  the  ground,  and  wholly 
lose  the  expense  of  ploughing  and 
manuring  the  land,  though  if  he 
was  ousted  afterward  he  would  be 
entitled  to  the  emblements.  *  * 
*  *  Compensation  for  preparing 
the  ground  for  seed  is  not  an  in- 
demnity for  the  loss  of  the  crop, 
which  includes  the  loss  of  the  seed, 
the  labor  of  sowing  and  nursing  it, 
and  the  hopes,  to  the  laborer  and 
his  family,  of  a  fruitful  harvest." 
Price  V.  Rckett,  21  Ala.  (N.  S.)741. 

'  Sheppard's  Touch.  244,  n. 

'Oland'sCase,  5  W.  R.  116 ;  Johns 
V.  Whitley,  3  Wils.  137 ;  Bulwer 
v.  Bulwer,  3  B.  &  Ad.  470 ;  Davis 
V.  Eyton,  7  Bing.  154 ;  Nicholas  v. 
Simonds,  3  Roll.  468. 

'Davis  V.  Thompson,  13  Me.  207 ; 
Davis  V.  Brocklebank,  9  N.  H.  73  ; 
Shelbume  v.  Jones,  80  Me.  70. 

*Co.  Litt.  55,  b;  Bulwer  v.  Bul- 
wer, ante ;  Knevett  v.  Poole,  Cro. 
Eliz.  463. 

'  Fisher  v.  Forbes,  9  Vin.  Abr. 
tit.  Emblements,  pi.  83 ;  3  Inst.  80. 

«WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  587,  et  seq. 

'Harris  v.  Carson,  7  Leagh.  (Va.) 
632;  Whitmarsh  v.  Cutting,  10 
John.  (N.  Y.)  360 ;  Mason  v.  Mey- 
ers, 3  Bob.  (Va.)  606 ;  Bain  v.  Clark, 
10  John.  (N.  Y.)  424;  HoweU  v. 
Schenck,  34  N.  J.  L.  89.  If  a  ten- 
ant has  a  term  which  may  continue 
until  the  seed  which  he  sows  may 


grow  and  ripen  for  harvest  he  may 
enter  and  reap  the  crop,  though 
his  estate,  in  the  mean  time,  has 
been  determined  by  the  act  of  God 
or  by  act  of  law ;  but  if  his  estate 
is  determined  between  seed  and 
harvest  time  by  his  own  act  the 
crop  passes  to  the  landlord.  De- 
bow  V.  Colfax,  10  N.  J.  L.  128.  By 
the  custom  of  Pennsylvania,  New 
Jersey,  and  Delaware,  a  lessee  for 
a  term  certain  is  entitled  to  the 
way-going  crop  (i.  e.  the  grain 
sown  in  the  autumn,  to  l)e  reaped 
the  next  harvest),  though  such 
right  be  not  recognized  in  the  con- 
tract ;  and  he  may  enter  to  gather 
it,  or  may  maintain  trespass  for  it 
against  the  lessor  or  his  vendee, 
after  the  expiration  of  the  lease. 
Stultz  V.  Dickey,  5  Binn.  (Penn.) 
385  ;  Diflfeedorffer  V.  Jones,  id.  289  ; 
Comfort  V.  Duncan,  1  Miles  (Penn.) 
231 ;  Biggs  v.  Brown,  3  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  14 ;  Demi  v.  Bossier,  1 
Penn.  234  ;  Van  Doren  v.  Everitt, 
5  N.  J.  L.  460  ;  Templeman  v.  Bid- 
die,  1  Harr.  (Del.)  532  ;  Clark  v. 
Harvey,  54  Penn.  St.  142.  Where 
the  lease  is  for  one  year,  to  wit, 
from  1st  April  to  1st  April,  a  ten- 
ant is  not  entitled  to  the  crop  of 
grain  sown  in  the  spring,  and  cut 
after  the  term  has  expired,  whether 
the  lease  is  upon  a  pecuniary  rent 
or  upon  shares.     Demi  v.  Bossier, 

1  Penn.  224.  See  also,  Templeman 
V.  Biddle,  1  Harr.  (Del.)  523.  And 
though  the  lessor's  vendee  obtains 
possession  on  a  judgment  in  eject- 
ment, obtained  by  the  lessor  against 
a  former  tenant,  the  lessee's  right 
to  the  crop  continues,  and  the  rec- 
ord of  the  ejectment  is  not  a  justi- 
fication of  the  vendee's  act  in  tak- 
ing off  the  crop.     Biggs  v.  Brown, 

2  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  14.    The  custom 


13Y2  Emblements.  [§  659. . 

ments  are  distinct  from  the  real  estate  in  the  land,  and 
subject  to  many,  though  not  all,  the  incidents  attend- 
ing personal  chatties :  thus  they  were  devisable  by  tes- 
tament before  the  statute  of  wiUs,  and  at  the  death  of 
the  owner  they  vest  in  his  executor,  and  not  his  heir, 
and  by  11  Geo.  2,  c.  19,  ss.  8,  9,  they  may  be  distrained 
for  rent  in  arrear.  Where  there  is  a  right  to  take 
emblements,  they  belong  either  to  the  tenant  himself, 
whose  estate  is  determined  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give 
him  the  right ;  to  his  grantee  or  devisee,  where  he  has 
granted  or  devised  them ;  or  to  his  personal  represen- 
tatives, where  the  right  arises  upon  the  death  of  a  tenant 
who  has  made  no  disposition  respecting  them.' 

In  most,  if  not  in  aU  the  States,  the  tenant's  right  to 
emblements  is  largely  regulated  by  statute,  and  that 
should  be  consulted  for  any  change  in  the  common  law 
rule .  Where  there  is  a  right  to  emblements,  ingress,  egress 
and  regress  are  allowed  by  law  to  enable  the  party  to  enter, 
cut    and    carry  them  away  after  the  estate  is  deter- 


which  allows  a  tenant  to  enter  af-  sell  the  demised  premises  during 
ter  his  term  and  reap  the  way-go-  the  term,  three  months'  notice  to 
ing  crop,  does  not  apply  to  a  spring  quit  should  be  given,  and  no  rent 
crop  of  oats  sown  without  consent  should  be  paid  for  the  year,  and 
of  ttie  landlord  in  March,  when  the  the  lessee,  on  entering,  received 
term  expires  in  AprU.  Howell  v.  the  crop  of  winter  grain  that  had 
Schenck,  34  N.  J.  L.  89.  In  the  been  sown  by  a  former  tenant; 
lease  of  a  farm  for  six  years,  if  it  and,  the  premises  being  sold,  the 
be  agreed  that  either  party  may  lessee  removed,  leaving  in  the 
put  an  end  to  the  lease,  on  giving  ground  a  crop  which  he  had  sown, 
to  the  other  six  months'  notice ;  — Held,  that  he  was  entitled  to 
but  if  the  lessor  give  notice  to  the  this  crop  as  emblements,  whether 
lessee  to  quit,  he  shall  allow  the  he  received  three  months'  notice 
latter  for  preparing  the  ground  for  to  quit,  or  not.  Comfort  v.  Dun- 
seed,  and  for  any  other  extra  labor,  can,  1  Miles  (Penn.)  229.  A  lessee 
&c.;  yet  if  the  lessor  determine  of  land  encumbered  by  a  judgment 
the  tenancy,  by  giving  notice  to  older  than  the  lease  is  entitied  to 
quit,  after  the  lessee  has  sowed  the  the  way-going  crop  in  preference 
ground,  the  lessee  is  entitled  to  to  a  purchaser  at  sheriflE's  sale,  un- 
emblements.  Stewart  v.  Doughty,  der  the  judgment.  Adams  v.  Mc- 
9  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  108.  The  way-  Kessan,  53  Penn.  St.  81 ;  Salladev. 
going  crop  includes  as  well  the  James,  6  id.  144.  But  see  Bittin- 
straw  as  the  grain,  which  the  ten-  ger  v.  Baker,  29  id.  66.  But  if  a 
ant  may  remove  and  dispose  of  as  husband  lease  lands  of  his  wife, 
he  pleases,  being  subject  only  to  and,  before  the  expiration  of  the 
the  terms  of  his  contract,  and  not  term,  she  procure  a  divorce  a  vin- 
to  any  supposed  custom  of  the  culo,  &c. ,  the  lessee  shall  hold  the 
countiy  on  the  subject.  Craig  v.  emblements.  Gould  v.  Webster,  1 
Dale,  IW.&S.  (Penn.)  509.  Where  Tyler  (Vt.)  409. 
a  lease  was  for  five  years,  with  a  '  2  -Blackstone's  Com.  440. 
stipulation  that  if  the  lessor  should 


CHAP.  Lffl.]  Right  of  Tenant  to.  1373 

mined : '  so  if  a  party  who  is  entitled  to  emblements 
grants  them  to  another,  the  grantee  may  cut  and  take 
them  away  after  the  death  of  the  grantor."  The  right 
to  emblements  does  not,  however,  give  a  title  to  the 
exclusive  occupation  of  the  land  ;  therefore  it  seems  that 
if  the  executors  occupy  tiU  the  corn  or  other  produce  is 
ripe,  the  landlord  may  maintain  an  action  for  the  use 
and  occupation  of  the  land.' 

>  Co.   Litt.    56,    a ;  Hayling  v.  "  Shep.  Touch.  244. 

Okey,    8    Exchq.   531;     1  Wms.  ^  Chamb.   L.   &  T.   340;    Plow- 

Exors.  689  (5th  ed.) ;  Smith  L.  &  den's  Queries,  No.  339 ;  1  Wms. 

T.  349  (3d  ed.).  Exors.  640, 


1374  Forcible  Entry  and  Detainer.         [§  560. 


CHAPTER  LIV. 

FOKCIBLE  BUSPTET  AND  DETAIKBR. 

Sec.  560.  What  is. — Nature  and  punishment  of  the  offence  by  in- 
dictment. 

Sec.  561.  Punishment  by  action. 

Sec.  562.  Punishment  by  justices. 

Sec.  563.  Restriction  by  the  Queen's  Bench. 

Sec.  564.  5  Ric.  2,  c.  3. 

Sec.  565.  Riot. 

Sec.  566.  What  is  a  forcible  entry. 

Sec.  567.  By  whom  may  be  made. 

Sec.  568.  What  is  a  forcible  detainer. 

Sec.  560.  What  is. — Nature  and  punishment  of  the  offence 
by  indictment.— Forcible  entry  and  detainer  is  the  violent 
taking  or  keeping  possession  of  lands  and  tenements,  with 
menaces,  force  and  arms,  and  without  the  authority  of 
the  law.'  This  was  formerly  permitted,  under  certain 
circumstances,  where  a  person  had  been  disseized  or  put 
out  of  possession ; '  but  being  prejudicial  to  the  pubUc 
peace  it  was  found  necessary  to  restain  the  use  of  such 
violent  methods."  Although  a  man  may  forcibly  defend 
the  possession  of  his  house  against  such  as  threaten  to 
make  an  unlawful  entry,  he  cannot  lawfully  do  the  same 
in  defence  of  his  close.'  Where  there  has  been  a  for- 
cible entry  made  into  a  freehold,  it  is  punishable  by  5 
Eich.  2,  st.  1,  c.  8,  with  imprisonment  and  ransom. 
Though  the  statute  mentions  entry  only,  if  expulsion  is 
laid    in    the   indictment    and    proved,   the  prosecutor 

1  See  Cole  Ejec.  Chap.  74 ;  Arch.  « 5  rjc.  2,  st.  1,  c.  8 ;  15  Ric.  3,  c. 

PI.  &  Ev.  C.  C.  736-740  (15th  ed.) ;  2  ;  8  Hen.  6,  c.  9  ;  31  Ehz.  c.  11 ; 

1   Russ.   on  Crimes,   431-434  (4th  31  Jac.  1,  c.  15  ;  3  Chit.  Stat.  154- 

ed.) ;  4  Blac.  Com.  148.  157 ;   1  Rues,   on  Crimes,   Ch.  39. 

■^  1  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  s.  1 ;  1  Russ.  *  Rex  v.   Bishop  of    Bangor,    1 

on  Crimes,  431  (4th  ed.).  Russ.   on  Crimes,  388  (2/),  4th  ed. 


CHAP.  Liv.]  What  is.  1375 

may  obtain  restitution ; '  but  no  restitution  can  be 
awarded  if  the  defendant  has  been  permitted  to  remain 
quietly  in  possession  for  three  years  previously  to  the 
finding  of  the  indictment.'  The  indicment  for  forcible 
entry  into  leashojd  premises  is  founded  on  1  Jac.  21.  c. 
15  ;  for  a  forcible  detainer,  on  8  Hen.  6,  c.  9,  or  21  Jac.  1, 
c.  15.  An  indicment  lies  also  at  command  law  for  a  for- 
cible entry ; '  but  ill  order  to  maintain  either  an  indict- 
ment or  a  process  for  a  forcible  entry,  either  at  common 
law  or  upon  the  statute  in  force  in  the  several  States, 
there  must  either  be  actual  violence  or  circumstances 
tending  to  excite  fear  of  such  violence,  either  to  his 
person,  goods,  buildings  or  inclosures.*  But,  if  possession 
is  obtained  surreptitiously,  and  maintained  by  force,  the 
entry  will  be  regarded  as  forcible  ; '  so  if  the  detainer  is 
riotous.'  No  expulsion  or  detainer  need  be  proved  under 
an  indictment  for  a  forcible  entry  merely  at  common  law,' 
because  no  restitution  can  be  awarded  ; '  but  an  entry 
with  such  force  and  violence  as  exceeds  a  mere  trespass 
is  sufficient ; '  but  an  indictment  for  a  forcible  entry  can- 
not be  supported  without  some  evidence  of  actual  force 
or  threats  and  appearance  of  ill  usage  ; '°  and  a  simple 
trespass  upon  premises,  without  menaces  or  other  cir- 
cumstances of  force  or  terror,  is  insufficient."  The  ten- 
ement in  which  the  force  was  made  must  be  described 
with    convenient  certainty ;    and  the  indictment  must 

'  1  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  s.  4r.  tainer.    Watson  v.    Whitney,    33 

"  8  Hen.  6,  c.  9,  s.  7 ;  31  Eliz.  c.  Cal.  375.     So  where  possession  is 

11 ;  Cole  Ejec.  688.  obtained  and  the  party  refuses  to 

'Rex  V.  Baker,  3  Burr.  1731.  leave  unless  put  out  by  force,  but 

*  Hopkins  v.  Halloway,  3  Sneed.  not  where  he  refuses  to  leave  until 

(Tenn.)  11 ;  Butts  v.  Voorhees,  13  put  out  by  law.     Hodgkins  v.  Jor- 

N.  J.  L.  13 ;  McMinn  v.  Bhss,   31  don,  39  Cal.  577. 

Cal.  133;  State  v.  PoUok,  4  Ired.  'PuUen  v.  Bonney,  4  N.   J.   L. 

(N.  C.)  L.  305  ;  Holmes  v.   HaUo-  135  ;  Cruiser  v.  State,   18  id.  306. 

way,  31  Tex.  658.  *  Rex  v.  Wilson,  7.  T.  R.  357. 

'Burtv.   State,  Treadw.  (S.   C.)  'State  v.  Pollok,  4  Ired.  (X  C.) 

Const.    489 ;  Botts  v.   Armstrong,  L.  305. 

8  Port.  (Ala.)  57.  '"State  v.  CargiU,  3  Brev.  (S.  C.) 

« Frazer  v.  Hanlon,   5  Cal.  156 ;  445  ;  Curry  v.  Hendry,  46  Ga.  631. 

O'Callaghan  v.  Booth,  6   id.   63;  "Foster  v.  Kelsey,  36  Vt.  199; 

Harrow  v.  Baker,  3  Greene  (Iowa)  Merrill  v.   Forbes,   33    Cal.     379 ; 

301.    Where  a  band  of  armed  men  People  v.  Smith,  S4  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 

entered  an  inclosure  and  began  to  16  ;  Greer  v.  Wroe,  1  Sneed.  (Term.) 

build  a  house  and  refused  to  yield  346.     But  in  Burt  v.  State,  3  Brev. 

possession,  and  make  a  show  of  (S.  C.)  143,  an  unlawful  entry  was 

force,  it  is  forcible  entry  and  de-  held  sufficient. 


1376  Forcible  Entry  and  Detainer.         [§  561. 

set  forth,  that  the  defendant  actually  entered  and  ousted 
the  party  grieved,  and  continued  his  possession  at  the 
time  of  finding  the  indictment ;  otherwise  he  cannot 
have  restitution,  because  it  does  not  appear  that  he  needs 
it.'  If,  however,  a  man's  wife,  children  or  servants 
continue  in  the  house,  or  upon  the  land,  he  is  not 
ousted  of  his  possession ;  but  his  cattle  being  upon  the 
grounds  do  not  preserve  his  possession.'  A  repugnancy 
in  setting  forth  the  offence  in  an  indictment  upon  any 
of  the  statutes  is  an  incurable  fault.  °  An  indictment 
for  forcible  entry  will  be  quashed  if  it  does  not  set 
forth  that  the  party  was  seized  or  disseized,  or  what 
estate  he  had  in  the  tenement ;  for  if  he  had  only  a  term 
for  years,  then  the  entry  must  be  laid  into  the  freehold 
of  A  in  the  possession  of  B.'  Upon  the  finding  by  the 
grand  jury  of  the  indictment,  the  judge  has  a  discretion 
to  refuse  to  award  restitution.* 

Sec.  561.  Punishmentbyaction.— BySHen.  6,  c.  9,  s.  6,  if 
any  person  be  put  out,  or  disseized  of  any  lands  or  tene- 
ments in  a  forcible  manner,  or  put  out  peaceably,  and 
after  holding  out  with  strong  hand,  the  party  grieved 
shall  have  a  writ  of  trespass  against  the  disseizor  ;  and 
if  he  recovers,  he  shaU  have  treble  damages,  and  the 
defendant  moreover  shall  make  fine  and  ransom  to  the 
king.  This  statute  applies  only  to  a  person  having  the 
freehold  :°  and  he  shall  recover  as  well  for  the  mesne  oc-, 
cupation  as  for  the  first  entry  :  and  although  he  shall 
recover  treble  damages,  yet  he  shall  recover  costs,  for  the 
word  "  damages  "  includes  costs  of  suit.' 

'  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  ss.  37,  41.  force  or  violence  is  shown  upon 

^  Dalt.  c.  133.  the  face    of    the    indictment    to 

^  1  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  s.  39.  make  it  appear  to  be  an  actual 

^  Reg.   V.  Bowser,  8  Dowl.  128.  force  indictable.    Nor  is  any  jiot 

In    Eegina    v.   Griffith,   et  al.,  3  charged  or  any  unlawful  assem- 

Salk.  199,  the  court  say  that  in.  an  bly."     Aston,    J.,    said:     "The 

indictment  under  the  stat.  H.  8,  true  rule  is,  that  it  ought  to  ap- 

the  word  seizin  is  a  word  of  art,  pear  upon  the  face  of  the  indict- 

and  therefore  does  not  have  the  ment  to  be  an  indictable  oflEence." 

same  effect  as  was  given  it  in  a  ^  Reg.  v.  Harland,  8  Ad.  &  El. 

case    ia    Paph.    205,   which   was  826. 

predicated  upon  the  stat.  21  Jac.  *  Cole  v.  Eagle,  8  B.  &  C.  409  ; 

chap.  15.    In  Eex  v.  Bake,  8  Burr.  AUen  v.  England,  3  F.  &  E.  49. 

1731,  Yates,  J.,  said:  "Here  no  '  Dalt.  c.  129. 


CHAP.  Liv.]       Punishment  by  Justices.  1377 

Sec.  562.  Punishment  by  justices. —By  8  Hen.  6,  c.  9, 
for  a  more  speedy  remedy,  the  party  grieved  may  com- 
plain to  any  one  justice,  or  to  a  mayor,  sheriff  or  bailiff, 
within  their  liberties.  Concerning  which  power  of  the 
justice,  it  is  enacted  as  follows  : — ^After  complaint  made 
to  such  justice,  by  the  party  grieved,  of  a  forcible  entry 
made  into  lands,  tenements  or  other  possessions,  or 
forcibly  holding  thereof,  he  shall,  within  a  convenient 
time,  at  the  costs  of  the  party  grieved  (without  any 
examining  or  standing  upon  the  right  or  title  of  either 
party),  take  sufficient  power  of  the  county,  and  go  to 
the  place  where  the  force  is  made.'  AH  people  of  the 
county,  as  well  the  sheriff  as  others,  shall  be  attendant 
on  the  justices,  to  arrest  the  offenders,  on  pain  of  impris- 
onment and  fine  to  the  queen  :  and  if  the  doors  be  shut, 
and  they  within  the  house  shall  deny  the  justice  to  enter, 
it  seems  he  may  break  open  the  house  to  remove  the 
force  :'  if,  after  the  entry  made,  the  justice  "shaU  find 
such  force,  he  shall  cause  the  offenders  to  be  arrested  ; " 
and  the  offenders  being  arrested,  they  shall  be  put  in  the 
next  jail,  there  to  abide  convict  by  the  record  of  the  same 
justice,  until  they  have  made  fine  and  ransom  to  the 
queen. °  The  justice  ought  to  "make  a  record  of  such 
force  by  him  viewed  ; "  which  record  shall  be  a  sufficient 
conviction  of  the  offenders,  and  the  parties  shaU  not  be 
allowed  to  traverse  it.  This  record,  being  made  out  of 
the  sessions,  by  a  particular  justice,  may  be  kept  by  him ; 
or  he  may  make  it  indented,  and  certify  the  one  part 
into  the  Queen's  Bench,  or  leave  it  with  the  clerk  of  the 
peace ;  and  the  other  part  he  may  keep  himself.  For 
this  view  of  the  force  by  the  justice,  being  a  judge  of 
record,  makes  his  record  thereof,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
law,  as  strong  and  effectual  as  if  the  offenders  had  con- 
fessed the  force  before  him ;  and  as  far  as  regards  the 
restraining  of  traverse,  more  effectual  than  if  the  force 
had  been  found  by  a  jury,  upon  the  evidence  of  others. 
A  conviction  for  a  forcible  detainer  must  show  on  the 
face  of  it  an  unlawful  entry,  as  well  as  a  forcible  detainer : 

'  Dalt.  c.  44 ;  1  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.         ^  Dalt.  c.  44. 
66,  s.  8.  8 15  Ric.  2,  c.  3. 


1378  Forcible  Entry  and  Detainee.         [§  563. 

a  conviction  on  the  view  merely  of  the  justices,  without 
any  evidence  of  an  unlawful  entry,  is  bad  even  though 
information  and  complaint  of  an  unlawful  expulsion  be 
stated."  An  inquisition  taken  under  the  8  Hen.  6,  c.  9, 
should  set  forth  the  estate  possessed  by  the  party  in  the 
property.  °  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  holding  over  by  a 
termor  after  the  expiration  of  his  term  is  constructively 
an  unlawful  entry."  The  court  will  not  compel  magis- 
trates to  hear  a  complaint  and  act  summarily  linder  the 
statutes.* 

Sec.  563.  Eestitution  by  the  Queen's  Bench.  —  Although 
regularly  the  justices  only  who  were  present  at  the 
inquiry,  and  when  the  indictment  was  found,  ought  to 
award  restitution  ;  yet  if  the  record  of  the  presentment 
or  indictment  is  certified  by  the  justice  or  justices  into 
the  Queen's  Bench,  or  the  same  presentment  or  indict- 
ment be  removed  or  certified  thither  by  certiorari,  the 
justices  of  that  court  may  award  a  writ  of  restitution  -to 
the  sheriff,  to  restore  possession  to  the  party  expelled ; 
for  the  justices  of  the  Queen's  Bench  have  a  supreme 
authority  in  all  cases  of  the  crown.'  Also  where,  upon 
removal  of  the  proceedings  into  the  Queen's  Bench,  the 
conviction  shall  be  quashed,  the  court  will  order  restitu- 
tion to  the  party  injured.  Where  a  conviction  of  for- 
cible entry  was  quashed  for  the  uncertainty  of  "mes- 
suage or  tenement,"  but  the  restitution  was  opposed,  on 
an  affidavit  that  the  party's  title  (which  was  by  lease) 
was  expired  since  the  conviction ;  the  court  said,  they 
had  no  discretionary  power  in  this  case,  but  were  bound 
to  award  restitution  on  quashing  the  conviction.' 

Sec.  564.  5E.ie.  2.C.  3.— Bythis  statute  it  was  enacted, 
"And  also  the  king  defendeth  that  none  from  hence- 
forth make  entry  into  any  lands  and  tenements,  but  in 
case  where  entry  is  given  by  the  law ;  and  in  such  case, 
not  with  strong  hand,  nor  with  multitude  of  people,  but 

'  Rex  V.   Wilson,  1  Ad.   &  El.  ^  Ex  parte  Davy,  3  Dowl.  N.  S. 

637 ;  3  id.  817.  24. 

*  Reg.  V.  Bowser,  8  Dowl.  138.  'Dalt.  c.  44. 

^  Rex  V.  Oakley,  4  B.  &  Ad.  307.  « Rex  v.  Jones,  1  Stra.  474. 


CHAP.  LIV.]  ElOT.  1379 

only  with  peaceable  and  easy  manner  ;  and  if  any  man 
from  henceforth  do  to  the  contrary,  and  thereof  be  duly 
convict,  he  shall  be  punished  by  imprisonment  of  his 
body,  and  thereof  ransomed  at  the  king's  will."  By  stat. 
21  Jac.  1,  c.  15,  authority  was  conferred  upon  those  who 
by  previous  statutes  were  empowered  to  order  restitution 
in  case  of  a  forcible  entry  and  detainer  of  freeholds,  to 
order  like  restitution  in  case  of  tenants  for  years,  &c. 

Sec.  565.  Biot.— If  a  forcible  entry  or  detainer  shall 
be  made  by  three  persons  or  more,  it  is  also  a  riot,  and 
may  be  proceeded  against  as  such,  if  no  inquiry  has 
before  been  made  of  the  force.' 

Sec.  566.  What  is  a  forcible  entry.— In  order  to  make 
the  entry  forcible,  it  must  be  accompanied  with  some 
circumstances  of  actual  violence  or  terror  ;  and  an  entry, 
which  has  no  other  force  than  such  as  is  implied  in 
every  trespass,  is  not  within  these  statutes."  With  re- 
spect to  violence,  an  entry  may  be  forcible,  not  only  in 
respect  of  a  violence  actually  done  to  the  person  of  a 
man, — as  by  beating  him  if  he  refuses  to  relinquish  his 
possession, — ^but  also  in  respect  of  any  other  kind  of 
violence  in  the  manner  of  the  entry, — as  by  breaking 
open  the  doors  of  a  house,  whether  any  person  is  in  it  or 
not,  especially  if  it  is  a  dweUing-house  :  and  perhaps, 
also,  by  an  act  of  outrage  after  the  entry, — as  by  carry- 
ing away  the  party's  goods.  But  an  entry  is  not  forcible 
by  the  bare  lifting  up  a  latch,  or  pulling  back  the  bolt  of 
the  door,  there  being  no  appearance  of  its  having  been 
done  by  a  strong  hand  or  multitude  of  people :  and  it  has 
been  held,  that  an  entry  into  a  house  through  a  window, 
or  by  opening  a  door  with  a  key,  is  not  forcible.  °  In 
order  to  constitute  such  a  forcible  entry  as  will  justify  a 
process  of  forcible  entry  and  detainer,  there  must  ba 
actual  violence,  or  circumstances  tending  to  excite  fear 
of  such  violence,  either  to  the  person,  goods,  house  or 

>Dalt.  c.  44;  1  Euss.  on  Crimes,         n  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  s.  36 ;  1 
380,  438  (4th  p.d.).  Euss.  on  Crimes,  437  (4th  ed.). 

2Eex  V.  Symth,  5  C.  &  P.  301 ;  1 
Euss.  on  Crimes,  436  (4th  ed.). 


1380  Forcible  Entry  and  Detainer.         [§  566. 

inclosure/  unless  the  entry  or  detainer  is  riotous,  in 
which  case  violence  will  be  presumed."  Actual  violence 
to  the  person  or  property  affords  sufficient  evidence  to 
sustain  a  forcible  entry  or  detainer ;  but  although  it  is 
not  shown,  yet  if  actual  possession  is  taken  and  held 
under  circumstances  which  show  that  it  wiU  not  be  sur- 
rendered without  a  breach  of  the  peace  it  is  a  forcible 
entry  and  detainer.'  An  entry  which  constitutes  a 
simple  trespass  merely,  unattended  by  menaces  or  any 
circumstances  of  force  or  terror,  is  insufficient.'  Nor  is  it 
sufficient  to  show  that  a  person  in  possession  of  the 
premises  detained  declared  that  he  would  remain  until 
put  out  by  force  or  law.'  But  if  a  person  so  in  posses- 
sion declares  that  he  will  not  give  up  possession,  and 
that  he  wiQ.  forcibly  maintain  his  possession — as,  that  he 
will  shoot  any  person  attempting  to  dispossess  him — he 
is  guilty  of  a  forcible  entry  and  detainer."  So,  in  some 
cases,  the  requisite  force  and  violence  will  be  presumed. 
Thus,  where  a  person  took  possession  and  locked  the 
doors,  and  nailed  up  the  windows,  and  his  agent,  when 
applied  to  therefor,  refused  to  give  up  possession,  and  a 
person  was  subsequently  found  in  possession,  claiming 
under  an  adverse  title  to  the  person  who  fastened  up  the 
house,  it  was  held  that  it  would  be  inferred  that  such 
person  obtained  possession  by  breaking  open  the  doors 
and  windows,  and  that  this  constituted  a  forcible  entry 
and  detainer.'  As  to  what  may  be  denominated  terror, 
it  is  held  that  wherever  a,  man,  either  by  his  behavior  or 
speech  at  the  time  of  his  entry,  gives  those  who  are  in 
possession  just  cause  to  fear  that  he  will  do  them  some 

'  Hendrickson  v.    Hendrickson,  (Tenn.)  317  ;  Scarlett  v.  Lamarque, 

12  N.  J.  L.  202 ;  Brick  v.  Middle-  5  Cal.  63. 

ton,  12  id.  266;  Hopkins  v.  CaUo-  *  Foster  v.   Kelsey,  36  Vt.  199; 

way,  3  Sneed.  (Tenn.)  11  ;  McMinn  People  v.  Smith,  24  Barb.  (N.   Y.) 

V.  BUss,  31  Cal.  122  ;  Cummook  v.  16  ;  MerrUl  v.  Forbes,  23  Cal.  379; 

Macy,   3  A.   K.  Mar.    (Ky.)    296 ;  Greer  v.   Wroe,   1  Sneed.  (Tenn.) 

Holmes  v.  HaUoway,  21  Tex.  658  ;  246. 

State  V.  Pollock,  4  Ired.   (N.   C.)  'Hodgkinsv.  Jordan,  29  Cal.  577. 

805;  Butts  V.  Voorhees,  13  N.  J.  L.  «Vanhook  r.  Story,  4  Humph. 

13 ;  Harrow  v.    Baker,  3    Greene  (Tenn.)  59. 

(Iowa)  201.  'Davison    v.    Phillips,  9  Yerg. 

-  O'Callaghan  v.  Booth.  6  Cal.  63 ;  (Tenn.)  93  ;  Jarvis  v.  Hamilton,  19 

Prazer  v.  Hanlon,  5  id.  156.  Wis.  187  ;  Bart  v.  State,  3  Treadw. 

3  Childress  V.    Black,  9    Yerg.  (S.  C.)  489. 


CHAP,  LTV.]  What  is,  1381 

bodily  hurt  if  they  do  not  give  way  to  him,  his  entry  is 
forcible.  This  is  the  case  whether  he  causes  such  a 
terror,  by  carrying  with  him  an  unusual  number  of  at- 
tendants :  or  by  arming  himself  in  such  a  manner  as 
plainly  intimates  a  design  to  kill,  maim  or  beat  those 
who  shall  continue  in  possession  ;  or  threatening  to  do 
so,  or  using  such  expressions  as  plainly  imply  a  purpose 
of  using  force.'  It  seems  that  if  a  person  enters  into  an- 
other man's  house  or  ground  with  apparent  violence, 
merely  to  cut  or  take  away  his  corn,  grass  or  other 
goods,  or  to  feU  or  chop  wood,  or  do  any  other  like  tres- 
pass, it  is  a  forcible  entry,  although  he  does  not  put  the 
party  out  of  possession.  If  the  entry  was  peaceable,  and 
after  such  entry  made  parties  cut  or  take  away  any  other 
man's  corn,  grass,  wood,  or  other  goods,  without  appar- 
ent violence  or  force,  such  acts  are  not  punishable  as 
forcible  entries  :  but  if  he  enters  peaceably,  and  then  by 
force  or  violence  cuts  or  takes  away  any  corn,  grass  or 
wood,  or  forcibly  or  wrongfully  carries  away  any  other 
goods  there  being,  it  seems  to  be  a  forcible  entry  punish- 
able by  the  statutes.  But  no  entry  is  forcible  from  any 
threatening  to  spoil  another's  goods,  or  to  destroy  his 
cattle,  or  to  do  him  any  other  damage  which  is  not  per- 
sonal.' It  is  a  forcible  entry  if  a  man,  having  an  estate 
in  land,  by  a  defeasible  title,  continues  with  force  in  the 
possession,  after  a  claim  made  by  one  who  had  a  right 
of  entry  thereto." 

Sec.  667.  By  whoin  may  be  made.— It  is  clear  that  a 
forcible  entry  may  be  committed  by  a  single  person  as 
weU  as  by  twenty ;  *  but  those  who  accompany  a  man 
when  he  makes  a  foi'cible  entry  are  treated  as  having 
entered  with  him,  whether  they  actually  go  upon  the 
lands  or  not.'  He,  however,  who  barely  agrees  to  a 
forcible  entry  made  to  his  own  use,  without  his  knowl- 
edge or  privity,  shall  not  be  adjudged  to  make  an  entry 
within  these  statutes,  because  he  did  not  concur  in  or 
promote  the  force.' 

1 1  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  b  37.  ^d.  s.  39, 

I     »Dalt.  c.  136.  'Id.  s.  23. 

8 1  Hawk,  P.  C.  c.  64,  s.  S3.  «  Hawk.  P.  C.  c.  64,  b.  34. 
11. —35 


1382  Forcible  Entry  and  Detaejek.        [§  56&. 

Sec.  568.  What  is  a  forcible  detainer.— The  same  circum- 
stances of  violence  and  terror  which  will  make  an  entry 
forcible,  will  make  a  detainer  forcible  also ;  and  a  detainer 
may  be  forcible  whether  the  entry  was  forcible  or  not.' 

1  Id.  s.  30;  1  Rubs,  on  Crimes,  427 
(4th  ed.). 


CHAP.  LV.] 


When  it  Lies. 


1383 


CHAPTER  LY. 

Ejectment. 
Sec.  569.    WhenitUea. 

Sec.  569.  When  it  lies.— When  the  tenant's  term  has 
expired  from  any  cause,  whether  from  effluxion  of  time 
or  by  reason  of  a  breach  of  any  condition  in  the  lease, 
involving  a  forfeiture,  the  landlord  may  bring  ejectment 
to  recover  possession  of  the  premises/  and,  as  the  tenant 
cannot  dispute  the  landlord's  title,  no  other  proof  of  title 
is  required  than  the  mere  fact  that  the  tenant  held  under 
the  plaintiff  as  landlord.'    And  this  is  the  rule  as  to  a, 


•Penn  t.  DiveUen,  2  Yeates 
(Penn.)  309 ;  Jackson  v.  Brownson, 
7  John.  (N.  Y.)  227. 

2  Hatchett  v.  Hykes,  3  Brewst. 
(Penn.)  162  ;  Thompkins  v.  Snow, 
68  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  525 ;  Silver  v.  Stim- 
ner,  61  Mo.  253 ;  Townsend  v. 
Davis,  Forrest,  120 ;  Hawes  v. 
Shaw,  100  Mass.  287 ;  Barwick  V. 
Thompson,  7  T.  R.  488 ;  Eoe  v. 
Prideaux,  10  East,  158.  The  settled 
general  rule  is,  that  a  tenant  can- 
not dispute  his  landlord's  title. 
Shepard  v.  Martin,  31  Mo.  492; 
Pope  V.  HarkinB,  Ala.  321 ;  Hoen 
V.  Simmons,  1  Cal.  119;  Morse  v. 
Roberts,  2  id.  515;  Tewsbury  v. 
MagrafE,  33  id.  237:  Cody  v. 
Quarterman,  12  Ga.  386  ;  Alwood 
v.  Mansfield,  33  111.  452 ;  Harle  v. 
McCoy,  7  J.  J.  Marsh.  (Ky.)  318; 
Winston  V.  President,  38  Miss.  118 ; 
Walker  v.  Harper,  83  Mo.  592  ; 
Jackson  v.  Stiles,  1  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
•  575 ;  Jackson  v.  Stewart,  6  Johns. 
(N.  Y.)  34  ;  Jackson  v.  Vosburgh, 
7  id.  186 ;  Jackson  v.  Harper,  5 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  246;  People  v. 
Siner,  45  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  56  ;  Moore 
r.  Beasley,  3  Ohio,  294 ;  Hamel  v. 
Lawrence,  1  A.  K.  Marsh.  (Ky.) 
330 ;  Hamit  v.  Lawrence,  3  id.  866  ; 
Galloway  v.  Ogle,  2  Binn.  (Pa.) 


468 ;  Graham  v.  Moore,  4  Watts 
rt'a.),  467  :  Phillips  v.  Robertson,  2 
Overt.  (Tenn.)  399  ;  Robinson  v. 
Hathaway,  Brayt.  (Vt.)  151 ; 
Anderson  v.  Darby,  1  Nott.  &  M. 
(S.  C.)  369  ;  Rogers  v.  Waiier,  4 
Hayw.  (Tenn.)  205;  Cowley  v. 
ChUes,  5  J.  J.  Marsh.  (Ky.)  303 ; 
Wolden  v.  Bodley,  14  Pet.  156 ; 
Mclntire  v.  Pattoii,  9  Humph. 
(Tenn.)  447  ;  Burke  v.  Hale,  9  Ark. 
328  ;  Tondro  v.  Cushman,  5  Wis. 
279  ;  Cranz  v.  Kroger,  32  HI.  74  ; 
Sims  V.  Glazener,  14  Ala.  695 ; 
Plumerv.  Plumer,  30  N.  H.  (10 
Fost.)  558 ;  Elliott  v.  Smith,  33  Pa. 
St.  181 :  Morse  v.  Roberts,  2  Cal. 
515  ;  Raujres  v.  Kent,  id.  558  ; 
Hood  V.  Mathis,  21  Mo.  308; 
Paquetel  v.  Gauche,  17  La.  An. 
63 ;  Slentes  v.  Odier,  id.  158 ; 
Griffith  V.  Parmley,  88  Ala.  398  ; 
Grant  v.  White,  43  Mo.  285.  The 
rule  that  a  tenant  cannot  dispute 
his  landlord's  title  without  sur- 
rendering the  possession,  applies 
even  where  the  tenant  was  in  pos- 
session before  the  making  of  the 
rent  contract.  Richardson  v. 
Harvey,  37  Ga.  324;  Gleatci  v. 
Gleaton,  id.  650  ;  McConnell  v. 
Bowdry,  ^-  T.  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  392  ; 
Patterson  y.  Hansel,  4  BuBh>  (Ky^^ 


1384' 


Ejectment. 


[§  569. 


tenant  holding  over,  an  assignee,  undertenant,  or  a  tenant 
holding  by  any  species  of  tenancy ;  and  it  is  a  matter  of 
no  importance  whether  they  hold  by  a  lease  under  seal 
or  by  parol.'  Having  entered  under  the  landlord's  title, 
he  is  precluded  from  denying  it  or  setting  up  an  out- 
standing title  in  another,'  or  an  adverse  title  in  himself,' 
unless  the  same  was  acquired  in  an  open  and  notorious 
manner.'  Therefore,  where  the  lease  is  in  writing,  or 
under  seal,  it  is  sufficient  to  produce  the  lease  and  show 
an  entry  under  it ;  °  and  where  the  lease  is  by  parol,  a 
mere  entry  under  the  plaintiff  is  sufficient,  and  no  other 


654  ;  Hockenbry  v.  Snider,  2  Watts 
&  S.  (Pa.)  240  ;  Thyer  v.  Soc.  of 
United  Brethi-en,  20  Pa.  St.  60. 
Without  proof  of  fraud  or  mistake 
in  the  execution  of  the  lease,  Lively 
V.  Ball,  3  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  53 ;  St. 
Louis  V.  Morton,  6  Mo.  475  ;  Ingra- 
ham  V.  Baldwin,  9  N.  Y.  (5  Seld.) 
45  ;  Boyer  v.  Smith,  5  Watts  (Pa.) 
55  ;  MiUer  v.  McBrian,  14  S.  &  R. 
(Pa.)  382.  But  see  Cooper  v.  Smith, 
8  Watts  (Pa.)  536.  And  if  a  tenant, 
after  renting  premisesi  acquires 
rights  adverse  to  his  landlord,  he 
isDound  to  surrender  the  property 
before  he  can  be  permitted  to  assert 
them.  Brown  V.  Keller,  32  lU.  151 ; 
Moshier  v.  Reding,  12  Me.  478; 
Eyersonv.  Eldred,18Mich.  12 ;  Red 
V.  Shepley,  5  Vt.  602 ;  Greeno  v. 
Munson,  9  id.  37.  A  lessee  at  wiQ 
is  estopped  to  assert  a  title  incon- 
sistent with  that  of  the  lessor  at 
the  time  of  making  the  lease,  with- 
out surrender  of  the  possession,  or 
evicton  by  the  owner  of  a  para- 
mount title  or  its  equivalent. 
Towns  V.  Butterfleld,  97  Mass.  105. 
A  tenant  in  possession  cannot 
question  the  title  of  his  landlord  in 
an  action  for  rent,  Allen  v.  Chat- 
field,  8  Minn.  435 ;  Binney  v.  Chap- 
man, 5  Pick.  (Mass.)  124 ;  Codman 
V.  Jenkins,  14  Mass.  93 ;  Watson  v. 
Alexander,  1  Wash.  (Va.)  340,  or  in 
an  action  on  a  bond  given  in  con- 
sideration of  rent.  Perkins  v.  Gov- 
ernor, Minor  (Ala.)  353.  This  rule 
appUes  to  a  stranger  who  obtains 
possession  through  a  tenant,  though 
by  purchase  of  the  land,  cannot 
dispute  the  landlord's  title.  Lock- 
wood  V.  Walker,  3  McLean,  431  ; 
Phillips  V.  RothweU,  4  Bibb.  (Ky.) 
33 ;  Turly  V.  Rogers,  1  A.  K.  Marsh. 


(Ky.)  245  ;  Newman  v,  Mackin,  21 
Mis.  (13  Smed.  &  M.)  383.  The 
estoppel  which  binds  the  tenant, 
binds  all  who  claim  under  or 
through  him.  Rose  v.  Davis,  11 
Cal.  133 ;  McCravey  v.  Remson,  19 
Ala.  430 ;  Blackeney  v.  Ferguson, 
20  Ai-k.  547. 

'  Ingraham  v.  Baldwin,  9  N.  Y. 
45  ;  Jackson  V.  Stiles,  1  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
575 ;  Stagg  v.  Car.  Co. ,  56  Mo.  317  ; 
Binney  V.  Chapman,  5  Pick.  (Mass.) 
124 ;  Jackson  v.  Harder,  4  John. 
(N.  Y.)  203  ;  Varnum  v.  Smith,  15 
N.  Y.  327.  A  declaration  in  an 
action  of  ejectment  by  A  against 
B  alleged  a  lease  by  P  to  F  of  a 
certain  parcel  of  land  for  a  term  of 
years,  entry  into  possession  by  F, 
an  assignment  of  the  lease  to  A  and 
an  ejection  thereafter  by  B.  It  was 
held  that  this  was  a  sufficient 
declaration  of  ejectment  of  a  term 
to  authorize  a  judgment  for  posses- 
sion and  for  damages,  and  was  not 
a  declaration  merely  in  trespass. 
Hodgkins  v.  Price,  137  Mass.  13. 

•^  O'Halloran  v.  Fitzgerald,  71  lU. 
53 ;  Galloway  v.  Ogle,  2  Binn. 
(Penn.)  472  ;  Johnson  v.  Hinman, 
10  John.  (N.  Y.)  292. 

^Blanchard  v.  Tyler,  13  Mich. 
839  ;  Gwynne  v.  Jones,  3  G.  &  J. 
(Md.)  178;  Lecott  v.  Stewart,  3 
Stew.  (Ala.)  474  ;  Bertram  v.  Cook, 
33  Mich.  518. 

oStacey  v.  Buttrick,  48  Vt.  192  ; 
Gwynne  v.  Johnson,  ante ;  Allen 
V.  Chatfield,  8  Minn.  435  ;  Byrne 
V.  Beason,  1  Doug.  (Mich.)  179. 
See  sees.  233-337. 

'Poe  V.  Davis,  7  East,  863 ;  WE- 
kins  V.  Wingate,  6  T.  R.  63. 


CHAP.  LV.] 


When  it  Lies. 


1885 


proof  of  title  is  necessary.'  But  an  entry  under  the 
plaintiff  or  his  grantors  must  be  shown.  In  other  words, 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  must  be  estabhshed, 
and  if,  by  reason  of  the  plaintiff's  fraud  or  violence  in 
inducing  the  defendant  to  take  a  lease,  the  violation 
never  lawfully  existed,  the  defendant  may  show  that  the 
plaintiff  had  no  valid  title  when  the  lease  was  given  or 
the  entry  was  made."  If  the  tenant  did  not  go  into  pos- 
session under  the  plaintiff,  the  mere  fact  that  he  has 
paid  rent  to  him  wiU  not  preclude  him  from  showing  that 
the  plaintiff  had  no  title,  and  that  he  paid  rent  to  him 
through  mistake.'    Although  the  tenant  cannot  show 


"Jackson  v.  DeWatts,  7  John, 
(N.  Y.)  157;  Jackson  V.  Dobbin,  3 
id.  233 ;  Jackson  v.  Mclieod,  13  id. 
183";  Jackson  v.  Cooley,  3  John. 
Ca*   223, 

s  Miller  v.  McBrier,  14  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  383;  Johnson  v.  Cheley, 
43  Cal.  300 ;  Swift  v.  Dean,  11  Vt. 
328 ;  Brown  v.  Dysinger,  1  Rawle 
(Penn.)  148;  Schultz  v.  Ainot,  38 
Mo.  173 ;  Hamilton  v.  Marsden,  6 
Binn.  (Penn.)  45  ;  Lisou  v.  Yawn, 
15  Ga.  491 ;  Smith  v.  McCurdy,  3 
Phila.  (Penn.)  438 ;  Thayer  v.  So- 
ciety, &c.,  20  Penn.  St.  60;  Cra- 
mer V.  Carlisle  Bank,  3  Grant's 
Cas.  (Penn.)  367.  The  landlord's 
fraud  will  avail  only  the  immedi- 
ate tenant.  An  assignee  of  the 
lessee  cannot  avail  himself  of  it. 
WiUiam  v.  Whitfield,  44  Ga.  51 ; 
Wyoming  Coal  Co.  v.  Price,  81 
Penn.  St.  156. 

3  Anderson  v.  Smith,  63  111.  136; 
Fenner  v.  Duplock,  3  Bing.  10 ; 
Schultz  V.  Arnot,  33  Mo.  173 ;  Mil- 
ton V.  Hayden,  33  Ala.  30  ;  AJnder- 
son  V.  Miller,  15  Gratt.  (Va.)  379 ; 
Jackson  v.  Leek,  13  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
105 ;  Givens  v.  MuUineux,  4  Rich, 
(S,  C.)  593;  Franklin  v.  Medina, 
35  Cal.  558;  Washington  v.  Con- 
rad, 3  Humph.  (Tenn.)  563.  If  a  ten- 
ant is  compelled  to  purchase  mort- 
gages in  order  to  protect  hisposses- 
sion,  equity  wiU  protect  his  equit- 
able title  until  he  is  reimbursed. 
Bates  v.  Conrow,  11  N,  J.  Eq. 
137.  A  tenant  may  show  an  out- 
standing title  against  his  landlord, 
where  the  title  of  his  landlord  has 
expired,  or  been  extinguished 
since  the  relation  of  landlord  and 
tenant  between  them  was  created. 


Jackson  v.  Rowland,  6  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  666;  Randolph  v.  Carlton,  8 
Ala.  606 ;  McDevitt  v.  SulUvan,  8 
Cal.  592:  Wheelock  v.  Warschan- 
er,  21  id.  309 ;  Camp  v.  Caomp,  5 
Conn.  391 ;  Wells  v.  Mason,  6  111. 
84;  Tnghman  v.  Little,  13  lU.  339; 
Kinney  v.  Doe,  8  Blackf.  (Ind.) 
350 ;  Gregory  v.  Crab,  3  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  334;  Casey  v.  Gregory,  13 
id.  505 ;  Hintze  v.  Thomas,  7  Md. 
346;  Giles  v.  Ebsworth,  10  Md. 
333;  Wolf  V.  Johnson,  30  Miss. 
513 ;  Pentz  v.  Cuester,  41  Mo.  447 ; 
RusseU  V.  Allard,  18  N.  H.  333; 
Howell  V.  Ashmore,  23  N.  J.  L. 
361 ;  Homer  v.  Leeds,  35  N.  J.  L. 
106;  Hoag  v.  Hoag.  35  N.  Y.  469; 
Ryress  v.  Farwell,  9  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
615 ;  Lawrence  v.  MiUer,  1  Sandf, 
(N.  Y.)  516 ;  Devatch  v.  Newsam, 
3  Ohio,  57.  A  party  in  possession, 
acknowledging  the  title  of  anoth- 
er, is  not  estopped  from  subse- 
quently disclaiming  holding  under 
such  title,  if  the  original  entry  is 
not  under  the  person  whose  title  is 
acknowledged.  Jackson  v.  Leek, 
13  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  105  ;  Franklin  v. 
Medina,  35  Cal.  658 ;  Washington 
V.  Conrad,  2  Humph.  (Tenn.)  562  ; 
Givens  v.  MuUineux,  4  Rich.  (S. 
C.)  590;  Alderson  v.  Miller,  15 
Gratt.  (Va.)  379.  Although  a  per- 
son, entering  into  the  possession 
of  land  under  another,  either  as 
his  tenant  or  by  virtue  of  an 
agreement  to  purchase,  cannot 
dispute  the  title  of  such  person, 
nor  attorn  to  a  stranger;  so  as  to 
affect  such  title,  while  he  contin- 
ues in  possession,  still  his  attorn- 
ment to  a  stranger  is  operative  as 
to  himself.    Kenada  v.-  Gterdner, 


1386 


Ejectment. 


[§  669. 


that  the  landlord  had  no  title  when  the  lease  and  entry- 
was  made,  yet  he  may  show  that  the  title  subsequently 
failed,'  and  that  he  has  attorned  to  the  person  thus 
acquiring  it,"  or  is  liable  to  be  compelled  to  do  so.' 


3  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  589.  After  a  judg- 
ment of  eviction  by  paramount 
title  he  may  attorn  to  the  success- 
ful party.  MofiEatt  v.  Strong,  9 
Bos.  (N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  57  ;  Lunsford 
V.  Turner,  5  J.  J.  Mar.  (Ky.)  104 ; 
Foster  v.  Morris,  3  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  104.  So  he  may  show  <;hat 
the  landlord  tiolds  in  violation  of 
law.  Milton  v.  Heyden,  32  Ala.' 
30 ;  Satterlee  v.  Mathewson,  13  S. 
&  R.  (Penn.)  133. 

'Lancashire  v.  Mason,  75  N.  C. 
455  5  Eamsdell  v.  MaxweU,  32 
Mich.  285 ;  Satterlee  v.  Matthew- 
son,  13  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  133;  Grun- 
din  V.  Carter,  99  Mass.  15  ;  Den,  v. 
Ashmore,  33  N.  J.  L.  261 ;  Dobson 
V.  Culpepper,  23  Gratt.  ^Va.)  353  ; 
Jackson  v.  Davis,  5  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
133  ;  Supervisors  v.  Herrington,  50 
111.  332  ;  Duff  v.  WUson,  69  Penn. 
St.  316;  Newman  v.  Rutter,  8 
Watts  (Penn.)  51 ;  Ryder  v.  Man- 
sell,  66  Me.  167  ;  Miller  v.  Bonsan- 
dan,  9  Ala.  817  ;  Hilborn  v.  Fogg, 
99  Mass.  11  ;  Higgins  v.  Turner, 
61  Mo.  349;  St.  John  v.  Quitzlow, 
73  lU.  334 ;  SUvey  v.  Thomas,  61 
Mo.  353 ;  Franklin  v.  Palmer,  50 
111.  203.  In  Harrison  v.  Palmer, 
76  Ala.  157,  it  was  held  that  in  a 
statutory  action  in  the  nature  of 
ejectraent,  the  legal  title  must 
prevail  against  an  equitable  title, 
no  matter  how  perfect  the  equity 
may  be.  K  the  defendant  entered 
under  an  executory  agreement  for 
a  lease,  he  has  no  legal  title  which 
win  defeat  the  plaintiff's  recovery, 
though  he  may  maintain  an  action 
at  law  for  damages,  or  a  bill  in 
equity  for  specific  performance; 
but  if  he  entered  under  an  executed 
lease,  and  the  term  has  not  expired, 
he  may  successfully  defend  the 
plaintiff's  action.  A  writing  having 
Seen  dravim  up  and  signed  by  both 
parties  at  their  first  interview,  duly 
attested,  describing  the  premises, 
to  be  let,  the  commencement  and 
duration  of  the  term,  and  the  an- 
nual rent  to  be  paid,  this  is  suffi- 
cient to  satisfy  the  requisitions  of 
the  statute  of  Jraudsandto  make  a 
binding  contract ;  but  the  addition 
of  these  words,  "  notes  and  papers 


to  be  drawn  up  as  soon  as  conven- 
ient," shows  that  the  parties  con- 
sidered the  transaction  as  incom- 
plete, and  the  writing  is  only  an  ex- 
ecutory agreement  for  a  lease.  A 
writing  having  been  up  at  the  sec- 
ond interview  between  the  parties, 
which  specified  .particularly  the 
duties  and  obligations  of  the  lessee, 
was  signed  by  him,  and  delivered, 
with  his  notes  for  the  rent  as  spec- 
ified, to  the  lessor,  who  thereupon 
surrendered  to  him  the  original 
writing ;  this,  without  more,  would 
amount  to  an  executed  lease,  and 
the  lessor  would  be  held  to  have 
waived  any  stipvdations  not  con- 
tained in  the  writing.  But,  it  be- 
ing further  shown,  that  the  parties 
separated  with  the  understanding 
that  they  were  to  meet  a  third 
time,  when  a  dupUcate  of  the  writ- 
ing signed  by  the  lessee  was  to  be 
prepared  and  signed  by  the  lessor, 
and  the  first  writing  was  to  be  then 
surrendered  by  the  lessee,  and  that 
this  was  not  done  at  the  third 
meeting ;  these  facts  show  that  the 
parties  considered  the  transaction 
as  still  incomplete,  and  the  writ- 
ings operate  only  as  an  executory 
agreement  for  a  lease.  Where  the 
uncontroperted  facts  clearly  estab- 
lish the  plaintiff's  right  to  recover, 
erroneous  rulings  on  evidence  ad- 
verse to  the  defendant  which  would 
not  vary  the  result,  are  error  whit- 
out  inquiry. 

^  Kingman  v.  Abington,  56  Mo. 
46;  Holt  V.  Martin,  51  Penn.  St. 
399. 

'Palmer  v.  Bowker,  106  Mass. 
317  ;  Miller  v.  Lang,  99  Mass.  13  ; 
WinsteU  v.  Hehl,  6  Bush.  (Ky.)  58 ; 
Hawes  v.  Shaw,  100  Mass.  187 ; 
WhaUn  v.  White,  35  N.  Y.  462  ; 
Simer  v.  Salters,  3  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
214 ;  Doe  v.  Barton,  11  Ad.  &  El. 
307.  The  tenant  is  bound,  however, 
to  make  out  by  competent  proof 
that  the  landlord's  title  is  ended. 
Wallen  v.  Forrest,  L.  R.,  7  Q.  B. 
239.  He  may  do  this  by  showing 
that  the  lessor  held  merely  as  ex- 
ecutor during  the  infancy  of  a  leg- 
atee, and  that  the  infant  has  at- 
tained bis  majority,  Andrews  v. 


ofiAP.  Lv.]  When  rr  Lies.  1387 

As  to  whether  or  not  the  tenant  can  be  permitted  to  re- 
deem his  term,  either  before  or  after  judgment,  depends 
upon  the  statute.  At  common  law  no  such  right  exists, 
but  in  some  of  the  States  the  statute  provides  for  such 
redemption  either  during,  the  pendency  of  the  action  or 
within  six  months  after  judgment,  upon  paying  the 
rent,  costs,  &c.,  which  have  accrued  into  court.  Of 
course  the  practitioner,  in  determining  whether  such  a 
right  exists  in  a  given  State,  must  consult  the  statute. 
In  New  York,  provision  is  made  by  statute'  for  such 
relief  in  favor  of  a  mortgagee  of  a  lessee;  and  similar 
relief  in  equity  is  provided  for  a  tenant,  in  case  the  bill 
is  brought  within  six  months  after  execution  is  executed 
on  a  judgment  in  ejectment.'  The  whole  matter  relat- 
ing to  ejectment  is  so  generally  i-egulated  by  statute, 
that  the  statute  should  always  be  consulted  to  ascertain 
the  rights  and  remedies  of  the  parties. 

If  a  landlord  defends  for  and  in  the  name  of  his  tenant 
and  puts  his  title  in  issue  in  aid  of  the  tenant's  right  of 
possession,  a  judgment  against  the  tenant  is  a  bar  to  a 
subsequent  action  by  the  landlord  against  the  party  re- 
covering the  judgment.  But  it  must  appear  that  the 
subject  matter  or  question  was  not  only  the  same,  but 
that  it  was  submitted  on  the  merits,  and  actually 
passed  upon  by  the  court.  Accordingly,  in  an  action  of 
ejectment,  where  there  was  a  plea  of  a  former  judgment 
in  favor  of  the  defendant  against  the  plaintiff's  tenant 
and  it  appeared  that  the  plaintiff  was  originally  a  party 
defendant  and  conducted  the  defence,  but  that  on  the 
close  of  the  testimony,  on  motion  of  the  former  plaintiff, 

Pearce,  4  B.  «fe  P.  158,  or  that  he  Gassett,  18  Vt.  346.    So  where  the 

was  seized  in  right  of  his  wife  on-  lessor's  title  has  been  transferred 

ly  for  her  life,  and  that  she  has  he  may  show  that  it  is  invalid, 

deceased.     Samson  v.    Clarkson,  Palmer  v.  Bowker,  106  Mass.  31 7-; 

113  Mass.  348 ;  Blake  v.  Foster,  8  Funk  v.  Kincaid,  5  Md.  404  ;  Cam- 

T.  E.  487.    The  tenant  cannot,  af-  arillo  v.  Folsom,  49  Cal.  168 ;  Ball 

ter  he  has  voluntarilj;  attorned  to  v.  Chadwick,  46  lU.  98  ;  Blautier 

another,  set  off  the  title  of  such  v.  Whittaker,  11  Humph.  (Teiin.) 

person  against  his  landlord,  but  if  313  ;  Bergman  v.  Boberts,  61  Penn. 

he  has  been  compelled  to  attorn  to  St.  497  ;  Gillett  v.    Matthews,  45 

such  person  or  be  evicted,  he  may  Mo.  807  ;    Hilboum  v.    Fogg,  99 

set  up  such  title.    Jones  v.  Clark,  Mass.  11. 
20  John.  (N.  Y.)  51 ;  MagiU  v.  Hins-        '  3  Rev.  Stat,  505. 
dale,  6    Conn.  464;   Stedman  v.         « 3  Kev.  Stat.  505,  sees.  33-38. 


1388  Ejectment.  [§  569. 

the  suit  was  dismissed  as  to  him,  and  his  deraignment 
of  title  stricken  out,  and  that  the  court  refused  to  permit 
the  defendants  to  show  that  they  were  his  tenants,  and 
to  justify  under  his  title  ;  it  was  held  that  there  was  no 
estoppel,  and  that  it  made  no  difference  that  the  rulings 
of  the  court  were  erroneous  and  that  an  appeal  might 
have  been  taken. 

In  an  action  to  establish-  an  involuntary  trust  as  to 
real  estate  against  a  person  and  to  compel  a  conveyance 
of  the  legal  title,  it  appeared  that  the  cause  of  action 
accrued  more  than  eight  years  before  the  commence- 
ment of  the  action,  but  that  the  plaintiff  was  at  that 
time  in  the  possession  of  the  land  by  his  tenant,  and  re- 
mained so  until  about  December  1867,  at  which  time  the 
defendant  entered  upon  the  land  by  coUusion  with 
the  tenant,  and  thenceforth  claimed  to  hold  adversely ; 
it  was  held  upon  a  plea  of  the  statute  of  limitations>  that 
the  plaintiff  was  not  barred.' 

>  Attschul  V.  Polaok,  55  Cal.  633. 


CHAP.  LVi.]  What  are.  1389 


CHAPTER  LVI. 

Meskb  PEOFrrs. 

Sec.  570.    What  are.— When  recoverable. 

Sec.  670.  ■Whatare.—Whenreeoverable.— After  the  plaint- 
iff in  ejectment  has  recovered  a  judgment,  he  is  entitled 
to  recover  of  the  defendant  a  fair  compensation  for  the 
use  of  the  premises  during  the  period  of  his  wrongful 
exclusion  therefrom  by  the  tenant,  which  are  denomi- 
nated mesne  profits.  An  action  of  trespass  for  mesne 
profits  may  also  be  maintained  where  a  person  wrong- 
fully withholds  possession  from  the  landlord  after  the 
landlord  has  obtained  possession,  whether  such  posses- 
sion was  obtained  in  an  ejectment  suit  or  otherwise. 
This  action  may  be  said  to  be  consequential  to  a  re- 
covery in  an  action  of  ejectment;  for,  by  bringing 
ejectment  the  plaintiff  treats  the  person  in  possession  as 
a  trespasser  from  the  date  of  the  writ,  and,  consequently, 
cannot  sue  him  for  rent  under  a  lease  or  agreement/ 
nor  for  use  and  occupation  subsequent  to  that  time ; " 
and  except  for  this  action  the  owner  would  in  many 
cases  be  without  a  remedy.  Where  a  person  entered  as 
tenant,  and  holds  over,  but  yields  up  possession  with- 
out an  ejectment  suit,  the  landlord  may  recover  the 
mesne  profits  in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation.''  But 
after  the  landlord  has  brought  ejectment  an  action  for 
use  and  occupation  will  not  he ; '  but,  where  a  tenant 
holds  over  after  the  expiration  of  a  notice  to  quit,  the 
landlord  may,  after  a  recovery  in  ejectment,  waive  his 
action  for  mesne  profits  and  bring  debt  under  the  statute 

'  Jones  V.  Carter,  15  M.  &W.  718.  Van  Allen  v.  Rogers,  1  John.  Cas. 

3  Birch  V.  Wright,  1  T.  E.  378;  {N.   Y.  )  381 ;  Goodtitle  v.   North, 

Smith  V.  Teft,  9  Exchq.  307.  Dou^.  584. 

3Doe  V.  Batten,  1  Cowp.  343;  ^  Birch  v.  Wight,  ante. 


1390'  Mesne  Ebofits.  [§  5T0.  ^ 

for  double  the  yearly  value  of  the  premises  during  the 
time  the  tenent  wrongfully  withheld  possession  from  him.' 

In  this  action  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  recover—  1st, 
compensation  for  the  use  and  occupation  of  the  premises 
recovered  during  the  time  they  were  actually  or  con- 
structively occupied  by  the  defendant;'  Sdly^  compensa- 
tion for  any  spetaaT  damage  that  the  plaintiff  may  be 
legally  entitled  to  in  respect  of  the  trespasses,  provided 
it  has  been  claimed  in  the  declaration  as,  if  the  defend- 
ant has  shut  up  an  inn  (being  the- premises  in  ques- 
tion), and  has  thereby  destroyed  the  custom;'  and 
lastly,  the  cost  of  the  action  of  ejectment.*  The  damages 
under  the  first  head,  however,  are  not  confined  to  the 
mere  rent  of  the  premises,  but  the  jury  may  give  more 
if  they  please,  as  for  the  plaintiff's  trouble  in  the  re- 
covery of  the  premises,  &c.' 

The  action  may  be  brought,  although  proceedings  in 
error  upon  the  ejectment  may  be  pending,"  and  the  pro- 
duction by  the  plaintiff  of  a  judgment  by  default  in  a  pre- 
vious action  of  ejectment  for  the  same  premises,  is  suffi- 
cient evidence  of  the  plaintiff's  title  from  the  date  of 
the  writ,'  and  also,  as  it  seems,  of  the  defendant's  pos- 
session of  the  premises  at  that  date.'  If,  however,  the 
plaintiff  seeks  to  recover  mesne  profits  from  a  day  an- 
terior to  that  on  which  possession  was  claimed  in  the 
writ  of  ejectment,  he  must  be  prepared  to  prove  his  title 
in  the  usual  way.°  The  action  is  a  local  one,"  and  may 
be  brought  by  one  tenant-in-common  against  his  co- 
tenant."  The  defendant,  if  in  possession  by  his  under- 
tenant, is   not   hable   for  the    wrongful  holding  over 

'  Tinmiins  v.  Eawlinson,  3  Burr.  Ad.  &  El.  40.    See  Doe  v.  Challis, 

1603.  17  Q.  B.  166. 

^  But    if    permanent    improve-  *  Dunn  v.  Large,  3  Doug.  335. 

ments  have  been  made  by  the  per-  *  Pearse  v.  Coker,  L.  R, ,  4  Exchq. 

son  in  possession,  or  those  of  whom  92. 

he  purchased,  the  value   of   the  ^Goodtitle  v.  Tombs3  Wils.  121., 
improvements  are  to  be  allowed  '  Donford  v.  EUys,  12  Mod.  138. 
him,  provided  they  must  not  bo  'See  Witkihson  v.  Kirby,  15  C. 
allowed  to  the  extent  of  reducing  B.  430. 
the  value  of  the  premises  below  *  Pearse  v.  Coker,  ante, 
what  they  would  be  worth  with-  '  See  Bamett  v.  Earl  of  Guild- 
out  them.     Averill  v.   Brady,  20  ford,  11  Exchij.  32. 
Ga.  523 ;  Morrison  v.  Bobinson,  31  "  Cole  on  Ejectment,  p.  638. 
Penn.  St.  456  ;  Doe  v.  Harlow,  12  "  Goodtitle  v.  Tombs,  ante. 


CHAP.  Lvi.]  What  abe.      ;  1391 

of  such  subtenant,"  unless  he  has  authorized  it.' 
In  an  action  for  mesne  profits  the  defendant  may  set 
up  any  matters  that  would  be  a  defence  in  an  action  of 
debt  for  rent,' — ^as,  that  he  was  not  in  possession,*  the 
statute  of  Umitations,"  and  indeed  any  matter  that 
legally  defeats  the  plaintiff's  right  of  action.  The  action 
being  tortious,  except  where  it  is  saved  by  statute,  it  dies 
with  the  defendant,  and  ca,nnot  be  ^upheld  against  his 
representatives ;  nor,  except  where  the  landlord  was 
prevented  from  pursuing  his  legal  remedy  by  a  rule  of 
court,  or  an  injunction,  will  a  court  of  equity  interfere 
to  give  relief.'  When  a  disseizee  has  lawfully  recovered 
possession,  according  to  the  weight  and  general  drift:  of 
the  more  modern  cases,  he  may  maintain  trespass  for 
mesne  profits,  against  the  disseizor's  tenant  even  though 
the  latter  has  in  good  faith  paid  the  rent  to  the  disseizor. 
The  principle  upon  which  this  remedy  rests  is  that  the 
law  presumes  the  freehold  to  have  been  continuously  in 
rightful  owner  by  a  sort  of  jiis  past  Urn  inii  and  gives 
him  this  action  for  damages  or  profits  during  the  period 
that  he  was  tortiously  dispossessed.'  The  dictum  in 
Lif ord's  case  °  to  the  contrary,  does  not  find  any  support 
from  the  later  English  or  American  cases. 

'Mansfield,    C.    J.,   Bume   v.  'Bullen's  N.  P.  88. 

Eichardson,  4  Taunt.  720.  « Poultney  v.  Warren,  6  Wis.  78. 

'Doe  V.  Harlow,  ante;  Eoe  v,  'Pardee,  J., in  Truhen  v.  Miller, 

Wiggs,  5  B.  &  P.   330 :  Chirac  v.  48  Conn.  347 ;  Morgan  v.  Varick, 

Eeinicker,  11  Wheat.  (U.  S.)  380  ;  8  Wend.   (N.   Y.)  587  ;  Judson    /. 

Bume  V.  Richardson,  4  Taunt.  730.  Stone,  13  John.  (N.  Y.)  448  :  Storch 

'  Aslin  V.   Parkin,  8  Burr.  668  ;  t.  Carr,  38  Penn.  St.  185  ;  Bradley 

Doe  V.   Huddart,  3  M.  &  E.   333  ;  v.  McDaniel,  8  Jones  (N.  O.)  138  ; 

Jackson  v.  EandaU,  11  John.  (N.  Green  v.  Biddle,  1  Wheat  (U.  S.) 

Y.)405  ;  Lungendyck  v.  Burhaus,  1  ;  Emerson  v.  Thompson,  3  Pick. 

11  id.  461.  (Mass.)  473 ;  Doe  v.  Whitcomb,  81 

*  Jackson    v.     EandaU,     ante ;  Bing.  46  ;    Holcomb  v.  Eamlins, 

Chirac  v.  Eeinicker,  11  Wheat.  (U.  Cro.  Eliz.  540. 

S.)  380.  « Liford's  Case,  11  Coke,  51. 


1392  Summary  Proceedings.  [§  571. 


CHAPTER  LVIT. 

SUMMARY  PKOCEEDINGS. 

Sec.  571.  When  applicable. 

Sec.  572.  When  a  tenant  may  be  removed  summarily  in  New  York. 

Sec.  573.  Who  is  entitled  to  summary  relief. 

Sec.  574.  How  application  must  be  made. 

Sec.  575.  Petition  by  a  neighbor  of  a  bawdy-house. 

Sec.  576.  To  whom  application  should  be  made. 

Sec.  577.  What  should  be  stated  in  the  petition. 

Sec.  578.  How  served. 

Sec.  579.  Amendments  to  petitions,  precept,  etc. 

Sec.  580.  Answer,  issues,  etc. 

Sec.  581.  Trial,  jury,  etc. 

Sec.  582.  Change  of  venue. 

Sec.  583.  Adjournment. 

Sec.  584.  Pinal  order. 

Sec.  585.  How  possession  is  obtained. — Stay  of  warrant,  etc. 

Sec.  586.  When  lessee  may  redeem. 

Sec.  587.  Appeal,  effect  of. — Power  of  Appellate  Court. 

Sec.  571.  When  Applicable.  —  The  remedy  by  eject- 
ment, far  the  recovery  of  the  possession  of  premises,  is 
necessarily  slow,  tedious  and  expensive,  and  iUy  adapted 
to  protect  the  rights  of  landlords  against  obstinate,  con- 
tumacious and  generally  irresponsible  tenants ;  conse- 
quently, in  most,  if  not  in  all  the  States,  a  summary 
mode  of  obtaining  possession  is  provided  by  statute. 
This  remedy  being  purely  statutory  can  be  resorted  to  only 
in  those  instances,  and  in  the  manner  provided  by  the 
statute.  The  statutory  provisions  in  the  several  States, 
and  consequently  the  practice  under  them,  are  so  diverse, 
as  to  make  it  unadvisable  to  attempt  to  give  even  a 
synopsis  of  all  of  them  here,  and  in  obedience  to  the 


CHAP.  Lvn.]         When  Applicable.  1393 

wishes  of  the  pubhsherS,  I  shall  give  only  the  law  and  prac- 
tice relating  thereto  as  it  exists  in  the  State  of  Hew  York, 

Sec.  572.  When  a  tenant  may  be  removed  summarily  in 
New  York.— By  title  2,  chap.  17,  of  the  Code  of  1880,  sec. 
2231,  it  is  provided  that  a  tenant  or  lessee  at  will,  by 
sufferance,  for  a  part  of  a  year,  or  for  one  or  more  years, 
of  real  estate,  including  a  specific  or  undivided  portion 
of  a  house  or  other  dwelUng,  and  his  assigns,  under- 
tenants or  legal  representatives,  may  be  removed  there- 
from under  thp  provisions  of  the  title  named— 1st. 
"Where  he  holds  over  and  continues  in  possession  of  the 
demised  premises,  after  the  expiration  of  his  term,  with- 
out the  permission  of  his  landlord. 

This  clause  applies  as  well  to  cases  where  the  term 
expires  by  reason  of  a  breach  of  any  condition  in  the 
lease,  to  which  a  forfeiture  is  attached,  as  to  cases  where 
it  expires  by  effluxion  of  time.  But,  where  the  proceed- 
ings are  based  upon  a  forfeiture  of  the  term,  it  is  always 
a  good  defence,  that  the  landlord,  after  the  forfeiture  was 
incurred,  and  with  knowledge  thereof,  has  done  some 
act  affirming  the  tenancy.  That  is,  has  done  some  act 
that  shows  that  he  regarded  the  defendant  as  a  tenant 
after  the  forfeiture  arose,'— as,  that  he  accepted  rent  ac- 
ruing  after  the  forfeiture,"  or  that  he  distrained  or  brought 
an  action  for  the  same.'  So  an  unqualified  demand  of 
such  rent  by  the  landlord,  or  any  person  having  authority 
to  demand  it ;"  or  an  agreement  by  the  landlord,  to  grant 
a  ne,w  lease  after  the  old  lease  has  expired  ; "  or  advice 
given  by  him  to  a  third  person  to  purchase  the  lease, 
after  a  forfeiture  has  been  incurred,  amount  to  a  waiver 

'  Doe   V.    Allen,    3   Taunt.    81 ;  the  receipt  or  other  acknowledg 

Ward  V.  Day,  5  B.  &  S.  464.  ment  of  tenancy  will  preclude  him 

^  Amsby  v.  Woodard,  6  B.  &  C.  from  avaihng  himself  of  a  subse- 

519  ;  Doe  v.  Pritchard,  5  B.  &  Ad.  quent  forfeiture.     Doe  v.  Jones,  5 

765  ;  Doe  v.  Eees,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  34  ;  Exchq.  498  ;  Doe  v.  Woodbridge,  9 

McGlynn  v.  Moore,  25  Cal.  384.    An  B.  &  C.  376. 

acceptance  of  i-ent  due  before  and  '  Doe  v.  Peek,  1  B.  &  Ad.  428  ; 

up     to    the    time    of    forfeiture  Dandy  v.   NichoU,  4  C.   B.   N.   S. 

does    not   operate    as    a    waiver.  376 ;    McKildoe  v.    Darracott,  13 

Price  V.  Worwood,  ante  ;  Jones  v.  Gratt.  (Va.)  378. 

Carter,   15   M.   &   W.    718.      Nor  ^Doa  v.  Birch,  1  M.  &  W.  408. 

where  the  breach  occasioning  the  '•  Price  v.  Worwood,  4  PI.  &  N. 

.forfeiture  is    continuous,    neither  513. 


1394  SUMMABY  PROCEEDINGS.  [§  572. 

thereof ; '  and  if  the  landlord  has  done  an  act  which 
amounts  to  a  waiver,  no  words  of  his  at  the  time  the  act 
was  done  can  prevent  the  legal  effect  of  the  act.' 

2d.  "  Where  he  holds  over  without  permission  after  a 
default  in  the  payment  of  rent  pursuant  to  the  agreement 
under  which  the  demised  premises  are  held,  and  a  demand 
of  the  rent  has  been  made,  or  at  least  three  days'  notice 
in  writing,  requiring  in  the  alternative  the  payment  of 
the  rent  or  the  possession  of  the  premises,  has  been  served 
in  behalf  of  the  person  entitled  to  the  rent  upon  the 
person  owning  it,"  as  prescribed  in  the  title  for  the  service 
of  a  percept. 

It  win  be  seen  by  the  language  of  this  clause,  that  a 
personal  demand  of  the  rent  dispenses  with  the  necessity 
of  a  written  notice,  and  that  a  written  notice,  properly  • 
served,  dispenses  with  the  demand.  The  advantage  of  a 
personal  demand  is,  that  proceedings  may  be  instituted 
without  delay,  while  if  a  written  notice  is  relied  upon, 
a  delay  of  at  least  three  days  is  a  necessary  con- 
sequence. 

3d.  Where  a  tenant,  "  being  in  possession  under  a  lease 
for  a  term  of  three  years  or  less,  has,  during  the  term, 
taken  the  benefit  of  an  insolvent  act,  or  has  been  adjudi- 
cated a  bankrupt  under  a  bankrupt  law  of  the  United 
States." 

It  is  necessary  only,  to  bring  the  tenant  within  this 
clause,  to  show  that  he  holds  under  a  lease  for  a  term, 
however  short.  If,  however,  he  holds  under  a  lease  for 
a  longer  term  than  three  years,  he  does  not  come  within 
the  "provisions  of  this  clause,  because  leases  for  a  longer 
term  are  excluded  from  the  operation  of  the  act  by  neces- 
sary implication,  as  the  maximum  Umitation  is  expressly 
fixed :  while  by  the  terms  of  the  act  the  minimum  limita- 
tion is  indefinite,  leaving  no  ground  upon  which  the 
clause  can  be  extended  by  intendment  to  a  lease  for  a 
longer  term  than  three  years.  If  the  words  "or  less" 
were  not  used,  the  clause  might  be  susceptible  of  a  differ- 
ent interpretation. 

'  Waxd  V.  Day,  ante.  » Croft  v.  Lumley,  6  H.  L.  Cas. 

672. 


CHAP.  Lvn,]       .         New  York.    *■  1396 

4th.  Where  the  demised  premises,  or  any  part  thereof, 
are  used  or  occupied  as  a  bawdy-house,  or  house  of 
assignation  for  lewd  purposes,  or  for  any  illegal  trade  or 
manufacture,  or  other  illegal  business. 

As  to  what  is  an  illegal  trade,  manufacture,  or  business, 
it  may  be  said  that  any  trade  or  business  which  is  pro- 
hibited by  statute,  or  which  is  held  to  be  illegal  or  immoral 
at  the  common  law,  clearly  come  within  the  provisions  of 
this  clause.  So  too  does  the  exercise  of  a  trade  or  busi- 
ness without  a  Uncense,  for  the  exercise  of  which  the 
statute  requires  that  a  lincense  shall  be  obtained.  Under 
this  clause,  the  exercise  of  an  illegal  trade  or  business  by 
an  undertenant  of  the  lessee  works  a  forfeiture,  whether 
the  lessee  knew  the  fact  or  not.' 

It  is  provided  by  sec.  2232  of  chap.  17  of  the  Code,  that 
persons  holding  over  after  notice  to  quit  may  be  removed 
in  the  following  cases  : 

1st.  "Where  the  property  has  been  sold  by  virtue  of 
an  execution  against  him,  or  the  person  under  whom  he 
claims,  and  a  title  under  the  same  has  been  perfected." 

2d.  Where  the  property  has  been  duly  sold  under  fore- 
closure proceedings  taken  as  prescribed  in  title  9  of  chap. 
17,  of  a  mortgage  executed  by  the  tenant  or  the  person 
under  whom  he  claims,  and  the  title  has  been  duly 
perfected. 

3d.  Where  the  tenant  holds  under  an  agreement  to 
occupy  and  cultivate  on  shares,  or  for  a  share  of  the  crops, 
and  the  time  fixed  in  the  agreement  for  his  occupancy 
has  expired. 

4th.  Where  he,  or  the  personunder  whom  he  claims, 
has  intruded  into  or  squatted  upon  a  parcel  of  land  in  a 
city  or  incorporated  village,  without  the  permission  of 
the  person  entitled  to  possession  thereof,  either  at  the 
commencement  of,  or  during  such  possession,  or  who  con- 
tinues in  possession  after  a  permission  given  has  been 
revoked  by  proper  notice  to  the  occupant  or  person  to  be 
removed,  and 

5th.  Where  a  person  makes  a  forcible  entry  upon  real 

"  People  V.  Bennett,  14  Hun,  63. 


1396  Summary  Proceedings.  [§  573. 

property,  or,  having  peaceably  entered,  holds  possession 
thereof  by  force.' 

The  first  and  second  clauses  of  sec.  2232,  referred  to 
supra,  are  obscure,  if  given  such  an  enlarged  interpreta- 
tion as  they  are  susceptible  of,  can  hardly  stand  in  the 
face  of  the  provision  in  the  national  constitution,  which 
prohibits  the  passage  of  any  law  which  impairs  the  obli- 
gation of  a  contract.  The  intention  of  the  legislature, 
undoubtedly,  was  to  provide  for  the  recovery  of  posses- 
sion by  the  landlord  where  the  estate  of  the  lessee  or 
occupation  is  taken  on  execution  ;  but  the  addition  of  the 
words,  "or  a  person  under  whom  he  claims,"  while  doubt- 
less intended  to  apply  merely  to  levies  made  against  the 
lessee  or  an  undertenant,  makes  it  apparently  equally  ap- 
plicable where  the  property  is  sold  upon  an  execution 
against  the  landlord.  If  restricted  to  instances  where 
the  property  is  sold  upon  an  execution  against  the  lessee 
or  his  undertenant,  the  law  is  not  obnoxious  to  objec- 
tion, and  this  was  doubtless  the  intention  of  the  legisla- 
ture. At  least  its  application  cannot  be  extended  be- 
yond such  cases,  and  the  remedy  under  this  clause  exists 
only  in  favor  of  the  lessor  or  his  assigns,  and  not  in  favor 
of  the  execution  creditor. 

The  same  may  be  said  in  reference  to  the  second  clause. 
Except  where  the  tenant  enters  under  a  lease  made  after 
the  mortgage  is  executed,  the  mortgagee  takes  subject  to 
the  lease,  and  the  lessee's  rights  are  prior ;  but,  where  the 
lease  is  subsequent  to  the  mortgage,  the  mortgagee's  rights 
are  prior,  and  the  lessee's  estate  falls  with  the  estate  of  the 
lessor,  if  the  mortgagee  so  elects.  Where,  as  in  New 
York,  a  judgment,  in  certain  cases,  operates  as  a  lien 
upon  all  real  estate  then  owned  or  subsequently  acquired 
by  the  execution  d-ebtor  within  twenty  years  from  the 
date  thereof,  a  lessee  taking  a  lease  after  a  judgment 
has  been  obtained  against  the  lessor,  and  proper  steps 
taken  to  give  it  full  operation  as  a  lien,  takes  subject  to 
such  lien,  and  subject  to  the  prior  right  of  the  execution 
creditor ;  and  in  either  of  the  latter  class  of  cases,  clauses 

'Sec.   3233,  chap.   17  of  N.  Y. 
Code,  1880. 


CHAP.  Lvn.]     Who  Entitled  to  Eelief.  1397 

1  and  2  supra  might  apply,  without  being  subject  to  the 
objections  stated. 

Sec.  573.  Who  is  entitled  to  summary  relief.— Under  the 
Code,'  the  application  for  summary  rehef  must  (except 
in  the  single  instance  of  a  bawdy-house)  be  made  by  the 
person  legally  entitled  to  possession,  as,  the  landlord  or 
lessor,  a  purchaser  upon  the  execution  of  foreclosure 
sale,  the  person  forcibly  put  or  kept  out,  the  person 
with  whom  as  owner  the  agreement  was  made-,  or  the 
owner  of  the  property  under  whom  the  property  is 
occupied,  to  cultivate  upon  shares,  or  the  person  lawfully 
entitled  to  the  possession  of  the  property  intruded  or 
squatted  upon,  as  the  case  requires,  or  by  the  legal  rep- 
resentative, agent  or  assignee  of  the  landlord,  purchaser, 
or  other  person  so  entitled  to  apply." 

Sec.  674.  How  application  must  be  made.— A  person  ap- 
plying for  summary  relief  must  present  a  petition  in 
writing  to  the  judge  or  justice  having  jurisdiction,  which 
must  be  verified  in  the  same  manner  as  a  verified  com- 
plaint brought  in  the  Supreme  Court.  The  petition 
must  describe  the  premises  of  which  possession  is  sought, 
and  must  set  forth  the  petitioner's  interest  therein,  or 
the  interest  of  the  person  whom  he  represents,  and  the 
faicts  upon  which  he  claims  the  removal  of  the  tenant  or 
person  in  possession.  The  names  of  the  person  or  ppr- 
sons  sought  to  be  removed  must  be  stated,  or  they  must 
otherwise  be  intelligibly  designated,  where  the  names  of 
such  person  or  persons  are  unknown  ;  and  where  there  are 
two  or  more  persons  who  hold  in  different  rights,  as  ten- 
ants, or  undertenants  or  assignees,  the  petitions  must 
specify  who  are  tenants,  and  who  are  undertenants, 
assignees,   &c.,  and  the  petition  must  also  contain  a 

'  Sec.  2335.  and  no  right  to  maintain  an  action 

•^  A    husband,    after   his   wife's  to  dispossess  a  tenant.     Weisen- 

death,    may    maintain    summary  bach  v.  Pohalski,  N.  Y.  Daily  Reg. 

proceedings   for  the  recovery    of  Dec.  14th,  1883.     Nor  does  she  ob- 

such  of  the  wife's  lands  as  remain  tain  this  right  under  a  will  which 

unbequeathed.    Mack  v.  Eoek,  13  provides  for  the  sale  of  the  land, 

Daly  (N.   Y.   C.   P.)  103.     But  a  and  payment  of  the  avails  of  the 

widow,  until  dower  is  assigned  to  sale,  in  whole  or  in  part  to  her. 

her  gives  her  no  estate  in  the  land.  Lent  v.  Howard,  89  N.  Y.  176. 
ii.— 36 


1398  Summary  Proceedings.  [§  575i 

prayer  for  an  order  for  the  removal  of  such  person  or 
persons.' 

Sec.  57o.  Petition  by  a  neighbor  of  a  bawdy-house.— A 
person  who  owns  or  occupies  premises  in  the  immediate 
neighborhood  of  premises  held  under  a  lease,  which  are 
used  or  occupied  as  a  bawdy-house,  or  house  of  assigna- 
tion for  lewd  persons,  may,  under  the  provisions  of  the 
Code,"  serve  upon  the  owner  or  landlord  of  such  prem- 
ises, or  upon  his  agent,  personally,  a  written  notice 
requiring  the  owner  or  landlord  to  apply  for  the  removal 
of  the  person  or  persons  so  using  such  premises,  and  if 
such  owner,  landlord  or  agent,  does  not  so  apply  within 
five  days  after  such  notice  is  served,  or,  having  made 
such  application,  does  not  in  good  faith  diligently  pursue 
it,  the  person  giving  such  notice  may  make  such  an  appli- 
cation, stating  therein  the  facts  which  he  claims  entitle 
him  to  make  it.  Of  course,  the  petition  must  state  that 
he  owns,  or  occupies  as  tenant,  premises  in  the  immediate 
neighborhood  of  the  premises  so  wrongfully  used,  and 
that  he  has  served  the  notice  required  by  this  section, 
and  in  the  manner  required,  upon  the  owner  or  landlord 
thereof,  or  his  agent,  and  that  they  have  failed  to  insti- 
tute proceedings  for  the  removal  of  such  persons,  within 
five  days  after  the  service  of  such  notice.  If  the  applica- 
tion is  based  upon  the  claim  that  such  owner,  &c.,  having 
instituted  proceedings,  has  failed  in  good  faith  to  dili- 
gently prosecute  them,  the  petition  must  set  forth  fully 
the  facts,  and  they  must  be  of  such  a  character  as  clearly 
indicate  that  the  proceedings  were  not  instituted  and 
prosecuted  in  good  faith,  or  that  their  prosecution  has 
been  unreasonably  delayed  or  prolonged.  Of  course,  the 
applicant  takes  the  burden  of  showing  that  the  premises 
are  occupied  or  used  by  the  persons  in  possession  thereof, 
either  as  a  bawdy-house,  or  as  a  house  of  assignation /or 
lewd  persons ;  and  upon  failure  to  establish  the  fact  of 
such  use  by  satisfactory  proof. 

Sec.  576.  Towhomapplieationshoiildbemade.— Acounty 

'  Sec.  2235,  Code  of  1880.         '  Sec.  3337. 


CHAP.  Lvn.]       Statement  of  Petition.  1399 

judge,  or  special  county  judge  of  the  county,  or  a  justice 
of  the  peace  of  the  city  or  town,  or  the  mayor  or  recorder 
of  the  city  wherein  the  premises  are  situated,  and  the 
city  judge  or  judge  of  general  sessions,  or  a  judge  of  the 
Marine  Court  of  the  city  of  New  York,  or  the  District 
Court  of  the  district  within  which  the  property  or  a 
portion  of  it  is  situated,'  and  a  police  justice  in  the  city 
of  Brooklyn,  or  a  justice  of  the  Justices'  Court  in  the 
cities  of  Albany  and  Troy,  and  the  city  judge  of'Yonkers 
and  a  judge  of  the  Municipal  Court  of  Eochester,  are 
given  jurisdiction  in  this  class  of  cases,  and  no  other 
judges,  magistrates  or  courts  have  the  power  to  enter- 
tain an  application  or  to  issue  a  precept  for  the  summary 
removal  of  tenants  or  occupants  of  premises  his  applica- 
tion wiU  fail." 

Sec.  57T.  what  should  be  stated  in  the  petition.-  Proceed- 
ings for  summary  removal  being  in  derogation  of  the 
common  law,  and  purely  statutory,  every  requirement 
of  the  statute  in  reference  thereto  must  be  strictly 
complied  with.  The  petition  must  state  facts,  and  the 
facts  stated  must  be  such  as  clearly  show  that,  if  proved, 
the  petitioner  is  entitled  to  the  relief  prayed  for.  Every 
essential  fact  requisite  to  entitle  the  petitioner  to  this 
remedy  should  be  clearly  stated.'  The  right  of  the  peti- 
tioner to  immediate  possession  must  clearly  appear,  and 
it  must  also  appear  that  the  premises  are  within  the 
county,  city  or  district  over  which  the  judge,  magistrate 
or  court  has  jurisdiction  ;  and  an  ommissionin  this  respect 
is  a  jurisdictional  defect."  So,  too,  it  must  appear  when 
the  petition  was  verified,  so  that  it  may  be  known 
whether  the  officer  before  which  it  was  verified  had 
authority  to  administer  the  oath.'  Jurisdiction  depends 
upon  the  petition,  and  every  fact  requisite  to  give  juris- 
diction must  be  stated  ;  and  if  it  lacks  an  essential  requi- 
site— and  all  the  matters  specified    by  the  statute  as 

1  In  Brown  y.  New  York,  66  N.  '  Powers  v.  "Witty,  43  How.  Pr- 
Y.  385,  it  was  held  that  proceed-  859 ;  Campbell  v.  Mallory,  S3  id- 
ings  against  the  city  of  New  York      183. 

under  this  provision  of  the  statute  *  People  v.  De  Camp,  13  Hun,  378. 
would  lie  in  a  district  court.  '  Cook  v    Staats,  18  Barb.   407 ; 

2  Sec.  3334,  Code  of  1880.  Sane  v.  Morse,  6  How.  Pr.  394. 


14:00  Summary  PROCEEDmas.  [§  577. 

requisite  to  give  this  remedy  are  essential — all  subsequent 
proceedings  are  void,  unless  the  defect  is  waived  ; '  conse- 
quently, the  petition  must  state  the  petitioner's  right  to 
possession,  and  whether  he  claims  as  landlord  or  lessor, 
as  a  purchaser  upon  execution  or  foreclosure  sale,  or  of 
premises  upon  which  a  stranger  has  squatted,  or  as  a 
former  occupant  who  has  been  put  and  kept  out  of  pos- 
session, or  as  owner  who  let  the  premises  to  be  culti- 
vated, or  as  the  representative,  agent  or  assignee  of  the 
landlord,  purchaser  or  other  person  who,  under  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Code,  is  entitled  to  apply  for  this  species 
of  relief.  So,  too,  it  must  state  under  what  claim  of 
right  the  person  sought  to  be  removed  holds,  and  unless 
it  appears  that  the  defendant  holds  in  some  one  of  the 
capacities  specified  in  the  Code,  the  petition  will  not  lie. 
The  remedy,  being  purely  statutory,  can  be  maintained 
only  in  those  instances,  and  in  the  mode  specified  by 
the  statute.  The  petition  must  state  facts,  and  not 
inferences  from  facts,"  and  should  make  out  a  plain  case 
within  the  provisions  of  the  statute."  It  must  appear 
from  the  petition  that  all  the  preliminary  steps  requisite  to 
be  taken  to  entitle  the  party  to  the  remedy  have  been 
taken,  and  also  precisely  what  was  done,  as,  in  the  case 
of  a  tenant  at  will,  or  by  sufferance,  that  the  tenancy  has 
been  termmated  by  giving  notice  to  quit  by  a  certain 
specified  day,  which  must  have  been  of  at  least  ten  days' 
duration;*  or,  if  a  demand  of  the  rent  is  required  to  be 
made,  that  such  demand  has  been  made  as  required  by 
the  statute,"  and  generally  that  everything  has  been  done 
that  is  required  by  the  statute  as  preliminary  to  a  right 
to  this  remedy  ;  and  a  mere  statement  that  such  require- 
ment has  been  performed  is  not  enough,  as  such  a  state- 
ment is  a  mere  inference  from  facts ;  the  facts  must  be 

'  Baenard,  p.  J.,  in  People  v.  which  is  hereto  annexed,"  and  it 

De  Camp,  ante.  was  held  that,  as  the  statute  pre- 

'  Hill  V.  Stacking,  6  Hill,  317.  scribed  how  the  notice  should  be 

3  Wiggin  V.  Woodruff,  ante.  served,  the  affidavit  was  defective 

*  Sec.  3336,  Code  1880.  in  not  setting  out  the  manner  of 

*  In  People  v.  Keteltas,  13  Hun,  service,  so  that  the  the  court  could 
67,  the  aflSdavit  stated  that  "he  see  whether  the  statute  had  been 
has  demanded  the  rent  by  a  three  comphed  with,  and  jurisdiction 
days'  notice  in  writing,  a  copy  of  acquired. 


CHAP.  Lvii.j  How  Served.  1401 

stated,  so  that  the  court  can  see  whether  such  an  inference 
is  properly  deducible  therefrom. 

Sec.  578.  How  served.— The  Code,  sec.  2240,  provides 
that  the  precept,  if  directed  to  a  corporation,  must  be 
served  by  dehvering  to  an  officer  thereof,  upon  whom  a 
summons  issued  out  of  the  Supreme  Court,  in  an  action 
against  the  corporation,  may  be  served,  a  copy  of  the 
precept,  and  at  the  same  time  showing  him  the  original. 
If  upon  an  individual,  the  precept  must  be  served  upon  him 
by  delivering  him  a  copy  thereof,  and  also  showing  him 
the  original,  and  if  there  are  several  defendants  similar 
services  must  be  made  upon  each  of  them. 

If,  however,  the  defendant  resides  in  the  city  or  town 
where  the  property  is  situated,  and  is  absent  from  his 
dwelling-house,  service  may  be  made  by  delivering  a 
copy  of  the  precept  at  his  dwelling-house,  to  a  person  of 
suitable  age  and  discretion  who  resides  therein,  and  if  no 
such  person  can  be  found  there,  then  by  delivering  a 
copy  of  the  precept  at  the  property  sought  to  be  recovered, 
either  to  some  person  of  suitable  age  and  discretion  resid- 
ing there,  or  if  no  such  person  can  be  found  there,  to  any 
person  of  suitable  age  and  discretion  employed  there.' 
In  case  service  cannot  be  made  in  either  of  the  modes 
previously  named,  then  the  precept  may  be  served  by 
affixing  a  copy  of  the  precept  upon  a  conspicuous  part 
of  the  property.  The  statutory  provisions  as  to  service 
must  be  complied  with  in  order  to  give  jurisdiction,  and 
an  omission  to  show  that  the  tenant  or  person  on  whom 

'  By  sec.  2241  it  is  provided  that  that  he  has  been  unable,  after  the 
a  person  to  whom  a  copy  of  a  pre-  exercise  of  reasonable  diligence,  to 
cept,  directed  to  another,  is  deUv-  find  the  person  to  whom  the  pre- 
ered,  as  prescribed  in  this  title,  cept  is  directed,  or  his  agent,  with- 
must,  without  any  avoidable  de-  in  the  town  or  city.  A  person  who 
lay,  deliver  it  to  the  person  to  wilfully  violates  any  provision  of 
whom  it  is  directed,  if  he  can  be  this  section,  is  guilty  of  a  misde- 
found  within  the  same  town  or  meaner ;  and,  if  he  is  a  tenant  upon 
city ;  or,  if  he  cannot  be  so  found,  to  the  property,  forfeits  to  his  laad- 
his  agent  therein ;  and  if  neither  lord  the  value  of  three_  years'  rent 
can  be  so  found,  after  the  exercise  of  the  premises  occupied  by  him. 
of  reasonable  diligence,  before  the  A  copy  of  this  section  must  be  in- 
time  when  the  precept  is  retuma-  dorsed  upon  each  copy  of  a  pre- 
ble,  to  the  judge  or  justice  who  is-  cept  served  otherwise  than  per- 
sued  the  same,  at  the  time  of  the  sonaUy  upon  the  person  to  whom 
return  thereof,  with  a  written  it  is  directed, 
statement     indorsed     thereupon," 


1402  Summary  Proceedings.  ~       [§  5Y8. 

the  precept  is  to  be  served  resides  in  the  city  or  town 
where  the  property  is  located  and  was  absent  from  his . 
dwelling-house,  will  invalidate  the  service.  So,  too, 
where  personal  service  is  made,  it  has  been  held  that  a 
failure  to  show  that  the  original  summons  was  shown 
the  defendant  rendered  the  service  irregular.'  If  there 
are  several  defendants  the  return  must  show  service 
upon  each  one."  If  the  precept  is  made  i-eturnable  upon 
the  day  upon  which  it  issues,  it  must  be  served  at  least 
two  hours  before  the  hour  at  which  it  is  returnable  ;  but 
in  all  other  cases,  it  must  be  served  at  least  two  days 
before  the  day  on  which  it  is  returnable.  Under  this 
provision,  it  has  been  held  that  service  made  on  the-  23 
of  Nov.  to  appear  on  the  25th  is  sufficient.'  "Where  a 
petition  is  made  by  a  neighbor  of  a  bawdy-house  the 
precept  must  be  directed  to  the  landlord  or  his  agent 
and  the  tenant  or  occupant  of  the  property,  and  must  be 
served  upon  both. 

In  case  the  precept  is  served  by  a  sheriff,  constable  or 
marshal  service  may  be  proved  by  the  certificate  of  the 
officer,  stating  the  facts ;  but  where  it  is  served  by  an 
indifferent  person,  the  service  should  be  proved  by  affida- 
vit ;  and  in  either  case  the  return  of  the  affidavit  should 
set  forth  the  facts  as  to  the  mode  of  service.  If  service 
is  made  personally,  it  should  appear  in  the  return  that  a 
copy  of  the  precept  was  delivered  to  the  defendant  and 
the  original  shown  to  him  ; '  and  if  service  is  made  by 
delivering  a  copy  of  the  precept  at  his  dwelling-house  to 
a  person  of  suitable  age  and  discretion  residing  there,  the 
fact  of  the  defendant's  residence  in  the  city  or  town  in 
which  the  property  is  located,  as  well  as  his  absence 
from  the  dwelling  at  the  time  of  service,  should  be  clearly 
and  distinctly  stated,  as  a  justification  of  that  mode  of 
service ;  and  if  service  is  made  by  delivering  a  copy  of 
the  precept  at  the  property,  &c.,  with  a  person  of  suit- 

•  People  V.  Matthews,  43  Barb.  ^  People   v.   DeCamp,   12    Hun, 

168.    Unless  it  appears  from  the  378 ;  Matter  of  Glern,  1  How.  213. 

record  that  the  precept  was  legal-  '  People  v.  Marvjai  Safe  Co.,  5 

ly  served  jurisdiction   is  not  ac-  Hun,  218. 

quired,  and  the  judgment  is  void.  *  Duel  v.  Rust,  24  Barb.  438. 
Beach  v.  Bainbridge,  7  Hun,  81. 


CHAP.  Lvn.]  How  Served.  1403 

able  age  and  discretion  residing  there,  it  should  oe  stated 
that  neither  the  defendant  or  any  person  of  suitable  age 
and  discretion  could,  with  reasonable  diligence,  be  found 
at  the  defendant's  dwelling ;  and  if  service  is  made  by 
delivering  a  copy  at  the  property  with  a  person  of  suit- 
able age  and  discretion  employed  there,  all  the  foregoing 
matters  should  appear,  as  weU  also  the  fact  that  no 
person  of  suitable  age  and  discretion  residing  at  the  prop- 
erty could  be  found  there. 

If  service  is  made  by  aflBxing  a  copy  of  the  precept 
upon  a  conspicuous  part  of  the  property,  it  should  also 
appear  from  the  return  or  affidavit  that  service  could  not 
be  made  in  any  other  of  the  modes  designated  in  sec. 
2240.  This  is  essential,  because  the  statutory  method  of 
service,  in  the  order  stated,  is  essential  to  give  jurisdic- 
tion, and,  unless  it  appears  from  the  record  that  personal 
service  could  not  be  made,  it  will  not  be  presumed  from 
the  mere  fact  that  service  was  made  by  either  of  the 
other  modes  that  personal  service,  &c.,  could  not  be 
made. 

The  petitioner  is  bound,  upon  the  return  day  of  the 
precept,  unless  the  defendant  appears,  to  prove  the  due 
service  thereof,  and  the  time,  place  and  manner  of  ser- 
vice ;  and  unless  service  was  made  personally  upon  the 
defendant,  or  by  affixing  a  copy  of  the  precept  upon  a 
conspicuous  part  of  the  property,  the  name  of  the  person 
to  whom  the  copy  was  delivered  should  appear,  if  it  can 
be  ascertained  with  reasonable  diligence. 

As  previously  stated,  where  the  precept  is  served  by  a 
regular  officer,  as  a  sheriff,  constable  or  marshal,  his 
return,  so  far  as  it  states  the  facts,  will  be  taken  as 
sufficient  proof  of  such  service ;  but  whether  service  is 
proved  by  such  certificate  or  by  the  affidavit  of  any 
other  person  serving  the  precept,  it  seems  that  if  the 
return  or  affidavit  is  insufficient  the  oral  testimony  of 
the  officer  or  person  making  affidavit  of  service  is  admis- 
sible to  show  the  manner  of  service,  and  that  the  statute 
was  complied  with  by  him  in  making  such  service, 
although  such  fact  does  not  appear  upon  the  face  of  the 
return  or  affidavit.    Thus,  where  a  precept  was  served 


1404  SuMMAEY  Proceedings.  [§  579. 

by  a  constable,  and  in  his  aflRdavit  of  service  he  stated 
that  he  left  a  copy  of  the  precept  at  the  dwelling,  &c., 
of  the  defendant,  "with  his  wife,  a  person  of  mature 
age,  residing  on  the  premises,"  but  did  not  state  that 
the  defendant  was  absent  from  his  last  or  usual  place  of 
residence,  and  the  record  show  that  upon  the  return  of 
the  summons  to  the  justice  the  constable  was  sworn  and 
examined  orally  as  to  its  service,  and  then  testified 
that  before  delivering  the  copy  to  the  defendant's  wife 
he  inquired  of  her  if  he  was  at  home,  and  she  said  that 
he  was  not,  it  was  held  that  the  defect  was  cured  and 
the  justice  acquired  jurisdiction.'  But  such  defect  can- 
not be  cured  after  judgment." 

Sec.  579.  Aniendmentstopetltion,preeept,  &e.— If  there 
is  a  defect  in  the  petition,  precept  or  answer,  the  statute 
does  not  confer  authority  upon  the  justice  or  court  to 
permit  amendments  thereto,  or  to  permit  a  supplemental 
petition  or  answer  to  be  filed ;  therefore,  where  the 
defect  is  such  as  affects  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court — as, 
where  facts  sufficient  to  uphold  such  remedy  under  the 
statute  are  not  stated — ^the  only  remedy  of  the  petitioner 
is  to  commence  de  novo.  Of  course,  where  the  defect 
is  merely  technical,  it  is  treated  as  having  been  waived 
unless  seasonably  objected  to  ;  but  if  objection  is  season- 
ably taken,  it  may  seriously  prejudice  if  not  entirely 
defeat  the  claim  or  defence." 

Sec.  580.  Answer,  issues,  &c.— The  Code  provides' that, 
when  the  precept  is  returnable,  without  waiting  as  pre- 
scribed in  an  action  before  a  justice  of  the  peace,  or  in  a 
District  Court  of  New  York  City,  the  person  to  whom  it 
is  directed,  or  his  landlord,  or  any  person  in  possession  or 
claiming  possession  of  the  premises,  or  of  any  of  them, 
may  file  with  the  judge  or  justice  who  issued  the  precept 
a  written  answer,  verified  in  the  same  manner  as  an 

'  Robinson  v.  McManus,  4  Lans.  default.    McAdam's  L.  &  T.  363  ; 

381.     The  power  of   amendment  Perry  v.  Tynen,  83  Barb.  137. 

does  not  depend  upon  the  defend-  ^  Tlie    People    v.    Boardman,    4 

ant's  appearance  in  the  suit,  but  an  Keyes,  59. 

amendment  will  be  permitted  even  *  McAdam's  L.  &  T.  263,  270. 

in  case  where  judgment  goes  by  ^Sec,  3244. 


CHAP.  Lvn.J         Answer,  Issues,  &c.  1405 

answer  in  the  Supreme  Court,  denying  generally  the  alle- 
gations, or  specifically  any  material  allegation  of  the 
petition. 

It  was  not  intended  by  the  legislature  to  cut  ofE 
special  defences  by  the  tenant,  although  such  might  be 
the  apparent  effect  of  this  section.  Such  a  construction 
would  be  highly  inequitable,  and  would  ha.ve  the  effect 
to  dispossess  the  tenant  in  instances  where  he  had  a 
complete  legal  defence.  The  spirit  of  the  statute  rather 
than  its  letter  is  to  be  regarded,  and  special  defences, 
even  where  the  tenant  cannot  deny  any  of  the  allegations 
in  the  petition,  are  undoubtedly  permissible.  Mr.  Mc- 
Adam,  in  his  excellent  treatise  upon  this  topic  in  dis- 
cussing this  question,  says  : '  "  Take  the  case  of  a  tenant 
whose  defence  is  payment;  he  cannot  dispute  the  hiring, 
nor  its  terms,  nor  can  he  deny  that  the  rent  became  due 
as  alleged  by  the  landlord,  nor  can  he  deny  that  the  land- 
lord demanded  it,  and  these  admissions  substantially  make 
out  the  landlord's  case,  and  yet  the  tenant,  after  admit- 
ting all  these  facts,  may  have  paid  the  landlord  at  the 
time  he  demanded  the  rent.  The  legislature  did  not  in- 
tend to  exclude  this  affirmative  defence.  Take  another 
case:  Suppose  the  tenant  has  been  evicted  by  title  par- 
amount before  the  rent  claimed  accrued,  and  was,  in 
consequence,  compulsorily  obliged  to  attorn  and  pay  rent 
to  the  paramount  owner,  in  order  to  protect  his  posses- 
sion ;  the  tenant  could  not,  in  such  a  case,  deny  any  of 
the  facts  required  to  be  stated  in  the  affidavit  of  the 
original  landlord,  if  he  saw  fit  to  institute  a  proceeding  of, 
dispossession,  and  still  the  tenant  has  a  complete  defence 
in  law.  The  legislatui'e  did  not  intend  to  exclude  such 
an  affirmative  defence.  The  denial  contemplated  by  the 
statute,  means  the  denial  by  te-liant  of  the  landlord's 
claim  for  rent  or  possession  by  the  pleading  of  facts, 
which  of  themselves  constitute  such  denial,  by  showing 
that  for  some  reason,  recognized  in  law  as  valid,  the 
claim  made  by  the  landlord,  although  it  once  existed,  has, 
by  reason  of  the  facts  alleged,  ceased  to  exist  or,  if  the 

'  McAdams  L.  &  T.  266. 


1406  Summary  Proceedings.  [§  581. 

right  never  existed,  the  same  result  is  accomplished  by  a 
simple  denial  of  the  facts  alleged  by  the  landlord.  That 
this  was  the  intention  of  the  legislature  is  manifest  from 
the  spirit  if  not  from  the  language  of  the  statute,  partic- 
ularly when  construed  with  reference  to  the  plea  of  the 
general  issue  under  the  system  of  pleading  in  use  at  the 
time  the  statute  was  passed  ;  for  under  this  plea  almost 
every  affirmative  defence  was  admitted  which  went  to 
defeat  the  plaintiff's  claim.  The  modern  system  of  plead- 
ing has,  however,  changed  the  former  rule  by  requiring 
affirmative  matter  to  be  specially  pleaded." 

Where  the  application  is  for  a  forcible  entry  or  holding 
over,  the  petitioner  is  required  to  allege  and  prove  an 
actual  peaceable  possession  of  the  premises  by  him  at 
the  time  when  the  forcible  entry  was  made,  or  that  he 
had  a  constructive  possession  thereof  at  the  time  of  for- 
cible holding."  The  defendant  must  deny  the  forcible 
jntry  or  holding,  or  must  allege  in  defence  that  he,  or  his 
:  :,ncestor,  or  those  whose  interest  he  claims,  had  been  in 
ruiet  possession  of  the  premises  for  three  consecutive 
years  next  before  the  alleged  forcible  entry  or  detainer, 
and  that  such  interest  is  not  ended  or  determined  at  the 
time  of  trial. 

Sec.  581.  Trial,  jury,  &c.— When  the  issue  is  made  up 
in  these  proceedings  by  the  petition  and  answer,  it  must 
be  tried  by  the  judge  or  justice,  unless  some  one  of  the 
parties  answering  files  with  his  answer  a  written  de- 
mand that  the  issues  be  tried  by  jury,  and  at  the  same 
time  pays  to  the  judge  or  justice,  or  to  the  clerk  of  the 
court,  the  fees  of  the  jurors  and  of  the  officer  for  notify- 
ing them.  The  right  to  demand  a  jury  is  confined  to 
the  defendant,  and  doQS  not  exist  unless  demanded  in 
the  mode  provided, .  and  upon  full  compliance  with  all 
the  preliminaries  named ."  If  the  statutory  require- 
ments are  complied  with  a  jury  must  be  summoned,  and 
the  right  of  the  judge  or  justice  to  try  the  issues  is  gone, 
unless  they  agree  to  waive  a  jury  trial.  °    The  jury  is  to 

1  Sec.  3245,  Code  1880.  ''People  v.   Hovey,  4  Lans.  86. 

=  Sec.  2247,  Code  1880.  In  this  case  it  was  held  that,  unless 


CHAP.  Lvn.]  Change  of  Venu^^J  )     ) ,  /  i       1407 

be  summoned  and  the  issues  tried  by  it  in  the  same 
manner  as  in  other  actions  in  the  court  of  which  the 
judge  or  justice  who  issued  the  precept  is  the  presiding 
officer,  and  the  court  possesses  the  same  powers  in  these 
proceedings  as  in  other  actions  in  his  court,  except  so 
far  as  such  powers  are  specially  abridged  in  title  2  of 
chapter  17  of  the  Code. 

Sec.  582.  Change  of  venue.— In  New  York  City,  a  jus- 
tice sitting  in  a  District  Court,  at  the  time  of  joining 
issue  in  these  proceedings,  may,  in  his  discretion,  upon 
motion  of  either  of  the  parties,  or  if  no  justice  is  present 
the  clerk  may,  hy  consent  of  both  parties,  make  an  order 
transferring  the  cause  for  trial  in  a  District  Court  of  an 
adjoining  district,  and  the  court  to  which  the  cause  is 
transferred  has  the  same  powers  as  though  the  proceed- 
ings had  been  commenced  in  that  court,  and  as  though 
the  property  was  situated  in  the  district.' 

Sec.  583.  Adjournment.— The  judge  or  justice  has  no 
power  to  grant  or  order  an  adjournment,  except  where 
an  adjournment  is  requested  by  one  of  the  parties  upon 
the  ground  that  such  adjournment  is  necessary  to  enable 
the  apphcant  to  procure  his  necessary  witnesses,  or  by 
consent  of  all  the  parties  ;  and  an  adjournment  for  any 
other  cause,  or  upon  any  other  ground,  ousts  the  court 
of  its  jurisdiction."  When  an  adjournment  is  granted  to 
enable  a  party  to  procure  his  necessary  witnesses,  the 
record  should  show  the  fact  that  it  was  granted  for  that 
cause,  and  upon  satisfactory  proof,  either  by  affidavit  or 
orally,  that  such  adjournment  for  that  purpose  was  nec- 
essary. An  adjournment  cannot  be  granted  for  more 
than  ten  Al.jS,  unless  all  the  parties  consent,  nor  can 
more  than  one  adjournment  be  granted  by  the  court ; 
although,  if  all  the  parties  consent  to  a  second  adjourn- 
ment, the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  is  not  thereby  ousted.' 

the  parties  complied  with  the  stat-     power  to  order  the  empanelling  of 
ute  and  demanded  a  jury  at  the     a  jury, 
time  of  filing  the  answer,  and  paid         '  Sec.  2246. 
thefees,  the  rights  to  a  jury  trial  is         ^Bollerv.NewYorkjSJ.  &S.364. 
waived,  and  the  court  then  has  no         '  Brown  v.  New  York,  66  N.  Y. 

385  ;  sec.  2248. 


1408      .,  Summary  Proceedings.  [§  684, 

If  none  of  the  defendants  appear,  upon  the  return  of  the 
summons  the  justice  may  enter  a  judgment  by  default, 
and  is  not  bound  to  wait  an  hour,  as  in  ordinary  civil 
actions." 

Sec.  684.  Pinal  order.— If  the  verdict  of  the  jury  is  in 
favor  of  the  petitioner,  or  if  the  issue  is  tried  by  the 
judge  or  justice  and  found  in  favor,  of  the  petitioner,  the 
judge  or  justice  must  make  an  order  awarding  to  the 
petitioner  the  delivery  of  the  possession  of  the  premises, 
and  the  costs  of  the  special  proceedings.  But  if  the  ver- 
dict or  decision  is  in  favor  of  the  defendant,  an  order 
that  the  petitioner  is  not  entitled,  &c.,  and  that  the  de- 
fendant is  entitled  to  retain  possession,  and  awarding 
him  his  costs,  must  be  made."  This,  however,  is  not  the 
case  where  the  petition  is  brought  by  the  neighbor  of  a 
bawdy-house,  as,  in  such  a  case,  the  petition  is  not  based 
upon  the  petitioner's  right  to  possession,  but  rather  upon 
his  right  to  have  a  nuisance  abated  ;  and  the  order,  ac- 
cording to  the  provisions  of  the  section  last  referred  to, 
must  direct  the  removal  of  the  occupant  or  occupants  of 
the  bawdy-house,  and  the  payment  of  the  petitioner's 
costs. 

Costs,  except  as  otherwise  provided,  must  be  at  the 
rate  allowed  by  law  in  the  court  in  which  the  action 
is  tried,  and  subject .  to  all  the  limitations  in  that 
respect.  Where  the  petition  is  based  upon  a  forcible 
entry  or  detainer,  the  judge  or  justice  may  award  to  the 
party  recovering  a  specific  sum  as  costs,  not  exceeding 
fifty  dollars,  in  addition  to  Ms  disbursements.^  The 
final  order  for  costs  may  be  docketed,  and  an  execution 
may  be  issued  to  collect  the  same,  as  is  done  in  cases  of 
other  actions  in  the  court  of  which  the  judge  or  justice  is 
presiding  officer. 

Sec.  586.  How  possession  is  obtained.— Stay  of  warrant, 
etc-- Where  an  order  is  in  favor  of  the  petitioner  (except 
when  the  petition  is    brought  by  the  neighbor  of    a 

'  Mordant  v.  'N  lee,  1  Abb.  JST.  C.         'Sec.  2349. 
300.  ^Sec.  3250.  Code  of  1880. 


CHAP.  Lvn.]  Possession.  1409 

bawdy-house),  the  judge  or  justice  must  issue  his  war- 
rant, directed  to  the  sheriff  of  the  county,  or  to  any 
constable  or  marshal  of  the  town  or  city  in  which  the 
premises,  or  a  part  thereof,  is  situated,  describing  the 
property,  and  commanding  the  officer  to  remove  all 
persons  therefrom,  and  to  put  the  petitioner  in  full  pos- 
session thereof.*  The  warrant  must  be  executed  only 
in  the  day-time,  between  the  hours  of  sunrise  and  sun- 
set." The  issuing  of  a  warrant  cancels  the  contract  or 
lease  under  which  the  defendant  holds,  and  annuls  the 
relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  except  that  it  does  not 
defeat  the  landlord's  right  to  recover  by  action  under 
such  agreement  or  lease,  the  rent  which  had  accrued  at 
the  time  when  the  precept  was  issued  ;  or,  if  no  sum 
was  agreed  upon,  a  reasonable  sum  for  the  use  and  oc- 
cupation of  the  premises  to  the  time  when  the  warrant 
was  issued.' 

If  an  order  for. the  removal  of  the  tenant  is  made  for 
non-payment  of  rent,  the  tenant  may,  at  any  time  before 
a  warrant  is  issued,  stay  the  issuing  of  such  warrant  by 
payment  of  the  rent  due  and  all  costs,  or  by  delivering  to 
the  judge  or  justice,  or  the  clerk  of  the  court,  his  under- 
taking to  the  petitioner  in  such  sum  and  with  such 
sureties  as  the  judge  or  justice  approves,  to  the  effect 
that  he  will  pay  the  rent  and  costs  within  ten  days,  at 
the  expiration  of  which  time  a  warrant  may  issue,  un- 
less he  produces  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  payment. 

Where  the  petition  is  predicated  upon  the  ground  that 
the  lessee  or  tenant  has  been  adjudicated  a  bankrupt, 
or  has  taken  advantage  of  an  insolvent  act,  he  may  stay 
the  warrant  by  paying  the  costs  and  delivering  to  the 
judge  or  justice,  or  the  clerk  of  the  court,  with  sureties, 
and  for  a  sum  approved  of  by  them,  and  undertaking  to 
the  petitioner  that  he  will  pay  the  rent  of  the  premises 
as  it  has  become,  or  may  thereafter  become,  due. 

Where  the  final  order  establishes  that  the  defendant  con- 
tinues in  possession  of  real  property,  which  had  been  sold 
by  virtue  of  an  execution  against  his  property,  he  may 

1  Sec.  3251.  2  Sec.  2253. 

2  Sec.  3253. 


1410  SuMMAEY  Proceedings.  [§  586. 

effect  a  stay  by  paying  the  costs  of  the  special  proceeding, 
and  delivering  to  the  judge  or  justice,  or  the  clerk  of  the 
court,  an  affidavit  that  he  claims  the  possession  of  the 
property  by  virtue  of  a  right  or  title  acquired  after  the 
sale,  or  as  guardian  or  trustee  for  another,  together 
vpith  his  undertaking  to  the  petitioner,  in  such  a  sum 
and  with  such  sureties  as  the  judge  or  justice  approves, 
to  the  effect  that  he  will  pay  any  costs  and  damages 
which  maj'  be  recovered  against  him,  in  an  action  of 
ejectment  to  recover  the  property,  brought  against  him 
by  the  petitioner  within  six  months  thereafter,  and  that 
he  will  not  commit  any  waste  upon  or  injury  to  the 
property  during  his  occupation  thereof.' 

Where  an  undertq,king  is  given,  in  a  case  where  the 
final  order  is  obtained  for  the  non-payment  of  the  rent, 
the  judge  or  justice  must  deliver  it  to  the  person  against 
whom  the  final  order  was  made  upon  satisfactory  proof 
of  payment  of  the  rent,  &c. ;  but  if  such  proof  is  not  pro- 
duced within  ten  days  the  undertaking  belongs,  and 
must  be  delivered,  to  the  petitioner.  In  all  other  cases, 
the  undertaking  must  be  delivered  to  the  petitioner 
immediately  after  its  approval." 

Sec.  586.  Whenlesseemayredeem.— When  a  warrant  for 
the  removal  of  a  tenant  is  obtained  for  the  non-payment 
of  rent,  and  the  unexpired  term  of  the  lease  exceeds  five 
years,  at  the  time  when  the  warrant  is  issued  the  tenant 
or  his  assignee  or  legal  representative,  may,  within  one 
year  after  the  execution  of  the  warrant,  tender  to  the 
landlord,  his  assignee  or  legal  representative,  all  rent  in 
arrear  at  the  time  of  the  payment  or  tender,  with  legal 
interest  thereon,  and  aU  costs  and  charges  incurred  by 
the  petitioner  ;  or  if  within  five  days  before  the  expiration 
of  the  year  the  petitioner,  his  assignee  or  legal  represent- 
ative, cannot  with  reasonable  diligence  be  found,  such 
tender  or  payment  may  be  made  to  the  judge  or  justice 
who  issued  the  warrant,  or  liis  successor  in  office,  and 
thereupon  he  shall  be  entitled  to  the  possession  of  the 

>  Sec.  2254.  « Sec.  2355. 


CHAP.  LVII.J  .When  Lessee  May  Eedeem.  1411 

demised  pi'emises  under  the  lease,  and  may  hold  and 
enjoy  the  same  according  to  the  terms  thereof.'  The 
right  of  redemption  is  extended  to  a  judgment  creditor  or 
the  lessee  whose  judgment  was  docketed  in  the  county, 
and  to  a  mortgagee  of  the  lease  whose  mortgage  was 
duly  recorded  in  the  county,  where  such  execution  was 
docketed  or  mortgage  recorded  before  the  precept  was 
issued.  But  in  order  to  avail  themselves  of  this  right 
they  must,  unless  the  tenant  has  previously  redeemed 
within  one  year  after  the  execution  of  the  warrant,  file 
with  the  judge  or  justice  who  issued  the  warrant,  or  with 
his  successor  in  office,  a  notice  specifying  his  interest  and 
the  sum  due  to  him,  and  describing  the  premises,  and 
stating  his  intention  to  redeem  the  same.  After  having 
this  preliminary  step,  such  creditor  or  mortgagee  may, 
if  the  tenant,  or  those  entitled  to  do  so  under  or  through 
him,  does  not  redeem  at  any  time  before  two  o'clock  of 
the  day  (not  a  Sunday  or  a  public  holiday)  next  succeeding 
the  last  day  of  the  year  within  which  the  lessee  might 
redeem,  redeem  for  his  own  benefit,  in  like  manner  as 
the  lessee  may  redeem .  If  there  are  two  or  more  execu- 
tion creditors  or  mortgagees,  they  must  redeem  in  the 
order  of  the  priority  of  their  claims,  to  be  determined  in 
the  order  in  which  their  liens  are  filed  or  recorded. 
Where  two  or  more  such  judgment  creditors  or  mortga- 
gees have  filed  such  notices,  the  holder  of  the  second  lien 
may  redeem  at  any  time  before  two  o'clock  of  the  day 
(not  being  a  Sunday  or  public  holiday)  next  suceeding 
that  in  which  his  predecessor  might  have  redeemed." 
But  a  second  or  subsequent  redemption  is  not  valid  unless 
the  person  redeeming  pays  or  tenders  to  each  of  his  prede- 
cessors who  has  redeemed  the  sum  paid  by  him  to 
redeem,  and  also  the  sum  due  upon  his  judgment  or 
mortgage,  or  deposits  the  same  with  the  judge  or  justice 
for  the  benefit  of  his  predecessors.'  In  every  case  the 
rights  of  the  person  redeeming  are  subject  to  a  lease,  if 

'  Sec.  3356.  lease,  accruing  after  redemption, 

^  The  person  redeemins;  aa  judg-  the  same  as  though  he  was  named 

ment  creditor,  mortgagee,  &c.,  be-  as  lessee  in  the  lease.    Sec.  2259. 

comes  subject  to  all  the  duties  and  '  Sec.  3257. 

liabilities  of  the  lessee  under  the 


1412  Summary  Proceedings.  [§  587. 

any  has  been  executed  by  the  petitioner  subsequent  to 
the  issuing  of  the  warrant,  so  far  that  the  new  lessee, 
his  assigns,  undertenants  or  other  representatives  may, 
upon  complying  with  the  terms  of  the  lease,  hold  the 
premises  so  leased  until  12  o'clock,  noon,  of  the  first  day 
of  May  next  after  such  redemption.  And  in  all  other 
respects  the  person  redeeming,  as  weU  as  his  assigns  and 
representatives,  succeed  to  all  the  rights  and  Uabilities  of 
the  petitioner  under  such  a  lease.'  The  person  redeem- 
ing, or  the  owner  of  the  property  redeemed,  may  present 
to  the  justice  or  judge  who  issued  the  warrant,  or  to  his 
successor  in  office,  a  duly  verified  petition  setting  forth 
the  facts  of  tlie  redemption,  and  praying  for  an  order 
establishing  the  rights  of  the  parties  Under  such  redemp- 
tion. Upon  such  petition  the  judge  or  justice  must  issue 
an  order  requiring  the  other  party  to  the  redemption  to 
show  cause  before  him,  at  a  time  and  place  specified,  why 
the  prayer  of  the  petition  should  not  be  granted.  Such 
order  must  be  returnable  in  not  less  than  two  nor  more 
than  ten  days  after  it  is  granted,  and  must  be  served  at 
least  two  days  before  it  is  returnable.  Upon  the  return 
day  named  in  the  order  the  judge  or  justice  must  hear 
the  parties  and  make  such  final  order  as  justice  requires, 
which  may  be  recorded  in  the  same  manner  as  a  deed. 
The  petitioner  must  pay  the  costs  of  such  proceeding." 

Sec.  587.  Appeal,  effect  of.— Power  of  Appellate  Court. 
An  appeal  may  be  taken  from  a  final  order,  made  in 
these  proceedings,,  to  the  same  court,  within  the  same 
time,  and  in  the  same  manner,  as  where  an  appeal  is 
taken  from  a  judgment  rendered  in  the  court,  of  which 
the  judge  or  justice  is  the  presiding  ofiBcer,  and.  with 
like  effect,'  except  that  the  issuing  or  execution  of  the 
warrant  cannot  be  stayed  by  such  an  appeal,  or  by 
the  giving  of  an  undertaking  thereupon,  except  as  here- 
inafter stated.  An  appeal  cannot  be  taken  to  the 
Court  of  Appeals,  from  a  final  determination  of  the 
general  term  of  the  Supreme  Court  or  of  a  superior  city 

1  Sec.  2358.  » Sec.  3260. 

2  Sec.  3259. 


CHAP.  Lvn.]         Appeal,  Effect  op.  1413 

court,  upon  such  an  appeal,  unless  the  latter  court,  by  an 
order  made  at  the  general  term  where  the  final  order  is 
made,  or  the  next  general  term  thereafter,  allows  it  to  be 
taken.' 

Where  an  appeal  is  taken  from  a  final  order,  award- 
ing delivery  of  possession  to  the  petitioner,  which  estab- 
lishes that  a  lessee  or  tenant  holds  over,  after  a  default 
in  the  payment  of  rent,  the  issuing  and  execution  of  the 
warrant  may,  except  in  the  city  and  county  of  New 
York,  be  stayed  by  the  order  of  the  county  judge.  Such 
an  order  can  be  made  only  upon  the  appellant's  giving 
the  security  required  to  perfect  the  appeal,  and  to  stay 
the  execution  of  the  order  appealed  from,  and  also 
an  undertaking  to  the  petitioner,  in  a  sum,  and  with 
sureties,  approved  by  the  county  judge,  to  the  effect 
that  if,  upon  the  appeal,  a  final  determination  is  rendered 
against  the  appellant,  he  will  pay  aU  rent  accruing  or  to 
accrue  upon  the  premises,  or,  if  there  is  no  lease  thereof 
the  value  of  the  use  and  occupation  of  the  premises, 
subsequent  to  the  institution  of  the  special  proceeding.' 

If  the  final  order  is  reversed  upon  the  appeal,  the 
appellate  court  may  award  restitution  to  the  party 
injured,  with  costs  ;  and  it  may  make  any  order,  or 
issue  any- other  mandate,  necessary  to  carry  its  determina- 
tion into  effect. 

The  person  who  has  been  dispossessed  under  the  war- 
rant may  also  maintain  an  action  to  recover  the  damages 
he  has  sustained  by  the  dispossession.'  Proceedings 
under  a  petitioner  for  any  of  the  causes  hereinbefore 
referred  to,  before  the  final  order  or  before  the  issuing 
of  a  warrant  under  a  final  order  awarding  possession  to 
the  .petitioner,  cannot  be  stayed  by  any  court  or  judge 
except  as  above  stated,  and  by  an  injunction  order 
granted  in  an  action  against  the  petitioner.  An  injunc- 
tion order  cannot  be  issued  before  the  final  order  is  made 
in  the  special  proceedings,  except  in  a  case  where  an 
injunction  would  be  granted  to  stay  proceedings  in  an 

'  Sec.  2361.  "  Sec.  3263. 

2  Sec.  3363. 

II.-37 


liU-  Summary  Peoceedings.  [§  587. 

action  of  ejectment  brought  by  the  petitioner,  and  upon 
the  same  terms  ;  nor  after  the  final  otder  is  made,  except 
in  a  case  where  an  injunction  would  be  granted  to  stay 
the  execution  of  a  final  judgment  in  ejectment,  and  upon 
the  same  terms.' 

•Sec.  2265. 


TABLE  or  CASES. 


References  are  to  Pages. 


Abbey  v.  Fetch,  1334. 

Abbey,  &c.,  Ass'n  v.  Welland,  336. 

Abbott  V.  Parsons,  196.  198,  300. 

Abbott  Y.  Stewartson,  515. 

Abbott  V.  Abbott,  655. 

Abbott  V.  Alsdorf ,  445. 

Abbott  V.  Blair,  369. 

Abbott  V.  Botsworth,  895. 

Abbott  V.  Cromartie.  495. 

Abbott  V.  Cromlie,  489. 

Abbott  V.  May,  376. 

Abbott  V.  WUbur,  485. 

Abby  V.  Billings,  189,  811. 

Abby  V.  Stevens,  1301. 

Abeel  v.  RadcHflEe,  33,  941,  1331. 

AbeU  V.  Williams,  1363.    . 

Abercrombie  v.  Redpath,  1045, 
1303. 

Abney  v.  Miller,  950. 

Abraham  v.  Budd,  573. 

Abrahams  v.  Tappe,  1198. 

Absalom  v.  King,  1309, 1310. 

Academy  v.  Hackett,  1035,  1106. 

Accidental,  &c.,  Ins.  Co.  v.  Mac- 
Kenzie,  1805. 

Achey  v.  Hull,  977. 

Acheson  v.  Fair,  951. 

Ackerman  v.  Lyman,  6,  1339. 

Ackland  v.  Lukey,  1173. 

Ackland  v.  Lutley,  603,  1035. 

Ackland  v.  Luttey,  153,  616. 

Ackroyd  v.  Ray,  430. 

Ackroyd  v.  Smith,  438,  573. 

Acocks  V.  PhiUips,  1037,  1309. 

Acquachanonk  Water  Co.  v.  Wat- 
son, 518. 

Acton  V.  BlewdeU,  538,  555,  558. 

Acton  V.  White,  330. 

Adair  v.  Bogle,  779. 

Adams  v.  Adams,  310,  1396. 

Adams  v.  Andrews,  557. 


Adams  v.  Beach,  179,  730. 
Adams  v.  Bigelow,  7. 
Adams  v.  Breverton.  978,  983. 
Adams  v.  Briggs  Co.,  171. 
Adams  v.  Capron,  374. 
Aday  v.  Eehals,  374. 
Adams  v.  Frothingham,  504,  57&. 
Adams  v.   Gibney,   694,  696,   757 

764. 
A.dams  v.  Greene,  1313. 
Adams  v.  McKessan,  1373. 
Adams  v.  McKinney,  473. 
Adams  v.  Pease,  536. 
Adams  v.  Power,  368. 
Adams  v.  Warner,  553. 
Addison  v.  Dawson,  338. 
African  Society  v.  Varick,  194. 
Agand  v.  King,  89,  90. 
Agar  V.  Brown,  484,  601,  1153. 
Agard  v.  King,  610. 
Agar  V.  Young,  491. 
Agricultural    Cattle    Ins.    Co.    v. 

Fitzgerald,  483. 
Aiken  v.  BlaisdeU,  465. 
Aiken  v.  Blanchard,  194. 
Aiken  v.  Smith,  884. 
Ainsley  v.  Rutter,  835. 
Ainsworth  v.  AUen,  176. 
Ainsworth  v.  Ritt,  814, 1033. 
Akerly  v.  VHas,  759. 
Akin  V.  Drummond,  635. 
Ala.  Gold  L.  Ins.  Co.  v.  OUver, 

155 
Albert  v.  State,  863,  865. 
Albert  v.  Zeigler,  624. 
Alchome  v.  Gomme,  349,  1308. 
Alcoek  V.  Wilshaw,  1864. 
Alcorn  V.  Morgan,  113. 
Aldenburgh  v.  People,  1163,  1316. 
Alder  v.  Fouracre,  950. 
Alder  v.  Keightley,  897.     . 


1416 


Table  of  Cases. 


Alderman  v.  Neate,  335,  841,  343. 
Aldershaw  v.  Breach,  100. 
Alderson  v.  Miller,  494,  498. 
Alderson  v.  Merrill,  492. 
Aldragd  v.  Crampton,  390. 
Aldrich  v.  Reynolds,  1349. 
Aldridge  v.  Gt.  West'n  R.  Co.,  987. 
Aldridge  v.  Howard,  913,  935. 
Aldridge  v.  Sturdevant,  1376. 
Aldridge  v  Rilevre,  847. 
Alexander  v.  Alexander,  375. 
Alexander  v.  Dyer,  1353. 
Alexander  v.  Harris,  87. 
Alexander  v.  Hodges,  1313. 
Alexander  v.  Mann,  587. 
Alexander  v.  Troutman,  1054. 
Alexander  v.  Warrance,  1034. 
Alford  V.  Vickery.  130,  1033,  1308. 
Algar  V.  Watson,  36. 
Alger  V.  Kennedy,  637,  846,  1108, 

1113. 
Alger  V.  Thatcher,  918. 
Allegany  Oil  Co.  v.  Bradford  Oil 

Co  ,  1311. 
AUegeant  v  Smart,  1136. 
Allegre  v.  Maryland  Ins.  Co.  640. 
Allen  V.  Allen,  400,  1353. 
Allen  V.  Anderson,  1188. 
Allen  V.  Babbington,  768,  773. 
AUen  V.  Beal,  355. 
Allen  V.  Bennett,  354. 
Alien  V.  Blakeway,  1196. 
Allen  V.  Brown,  1183. 
Allen  V.  Bryan,  1353. 
Allen  V.  Chatfield,  490, 1384. 
Allen  V.  Clairit,  303. 
AUen  V.  Culver,  817,  1338. 
Allen  V.  DevUn,  1157,  1169. 
Allen  V.  De  Witt,  489. 
AUne  V.  England,  75,  1376. 
Allen  V.  Feland,  473. 
AUen  V.  Fiske,  470. 
Allen  V.  Howe,  795. 
AUen  V.  Jaquish,  39,  1159,  1161. 
AUen  V.  Mack,  1391.  , 

AUen  V.  Mansfield,  44. 
AUen  V.  Moses,  447. 
AUen  V.  Ogden,  373. 
Allen  V.  PeU,  1131,  1133. 
AUen  V.  Smith,  450. 
AUen  V.  Thayer,  498. 
Allen  V.  Wooley,  675,  736. 
AUey  V.  Carlton,  513,  575. 
AUey  V.  Deschamps,  373. 
AUis  V.  BiUing,  338. 
Almy  V.  Gren,  465. 
Alpine  v.  Swift,  946. 
Alseheimer  v.  Krohn,  841. 
Alsop  V.  Pine,  394. 
Alston  V.  Scales,  1378. 
Altham's  Case,  598. 
Alton  V.  Pickering,  59. 
Alton  ^r.  Trans.  Co.,  504,  657. 


Alwood  V.  Mansfield,  489, 1383. 
Alyward  v.  Kearney,  586. 
Ambler  v.  Woodbridge,  715,  1314. 
Ambrose  v.  Nott,  355. 
American  Co.  v.  Bradford  547. 
Am.  Bible    Society    v.  MarshaU, 

188. 
American  Fur  Co.  v.  U.  S.,  378. 
Ames  V.  Daivany,  337. 
Ames  V.  Schuesler,  13,  1073. 
Amfleld  v.  White,  960. 
Amory   v.  KanoflEsky,    1153,    1170. 
Amos  V.  Ferrandon,  1336. 
Amoskeag  Co.  v.  Goodale,  545. 
Anderson  v.  Baughman,  503. 
Anderson  v.  Benloe,  571. 
Anderson  v.  Darley,  310,  489,  1383. 
Anderson  v.  Dickie,  1376. 
Anderson  v.  Dugas,  446. 
Anderson  v.  HiU,  336. 
Anderson  v.  Knox,  971. 
Anderson  V.  Lemon,  950. 
Anderson  v.  McGowan,  343. 
Anderson  v.  Martindale,  681,  650. 
Anderson  v.  Midland,  13,  53,  345. 
Anderson  v.  Nesmith,  1378. 
Anderson  v.  Pitcher,  639. 
Anderson  v.  Prindle,  30,  47. 
Anderson  v.  Smith,  1385. 
Anderson  v.  Tighe,  1118. 
Anderson  v.  Turner,  340. 
Andesco  Oil  Co.  v.  N.  A.  Oil  Co. 

1069. 
Andrew   v.    Hancock,    186,     955, 

1310. 
Andrew's  Case,  693,  774. 
Andrews  v.  Andrews,  360. 
Andrews  v.  Bruenfleld,  394. 
Andrews  v.  Hailes,  1358. 
Anderson  v.  Miller,  1385. 
Andrews  v.  Mobray,  380. 
Andrews  V.  Murphy,  399. 
Andrews  v.  Needham,  335,  1139. 
Andrews  v.  Paradise,  769,  781. 
Andrews  v.  Pearce,  1386. 
Andrews  v.  Russell,  1333. 
Andrus  v.  Vreelain,  1187. 
Angel  V.  Boner,  1188. 
AngeU  V.  Duke,  347,  506. 
Ajngerstein  v.  Handson,  696,  697. 
Anghinbaugh     v.    Coppenhaflfer 

501. 
Angler  v.  Webber,  917. 
Anglesea  v.  Rugeley,  690,  911. 
Angus  V.  Dalton,  570. 
Ankeney  v.  Pierce,  493. 
Annapolis,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Gautt, 

353. 
Anonymous,  338,  603,  715,  933. 
Ansell  V.  Robson,  1334. 
Anstell  V.  Rice,  371. 
Anthony  v.  Haney,  471. 
Anthony  v.  Lapham,  540. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1417 


Anthony  v.  Smith,  S74. 
Antoni  v.  Belknap,  1226,  1264. 
Antrobus  v.  Jepson,  1203. 
Amoorth    v.   Johnson,    784,    785, 

1329. 
Appleton  V.  Basoom,  183. 
Appleton  V.  Binks,  372. 
Appleton  V.  Campbell,  131. 
Appleton  V.  Mui-ray,  1357. 
Arbeiter  v.  Day,  634. 
Axbuckle  v.  Nelous,  1305. 
Arcedeokue  v.  Kelk,  1001. 
Archdeacon  v.  Jenner,  1014. 
Archer  v.  Dally,  363. 
Archer  v.  Marsh,  918,  919. 
Ard  V.  McGruder,  272. 
Arden  v.  BuUen,  695,  785,  834. 
Arden  v.  Sullivan,  14,  103,  890. 
Ardesco  Oil  Co.  v.  Eichardson,  798. 
Ards  V.  Watkin,  681. 
Armfield  v.  Tate,  1345. 
Armfleld  v.  White,  968. 
Argent  v.  Durant,  30. 
Argenti  v.  San  Francisco,  194. 
Argols  Case.  238. 
Arkwrght  v.  Gell,  555. 
Arms  V.  Burt,  436. 
Armstrong  v.  Colly,  400. 
Armstrong  v.  Courtnay,  997. 
Armstrong  v.  Gilchrist,  1355. 
Armstrong  v.  Mudd,  622. 
Armstrong  v.  Pearce,  437. 
Armstrong  v.  Stovall,  441. 
Armstrong  v.  Tale,  1343. 
Armstrong  v.  Wheeler,  743. 
Arnold  v.  Bidgood,  217,  240, 
Arnold  v.  Clark,  828. 
Arnold  v.  Foot,  540. 
Arnold  v.  Grimes,  236. 
Arnold  v.  Mundy,  527. 
Arnold  v.  Nash,  92. 
Arnold  v.  Richmond  Iron  Works, 

238. 
Arnold  v.  Stevens,  547. 
Arnold  v.  U.  S.  605. 
Arnot  V.  Alexander,  941,  942. 
Amott  V.  PittstonCoalCo.,  918. 
Amsly  V.  Woodard,  180,  452,  1398. 
Arquello  v.  Edinger,  374. 
Arran  v.  Crisp,  960. 
Arrison  v.  Harrustead,  457, 
Arthur  v.  Case,  539. 
Arthur  v.  Lamb,  993. 
Arthur  v.  Vanderplank,  666. 
Arundel  v.  Gray,  1162, 1165. 
Arundel  v.  Steere,  534. 
Ascough's  Case,  1137. 
Ash  V.  Dagg,  358. 
Ashley,  Ex  parte,  1360. 
Ashfield  V.  Ashfield,  196,  303. 
Ashley  v.  Root,  858. 
Ashley  v.  Warren,  48. 
Ashley  v.  Wolcott,  537. 


Ashman  v.  Ayers,  487. 
Ashman,  v.  WiUiams,  473. 
Ashmead  v.  Ranger,  535. 
Ashmore  v.  Evans,  878. 
Ashton  V.  Bretland,  934. 
Ashton  V.  Martyn,  771. 
Ashton  V.  Underhill,  600. 
Ashurst  V.  Mingay,  666,  667. 
Aslin  V.  Parkin,  1391. 
AsUn  V.  Summersett,  120,  164. 
Aspdin  V.  Austin,  644,  699. 
Astley  V.  Weldon,  1058,  1059. 
Aston  V.  Aston,  991. 
Astor  V.  Hoyt,  742,  744,  745. 
Astor  V.  L'Amoreux,  742. 
Astor  V.  Miller,  674,  680,  965. 
Astor  V.  Turner,  246,  249. 
Astor  V.  Union,  Lis.  Co. ,  687. 
Astry  V.  Ballard,  138,  572. 
Atkms  V.  Bryne,  1309. 
Atcherly  v.  Vernon,  1189. 
Atkins  V.  Brynes,  1083. 
Atkins  V.  Chillson.  1088, 1041. 
Atkins  V.  Cilson,  806. 
Atkins  V.  Humphrey,  1333. 
Atkins  V.  Sleeper,  608,  1035. 
Atkinson  v.  Coatsworth,  487. 
Atkyns  v.  Horde,  387, 288, 289, 290, 
Atkyns  v.  Kinney,  917,  1056. 
Atlantic  Dock  Co.  v.  Leavitt,  565. 
Atlantic  Matl.  Bank  v.  Demmon, 

78. 
Attack  V.  Bramwell,  1312, 1316. 
Atto  V.  Hemmings,  502,  1307. 
Atton  V.  Pickering,  19. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  BaUol  College,  319, 

323 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Bishop  of  Ely,  951. 
Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Blackhouse,  318,  323. 
.  Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Brooke,  819, 331,  934. 
Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Cashel,  318. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Counties  of  Portland, 

303. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Cox,  453,  679,  1188. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Cross,  818,  831. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Dixie,  318,  330. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Earl  of  Clarendon, 

320. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  East  India  Co.,  318. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Foley,  1146. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Foord,  318,  333. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Fullerten,  1007. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Gee,  541. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Grove,  189,  330. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Green,  331. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Griffin,  319. 
Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Griffith,  830,831,  333. 
Attt'y  Gen'l  v.  Hotham,  319,  321, 

491. 
Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Hungerford,  320, 333. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  JoUy,  317. 
Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Kew,  319,833. 
Att'y  Gen'l  V.  Leeds,  541. 


1418 


Table  of  Cases. 


Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Lord  Faley,  69. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Magwood,  331,  323. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Mathias,  525. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Mayor  &c.,  318,  1019. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Morgan,  318,  322. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Moses,  188,  318. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Owen,  319,  321,  615. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Owen,  314. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Pargeter,  322. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Parish,  434. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Pembroke,  820. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Rochester,  830. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Scott,  273. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Smith,  319,  935. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  So.  Sea  Co.,  318,  319. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Steward,  541. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  StilweU,  366. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Talbot,  317. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Warren,   315,   819, 

935 
A't'y  Gen'l  v.  Whiteley,  323. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Wilson,  330. 
Att'y  Gen'l  v.  Wood,  581,  533. 
Attschul  V.  Polack,  1388. 
Atwood  V.   Barham,  377. 
Atwood  V.  Mansfield,  490. 
Aubin  V.  Holt,  364. 
Aubray  v.  Jenkins,  161. 
Aubrey  v.  Fisher,  1010, 
Auer  V.  Auer,  1155. 
AuU  Savings  Bk.  v.  AuU,  1333. 
Auriol  V.  MiUs,  646,  647,  743,  1354. 
Aurora,&c.  .Society  V.  Paddock  190. 
Austin  V.  Cambridgeport,  721. 
Austin  V,  Ewell,  866. 
Austin  V.  Feridall,  443. 
Austin  V.  Field,  647,  883,  1130. 
Austin  V.  Harris,  720. 
Austin  V.  Hudson  E.  E.    Co.,  1377. 
Austin  V.  Huntsville,  &c.  943 
Austin  V.  Sawyer,  449. 
Austin  V.  Stevens,  139. 
Austin  V.  Thomson,  89, 181. 
Auter  V.  Miller,  358. 
Aveline  v.  Whisson,  440. 
Avenell  v.  Croker,  1331, 1323. 
Averillv.  Brady,  1390. 
Averill  v.  Taylor,  347,  335. 
Avery  v.  Chesslyn,  1219, 1353. 
Avery  v.  Fox,  530,  585. 
Avery  v.  Langford,  918. 
Ayar  v.  Young,  489. 
Ayer  v.  Starkie,  986. 
Aylesford's  Case,  877. 
Aylett  V.  Ashton,  319. 
Aymar  v.  BUI,  253. 
Ayrag's  Case,  195. 
Ayres  v.  Duprey,  446. 
Ayroy's  Case,  195. 
Babcock  v.  Kennedy,  347,  353. 
Babcock  v.  Orbison,  374. 
Babcock  v.  ScoviUe,  723,  731. 
Babcock  v.  Williams,  682. 


Baber  v.  Harris,  657. 

Bach  V.  Meats,  1316. 

Bachelome  V.  Gage,  666,  750. 

Backett  v.  Bates,  870. 

Backhouse  v.  Bonomi,  525. 

Bacon^v.  Bacon,  laOO. 

Bacon  v.  Bowdoin,  331,  394,  887. 

Bacon  v.  Brown,  14,  34,  106, 1180. 

Bacon  v.  Gyrling,  572,  578. 

Bacon  v.  Mertins,  877. 

Bacon  v.  Parker,  350. 

Bacon  v.  Taylor.  313. 

Bacon  v.  Waller,  603. 

Bacon  v.  West'n,  Furn.  1040,  1309. 

Baddeley  v.  Masey,  1358. 

Badeau  v.  Tyler,  1356. 

Badeley  v.  Vigurs,  744,  1158,  1307 

Badger  v.  Shaw,  1360. 

B0,gallay  v.  Pettit,  683. 

Bagert  v.  Dean,  1157. 

Baggott  V.  On,  535. 

Baggott  V.  Oughton,  309. 

Baggsv.  Muxby,  1831. 

Bagley  v.  Warburton,  810. 

Baglor  V.  Peabody,  o.,  936. 

Bagnall  v.  E.  E.  Co..  853. 

Bagot  V.  Bagot,  979, 1011. 

Bailes  v.  Denman,  614. 

Bailey  v.  De  Orespigeuy,  719. 

Bailey  v.  Delaplaine,  1179. 

Bailoy  v.  Foster,  489. 

Bailey  v.  Hughes.  774. 

Bailey  v.  Mason,  1315. 

Baiiey  v.  Ogden,  353. 

Bailey  v.  Wells,  1153. 

Bailey  v.  White,  633. 

Bailey  v.  Wright,  1809. 

Bailie  v.  Eadway,  733. 

Bainv.  Clark,  1371. 

Bain  v.  Cooper,  500. 

Bain  v.  Mattison,  240. 

Baines  v.  Burbridge,  168. 

Baines  v.  Ewing,  855. 

Baird  v.  Dalv,  874. 

Baird  v.  Tallnier,  1057,  1059. 

Baird  v.  WilUamson,  559. 

Bairdes  v.  Amhurst,  377. 

Bakeman  v.  Talburt,  574,  515. 

Baker  v.  Davis,  9r)5,  1233. 

Baker  v.  Gosling,  156,  393,  747. 

Baker  v.  Green,  957. 

Baker  v.  Greenhill,  947. 

Baker  v.    HoltzapflEeU,   809,   1136, 

1350. 
Baker  v.  Jones,  701,  893,  1196. 
Baker  v.  Kenneth,  204. 
Baker  v.  Noll,  489,  495. 
Baker  v.  Pratt,  1170. 
Baker  v.  Richardson,  593. 
Baker  v.  Eoot,  13,  1073. 
Baker  v.  Swan,  836. 
Baker  v.  Wheeler,  173. 
Baker  v.  White,  115,  196. 


Table  of  Oases. 


1419 


Baker  r.  Willoughby,  1164. 

Bald  V.  O'Brien,  854. 

Balder  v.  Blackborn,  213. 

Baldwin  v.  Breed,  473. 

Baldwin  v.  Calkins,  555. 

Baldwin  v.  Morgan,  405. 

Baldwin  v.  Munn,  779,  897. 

Baldwin  v.  Walker,  347,  674. 

Baldwin's  Case,  599. 

Balfoiir  V.  Balfour,  5. 

Balfour  v.  Westin,  785, 1133. 

Balfour  v.  Willard,  933. 

Ball  V.  Chadwick,  1387. 

BaU  V.  Cullimore,  47,  69,  93. 

BaU  V.  Nye,  851. 

Ball  V.  Wyeth,  813,  1346. 

Ballard  v.  Way,  363. 

BaUentine  v.  McDoweU,  13. 

Ballew  V.  aark,  229. 

Balling  v.  Stokes,  960,  966. 

Bally  V.  Wells,  677,  703. 

Baltimore  v.  Porter,  311. 

Balto   Steamboat  Co.  v.    Brown, 

625. 
Bamford  v.  Hayley,  153,  944, 1141. 
Bancroft  v.  Wadsworth,  1333. 
Bancroft  v.  Wardwell,  19,  61,  63. 
Bancroft  v.  Wprden,  1337. 
Bandeley  v.  Brook,  481. 
Banders  v.  Fletcher,  1115. 
Bandette  v.  Pierce,  1072. 
Bandure  t.  Fletcher.  761. 
Bandy  v.  Cartwright,  348,  691. 
Bangs  V.  Lowler,  683. 
Banhannon  v.  Lewis,  438. 
Bank  v.  Bailey,  438. 
Bank  v.  Beverly,  338. 
Bank  v.  Bugbee,  488. 
Bank  v.  Dudley,  238. 
Bank  v.  Hall,  458. 
Bank  v.  Newton,  1099. 
Banks  v.Haskie,  936,  942. 
Banks  v.  White,  834. 
Bank  of  Columbia  v.  Patterson, 

189. 
Bk.  of  England  v.  Chambers,  189. 
Bank  of  Louisiana  v.  DUery,  204. 
Bank  of  Middlebury  v.  E.  &  W.  E. 

E.  Co.,  189. 
Bank  of  Ogdensburgh  v.  Arnold, 

249. 
Bank  of  Penn.  v.  Wise,  1044. 
Bank  of  Rochester  v.  Gray,  438. 
Bank  of  the  State  v.  Mitchell,  219. 
Bank  of  U.  S.  v.  Dandridge,  189, 

190. 
Bank,  &c.,  v.  Crary,  1249. 
Bank,  &c.,  v.  Miller,  420. 
Bann  v.  Mayo,  969, 
Bannister  v.  Hyde,  1330,  1333. 
Bannister  v.  Usbome,  100. 
Bannock  v.  Whipple,  35. 
Banoilhet  v,  Batelle,  668. 


Banorgee  v.  Harey,  267. 
Bantheon  v.  Smith,  1319. 
Barber  v.  Kent,  339. 
Barber  v.  Lawrence,  487, 1304. 
Barlett  v.  Euth,  489. 
Barclay  Ex  parte,  1319. 
Barclay  v.  Pickles,  1098. 
Barclay  v.  Eaine,  677. 
Barclay  v.  Richardson,  944. 
Barclay  v.  Steamboat  Co.,  678. 
Barclay  v.  Wainwright,  1093. 
BardweU  v.  Ames,  553,  554. 
Barfoot  v.  Treswell,  633,  644,  699. 
Barey  v.  Burch,  648. 
Bargent  v.  Thompson,  1000. 
Barhelouse  v.  Gage,  647. 
Barker  v.  Allen,  353. ' 
Barker  v.  Barker,  838, 1377. 
Barker  v.  Brown,  1070. 
Barker  v.  Dacie,  1355. 
Barker  v.  Darner,  435. 
Barksr  v.  Fletwell,  1136. 
Barker  v.  Goldsmith,  1304. 
Barker  v.  Hodgson,  810. 
Barker  v.  Keat,  503. 
Barker  v.  Smark,  355. 
Barker  v.  Wilson,  198. 
Barksdale  v.  Payne,  358. 
Barksdale  v.  Toomer,  683. 
Barlett  v.  Eendle,  309. 
Barlow  v.  McKinley,  969,  970. 
Barlow  v.  Ehodes,  415,  416. 
Barlow  v.  St.  Nicholas  Bk.,  961 

962. 
Barlow  v.  Wainwright,  52,  100. 
Barnard  v.  Cane.  368. 
Bamard  v.  GodscaU,  666,  733,  750. 
Barnes  v.  Barnes,  469,  473. 
Barnes    v.    East   London   Water 

Works,  315. 
Barnes  v.  Racine,  536. 
Barnes  v.  Sabron,  537. 
Barnes  v.  Strohecker,  1133. 
Barnett  v.  Guildford,  1391. 
Barnett  v.  Spratt,  358. 
Barney  v.  Adams,  1204. 
Barney  v.  Keith,  760,  691,  693. 
Barneycastle  v.  Walker,  1377. 
Bamfather  v.  Jordan,  749. 
Bamfather  v.  Lee,  967. 
Bamhart  v.  Campbell,  170. 
Barns  v.  Wilson,  1098,  1099. 
Barnum  v.  Bamum,  140. 
Barraelhet  v.  Battalle,  734. 
Barrel  v.  Wells,  543. 
Barren  v.  Marsh,  1332. 
Barrett  v.  Barrett,  237. 
Barrett  v.  Bedford,  957,  959. 
Barrett  v.  Bell,  418. 
Barrett  v.  Bla<<rave,  995. 
Barrett  v.  Buxton,  230. 
Barrett  v.  Button,  1099. 
Barrett  v.  French,  503. 


1420 


Table  of  Oases. 


Barrett  v.  Parsons.  543,  553. 
Barrett  v.  Rolf,  393. 
Barrett  v.  Thorndike,  457,  458. 
Barrington  v.  Clarke,  201. 
Barrington  v.  Parkhurst,  599. 
Barrington  v.  Watson,  748. 
Barron  v.  Lundey,  545. 
Barron  v.  Ridiards,  676,  1277. 
Barruso  v.  Maddan,  587,  683,  683. 
Barry  v.  Glover,  1199,  1357. 
Barry  v.  Goodman,  345. 
Barry  v.  Merchants'  Ex,  Bank,  188. 
Barry  v.  Nugent,  343. 
Bart  V.  Bart,  388. 
Bart  V.  State,  1380. 
Bart  Y.  Withers,  798,  891. 
Bartle  v.  Vosburgh,  635. 
Bartleon  v.  Smith,  1309. 
Bartlett  v.  Baker,  86. 
Bartlett  v.  Downes,  1185. 
Bartlett  v.  Farrington,  1069,  1095. 
Bartlett  v.  Greenleaf,  588. 
Bartlett  v.  Hitchcock,  5. 
Bartlett  v.  Perkins,  449. 
Bartlett  v.  Sutherland,  340. 
Bartlett  v.  Wood,  1338. 
Bartlett  v.  Wright,  398,  400,  410. 
Barton  v.  Biney,  64. 
Barton  v.  Dawes,  505,  593,  634. 
Barton  v.  Fitzgerald,  655,  657. 
Barton  v.  Smith,  9. 
Barton  v.  Cox,  48,  53,  68. 
Barwick  v.  Foster,  1089. 
Barwick  v.   Thompson,  488,  491, 

1388. 
Barwick's  Case,  134,  603. 
Bascomb  v.  Phillips,  370. 
Baskin  v.  Seechrist,  494, 498. 
Bassett  v.  Company,  545. 
Bassett  v.  Bassett,  457,  458. 
Bassett  v.  Lewis,  606. 
Bassett  v.  Sahsbury,  &c.  544. 
Bassett  v.  Thomas,  389,  307,  394. 
Bassford  v.  Pearson,  457. 
Bastard  v.  Polden,  431. 
Bastin  v.  BidweU,  933. 
Baston  v.  Cox,  46,  93,  94. 
Batohelder  v.  Batohelder,  70. 
Batchelor  v.  Gage,  733. 
Bateman  Ex  parte,  707. 
Bateman  v.  Allen,  323,  734. 
Bateman  v.  Hotchkin,  990. 
Bateman  v.  Murray,  946. 
Bates  V.  B.  &  N.  Y.  R.  R.  Co.,  437. 
Bates  V.  Conrow,  1385. 
Bates  V.  MacKinlay,  1094. 
Bates  V.  WeUis,  1309. 
Bathurst  v.  Burden,  995. 
Batishiel  v.  Reed,  516,  1278. 
Batten  v.  Earnley,  1355. 
Batterman  v.  Pierce,  639. 
Batterton  v.  Yoakum,  450. 
Baugh  V.  Haynes,  394. 


Baugher  v.  Wilkins  691,  759. 

Baumann  v.  James,  353. 

Bauman  v.  Matheus,  369. 

Bawdes  v.  Amherst,  354. 

Bawker  v,  Burdikin,  448. 

Baroman  v.  Lewis,  256. 

Bawe  In  Re,  1083. 

Baxter  v.  Bush,  199. 

Baxter  v.  Taylor,  1277. 

Bayley  v.  Bradley,  24. 

Bayley  v.  Fitzmaunce,  355,  609. 

Bayley  v.  Freeman,  743. 

Bayley  v.  Lawrence,  1100. 

Bayley  v.  Peddle,  1055. 

Baylis  v.  Church,  635. 

Bayhs  v.  Dinely,  198. 

Baylis  v.  Le  Gros,  455,   686,   816, 

1097. 
Baylyle  v.  Ofiford,  738. 
Baynham  v.  Guy's  Hosp.  933,  936. 
Bayntune  v.  Watton,  603. 
Bays  V.  Ayerst,  354. 
Beach  v.  Badnbridge,  1401. 
Beach  v.  Cain,  793,  801,  808,  809. 
Beach  v.  Fairish,  835,  1346. 
Beach  v.  Gray,  18. 
Beaden  v.  Pyke,  1181. 
Beal  V.  Boston,  &o.,  1069. 
Beal  V.  Hayes,  1054,  1055 
Bealand  y.  Hurst,  637. 
Beale  v.  HaU  489. 
Beale  v.  Sanders  13,  106,  797,  1147. 
Bealey  v.  Shew,  539,  554. 
Beall  V.  Fox,  317. 
BeaU  V.  White,  1181. 
Beals  v.  Prov.  Rabber Co.,  959, 960. 
,  Bealy  v.  Stuart,  698. 
Beaman  v.  Russell,  461,  462. 
Bean  v.  Atwater,  586,  683. 
Bean  v.  Coleman,  409,  514. 
Beard  v.  Dennis,  918. 
Beard  v.  Durald,  407,  1235. 
Bearden  v.  Rich,  1055. 
Beardsly  by  v.  Knight,435. 
Bearinger  v.  O'Hare  1305. 
Bearpark  v.  Hutchinson,  1046. 
Bears  V.  Ambler,  1390. 
Beatson  v.  Nicholson,  379. 
Beatty  v.  Gibbons,  936,  1364. 
Beauchamp  v.  Vanderhennel,  64. 
Beaufort  v.  Bates,  706,  930. 
Beaulien  v.  Finglam,  985. 
Beaumont  v.  Boulsbee,  381. 
Beavan  v.  Delahay  792,  1147,  1314. 
Becar  v.  Flues,  351  1300. 
Beck  V.Allison,  894. 
Beoh  V.  Carter,  1395. 
Beck  V.  Bebow,  1351. 
Beck  V.  Ribow,  1319. 
Becker  v.  De  Forest,  332. 
Becker  v.  Wener,  1197. 
Beckett  v.  Bradley,  490. 
Beckham  v.  Drake,  1058. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1421 


Becklin's  Case,600. 

Beokman  v.  Kreamer,  526. 

Beckwith  v.  Frisbie,  233. 

Beddoe  v.  Wadsworth,  674. 

Bedell  v.  Constable  212,  213. 

Bedford  v.  Ford  325. 

Bedford  v.  Kendrick,  1043. 

Bedford  v.  McEthenon,  109. 

Bedford  v.  Terhune  157,  668. 

Bedinger  v.  Wharton,  305. 

Bedingf  ore  v.  Onslow,  1177. 

Beecher  v.  Grouse,  213. 

Beekman  v.  Frost,  445. 

Beely  v.  Perry,  715. 

Beer  v.  Boer.  1093. 

Beers  v.  St.  John,  978. 

Bees  V.  Wilhams,  1178. 

Beesaw  v.  Patterson,  479. 

Beeson  v.  Carlton,  196. 

Beeston  v.  Stutlea,  368. 

Beeston  v.  Weate,  556.' 

Behrman  v.  Barto,  943. 

Beiate  v.  White,  311. 

BelarViSe  v.  Luoan,  411. 

Belcher  v.  ColUns,  856. 

Belcher  v.  M'  Intosh,  797,  799,  880. 

Belfour  v.  Weston,  809. 

Belknap  v.  Ti-imble,  538. 

Bell  V.  Armstrong,  853. 

Bell  V.   Bronson,  671. 

BeU  V.  Elliot,  470. 

Bell  T.  Ellis,  19,  63,  1337. 

BeU  V.  Golding,  403. 

Bell  V.  Hayden,  793,  895,  898. 

Bell  V.  Keefe,  437. 

Bell  V.  Quik,  457. 

Bell  V.  Sawyer,  639. 

Bell  V.  Soamman,  503. 

Bell  V.  Tenney  1187. 

BeU  V.  Twenty,  Men  853.  1378. 

Bell  V.  Wilson  564,  565,  567. 

BeUamy  v.  Bunoughs,  390. 

BeUamy  v.  Brickenden,  703. 

BeUamy  v.  Smith.  1103. 

Bellas  V.  Hays,  371. 

Bellasis  v.  Burbriche,  89,  90,  1353. 

BelUngham  v.  Alsop.  165.  836. 

Bellows  V.  McGinnis,  983. 

BeUows  V.  Sackett,  1385. 

Bemis  v.  Leonard,  605,  1305. 

Bemis  V.  Wilder,  714,  719- 

Benan  y.  Delahay,  13. 

Bendall  v.  Summerset  338. 

Bender  v.  George,  735. 

Benedict  v.  Gaylord  579,  653. 

Benedict  v.  Lynch  360. 

Benidge  v.   Glassey,  630. 

Benjamin  v.  Betjamin  1334. 

Benjamin  v.  Herney,  830. 

Bennan  v.  McDonnell  239. 

Bennett  v.  Bayes,  1309.  1310. 

Bnnett  v.  Bittle,  406,  761,  1396. 

Bennett  v.Davis,  199,  314. 


Bennett  v.  Herring  741,  816,  1306, 
Bennett  v.  Irelane,  50,  456,  813. 
Bennett  v.  Judson,  377,  378. 
Bennett  v.  Long,  135. 
Bennett  v.  Nichols,  604. 
Bennett  v.  Pixley,  688,  587. 
Bennett  v.  Beere,  530. 
Bennett  v.  Robins,  1308. 
Bennett  v,  Turner,  26,  31,  71. 
Bennett  V.  Vade,  481- 
Bennett  v.  Vansyokle,  733. 
Bennett  v.  Waller,  675 
Bennett  v.  Womack,  304,  347,  419. 
Bennett  v.  Case,  1154. 
BenseU  v.  BhanceUor,  "239. 
Benson  v.  BoUis,  31. 
Benson  v.  Chester,  520. 
Benson  v.  Gibson,  1057. 
Benson  v.  Hobbs,  683. 
Benson  v.  Saureg,  896. 
Bentley  Ex  parte,  1360. 
Bentley  v.  Sill  1026,  1097. 
Benton  v.  Bailey,  246. 
Bowring  v.  Emslie,  657. 
Bereton  v.  Evans,  488. 
Bergman  v.  Roberts  1387. 
Berkeley  V.  Archbishop,  1165, 1160 
Berkley  v.  Shafte,  566. 
Berkley  v.  York,  434,  1154,  1174. 
Bermingham  v.  Sheridan,  370. 
Bernard  v.  Bonner,  1163,  1167. 
Berney  v.  Moore,  181,  1087. 
Berriman  v.  Peacock,  1010. 
Berry  v.  Berry,  457. 
Berry  v.  Carly,  530. 
Berry  v.  Heard,  578,  1376. 
Berney  v.  Lindley,  49,  102, 1147. 
Berry  v.  Taunton,  714. 
Berry  v.  Van  Wmkle,  938. 
BeiTy  V.  White,  289. 
Berry  v.  Wisdom,  1055. 
Berry  v.  Wright,  399. 
Berry  v.  Young,  856. 
Bertie  v.  Beaumont,  75,  76. 
Bertram  v.  Cook,  489,  1384. 
Bertrand  v.  Burd,  436. 
Berwick  v.  Whitfield.  1376. 
Beryl  v.  Carle,  537,  533. 
Bessant  v.  Gt.  Western,  &c.,  1006. 
BesseU  v.  Lansberg,  1166,  1333. 
Best  V.  Drake,  997. 
Beston's  Case,  718. 
Beswick  v.  Swindell,  656. 
BetheU  v.  Blencoe,  118. 
Betteley  v.  Stainsby,  707. 
Bettsworth  v.  Dean,    &c.,   of   St. 

Paul's,  930. 
Bettison  v.  Budd,  498. 
Bettisworth's  Case,  411,  419. 
Betts  V.  Burch,  1057. 
Bettsworth  v.  Dean,  364. 
Bevais  v.  SoUee,  1306. 
Bevan  v.  Crooks,  1311. 


1422 


Table  of  Oases. 


Bevan  v.  Hapgood,  398. 
Beverley  v.  Gas  Light  Co.,  96. 
Beverley's  Case.  228. 
Beverly  v.  The  Lincoln   Gas  Co., 

193. 
Bewick  v.  Wingfield,  1011. 
Beyer   v.  Dickinson,  1131 
Bickford  v.  Parson,  483,  891,  1306. 
Bicknell  v.  Hood,  386,  345,  395. 
Blddle  V.  Ash,  433. 
Biddle  v.  Reed,  830. 
Biddle  v.  Vandeventer,  153. 
Biddulph  V.  Poole,  1158,  1169. 
Bierbaum  v.  Crowninshield,  1381. 
Biesenbach  v.  Key,  1313. 
Bigelow  V.  CoUamore,  808,  809. 
Bigelow  V.  Kinney.  198. 
Bigelow  V.  Lehr,  449. 
Bigelow  V.  Stutpen,  457,  460. 
Bigelow  V.  TopliflE,  168,  170. 
Bigelow  V.  Willson,  605,  1035. 
Biggins  V.  Goode,  1337. 
Biggs  V.  Brown,  1371. 
Biggs  V.  White,  296. 
Biglow  V.  Reynolds,  1330 
Bilbie  v.  Lumley,  865. 
Billings  V.  Ames,  918. 
Billings  V.  Stark,  443. 
Billingsley  v.  Hersey,  391. 
Billiter  v.  Young,  716. 
Bellows  V.  Mc  Ginnis,  979. 
Bingham  v.  Cartwright,  395. 
Bingham  v.  Sprague,  50. 
Binks  V.  So.  Yorkshire,  1007. 
Binney  v.  Chapman,  1384.    ' 
Binney's  Case,  554. 
Birch  V.  Boltor,  57. 
Birch  V.  Dawson,  1350,  1253. 
Birch  V.  Stephenson,  411,  925, 1056. 
Birch  V.  Wright,  70,  250,  1390. 
Bh-ckhead  v.  Commins,  386. 
Bird  V.  Bird,  399,  460. 
Bkd  V.  Baker.  599,  791,  1143. 
Bird  V.  Carital,  1337. 
Bird  V.  Defonvielle,  117,  1120. 
Bird  V.  Elwes,  798,  800. 
Bird  V.  Gt.  Eastern  R.  R.  Co.,  467. 
Bird  V.  Higginson,  189,  1032. 
Birdsong  v.  Birdsong,  281. 
Birkhamstead  Free  School,  330. 
Birkhead  v.  Cummins,  1300. 
Birmingham  v.  Rogers,  9. 
Birmingham   Canal    Co.  v.  Bold, 

193. 
Birmingham  Joint  Stock  Co.    v. 

Lea,  485. 
Bish  V.  Keeling,  907. 
Bishop  V.  Bishop.  1253. 
Bishop  V.  Byrant,  1323. 
Bishop  V.  Howard,  83,  111,  1333. 
Bishop  of  Bath's,  601,  609,  614. 
Bishop,  &c.,v.  Bridges,  1164. 
Bishop,  &c.,  V.  Knight,  1355. 


Bissell  V.  Bissell,  605. 
Bissell  V.  Nooney,  445. 
BitheU  V.  Blencowe  116. 
Bittinger  v.  Baker,  1372. 
Black  V.  Ebner,  806,  831, 1132. 
Black  V.  Isham,  671. 
Black  V.  Payne,  252. 
Black  V.  Shreens,  443. 
Blackburn  v.  Edgley,  418. 
Blackburn  v.  Smith,  278. 
Blackeney  v.  Bagot,  382,  383. 
Blaokeney  v.  Ferguson,  490,  1384. 
Blackett  v.  Bates,  369,  373. 
Blackett  v.  Ex.  Ass.  Co.,  687. 
Blackball  v.  Combs,  1355. 
Blackhouse  v.  Bonomi,  1378. 
Blackmore  v.  Boardman,  737,  936. 
BlackneU  v.  Plowman,  1185. 
Black's  Estate,  338. 
Blackspeer's  Case,  167. 
BlackwUder  v.  Loveless,  358. 
Blades  v.  Arundel,  1813. 
Blades  v.  Higgs,  414,  1356. 
Blaiu  V.  Everett,  107. 
Blaine  v.  M'Clarken,  1333. 
Blaine  v.  Taylor,  674. 
Blair  v.  Claxton,  1106,  1107,  1117. 
Blair  v.  Hardin,  694. 
Blair  v.  Street,  71. 
Blake  v.  Baker,  965. 
Blake  v.  Crowninshield,  1035. 
Blake  v.  Delisselme,  1319. 
Blake  v.  Fosh,  448. 
Blake  v.  Foster,  163,  487, 1387. 
Blake  v.  Graham,  446. 
Blake  v.  Jerome,  473. 
Blake  v.  Phinn,  184,  748. 
Blake  v.  Sanderson,  14,  714,  751. 
Blanchard  v.  Baker,  539. 
Blanchard  v.  Brooks,  346. 
Blanchard  v.  Dyer,  176. 
Blanchard  v.  Porter,  533. 
Blanchard  v.  Raines,  1813. 
Blanchard  v.  Tyler,  1384. 
Blanchard,   &c.,   Co.   v.    Warner 

188. 
Blanche  v.  Bradford,  1311. 
Bland  v.  Inman,  1048,  1049. 
Bland  v.  Lipscombe.  536. 
Blandford  v.   Marlborrough,   959, 

960. 
Bland's  Case,  1049. 
Blaney  v.  Bearoe,  346. 
Blantier  v.  Whittaker,  1387. 
Blatchford  v.  Mayor,  &c.,  580,  770. 
Blatchford  v.  Plymouth,  777. 
Bleakley  v.  Smith,  353,  354. 
Bleeoker  v.  Ballon,  964,  965. 
Bleeckner  v.  Smith,  584,  1213. 
Blenco  v.  Bugby,  145. 
Blencowe  v.  Bugby,  714. 
Blenkiron  V.  Gt.  Cutt.,  &c.,  989. 
Blethen  v.  Lamb,  1232. 


Table  of  Cases, 


1423 


Blethen  v.  Towle,  1233. 
Blewett  V.  Coleman,  173,  173. 
Blewitt  V.  Ti-egoning,  535. 
Bligh  V.  Coleman,  307. 
BUght  V.  Dennett,  133. 
Blight  V.  Rochester,  16. 
Bliss  V.  Collings,  1089. 
Bliss  V.  Conn.  R.  R.  Co.,  239. 
Bliss  V.  Kennedy,  539. 
Bliss  V.  Mclntyre,  457,  458,  1398. 
Bliss  V.  Whitney,  1333. 
Block  V.  Ebner,  793,  1068. 
Blood  V.  Goodrich,  170,  367. 
Bloomer  v.  Henderson,  446. 
Bloomer  v.  Merrill,  18,  805,  1173. 
Blore  V.  Sutton,  161,  370,  355, 
Blossom  V.  Brightman,  170. 
Blossom  V.  Vancourt,  961. 
Blount  V.  Johnston,  341. 
Bloxam  v.  Walker,  774. 
Bluck  V.  Moyes,  1358. 
Bludworth  v.  Lake.  246. 
Blumenthal  v.  Bloomingdale,  594. 
Blunden  v.  Baugh,  158,  216. 
Blunt  V.  Walker,  193. 
Blyth  V.  Birmingham  W.  W.  Co., 

853 
Blyth  V.  Dennett,  133,  1212. 
Boal  V.  Mix,  197,  198. 
Boardman  v.  Mastyn,  375,  377. 
Boardman  v.  Osborn,  1025,  1026. 
Board  of  Education  v.  Greenham, 

190. 
Bodenham  v.  Pritchard,  418. 
Bodine  v.  Glading,  360. 
Bodman  v.  American  Tract  Soc, 

194. 
Bogardus  v.  Trinity  Church,  171. 
Bogart  V.  DeBussey,  372. 
Boggs  V.  Black,  116. 
Boggs  V.  Hargrave,  246. 
Boggs  V.  Price,  333. 
Bohaman  v.  Hough,  436. 
Bokannon  v.  Lewis,  810. 
Bold  V.  O'Brien,  870. 
Bolder  v.  Blackborn,  224. 
Bohvar  v.  M'f'g  Co.,  538. 
BoUer  v.  New  York,  1407. 
Boiling  V.  Stokes,  957. 
Boiling  V.  Whittle,  1345. 
Bolting  V.  Martin,  1173. 
Bolton  V.  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  4S8. 
Bolton  V.  Bolton,  417. 
Bolton  V.  Carhsle,  434,  1154, 
Bolton  V.  Grantham,  388. 
Bolton  V.  Landers,  117,  124,  135. 
Bolton  V.  Lingham,  151. 
Bolton  V.  Tomlin,  50,  100,  456. 
Boly  V.  Arbuthnot,  352. 
Bond  V.  Cartwright,  165. 
Bond  V.  Fay,  399. 
Bond  V.  Lockwood,  983. 
Bond  V.  Rosling,  840,  431. 


Bond  V.  Storrs,  273. 
Bonham  v.  Newcomb,  266. 
Bonnecoze  v.  Beer,  1096. 
Bonner  v.  Caldwell,  373. 
Bonner  v.  Smith,  181, 
Bonney  v.  Seely,  183. 
Bonoyan  v.  Palmer,  165. 
Boodle  Y.  Cambell,  1065, 1337. 
Booker  v.  Anderson.  317. 
Booker  v.  Stivender,  457. 
Bool  V.  Mix,  303,  314. 
Boone  v.  Eyre,  587,  683,  933. 
Boone  v.  Iron  Co.,  371. 
Bonomi  v.  Blaokhouse,  560. 
Booth  V.  AJcock,  423. 
Booth  V.  Ammerman,  968. 
Booth  V.  Macfarlane,  1359. 
Booth  V.  Wilson,  1293. 
Boothly  V.  Hathaway,  771. 
Bootheroyd  v.  Wooley,  1091, 
Boraghis'  Case,  1039. 
Boraston  v.  Green,  13,  1147,  1365. 
Boraston's  CasCj  601,  614. 
Boreel  v.  Lawton,  1084,  1120,  1348. 
Borgus  V.  Edwards,  800. 
Boroughe's  Case,  137,  1038,  1209. 
Boscowen  v.  Bhss,  714,  913,  1303. 
Boskomb  t.  Phillips,  363. 
Bosley  v.  Shaimer,  232. 
Boston  V.  Benson,  458. 
Boston  V.  Binney,  13j0,  1335, 
Boston  V.  Gray,  1281. 
Boston  V.  Worthington,  1387. 
Boston  Bank  v.  Chamberlain,  204. 
Boston,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Bartlett, 

372 
Boston,  &c.,  Co.  V.  Condit,  168, 170. 
Boston,  &c.,  V.  Ripley,  1103,  1105. 
Bosworth  V.  Sturtevant,  399. 
Botting  V.  Martin,  148. 
Botts  V.  Armstrong,  1375. 
Boult  V.  Symonds,  13. 
Boultbee  v.  Stubbs,  1086. 
Boulton  V.  Canon,  667,  742. 
Boulton  V.  Reynolds,  1310. 
Boudereau  v.  Montgomery,  238. 
Buodette  v.  Tierce.  1019. 
Bourne  v.  Gatchffe,  637. 
Bouter  v.  Frazer,  ll5. 
Bowdish  V.  Dubuque,  489,  495. 
Bowditch  V.  Chickering,  641. 
Bowe  V.  Hunking,  55,  860,  869. 
Bowen  v.  Bowen,  713. 
Bowen  v.  Buck,  485. 
Bowen  v.  Conner,  573. 
Bowen  v.  Irish,  &c.,  Cong.,  358. 
Bowen  v.  Marshall,  670. 
Bowen  V.  State  Bank,  194. 
Bowens  v.  Cator,  375. 
Bowen  v.  Hill,  1277. 
Bowen  v.  Hodges,  1353. 
Bowerman  v.  Sybourn,  1185. 
Bowers  v.  Nixon,  1029,  1056,  1057. 


1424 


Table  of  Cases. 


Bowers  v.  Williams,  239. 

Bowes  V.  Ci-oll,  103,  105,  111,  669. 

Bowes  V.  E.  London  W.  Co.,  158. 

Bowman  t.  Bates,  235. 

Bowman  v.  Foot,  458,  1088,  1040. 

Bowman  t.  Robb,  438. 

Bowman  v.  StilweU,  359. 

Bowman  v.  Wood,  605. 

Bowry  y.  Bennett,  181,  1848,  1345. 

Bouser  v.  Bliss,  917. 

Bouser  v.  Colly,  717,  1000. 

Boyce  v.  Brown,  516. 

Boyce  v.  Guggenheim,  422,  423. 

Boyce  v.  Watson,  385. 

Boyd  V.  Plumb,  271. 

Boyd  V.  Profaze,  1320. 

BoydeU  v.  M'Michkel,  1258,  1270. 

Boyer  v,  Dickson,  1134. 

Boyer  v.  Grundy,  626. 

Boyer  v.  Smith,  1384. 

Boyle  V.  Lysaght,  947. 

Boyle  V.  Tamlyn,  1006. 

Boynham  v.  Guy's 'Hospital,  932. 

Boynton  v.  Babbett,  1116.         j 

Boynton  v.  Finnall,  218,  221. 

Boynton  v.  Reynolds,  437. 

Boys  V.  Aucell,  1051,  1058. 

Boyse  v.  Ambrose,  1055. 

Bozeman  v.   Browning,  197,  301, 

205. 
Brace  v.  Wehnert,  869. 
Brace  v.  Yale,  543,  550,  554. 
Bracebridge  v.  Cook,  226. 
Bracken  v.  Miller,  465. 
Bracklington  v.  Saunders,  104. 
Bradber  v.  Governors,  &c.,  1007. 
Bradburne   v.   Batfield,   178,  650, 

681. 
Bradbury  v.  White,  365,  960. 
Bradbury    v.   Wright,  619,    1034, 

1308. 
Bradely  v.  De  Goicouria,  1340. 
Bradfield  v.  McCormick,  436. 
Bradford  v.  Cressey,  396,  579,  655. 
Bradford  v.  Patten,  930,  945,  948. 
Bradford  v.  Pratt,  1376. 
Bradford  Oil  Co.  v.  Blau:,  675. 
Bradley  v.  Bentley,  624. 
Bradley  v.  Covel,  82,  89,  105. 
Bradley  v.  De  Gourcouria,  864. 
Bradley  v.  McDaniel,  1393. 
Bradley  v.  Pigott,  1305. 
Bradshaw  v.  Bradbury,  899. 
Bradshaw's  Case,  776. 
Bradstreet  v.  Clark,  1078,  1079. 
Bradstreet  v.  Huntington,  16. 
Brady  v.  McKenney,  304. 
Brady  v.  Peiper,  1153. 
Brady  v.  Spurch,  181. 
Bragg  V.  Fessenden,  368. 
Bragg  V.  Wiseman,  155,  694. 
Brahan  v.  Pope,  1054. 
Brahan  v.  Jersey  City  Forge  Co.  ,489. 


Brain  t.  Mattison,  241. 
Brainerd  v.  Arnold,  1082. 
Braithwaite  v.  Cooksey,  1317, 1319. 
Braithwaite  v.  Hitchcock,  12,  46, 

85. 
Braithwaite  v.  Skinner,  1853. 
Braman  v.  Bingham,  445. 
Bramley  v.  Chesterton,  897,  1356. 
Bramston  v.  Robins,  186,  955, 1061. 
Branch  v.  Doane,  473. 
Branch  v.  Morrison,  1249. 
Branch  Bank  v.  Fi-y,  349. 
Brand  v.  Founweller,  815. 
Brandon  v.  Astor,  716. 
Brandon   v.   Brandon,   265,   1190, 

1808. 
Brandon  v.  Calvert,  1185. 
Brandon  v.  Grimke,  449. 
Brandon  M'f 'g  Co.  v.  Morse,  684. 
Brane  v.  Rawlins,  28,  117. 
Branger  v.  Manciet,  650,  692. 
Branscomb  v.  Bridges,  1309,  1326. 
Boardmanv.  Mostyn,  304. 
Boashier  v.  Jackson,  843,  602,  761. 
Brattle  Square  Church  v.  Grant, 

721. 
Bratton  v.  Clawson,  1222,  1289. 
Brauer  v.  Wilkinson,  109. 
Brawley  v.  Wade,  725. 
Braxon  v.  Bresler,  415. 
Bray  v.  Fogarty,  908,  912. 
Breck  v.  Blanohard,  232. 
Breckner  v.  Warren,  1210. 
Brecknock  Co.  v.  Pritchard,  798. 
Bredan's  Case,  508. 
Breden  v.  Dubarry,  369,  376. 
Bree  v.  Holbech,  347. 
Bree  v.  Lees,  609. 
Breed  v.  Cunningham,  409,  437. 
Breed  v.  Green,  1063. 
Breener  v.  Knapp,  34. 
Breese  v.  Bangs,  1168. 
Breese  v.  McCann,  1084. 
Breithaupt  v.  Thurmond,  268. 
Brekley  v.  York,  393. 
Bremer  v.  Conover,  10,  61. 
Bremer  v.  Bigelow,  493. 
Bremer  v.  Knapp,  18. 
Bremer  v.  Marshall,  181,  674. 
Bremer  v.  Hill,  179. 
Brenckman  v.  Twibill,  1171. 
Brend  v.  FrumveUe,  936. 
Brennan  v.  Bolton,  377. 
Brennan  v.  Whittaker,  1284. 
Bret  V.  Cumberland,  643,  646,  647. 
Breton  v.  Twohey,  930. 
Brett  V.  Read,  1828. 
Brevard  v.  Nieley,  443. 
Brewer  v.  Craig,  1329. 
Brewer  v.  Hill,  391,  677, 714. 
Brewer  v.  Knapp,  96,  154,  1086. 
Brewster  v.  Defremery,  854,  860, 

875. 


Table  of  CAkSES. 


1425 


Brewster  v.  Edgerly,  1061,  1053. 
Brewster  v.  Kidgell,  594,  958,  960. 
Brewster  v.  Parrott,  1164. 
Breyman  v.  Noyes,  909. 
Brice  V.  CaiTe,  623. 
Brick  V.  Middleton,  1380. 
Bridge  v.  Pierson,  659. 
Bridges  v.  Chandos,  1184. 
Bridges  v.  Hitchcock,  933,  935. 
Bridges  v.  Longman,  913. 
Bridges  v.  Potts,  105,  111,  1093. 
Bridges  v.  Puroell,  468. 
Bridges  v.  Smyth,  1307. 
Bridges  v.  Winters,  461. 
Bridge  Co.  v.  Bragg,  470. 
Bridge  Co.  v.  Kirk,  533. 
Bridge  Co.  v.  Syds,  189. 
Bridgman  v.  David,  716,  1303. 
Briggs  Y.  Fish,  346. 
Briggs  V.  HuU,  1095,  1098. 
Briggs  V.  Large,  1811. 
Briggs  V.  Oaks,  938. 
Briggs  V.  White,  293. 
Brigham  v  Calvert,  371. 
Brigham  v  Rogers,  506. 
Bright  V.  McOuat,  108. 
Bright  V.  Rowland,  1053. 
Brigland  v.  Shatter,  390. 
Brillhart  v.  McConnell,  367. 
Bringloe  v.  Goodson,  491. 
Brink  v.  Richmeyer,  538. 
Brinkerhoof  v.  Olf ,  1054. 
Brinkley  v.  Wolcott,  89,  1073. 
Brmkerhoff  v.  Olf,  1051. 
Brinway  v.  Cobb,  1223. 
Briscoe  v.  Draught,  537. 
Briscoe  v.  Kennedy,  319. 
Brisden  v.  Hussey,  813. 
Brissell  v.  Shall,  544. 
Bristol  V.  Jones,  685,  795.  819. 
Briston  v.  Old,  1317. 
Brittam  v.  Newland,  i94. 
Brittin  v.  Vaux,  731. 
Britton  v.  Vaux,  741. 
Broadhurt  v.  Ramsbotham,  537. 
Broadwater  v.  Dome,  231. 
BroadweU  v.  Broadwell,  358. 
Broadwood  Ex  parte,  1860. 
Brocking  v.  Cham,  774. 
Brodie  v,  St.  Paul,  366. 
Broomfleld  v.  Smith,  100,  307,  345. 
Broomley  v.  Stanley,  1158,  1166. 
Bromlin  v.  Theiss,  157. 
Bronson  v.  CoflBn,  674,  676. 
Brook  V.  Berry,  1297. 
Brook  V.  Biggs,  490, 1304. 
Brook  V.  Bulkley,  944. 
Brook  V.  Gering,  1165. 
Brooke  v.  Buckley,  677. 
Brooke  v.  Cunningham,  1020. 
Brooke  v.  Noakes,  1315. 
Brooke  v.  Stone,  703. 
Brookes  v.  Humphries,  776,  783. 


Brookhaven  v.  Strong,  537. 

Brooks  V.  Christopher,  1137,  1187. 

Brooks  V.  Cunningham,  1029, 1075. 

Brooks  v.  Galster,  1364. 

Brooks  V.  Reynolds,  423,  433. 

Brooks  V.  Wilcox,  1075. 

Broom  v.  Hore,  666,  681. 

Brough  V.  Higgius,  139. 

Brough  V.  Whitmore,  689. 

Broughton  v.  Coffin,  374. 

Brown  v.  Adams,  1077. 

Brown  v.  Armitead,  343. 

Brown  v.  Arunder,  1313. 

Brown  v.  Austin,  444. 

Brown  v.  Bellows,  1055. 

Brown  v.  Bowen,  468,  470. 

Brown  v.  Bunington,  758,  834. 

Brown  v.  Burtinshaw,  1169,  1173. 

Brown  v.  Bush,  554. 

Brown  v.  Byrne,  638. 

Brown  v.  Chadborne,  539,  567. 

Brown  v.  Coats,  15. 

Brovm  v.  Crump,  696,  785,  933. 

Brown  V.  Curran,  1131. 

Brown  v.  Duncan,  1313. 

Brown  v.  Dysenger,  494,  1385. 

Brown  v.  Eaton,  368. 

Brown  v.  Glenn,  1319. 

Brown  v.  Holson,  341,  343. 

Brown  v.  lUins,  541. 

Brown  v.  Jaddrell,  239. 

Brown  v.  Keller,  38,  107,  500, 1384. 

Brown  V.  Kennedy,  536,  530. 

Brown  v.  Keyes,  110. 

Brown  v.  Kite,  1298. 

Brown  v.  Langley,  653. 

Brown  v.  Lillie,  407,  1321. 

Brown  v.  Lindsay,  218, 223. 

Brown  v.  Lyddy,  938. 

Brown  V.  McAme,486. 

Brown  v.  Mc  Fauen,  483. 

Brown  v.  Mc  Eae,  671. 

Brown  v.  Manter,  503. 

Brown  v.  Mansby,  1054. 

Brown  v.  Mayor,  &c,  690. 

Brown  v.  Meady,  575. 

Brown  v.  New  York,  1898,  1407. 

Brown  v.  O'Dea,  1346. 

Brown  v.  Parsons,  947. 

Brown  v.  Powell,  1071,  1279,  1309. 

Brown  v.  Quitter,  758,  786, 812, 835. 

Brown  v.  Rahan,  335,  348. 

Brown  v.  Reynolds,  445- 

Brown  v.  Robbins,  566,  568. 

Brown  v.  Russell,  1284. 

Brown  v  Sherill,  1310,  1311. 

Brown  v.  Stewart,  255. 

Brown  v.  Storey,  14,  351,  357,  368. 

Brown  v.  ThisseU,  409,  437. 

Brown  v.  Trumper,  153,  794,  803. 

Brown  v.  Warner,  339. 

Brown  v.'Watrous,  536. 

Brown  v.  Wilkinson,  109,888. 


14:26 


Table  op  Cases. 


Brown  v.  Windsor,  563,  568. 
Brown  v.  Wood  worth,  468. 
Brown  v.  Amyot,  1045,  1093. 
Brown  v.  SUge,  368. 
Brown  v.  Tighe,  150,  615,  937. 
Brown  v.  Warner,  343,  344,  345. 
Browner  v.  Lambert,  905. 
Browne's  v.  Case,  1096. 
Browning  v.  Beston,  145,  233. 
Browning  v.  Dann,  1319. 
Browne  v.  Dawson,  1356. 
Browne  v.  Dunnevy,  1317. 
BuowneU  v.  HaskeU,  1347. 
Browning  v.  Wright,  767. 
Browning's  Case,  713. 
Bruce  v.  Fulton  Bank,  943 
Bruce  v.  Ruler,  1179. 
Brudnell's  v.  Case,  167,  186,  614. 
Bruerton  v.  Eomsford,  1399. 
Brummel  v.   McPherson,  710,  711. 
Burne  v.  Euwlings,13. 
Brunner  v.Knapp,  32. 
Bruns  v.  Rawlin's,  713. 
Brunton  v.  Hall,  580. 
Brush  V.  Young,  241. 
Byi-on  V.  Bancks,'  479,  912,  1189. 
Bryan  v.  Bradley,  449,  502,  653. 
Bryan  v.  Butts,  245,  246. 
Bryan  y.  French,  158. 
Bryan  v.  Lawrence,  1332. 
Bryan  v.  Weatherhead,  407,  416, 

421. 
Bryan  v.  Whistler,  469. 
Bryan  v.  Winburn,  500. 
Bryan  v.  Winwood,  491. 
Bryant  v.  Wippel,  175. 
Bryante  v.  Durkee,  271. 
Bryden  v.  Bryden,  205. 
Brydgesv.  Lewis,  1206. 
Bryne  v.  Beeson,  13, 493. 
Bryne  v.  Eomaine,  827. 
Bryne  v.  Van  Hoesen,  311,  313- 
Bryson  v.  Whitehead,  918. 
Bubb  V.  Yelverton,  991. 
Buchanan  v.  Exchange,  Ins.  Co. 

407. 
Buchanan  v.  King,  1302. 
Buchanan  v.  Munroe,  253. 
Buck  V.  Buck,  381. 
Buck  V.  Newton,  418. 
Buck  V.  Norton,  411,  419. 
Buck  V.  Pike,  793,  806,  807. 
Buck  V.  Eodgers,  839. 
Buck  d.  Whalley  v.  Norton,  431. 
Buokland  v.   Butterfield.  1219. 
Buckland  v.  HaU,  362,  647,  953. 
Buckland  v.   Papillon,  L.  E.  158, 

248,  733. 
Buckley  v.  Buckley,  1335. 
Buckley  v.  Daley,  253,  254. 
Buckley  v.  Pirk,  674,  817. 
Buckley  v.  Taylor,  1026,1317. 


Buckley  v.  Williams,  776. 
BuckUn's  Case,  184. 
Buckmaster  v.  Thompson,  359. 
Buckner  v.  Briggs,  189. 
Bucks  V.  Eogers,  1131. 
Buckworth  v.  Simpson,  755. 
Budloss  V.  PhiUips.  1050. 
Buell  V.  Cook,  331,  333,  345. 
Buerger  v.  Boyd,  814,  888. 
Bufferlow  v.  Newsom,  496. 
Buffum  V.  Deane,  1116. 
Bulfin  V.  Dunne  745. 
Bulkley  v.  Delacroix,  334. 
Bull  V.  Ellis,  19. 
Bull  V.  Sibbs,  18,  1333,  1353. 
Bull  V.  Wyatt,  608. 
Bull  V.  Wyeth,  807. 
Bullen  V.  Denning,  573,  578. 
BuUen  v.  Leake,  1318. 
BuUock  V.  Dommitt,  798,  808,  810 

Bullock  V.  Wilson,  583,  533. 

Bulwer  V.  Bulwer,  65,  66,  57, 1371. 

Bunch  V.  Kemmigton,  1313. 

Bunn  V.  Chauner,  531. 

Bunn  V.  Guy,  917,  918. 

Bunner  v.  Storm,  238. 

Bunny  v.  Wright,  188. 

Bunton  v.  Smith,  374. 

Burbank  v.  Dyer,  106. 

Burden  v.  Thayer,  247. 

Burdett  v.  Withers,  793,  806,  880, 

900. 
Burdett  v.  Wrighte,  il85. 
Burdick  v.  Cheadle,  867. 
Buren  v.  Digges,  1055. 
Burges  v.Lamb,  991. 
Burgess  v.  Bretefeur,  792. 
Burgress  v.  Harris,  269,  376. 
Burham  v.  Kempton,  548, 550,  551. 
Burhell  v.  Lechmere,  1137. 
Burk  V.  Baxter,  1326. 
Burke  v.  Creditors,  359. 
Burke  v.  Hale,  489,  1388. 
Burke  v.  Schwerdt,  1286. 
Burkett  v.  Baade,  1305. 
Burkhardt  v.  Houghton,  471. 
Burleigh  v.  Coffin,  218. 
Burleigh  v.  Stibbs,  433. 
Burleton  v.  Humfrey,  715. 
Burling  v.  Eeed,  30,  1297,  1357. 
Burlock  V.  Peck,  671. 
Burnby  v.  BoUett,  1271. 
Burne  v.  Cambridge,  173. 
Burne  v.  Eichardson,  1391. 
BumeU  v.  Curtis,  336,  348,  895. 
Burnett  v.  Fromberger,  779. 
Bui-nett  V.  Guilford,  394. 
Burnett  v.  Little,  1187. 
Burnett  V.  Lynch,  657,  693, 733,  944 
Burnett  v.  E.  Co.,  1395. 
Burner  v.  Adams,  261. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1427 


Burham  v.  Ayer,  458,  460,  461. 
Burnham   v.   Hubbard,    14,    1083, 

1180. 
Burnham  v.  Kempton,  547. 
Burnham  v.  Rogers,  1303. 
Burhams  v.  Van  Zandt,  1303. 
Buanitt  v.  Rich,  493. 
Burne  v.  Cambriege,  174. 
Burns  v.  Cooper,  1019. 
Bnms  V.  Lynde,  463. 
Burns  v.  Phelps,  1103,  1116. 
Burnside  v.  Twitchell,  1245. 
Burnside  v.  Weightman,  1045. 
Buron  v.  Denman,  130. 
Burr  V.  Burton,  333. 
Burr  V.  Lewis,  605. 
Burr  V.  Smith,  317. 
Burr  V.  Spencer,  1083. 
Burr  V.  Todd,  1055. 
Burr  V.  Van  Buskirk,  1313. 
Burrage  v.  Crump,  1055. 
BurreU  v.  Bull,  950. 
Burris  v.  Jackson,  1083. 
Burroughs  v.  Richman,  330. 
Burrows  v.  Gallup,  534. 
Burrows  v.  Gradin,  89,  15,  359,  726. 
Burrows  v.  Pixley,  536. 
Btirry  v.  Stanton,  717. 
Burt  V.  State,  1375. 
Burtin  v.  Austin,  450. 
Burton  v.  Barclay,  393,  736,  1183. 
Burton  v.  Brown,  326,  410. 
Burton  v.  Pressly,  461. 
Burwell  v.  Jackson,  759. 
Busenins  v.  Caffer,  450. 
Bush  V.  CaUs,  675. 
Bush  V.  Coles,  574. 
Bush  V.  Keeling,  905. 
Bush  V.  Whitney,  189. 
Bushans  v.  Van  Zandt,  968. 
Bushly  V.  Littlefield,  369. 
BusheU  V.  Lechmore,  1096,  1138. 
Bushnell  v.  Proprietors,  &o.,  504, 

650. 
Buskin  v.  Edwards,  1079,  1309. 
Buskurk  v.  Phillips,  364. 
Busnett  v.  Higgins,  317. 
Bussman  v.  Ganster,  128,  835. 
Bustard  v.  Coulter,  600. 
Butcher  v.  Butcher,  30, 1296, 1356. 
Bute  V.  Guests,  699. 
Butle  V.  Morgan,  539. 
Butler  V.  Burleston,  917. 
Butler  V.  Cowles,  20,  1333. 
Butler  V.  Doddington,  600. 
Butler  V.  Dodson,  600. 
Butler  V.  Gale,  970. 
Butler  V.  Kidder,  864,  1126. 
Butler  V.  Mamay,  446. 
Butler  V.  Many,  683. 
iiutler  V.  MulvihuU,  330. 
Butler  V.  Powns,  354,  595. 
Butler  T.  Rice,  116, 


Butler  V.  Swinnerton,  770,  777. 
Butman  v.  Hussey,  538,  540,  554. 
Butt  V.  Imperial  Gas  Co. ,  658. 
Butteworth  v.  Crawford,  431. 
Butts  V.  Voorhees,  1375,  1380. 
Butz  V.  Irec,  544. 
Buxton  V.  Rust,  352,  449. 
Buzzard  v.  Chapel.  419,  1313, 1336. 
Byasse  v.  Reese,  1323, 1249. 
Byers  v.  Mc  Clanahan,  443. 
Byrd  v.  Chase,  18,  1339,  1338. 
I  Byrne  v.  Beason,  1384. 
Byrne  v.  Buson,  495. 
Byron  v.  Acton,  364. 
Byron  v.  Deardon,  1186. 
Cabel  V.  Welborn,  773. 
Cacker  v.  Cowper,  469. 
Cadby  v.  Martinez,  152,  613,  1143. 
Caddington,  v.  Dunham,  1131. 
Cadman  v.  Johnson,  965. 
Cadmus  v.  Barney,  1318. 
Cadogan  v.  Kennett,  138. 
Cadwallder  v.  App. ,  150. 
Cadwallader  v.  TindaU,  1311. 
Cady  V.  Quaterman,  89. 
Cahill  V.  Dawson,  706. 
Cahill  V.  Dayton,  863. 
Cahill  V.  Eastman,  853,  853, 
Cain  V.  Geinon,  495. 
Cain  V.  Heard,  267. 
Cains  v.  Jones,  446. 
Caimes  v.  Bleecher,  376. 
Cairns  v.  Chobert.  139,  968. 
Caind,  &c.,  v.  Wiggins,  Ferry  Co. 

1073. 
Calcock  V.  Ferguson,  207. 
Caldecott    v.    Smythers,  109,  888, 

1364. 
Calderwood  v.  Brooks,  1309. 
Caldwalder's  Appeal,  354. 
Caldwell  V.  Smith,  500. 
Caledonian  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Sprot,  566. 
Calhoun  v.  Wilson,  806, 
Callahan  v.  Donnelly,  917,  815. 
Callahan  v.  Stanley,  626. 
Callander  v.  Oelricks,  889. 
Callendar  v.  Sherman,  494. 
Callow  V.  Hale,  170. 
Galium  V.  Branch  Bank,  969. 
Calwell  V.  Lawrence,  1051. 
Calvalerio  v.  Puget,  464,  483. 
CaUy  V.  Wells,  181. 
Calvert  v.  Aldrich,  1302. 
Calvert  V.  Bradley,  876. 
Calvert  v.  Frowd,  124,  135,  1147. 
Calvert  v.  Reid,  916. 
Calvert  v.  Selright,  770,  777. 
Camarillo  v.  Folsom,  1387. 
Cambaugh  v.  Bambaugh,  168. 
Camden  v.  Batterbury,  1050,  1330, 
Camen  v.  Sunderland,  855. 
Camley  v.  Stanfleld,  397,  398,  399. 
Camp  V.  Camp,  69,  497, 1385. 


1428 


Table  of  Case^. 


Camp  V.  Hamesley,  174. 
Camp  V.  Pulver,  712,  1036. 
Camp  V.  Wood,  859,  863,  1295. 
Campan  v.  Campan,  240. 
Campbell  v.  Arnold,  1276. 
Campbell  v.  Baxter,  115. 
Campbell  v.  Johnson,  672,  673. 
Campbell  v.  Leach,  288,  293, 294. 
Campbell  v.  Lewis,181, 977,737,781. 
Campbell  v.  MaUony,  1399. 
Campbell  v.  O'Neal,  1221. 
Campbell  v.   Portland  Sugar  Co. 

863. 
CampbeU  v.  Shields,  1097, 1136. 
CampbeU  v.  Shiplev,  1089. 
Campbell  v.  Wenlook,  885. 
Campton  v.  Cassada,  271. 
Cannaday  v.  Shepard,  361, 
Cannaday  v.  Shepherd.  358. 
Canal  Elevator  Co.  v.  Brown,  942. 
Canal  Co.  v.  Comeygs,  993. 
Canal  Co.  v.  Mathieson,  655. 
Canal  Co.  v.  Pritchard,  809,  810. 
Canal  Co.  v.  Wilmot,  189. 
Cancey  v.  Cummings,  450. 
Canhara  v.  Barry,  483. 
Cann  v.  Warren,  449. 
Cannan  v.  Bryce,  1345. 
Cannan      v.    Hartley,   1158,  1184, 

1332. 
Cannock  v.  Jones,  587,  795,  818. 
Canterberry  v.  Att'y  Gen'l,  984. 
Canterbury  v.  Wood,  189. 
Capel  V.  Buzzard,  1313,  1314. 
Capers  Case,  1018. 
Capen  v.  Peckham,  1223,  1272. 
Capenhurst  v.  Capenhurst,  668. 
Capley  v.  Hepworth,  394. 
Capenhurst  v.  Capenhurst,  608. 
Carberry  v.  Tannehill,  360. 
Carbray  v.  WiUis,  431. 
Card  well  v.  Lucas,  441,  487. 
Cardigan  v.  Vermitage,  566,  567. 
Carhart  v.  Ryder,  1294,  1340. 
Carleton  v.  Carleton,  990. 
Carleton  v.     Pranconia    Iron  Co. 

868. 
Carley  v.  Carter,  442. 
Carley  v.  Lewis,  1030. 
Carlilse  v.  Cooper,  548,  55,0,  551. 
Carlisle's  Appeal,  241. 
Carlton  v.   Pranconia,   &o.,  1295. 
Cariyle  v.  Patterson,  168. 
Cai-lyon  v.  Levering,  538,  542. 
Carrig  v.  Dee,  423. 
Carnarvon  v.  Villebors,  1167. 
Carlney  v.  Stanfield,  498. 
Carnes  v.  Hersey,  966. 
Cames  v.  Piatt,  443,  1444. 
Carpenter  v.  Bowen,  253. 
Carpenter  v.  Colins,  70,  71,  72,  153. 
Carpenter  v.  CresweU,  587,  683. 
Carpenter  v.  Lockport,  1054. 


Carpenter  v.  Parker.  261,  262,  888. 
Carpenter  v.  Shanklin,  624,  625. 
Carpenter  v.  Thompson,  498. 
Carpenter  t.  United  States,  16,  57, 

64. 
Carpenter  v.  Whitman,  309. 
Carr  v.  Benson,  466. 
Carr  v.  Carr,  990. 
Carr  v.  Clough,  201. 
Carr  v.  EUison,  933,  936. 
Carr  v.  Foster,  548. 
Carr  v.  Hoxie,  444. 
Carr  v.  Lambert,  520. 
CarroU  v.  CarroU,  1250. 
CarroU  v.  Newton,  1253. 
CarroU  v.  Norwood,  504. 
CarroU  v.  Potter,  206. 
CarroU  v.  Eenich,  337. 
Caruthers  v.  Humphrey,  345,  346. 
Carruthers  v.  Wheeler,  605. 
Carson  v.  Baker,  6. 
Carson    v.  Godley,  789,  863,  1098, 

1285. 
Carstairs  v.  Taylor,  848,  849,  850, 

851. 
Cartarr  v.  Berry,  356. 
Carter  v.  Burr,  1115,  1117. 
Carter  V.  Carter,  185, 186,1066, 1336, 
Carter  v.  Chardron,  488. 
Carter  v.  Cummins,  836,  839,  883. 
Carter  v.  Ely,  189. 
Carter  v.  Hammett,  743. 
Carter  v.  Harlan,  465,  467. 
Carter  v.  Murcot,  536,  527. 
Carter  v.  Page,  467. 
Carter  v.  Roe,  93,  101. 
Carter  v.  Strapham,  448,  713. 
Carter  v.  Taggart,  1093. 
Carter  v.  Taylor,  246. 
Carter  v.  Towne,  1388. 
Carter  v.  Walters,  1318. 
Carter  v.  Warne,  746. 
Carter  v.  Youngs,  139. 
Carter  v.  Bury,  372. 
Cartwright  v.  Gardner,  713. 
Cartwright  v.  Pinkeney,  1167. 
Cartwright  v.  McPherson,  115. 
Carty  v.  Kitohenman,  431. 
Carver  v.'  Jackson,  645. 
Carver  v.  McNulty,  468. 
Carver  v.  Richards,  289. 
Carvis  v.  MoClavy,  258,  259. 
Carrick  v.  Blargrave,  488,  490. 
Gary  v.  Darvine,  1100. 
Gary  v.  Ins.  Co.  469. 
Casborne  v.  Soarfe,  245. 
Case  V.  Benedict,  489. 
Case  V.  Stephens,  959. 
Casebeer  v.  Mourey,  539. 
Casey  v.  Gregory,  479,  1386. 
Casey  v.  Woodruf ,  1044. 
Case  of  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  200. 
Case  of  the  Queensbury  Lease,  149. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1429 


Casegray  v.  Core,  446. 
Cashberd  v.  Att'y  Gen'l,  745. 
Casser  v.  Collings,  184,  903,  904. 
Castleton  v.  Samuel,  115, 1147. 
Castrike  v.  Mason,  89. 
Cater  v.  Somerville,  111. 
Gates  V.  Waddlington,  530. 
C'athcart  v.  Bowman,  969. 
Cathcart  v.  Robinson,  358. 
Oatley  v.  Arnold,  84. 
CatUn  V.  Hayden,  1376,  1378, 
Catlin  V.  Valentine,  1384. 
Cattley  v.  Arnold,  85,  86,  88. 
Caugham  v.  King,  817. 
Caughton  v.  Pattison,  905. 
Caulson  v.  "White,  993. 
Caulson  v.  Whiting,  833, 1340. 
Cauthers  v.  Weaver,  493,  498. 
Cavan  v.  Pultney,  290. 
Cave  V.  Brookesby,  774. 
Ceates  v.  Cadogan,  875. 
Cecil  V.  Salisbury,  204. 
Center  v.  Davis,  846, 1393. 
Cesar  v.  Karatz,  508,  IVH,  1393. 
Central  Land  Co.  v.  Calhoun,  1318. 
Chadborn  v.   Green,  90,   109,  609, 

610. 
Chadbourn  v.  Henderson,  247. 
Chaddick  v.  Marsh,  1057. 
Chadesy  v.  McGreevy,  371. 
Chadwick  v.  Trower,  563. 
Chadwick  v.  Woodward,  633,  1124, 

1341. 
Challoner  v.  Daves,  174. 
Chamberlain  v.  Chamberlain,  243. 
Chamberlain  v.  Coliinson,  370. 
Chamberlain  v.  Donohue,  9,  19.  73, 

1330. 
Chamberlain  v.  Dunham,  51. 
Chamberlain  v.  Letson,  638. 
Chamberlain  v.  Neals,  1076. 
Chamberlain  v.    Thompson,    366, 

615. 
Chamberlain's  v.  Case,  1156. 
Chamberlayne  t.  Dunnuer,991,996. 
Chambers  v.  Bedell,  474. 
Chambers  v.   Hoss,  5,  13,  18,  1339. 
Chamblee  v.  McKenzie,  1086. 
Champion  v.  Plummer,  353. 
Champion  v.  Regly,  381,  283,  383. 
Champion  v.  White,  683. 
Champlin  v.  Lay  tin,  365.    0 
Champlin  v.  Parish,  268. 
Chance  v.  Beall,  358. 
ChanceUor  v.  Poole,  433,  667,  74.9, 
Chancey  v.  Smith,  1177. 
Chancey  v.  Strong,  218. 
Chander  v.  Ryder,  238. 
Chandler  v.  Ford,  626. 
Chandler  v.  Howland,  554. 
Chandler  v.  Lunsford,  486. 
Chandler  v.  McKinney,  198. 
Chandos  v.  Talbot,  1008, 1010. 
II.— 38 


Channon  v.  Patch.  1010. 
Chapin  v.  School  Dis.  194. 
Chaplin  v.  Southgate,  771. 
Chapman  v.  Beecham,  607. 
Chapman  v.  Bluck,  335,  339,  343. 
Chapman  v.  Chapman,  198. 
Chapman  v.  Dalton,  503. 
Chapman  v.  Harney,  1038,  1040. 
Chapman  v.  Kimball,  530. 
Chapman  v.  Kirby,  1038, 1041. 
Chapman  v.  Lee,  269. 
Chandler  v.  Spear,  467. 
Chapman  v.  Thumblethorp,  474. 
Chapman  v.  Towner,  49,  100,  456. 
Chapman  v.  Wright,  1038. 
Chappie  V.  Brookway,  917. 
Chappie  V.  Gregory,  1393. 
Charles  v.  Altin,  706. 
Charles  v.  Rankin,  563. 
Charlestown  v.    County  Comm'rs. 

531. 
Chase  v.  Allen,  1051,  1058,  1059. 
Chase  v.  Hazleton,  975,  978,  983. 
Chase  v.  Jefferson,  473. 
Chase  v.  Palmer,  440. 
Chasemore   v.  Richards,  541,  558, 

559. 
Chatard  v.  O'Donavan,  8. 
Chatham  v.  Brained,  449. 
Chatterton  v.  Fox,  779,  897,  1136. 
Chattley  v.  Arnold,  1091. 
Chaundflower  v.  Priestley,  774. 
Chauntler  v.  Robinson,  875,  1004. 
Curl  V.  Lowell,  1396, 
Cheddicke  v.  Marsh,  1059. 
Cheddington's  Case,  603,  608,  609. 
Cheek  v.  McAlley,  544. 
Cheek  v.  Waldron,  321. 
Cheere  v.  Smith,  736. 
Cheesebrough  v.  Green,  873,  875, 
Cheesman  v.  Hardham,  530,  533. 
Cheetham  v.  Hampson,   784,  788, 

1004,  1005. 
dieeverv.  E.  R.  Co.,  246. 
Cheny  v.  Batten,   711,   712,   1050, 

1314. 
Cheney  v.  Bromell,  1298. 
Cheney  v.  Duke,  lol."). 
Cheney  v.  Pierce,  218. 
Cheney's  Case,  195. 
Chesapeake,     &o.,  Canal    Co.    v. 

Knapp,  189. 
Chester  v.  Green,  219. 
Chesterfield  v.  Bolton,  808,  810. 
Cheshire  v.  Cheshire,  140. 
Cheshire  v.  Payne,  218. 
Chesley  v.  Welch,  1296. 
Chesman  v.  Namby,  918. 
Chessman  v.  Whittemore,  463. 
Chesterman  v.  Mann,  372. 
Chestnut  HiU  &Co.  v.  Rutter,  189, 
Chetham  v.  Williamson,  466. 
Clietwood  V,  Britain,  636. 


1430 


Table  of  Cases. 


Chew  V.  Evans,  340, 
Chicago  V.  Lamed,  058. 
Chicago  V.  McGin,  529,  533. 
Chicago  V.  O'Erennan,  129L 
Chicago  Legal  News  Co.  v.  Brown, 

904,  1348. 
Chicago  Qe.  B.  R.  Co.  v.  Stein,  415. 
Chicago  &c.  Co.  v.  United  States, 

837 
Chick  v.Willets,  346. 
Chiddick  v.  Marsh,  1053. 
Chidington's  Case,  601. 
Chighizoler  v.  LeBaron,  239. 
Child  Y.  Baylie,  603. 
Child  V.  Douglass,  680. 
ChUders  v.  Smith,  1044,  1048. 
Childress  v.  Black,  1380. 
ChUdress  v.  Wright,  1334. 
ChUds  V.  Childs,  1044. 
Childs  V.  Clark,  742. 
ChUds  V.  Westcot,  323. 
Chiles  V.  Coaley,  446. 
Chiles  V.  Smith,  605. 
Chills  V.  United  States,  10. 
China  v.  Southwick,  538. 
Chinsley  v.  Langley,  903. 
Chipman  v.  Emeric,  584,  709,  710. 
Chipman  v.  Martin,  1309. 
Chirac  v.  Reinicker,  1391. 
Chospenning    v.   Royce,  378,  579, 

653. 
Chretien  v.  Doney,  949. 
Christ  V.  Diffenbach,  1347. 
Christian  v.  Driggs,  1323. 
Christmas  v.  Oliver,  334. 
Christopher  v.   Austin,  111,  1137, 

1392. 
Christy  v.  Tancred,  41,  44. 
Chubb  V.  Peckham,  363. 
Chung  You  V.  Hoop  Chong,  601. 
Church  V.  Brown,   335,  348,  714, 

1030. 
Church  V.  GUman,  886,  444. 
Church  V.  Imperial  Gas  light  Co. 

7. 
Church  V.  Ingersoll,  688. 
Church  V.  McKillar,  1073. 
Church  V.  Town,  624. 
Church  V.  Wabash,  &c.,  E.  R.  Co., 

458. 
Churchill  v.  Evans,  1006, 
Churchwarden  V.  Ford,  45,  1329, 

1338. 
Cibel  V.  Hill,  1136. 
Ciacinnati  v.  Buckingham,  189. 
Cincinnati  v.  Stone,  867. 
Cincinnati  v.  Walls,  18,  1330, 1338. 
Cincinnati,  &c.,  E.  R.  Co.  v.  SlifiE, 

444. 
City  Bank  v.  Bateman,  278. 
Clake  V.  Foster,  318. 
Clancey  v.  Bryne,  1283, 1391. 
Clapham  v.  Moyle,  644. 


Clapp  V.  Haine,  116, 

Clapp  V.  Noble,  89,  1073. 

Clapp  V.  Plaine.  29,  109. 

Clapp  V.  Stoughton,  318. 

Clapton  V.  Martin,  269. 

Clarges  v.  Punucan,  289,  336. 

Claridge  v.    McKenzie,  490,  1061. 

Clark  V.  Allen,  462. 

Clark  V.  Chambers,  1288. 

Clark  V.  Clark,  348,  1187. 

Clark  V.  Coolidge,  963. 

Clark  V.  Crego,  494. 

Clark  V.  Crosby,  918. 

Clark  v..  Cuerdiu,  485. 

Clark  V.  Cummings,  712,  1300. 

Clai-k  V.  Dickson,  278, 

Clark  V.  Fay,  1390. 

Clark  V.  Fraley,  1806. 

Clark  V.  Fry,  867. 

Clark  V.  Gifford,  443. 

Clark  V.  Glasgow  Ass.  Co.  798, 808. 

Clark  V.  Goddard,  486. 

Clark  V.  Gordon,  1085. 

Clark  V.  Green,  1330. 

Clark  V.  Halford,  1035,  1037. 

Clark  V.  Harvey,  66,  1371. 

Clark  V.  Holden,  977,  981, 

Clark  V.  Hume,  1334. 

Clark  V.  Jones,  583,  713. 

Clark  V.  Lookwood,  450. 

Clark  V.  Rayburn,  247,  1347. 

Clark  V.  Smaridge,  35,  85,  610. 

Clark  V.  Smith,  106,  297. 

Clark  V.  Spaulding,  1133,  1186. 

Clark  V.  Vt.  Central  R.  R.  Co., 474. 

Clark  V.  Wheelock,  65,  71. 

Clark  V.  Abbott,  349,  352. 

Clark  V.  Boyne,  1856. 

Clark  V.  Charter,  1085. 

Clarke  v,  Clarke,  437,  489,  1001. 

Clarke  v.  Coughlan,  1354. 

Clarke  v.  Fuller,  353,  609,  1353. 

Clarke  v.  Gray,  1050. 

Clarke  v.  Hart,  1371.   . 

Clarke  v.  Merrill,  947,  948. 

Clarke  v.  Moore,  340,  373. 

Clarke  v.  Ray,  443. 

Clarke  v.  Rochester,  &c.,  358. 

Clarke  v.  Roystone,  637,  1365. 

Clarke  v.  Tinker,  521. 

Clarke  v.  Vaughn,  176. 

Clarkft  V.  Webb,  1833,  1334. 

Clarke  V.  Westrope,  936. 

Clarke's  Appeal,  318. 

Clarkson    v.    Scarborough,    1092. 

Clason  V.  Bailey,  354. 

Clason  V.  Rankin,  737. 

Clavering  v.    Clavering,  138,   572, 

979. 
Clavering  v.  Westley,  1356. 
Claygate  v.  Batchelor,  919. 
Clayton  v.   Blakeley,  49,  93,  106, 

456. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1431 


Clayton  v.  Burtenshaw,  S44,  345. 
Clayton  v.  Gregson,  396,  638,  648, 

915. 
Clayton  v.  Illingworth,  363. 
Clayton  y.  Southern,  271. 
Clayton's  Case,  603,  1035. 
Clearwater  v.  Rose,  135. 
Cleaton  v.  Gower,  368. 
Cleaves  v.  Willoughby,  1125. 
C'legg  V.  Rowland,  977. 
Clemena  v.  Stier,  980,  983. 
Clement  v.  Milner,  1814. 
'  <  lemens  v.  Murphy,  685,  1148. 
Clemens  v.  Stier,  974. 
Clement  v.  Burt,  416. 
Clements  v.  Collins,  411. 
Clements    v.    Lambert,  427,  428. 
Clements  v.  Welles,  184,  994,  1082. 
Clemm  v.  Wilcox,  493. 
Clemmett  v.  Bradbee,  99,  107. 
Clennel  v.  Reed,  955. 
Clerk  V.  Callady,  1328. 
Cleveland  v.  Boerum,  291. 
Cleves  V.    Willoughby,  833,    1392. 
Clewe  v.  Willoughby,  1347. 
Clifford  V.  Atlantic,  1286. 
CUflEord  V.  Dam,  1294. 
Clift  v.  White,  1187,  1188. 
Chfton  V.  Walmsley,  638,  982. 
CUmie  v.  Wood,  413. 
CUnan  v.  Cooke,  268,  353,  609. 
Cline  v.  Black,  808. 
Cline's  Case,  1027. 
Chnton  v.  Hooper,  219. 
Clinton  v.  Myers,  .548,  544. 
Clithwall  V.  Ogilvie,  858. 
Clives  V.  Willoughby,  507, 
Cloak  V.  Hooper,  757. 
Cloges  V.  Sweetzer,  654. 
Close  V.  McCullough,  1154. 
Close  v.  Wilberforce,  735,  745,  817. 
Clough  V.  Hosford,  19,   59,   1337. 
Clow  V.    Brogden,  183,   749,   901. 
Cloves  v.   Staffordshire,  &c.,  541. 
Cloydon  Hospital  v.    Farley,  195. 
Clulow  Ee,  1091,  1093. 
Clun  V.  Clarke,  99. 
Clun's  Case,  1036,  1089,  1071,  1089. 
Coal  V.  Barney,  356. 
Cobbv.  Bennett,  528. 
Cobb  V.  Davenport,  537. 
Cobb  V.  Lavalle,  415. 
Cobb  V.  Smith,  1280. 
Cobb  V.  Stokes,  104, 115, 1141,'1359. 
Cobb  V.  Welborn,  772,  778. 
Cochego  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Whittier,  439, 

504. 
Cocker  v.  Cowper,  557. 
Cockerell  v.  Chalmeley,  865. 
Cocking  V.  Heathcote,  599. 
Cocking  V.  Ward,  355,  1369. 
Cochran  v.  Guild,  971. 
Cocks  Ex  parte,  717. 


Cocks  V.  Gray,  265. 
Cockson  V.  Cock.  678,  675,  738. 
Cocy's  Estate,  1228. 
Codlington  v.  Durham,  785,  1109. 
Codman  v.  Evans,  516. 
Codman  v.  Jackson,  490. 
Codman  v.  Jenkins,  1384. 
Codman  v.  Johnson,  958. 
Cody  V.  Quaterman,  69,  490,  1383. 
Coe  V.  Clay,  389,  781,  1299. 
Coe  V.  Hobby,  1159. 
Coe  V.  Vodges,  1086,  1393. 
Coen  V.  Coutner,  1021. 
Coffin  V.  Coffin,  996. 
Coffin  V.  Heath,  1302. 
Coflfman  v.  Howard,  1331. 
Coffin  V.  Lunt,  93. 
Coffin  V.  Tallman,  672,  673. 
Cohen  v.  Dupont,  1102,  1106,  1109. 
Cohen  V.  Habenicht.  831. 
Cohen  v.  Kyler,  1329. 
Coke  V.  England,  793,  801. 
Coke  V.  Gutkese.  869. 
Coker  v.  Guy,  396,  684. 
Coker  v.  Pearsall,  347. 
Colburne  v.  Mixstone,  1167. 
Colburn  v.  MorreU,  1136,  1137. 
Colchester  v.  Amott,  958. 
Colcock  V.  Ferguson,  198. 
Colcombe  v.  Fideler,  337. 
Cole  t.  Blake,  1310. 
Colev.  Forth,  974,  976. 
Cole  V.  Eagle,  1376. 
Cole  V.  Gill,  35. 
Cole  V.  Greene,  974. 
Cole  V.  Haynes,  417 
Cole  V.  HiUs,  461. 
Cole  V.  Hughes,  671. 
Cole  V.  Lake  Company,  538. 
Cole  V.  McKey,  860. 
Colev.  Maxfield,  493. 
Cole  V.  O'Niell,  218. 
Cole  V.  Roach,  1335. 
Cole  V.  Spame,  624. 
Cole  V.  West  London,  &c.,  408. 
Cole  V.  White,  377. 
Colebeck  v.  Girdler's  Co.,  889,  785. 
Colegrave  v.  Dias  Santos,  1258, 1367. 
Coleman  v.  Barkew,  447, 1068. 
Coleman  v.  Bruce,  1067. 
Coleman  v.  Foster,  75,  467. 
Coleman  v.  Hall,  465. 
Coleman  v.  King,  779. 
Coleman  v.  Maherly,  1173. 
Coleman  v.  Sherwyn,  693. 
Coleman  v.  Sutterfleld,  331. 
Coleman's  Appeal,  171. 
Colemore  v.  Whitroe,  491. 
,  Colerick  v.  Hooper,  859,  360.  881. 
Cole's  Case,  675,  679. 
Coles  V.  Boune,  353. 
Coles  V.  Brown,  366. 
Coles  V.  Home,  631. 


1432 


Table  of  Cases. 


Coles  V.  Trecothick,  368. 
Collamer  v.  Kelley,  178.  737. 
College  V.  Hallett,  1378. 
CoUes  V.  Evanson,  1157,  1184. 
CoUett  V.  Curling,  110,  1348. 
Collett  V.  Hooper,  954. 
Colley  V.  Streeton,  183,  345, 1088. 
Corner  V.  Corbett,  173. 
Collier  v.  Mason,  369. 
Collier  v.  Nokes,  1039,  1316. 
CoUier  v.  Pierce,  433. 
CoUins  V.  Barrow,  833.  847,  810. 
Collins  V.  Benbury,  537,  553. 
Collins  V.   Blantern,  636. 
Collins  V.  CartT,  116,  133. 
Collins  V.  Collins,  369. 
Collins  V.   Crouch,  673,  755. 
Collins  V.  Harding,  391,  1033,  llSa 
Collins  V.   Hope,  640. 
Collins  V.  Prentice,  515. 
Collins  V.  Prosser,  176. 
Collins  V.  Smye,  715,  1306. 
Collins  V.  Torry,  346. 

Collins  V.  Vanderveer,  881. 

Collins  V.  Weller,  101,  111,  160,  393. 

Collins  V.  Whigham,  394. 

Collins  Co.  V.  Marcy,  467. 

Collison  V.  Lettsom,  740. 

Collun  V.  Gardner,  370. 

Colman  v.  Packard,  355. 

Colnaghi  v.  Black,  116. 

Colquhoun  v.  Atkinson,  448. 

Colson  V.  Thompson,  359. 

Colton  V.  Smith,  356. 

Colts  V.  United  States,  436. 

Columbia  College  v.  Lynch,  669. 

Columbia  Mining  Co.   t.    Haller, 
553. 

Columbia  Water  Co.  v.  Columbia, 
894. 

Colville  V.  HaU,  1304. 

Colwell  V.  Lawrence,  1053. 

Colwell  V.  Mav's  Landing  Co,,  554. 

Colwell  V.  Thayer,  547. 

Comargene  v.  Brown,  1343. 

Combe's  Case,  314,  373. 

Conels  V.  Jackson,  313. 

Conels  V.  Stewart,  437. 

Comer  V.  Sheehan,  361. 

Comerford  v.  Cobb,  436. 

Comfoot  V.  Fowke,  377,  378,  1393. 

Comfort  V.  Duncan,  1371,  1373. 

Commercial  Bank  v.  Norron,  374. 

Commercial  Bank  v.  Warren,  440. 

Com  V.  Anderson,  309. 

Com  V.  Bailey,  527. 

Com  V.  Charlestown,  537. 

Com  V.  Chapin,  537.  530. 

Com  V.  Fee,  309. 

Com  V.  Green,  993. 

Comm'rs  v.  Hemphill,  539,  530. 

Comm'rs  v.  Jennings,  537. 

Com.  V.  McXeil,  1396. 


Comm'rs  V.  O'Connor,  1032, 1119. 
Conmi'rs  v.  People,  530. 
Com.  V.  Eitney,  475. 
Com.  V.  Savings  Bank,459. 
Com.  V.  Shaw,  538. 
Comm'rs  v.  Stratton,  984. 
Com  V.  Welcome,  1193. 
Comm'rs  v.  Withers,  530. 
Commissioners  of  Pilots  v.  Clark, 

38. 
Commons  v.  Marshall,  394. 
Commonwealth  v.  Todd,  1069. 
Comparet  v.  Randall,  340. 
Compton  V.  AJlen,  807,  809,  810. 
Conan  v.  Kemise,  674,  681. 
Cones  V.  Piatt,  444. 
Conger  v.  Duryee,  455,  1197. 
Conger  v.  Weaver,  779. 
Congham  v.  King,  681,  736,  744. 
Congl.  Soc.  V.  Providence,  960,  966. 
Congreg.  Society  v.  Stark,  599. 
Congreve  v.  Evetts,  747. 
Congreve  v.  Morgan,  1394, 
Conklin  v.  Egerton,  339, 341. 
Conklin  v.  Thompson,  986. 
ConkUn  v.  White,  1394. 
Conkling  v.  Brown,  171. 
Connan  v.  Hale,  1311,  1313. 
Connell  v.  Read,  955. 
Conn.,  &c.,Ins.  Co.  v.  Cleaveland, 

194. 
Connor  v.  Jones,  931,  938,  939. 
Connolly  v.  Baxter,  18. 
Connor  V.  Bradley,  1036, 1038, 1039. 
ConoUy  y.  \ernon,  637. 
ConoverV.  Hoffman,  393. 
Conrac  v.  Birdsell,  198,  307. 
Conro  V.  Port  Henry  Iron  Co.,  373. 
Constable  v.  Nicholson,  566. 
Constant  v.  Abell,  44. 
Constantine  v.  Wake,  738,  1017. 
Converse  v.  Ferre,  1303. 
Conway  v.  Starkweather,  108, 1035, 

1309. 
Cooch  V.  Goodman,  433,  440,  441.   - 
Coogan  V.  Parker,  840,  1100. 
Cook  V.  Brightly,  674,  1187. 
Cook  V.  Brown,  443. 
Cook  V.  Ohamplain,  809. 
Cook  V.  Champlain  Trans.  Co.  ,1353, 
Cook  V.  Clayworth,  330. 
Cook  V.  Cook,  71. 
Cook  V.  Danvers,  1169. 
Cookv.  Finkler,  485. 
Cook  V.  Gerra,  1044. 
Cook  V.  Gerrard,  503. 
Cook  V.  Hawis,  449. 
Cook  T.  Mavlan,  484. 
Cook  V.  Montagu,  1383. 
Cook  V.  Parker,  339. 
Cook  V.  Prigdon,  468,  470. 
Cookv.  Sanford,  371. 
Cook  V.  Soule,  1338. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1433 


Cook  V.  Staats,  1399. 

Cook  V.  Steai-ns,  465,  469. 

Cook  V.  Toombs,  198. 

Cook  V.  Trans.  Co.,  980. 

Cook  V.  Travis,  447. 

Cook  V.  Waiigh,  361,  364, 

Cook  V.  Whitfield,  378. 

Cook  T.  Wilson,  373. 

Cooke  V.  Booth,  933,  938. 

Cooke  V.  Brogan,  334. 

Cooke  V.  Cholmondely,  800. 

Cooke  V.  England,  1131. 

Cooke  T.  Husbands,  389. 

Cooke  V.  Kuvkendail,  485. 

Cooke  V.  Wilson,  271. 

Cool  T.  Mix,  198,  198. 

Coolidge  V.  Hager,  430. 

Coolidge  V.  Williams,  537. 

Coomler  v.  Hefner,  113. 

Coombe  t.  Greene,  819. 

Coomber  t.  Howard,  1026,  1348. 

Combs  V.  Beaumont,  1360. 

Conn  V.   Brickett,  455,  713,  1036, 

Coone  V.  Clare,  345. 

Cooney  v.  Hayes,  157, 731. 

Coope  V.  England,  839. 

Cooper  V.  Blandy,  488. 

Cooper  T.  Bockett,  594. 

Cooper  T.  Day,  447. 

Cooper  V.  Hubbuck,  1001. 

Cooper  V.  Page,  462. 

Cooper  V.  Rankm,  267. 

Cooper  V.  Eobinson,  606. 

Cooper  V.  Slade,  464. 

Cooper  V.  Smith,  1384, 

Cooper  V.  Stower,  978. 

Cooper  V.  TwibUl,  916, 1060. 

Cooper  V.  Twibill,  1060. 

Cooper  V.  Young,  1116. 

Coot  V.  Q-aig,  366. 

Cope  V.  Eomeyne,  1386. 

Copeland  v.  Ins.  Co.,  373. 

Copeland  v.  Palmer,  715. 

Copeland  v.  Watts,  1180,  118S. 

Copeland  v.  Laporte,  817. 

Copper  Mining  Co.  v.  Beach,  936. 

Coppinger  v.  Armstrong,  1020. 

Corawinger,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Cumming- 

ham.  605. 
Corbet's  Case.  523,  1164, 1167. 
Corbett  v.  CosteUo,  638. 
Corbett  v.  Norcross,  442. 
Corbin  v.   Healey,  504,  598,  654. 
Corbin  v.  Sistrunk,  636. 
Corbv  T.  Hill,  516. 
Cordes  v.  Miller,  664. 
CordweU  v.  Hunt,  689. 
Core  V.  Clare,  343, 
Corey  v.  Mann,  847,  863,  1131. 
Corley  v.  Carter,  1054. 
Corlies  v.  City  Fire  Ins.,  1301. 
Corliss  V.  Corliss,  446. 
Corlis  V.  McDogin,  1333, 1334. 


Cornelius  v.  Ivins,  454. 

Cornell  v.  Jackson,  783. 

Cornell  v.  Lamb,  1035, 1127, 1306    ' 

Cornell  V.  Moulton,  604,  605. 

Cornell  v.  Todd,  654. 

Cornell  v.  VaimtsdaUn,  803. 

Cornfoot  v,  Fowke,  367. 

Corning  v.  Gould,  533. 

Corning  v.  Troy  Nail  Factorv,  492, 

539. 
Cornisli  v.  Cawsey,  603. 
Cornish  v.   Cleife,   799,   804,   836, 

879. 
Cornish  v.  ,S8arell.  1043, 1304. 
Cornish  v,  Strattoii,  983. 
Cornish  vr  Stubbs,  465,  476,  1183. 
Cort  V.  Sagar,  593. 
Cortelyon  v.  Van  Brandt,  538. 
Cory  V.  Briston,  405. 
Coryton  v.  Lithebye,  176. 
Cosser  v.  CoUiage,  748,  1087. 
Costegan  v.  Gould,  448. 
Costegan  v.  Hastier,  363. 
Cotching  V.  Bassett.  1001. 
Cotes  V.  Woodson,  228. 
Cotesworth  t.  Spokes,  1212. 
Cotheal  v.  Talmadge,  1051,  1053. 
Cother  v.  Merrick,  1048. 
Cotter  V.  Richardson,  392,  393. 
Cotton  V.  Singham,  1143. 
Cotton  V.  Smith,  355. 
CottreU  V.  Hughes,  1184. 
CottereU  v.  Purchase,  1355. 
Couch  V.  IngersoU,  586,  683. 
Coudon  V.  Barr,  85. 
Coulson  y.  White,  1001. 
Coulston  V.  Carr,  771. 
Coumers  v.  KempshaU,  537. 
Counter  v.  Macpherson,  795. 
Countess  of  Shrewsbury's  Case,  69, 

70. 
Countess  of  Sussex  v.  Wroth,  301. 
Coupland  v.    Hardingham,    1287, 

1303. 
Coupland  v.  Maynard,  1169, 1307. 
Coure  V.  Goodwin,  847. 
Courtail    v.    Thomas,   1154,  1155. 
Com-tauld  v.  Legh,  548. 
Courteney  v.  Taylor,  889. 
Cowan  V.  Milbourn,  364,  483. 
Coward  v.  Silliman,  75^,  773. 
Coward  v.  Gregory,  587,  795,  894, 

900. 
Cowell  V.   Lumley,  661,  695,  808, 

835. 
Cowell  Ex  parte,  1360. 
Cowen   V.   Phillips,  340,  355,  431. 
Cowen  V.  Saunderland,  868. 
Cowenhoven  v.  Brooklyn,  359. 
Cowie    V.    Goodwm,  1105,    1106, 

1110. 
Cowlan  V.  Slack,  520. 
Cowles  V.  Bawne,  359, 


1434 


Table  of  Cases. 


Cowley  V.  Chiles,  489,  1383. 

Cowper  V.  Fletclier,  338. 

Cowper  V.  Pollard,  774. 

Cowper  V.  Vemey,  161. 

Cox  V.  Bent,  46,  86,  150,  1307. 

Cox  V.  Bishop,  727,  735,  745. 

Cox  V.  Brown,  715. 

Cox  V.  Burt,  50. 

Cox  V.  Day,  308,  305,  605. 

Cox  V.  Fenwick,  734. 

Cox  V.  Heisley,  923. 

Cox  V.  Jugleston,  339. 

Cox  V.  Knight,  1043. 

Cox  V.  Montgomery,  335. 

Cox  v.Paintor,  1323. 

Coxv.  State.  530. 

Coy  V.  Downie,  836.  883,  1033. 

Coyne  v.  Smith,  180. 

Cozens  v.  Stevenson,  1399. 

Craddook  v.  Aldi-idge,  586,  638. 

Craft  V.  McConoughy,  918. 

Craig  V.  Dale,  1373. 

Craig  V.  Meoime,  1313. 

Craig  V.  Ward,  335. 

Cram  v.  Dresser,  833,  1106,  1107. 

Cramer  v.  Carlisle,  493,  494. 

Cramer  v.  Carlisle  Bk.,  1385. 

Cramer  V.  Mott,  1330. 

Cranch  v.  Brilds,  1333. 

Cranz    v.    Kroger,  489,  490,  1383. 

Craswell  v.  Crane,  1333. 

Cruens  v.  Logan,  374. 

Crawford  v.  Berthalf,  443. 

Crawford  v.  Chapman,  674. 

Crawford  v.  Jones,  1331. 

Crane  v.  Morris,  218,  633.  948. 

Crawford  v.  Wick,  917,  918. 

Crawley  v.  MullLn,  590. 

Crawley  v.  Price,  346. 

Crawley  v.  Rice,  589,  593. 

Crawley  v.  Vitty,  484. 

Creagh  v.  Blood,  1174. 

Creech  v.  Crockett,  50,  70. 

Creigh  v.  Blood,  1170. 

(jreigh  v.  Shotts,  361. 

Creighton  v.  McKee,  941,  945. 

Cremer  v.  Marshall,  181. 

Crenshaw  v.  Crenshaw,  1233. 

Cressinger  v.  Welch,  301,  303. 

Cressler  v.  Williams,  13. 

Cresson  v.  Stout,  1235. 

Crim  V,  Nelues,  499. 

Crippen  v.  Morrison,  253,  255. 

Crippen  v.  Morse,  171. 

Cripps  V.  Blank,  45,  1330,  1337. 

Crisdee  v.  Boulton,  918,  1058. 

Crisp  V.  Barber,  29,  30. 

Crisp  V.  Churchill,  1343. 

Crisp  V.  Price,  437. 

Crispe  V.  Frier,  1049. 

Crittenden  v.  Field,  554. 

Croch  V.  Wabash,  1313. 

Crocker  v.  Bragg,  540. 


Crocker  v.  Smith.  239. 
Crocker  v.  Tiffany,  170. 
Crockerell  v.  Ourrell,  69,  89. 
Crockett  v.  Crockett.  981. 
Crockett  v.  Lashbrook,  485. 
Crockford  v.  Alexander,  1359. 
Croft  V.  Howel,  195. 
Croft  V.  Lumley,  455,  716,  1197. 
Croft  V.  Tidbury,  1358. 
Croft  V.  White,  460,  463. 
Croger  v.  McLanney,  1139. 
Cromelin  v.  Theis,  50,  107,  1106. 
Cromwell  v.  Andrews,  1037,  1071. 
Cremwell  v.  Selden,  553. 
Cromwell's  Case,  412. 
Cronin  v.  Watkins,733. 
Cronise  v.  Clark,  198, 
Crooke  v.  Loxley,  1304. 
Croom  V.  Talbut,  1031,  1022. 
Croombe  v.  Lediard,  365. 
Cropp  V.  Hambleton,  1036. 
Cropp  V.  Humberton,  1038. 
Crosbie  v.  Tooke,  953. 
Crosby  v.  Bradbury,  399. 
Crosby  v.  Hamlord,  249,  252. 
Crosby  v.  Loop,  733, 1045,  1303. 
Crosby  v.  Otis,  318. 
Cross  V.  Button,  1330. 
Cross  V.  Carson,  454. 
Cross  V.  Eglin,  401. 
Cross  V.  Lome,  1019. 
Cross  V.  Powell,  433. 
Cross  V.  State  Bank,  463. 
Cross  V,  Upson,  739. 
Crosse  v.  Baw,  965. 
Crosse  v.  Young,  774. 
Crossfield  v.  Morrison,  689,  75D. 
Crossing  v.  Sendamore,  503. 
Crossly  v.  Lightower,  481,  541. 
Cros.well  v.  Crane,  1338. 
Crouch  V.  Briles,  1381. 
Crouch  V.  Fostolfe,  1079. 
Crouch  V.  Fowle,  693, 694,  699,  760. 
Crowley  v.  Vitty,  1158,  1357. 
Crowther  v.  Rowlandsan,  338. 
Crozierv.  Tomkinson,  1313. 
Crudwell's  Case,  136. 
Cniiser  v.  State,  1375. 
Crump  V.  Morrell,  847. 
Crumshay  v.  Thornton,  1356. 
Crune  v.  Prideaux,  161. 
Crusoe  v.  Bugby.  146,  709,  714,  717. 
Crutchfield  v.  Stanbaugh,  961. 
Cubitt  V.  Porter,  1004. 
CudgeU  V.  Durall,  940. 
Cudlip  V.  Rundall,  48,  93,  571. 
Cuddee  v.  Rutler,  361. 
Culeson  v.  Blunton,  447. 
Culling  V.  Tuffnal,  1286,  1345. 
CuUiQs  V.  Barrow,  885. 
Cumbert  v.  Frowd,  35. 
Cumberland  v.  Bours,  926. 
Cumberland  v.  Glairs,  456. 


Table  of  Cases, 


1435 


Cumberland's  Case,  1008. 
Gumming  v.  Bedborough,  186.  955, 

1065. 
Cuming  v.  Buswell,  1093. 
Cummings  v.  Iver,  S33. 
Gumming  v.  Powell,  197,  198. 
Cummock  v.  Macy,  1380. 
Gummingham  v.  Cambridge,  &o., 

1280. 
Gummingham  v.  Holton,  159. 
Gummingham  v.  Morrell,  586,  682. 
Gummingham  v.  Pattee,  934,  941. 
Cure  V.  Crawford,  949. 
Curling  v.  Mills,  334,  420,  887« 
Curney  v.  Mclntyre,  157. 
Curran  v.  Bryce,  1341. 
Currier  v.  Earl,  47,  487,  493. 
Currier  v.  Gale,  30. 
Currier's  Co.  v.  Corbet,  423,  1001. 
Curry  v.  Com.  Ins.  Co.,  139,473. 
Curry  v.  Hendry,  1375. 
Gurry  v.  Stein,  423. 
Curtis  V.  Ayrault,  431. 
Curtis  V.  Curtis,  209. 
Curtis  V.  Deeving,  446. 
Curtis  V.  Galoin,  39,  69. 
Curtis  V.  Gokey,  918. 
Curtis  V.   Hoyt,  473,   1229,    1245, 

1373. 
Curtis  V.  Hubbard,  1319. 
Curtis  V.  Jackson,  540. 
Curtis  V.  Keeler,  535. 
Curtis  V.  Leavitt,  437 
Curtis  V.  Lucat,  18. 
Curtis  V.  McDougal,  204. 
Curtis  V.  MiUer,  1031. 
Curtis  V.  Norton,  410. 
Curtis  V.  Pierce,  958,  965. 
Curtis  V.  Riddle,  1245. 
Curtis  V.  Spitty,  681,  736,  1329. 
Curtis  V.  Treat,  19,  1329,  1338. 
Curtis  V.   Wheeler,  94,   179,    187, 

1308. 
Curtis  V.  White,  671. 
Gurzon  v.  Evans,  135. 
Gushing  v.  Adams,  1096. 
Cushart  v.  Auburn  Gas  light  Co., 

541. 
Gushing  v.  Drew,  1059. 
Cuthbertsar  v.  Irving,  490,  744. 
Cuthbert  v.  Kuhn,  1035. 
Cuttle  V.  Brockway,  486. 
Cutting  V.  Derby,  119,  175, 1034, 
Daerdemay  v.  Gland,  771. 
Daggett  V.  Norton,  489. 
DaUey  v.  Grimes,  1307. 
Daily  v.  Litchfield,  1053,  1055. 
Dakin  v.  Williams,  584,  709,  710. 
Dalay  v.  Savage,  1288. 
Dalby  v.  Hu-st,  888,  923. 
Dald  V.  Geiger,  218. 
Dale  V.  Doddridge,  93. 
Daley  v.  Savage,  1280. 


Dallas  V.  Pool,  37. 
Daloret  v.  Rothschild,  373. 
Dalrymple  v.  Mead,  583. 
Dalston  v.  Reeve,  1018, 1028,  1137. 
Dalton  V.  Baker,  1114. 
Dalton  V.  Jones,  801,  1201. 
Dalton  V.  Lindahn.  30,  1329,  1330. 
Dalton  V.  Whittem,1310,1270, 1310. 
Damb  v.  Hoffman,  465,  738. 
Dame  v.  Dame,  1345. 
Dames  v.  Prentice,  579. 
Damon  v.  Granby,  370, 
Dampier  v.  Pole,  593. 
Daner  v.  Gardwell,  447. 
Dancer  v.  Hastings,  1308. 
Dana  v.  Coombs,  201,  204, 
Dandy  v.  NichoU,  1398. 
Dane  v.  Kirkwell,  339,  1347, 
Danellan  v.  Eeed,  1023,  1050, 
Danforth  v.  Durell,  517. 
Danforth  v.  Sargent,  96. 
Danforth   v,  Schoharie  Turnpike 

Co.,  189. 
Daniel  v.  Frazer,  360. 
Daniel  v.  Gracie,  1019, 1031, 1306, 
Daniel  v.  Hill,  614. 
Daniel  Be,  1260. 
Daniel  v.  Upley,  810. 
Daniel  v.  Veal,  503,  654. 
Daniel  v.  Waddington,  166,  167. 
Daniels  v.  Davison,  69. 
Daniels  v.  Dawson,  353. 
Daniels  v.  Richardson,  319,  334. 
Daniels  v.  Pond,  67. 
Dan  V.  Spurrier,  611,  1141. 
D'Aquin     v.   Armont,    668,    673, 

736. 
D'Aquin  v.  Barbour,  638. 
Darly  v.  Harris,  1340,  1310. 
.  Darby  v.  Whittaker,  369. 
Darcy  v.  Askwith,  659,  979,  980. 
Darey  v.  Askwith,  573. 
Dark  In  Be,   1363,  1364. 
Darke  v.  Bowditch,  158,  518, 1193, 

1200. 
Darkin  v.  Williams,  683. 
Darlington  v.  Bond,  1202. 
Darlington  v.  Hamilton,  184,  868, 

748. 
Darlington  v.  Painter,  551. 
Darlington  v.  Pritchard,  489. 
Darlington  v.  Ulph,  606,  701. 
DarreU  v.  Johnson,  109. 
DarreU  v.  Roper,  567. 
Darrell  v.  Stevens,  107. 
DarreU  v.  Whitchot,  951. 
Darrell  v.  Whitcott,  950. 
Dartmont  College  v.  Clough,  1013. 
Dartnal  v.  Morgan,  1328. 
Darwin  v.  Rippey,  460. 
Dater  v.  Earl,  465. 
Daupe  V.  Genin,  848. 
Davenish  v,  Moffatt,  111,  106,  890, 


1436 


Table  of  Cases. 


Davey  v.  Davey,  1355, 
Davey  Ex  parte,  1378. 
Davey  t.  Williams,  454.  • 
David  V.  Beekman,  1098. 
Davids  v.  Harris,  671. 
Davidson  v.  Cooper,  481. 
Davidson  v.  Moss,  335. 
■  Davidson  v.  Stanley,  484. 
Davenant  v.  Salisbury,  959. 
Davenport  v.  Hayme,  1071. 
Davenport  v.  Ruckman,  843, 
Davies  v.  Aston,  1313,  1336. 
Davies  v.  Connop,  1364,  1366. 
Davies  v.  Fitton,  366,  367. 
Davies  v.  Mannington,  196. 
Davies  v.  Marshall,  1001. 
Davies  v.  Myers,  139. 
Davies  V.  Powell.  1313. 
Davies  v.  Thomas,  44,  69,  73. 
Davies  v.    Underwood,  879,  898, 

1199. 
Davies  v.  Williams,  634. 
Davis  V.  Anderson,  346. 
Davis  V.  Banks,  1131. 
Davis  V.  Bancks,  785. 
Davis  V.  Brandon,  436. 
Davis  V.  Bridges,  337. , 
Davis  V.  Brigham,  693. 
Davis  V.  Brooklebank,  66,  67,  68, 

1371. 
Davis  V.  Burrell,  455,  480,  1204. 
Davis  V.  Burton,  438. 
Davis  V.  Carlisle,  460. 
Davis  V.  Cent].  Cong.  Soc,  1395. 
Davis  V.  Christain,  311 
Davis  V.  Crofts,  14. 
Davis  V.  Davis,  319. 
Davis  V.  Bisam,  1197. 
Davis  V.  Elsam,  908. 
Davis  V.  Eyton,  67,  1383. 
Davis  V.  Fieeman,  1053. 
Davis  V.  Fidler,  540,  554. 
Davis  V.  Getchell,  544,  553. 
Davis  V.  Gilliam,  981. 
Davis  V.  Gyde,  1063. 
Davis  V.  Hone,  356. 
Davis  V.  Jones,  448,  1S30,  1333. 
Davis  V.  Lyman,  653. 
Davis  V.  Mason,  917,  918. 
Davis  V.  Morris,  179,  734. 
Davis  V.  Oliver,  947. 
Davis  V.  Payne,  1311. 
Davis  V.  Penton,  1058. 
Davis  V.  Shepherd,  999. 
Davis  V.  Smith,  1130. 
Davis  V.  Stem,  635. 
Davis  V.  Susler,  333. 
Davis  V.  Taylor,  936. 
Davis  V.  Thomas,  933. 
Davis  V.  Thompson,  53, 66, 68, 1371, 
Davis  V.  Turner,  70. 
Davis  V.  Underwood,  453,  901. 
Davis  V.  Vincent,  394, 


Davis  V.  West,  1000. 
Davis  V.  Winslow,  530,  54S. 
Davison  v.  Gent,  1169. 1170. 
Davison  v.  PhiUips,  1380. 
Davison  v.  Wilson,  30,  1397, 1357. 
Davison  v.  Young,  204. 
Davisthorpe  v.  Porter,  393. 
Davone  v.  Fanning,  238. 
Dawes  v.  Prentice,  651. 
Dawsey  V.  Richardson,  130. 
Dawson  v.  Baldwin,  913. 
Dawson  v.  Bell,  400. 
Dawson  v.  Dawson,  444. 
Dawson  v.  Dyer,  590,  778,  933. 
Dawson  v.  Fitzgerald,  684. 
Dawes  v.  Heath,  593. 
Dawson  v.  Kettle,  640. 
Dawson  v.  Linton,  955. 
Dawson  v.  Massey,  381,  383,  384, 
Day  V.  Austin,  1116,  1351. 
Day  V.  CrackveU,  1337. 
Dayton  v.  Craik,  1148. 
Day  V.  Essex  Bank,  586,  683. 
Day  V.  Fynn,  401. 
Day  V.  Perkins,  1336. 
Day  V.  Twackhamer,  1377. 
Day  V.  Watson,  1130. 
Dayvell  v.  Hoare,  391,  398. 
Dayton  v.  Newman,  443. 
Dean  v.  AllaUey,  1233. 
Dean  v.  Emerson,  918. 
Dean  v.  Mason,  634. 
Dean  v.  Roesler,  373,  440. 
Dean  of  Bristol  v.  Jones,  587. 
Deal  V.  Palmer,  1234, 1236. 
Dearborn  v.  Eastman,  197. 
Dearmond  v.  Dearmond,  448. 
Debow  V.  Colfax,-  66,  67,  1371. 
De  Charms  v.  Harwood,  165. 
Decker  v.  Fisher,  528. 
Decker  v.  Livingston,  173. 
Deene  v.  Quay,  992. 
Deere  v.  Ivey,  889. 
Deery  v.  Cray,  486. 
Deering  v.  Farrington,  623,  694. 
Deering  v.  Long,  653. 
De  Forest  v.  Bryne,  14,  738,  905. 
Degrafifenried  v.  Sc.ruggs,1222,1233 

1339. 
Dalacroix  v.  Bulkley,  1161. 
De  Lancy  v.  Ganong,  69,  124,  592. 
Delaney  v.  Fox.  488,  490. 
Delano  v.  Montague,  1331. 
Delashman  v.  Berry,  945,  947. 
Delashman  v.  Thomas,  941. 
D.  &  I.  R.  Co.  V.  Walker,  1278. 
Dell  V.  Pigott,  411. 
Dellar  v.  Robert,  107. 
Deller  v.  Roberts,  33. 
Demi  v.  Bassler,  66. 
Demi  v.  Bossier,  1371. 
De  Medina  v.  Palson,  456. 
De  Minckui-tz  v.  Udney,  953. 


Table  op  Cases. 


1437 


Deming  v.  BilUt,  436,  437. 

DejTioi-est  t.  Willard,  674,  675. 

Dempsey  v.  Kipp,  470. 

Den  V.  Adams,  33,  li),  354 

Den  V.  Ashmore,  1386. 

Den  v..Cartwriglit,  90. 

Den  V.  Drake,  110. 

Den  V.  Hamilton,  635. 

Den  V.  Kinney,  976. 

Den  T.  McKay,  86. 

Den  V.  M'Night,  446. 

Den  T.  Post,  714. 

Den  V.  Quimby,  321. 

Den  V.  Riohman,  446. 

Denby  v.  Moore,  186,  955. 

Dendy  v.  NichoU,  455,  1311. 

Deninan  v.  Lopez,  1041. 

Denn  v.  Cartwright,  109,  610. 

Denn  v.  Fearnside,  46,  303. 

Denn  v.  Mcintosh,  91. 

Denn  v.  Rawlins,  1041,  1042. 

Dennison  v.  Ford,  779. 

Dennison  v.  Lee,  1319. 

Dennison  v.  Story,  272. 

Dennet  v.  Penobscot  FairGrd.  Co., 

19. 
Denny  v.  Smith,  1086. 
Dennett  ^r.  Dennett,  239. 
Dennett  t.  Penobscot,  1331, 
Dent  V.  Bennett,  280. 
Dent  T.  Hancock,  1309. 
Denton  v.  Riclimond,  1056,  1060. 
Denton  v.  Jackson,  ."522,  525. 
Denner  v.  Rice,  1305. 
Denver  Trans. ,  &c. ,  Co.  t.  Severn, 

1333. 
DePeystra-  v.  Michael,  583. 
Depew  V.  Canal  Co.,  533,  535. 
Depuy  V.  Silver,  1067,  1068, 1133. 
DeRivasinoli  v.  Corsetti,  363. 
Derby  v.  Harris,  1326. 
Derby  v.  Taylor,  146, 732. 
Dermott  v.  Grover,  475. 
Deslandes  v.  Gregpry.  371. 
besMoines  v.  Don,  965. 
bespard   v.   Walbridge,   108,  490, 

948. 
De  St.  iRomes  v.  New  Orleans,  1348. 
Da  Silver's  Estate,  1084. 
Detroit  Savings  Bank  v.  Bellamy, 

113. 
Detweller,v.  Cox,  1306. 
Deuatch  v.  Newsom,  497. 
Deusen  v.  Young,  983. 
Devatch  v.  Newsam,  1385. 
Devin  V.  Dougherty,  1384. 
Devin  v.  Huier,  463. 
Devltt  V.  Harvey,  420. 
Devon  v.  Collyer,  666. 
Devone  v.  Sunderland,  679. 
Devereux  v.  Barlow,  666,  667. 
Dew  V.  Camp,  325. 
Dewey  v.  Paine,  31. 


Dewey  v.  Williams,  553. 
Dewy  Bank  v.  Webster,  444. 
DeWitt  V.  Lockwood,  197. 
De  Witt  V.  Pierson,  1104, 1183, 
DeWolfv.  Mkrtin,  490. 
Dexter  v.  Manley,  760,  779,  783. 
Dexter  v.  Phillips,  56. 
D'Eyncourt  v.  Gregory,  1325. 
Deyo  T.  Bleakly,  1027. 
De  Young  t.  Buclianan,  13, 88,  107. 
DeZeng  v.  Bailey,  1086. 
Dibble  v.  Bowater,  1034,  1317. 
Dickey  v.  MoCullough,  709. 
Dicker  v.  Jackson,  684. 
Dickens  v.  Barnes,  399,  400. 
Dickson  v.  Desire,  679. 
Dickson  v.  Zizina,  653. 
Dickinson  v.  Barber,  229. 
Dickinson  v.  Chrisman,  374. 
Dickinson  v.  Conway,  269. 
Dickinson  v.  Goodrich,  65. 
Dickinson  v.  Goodspeer,  1396, 1300. 
Dickinson  v.  Grand  Junction,  &c. 

541. 
DickersOnv.  Holmes,  674. 
Dickenson  v.  Jones,  993. 
Dickinson  v.  Worcester,  537. 
Dieti-ichsen  v.  Guibiler,  891. 
Dififeedoffer  v.  Jones,  1371. 
Digby  V.  Atkinson,  106,  809,  833. 
Diggs  V.  Maury,  829, 
Dighton  V.  Tomlinson,  310. 
Dillon  V.  Parker,  154. 
Dillon  V.  Brown,  26. 
DiUer  v.  Roberts,  34,  88. 
Dillingham  V.  Jenkins,  615. 
Dimich  v.  Corbett,  1058,  1060. 
Dimmock  v.  Daly,  1085. 
Dingley  v.  Buffum,  1333, 1344. 
Dingley  v.  Sales,  715,  718. 
Dinsmore  v.  Rich.  467. 
Dirrickson  v.  Springer,  514. 
Disdale  v.  Ives,  69,  70. 
Diser  v.  Rice,  463. 
Dishon  v.  Porter,  553. 
Ditchett  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  826,  1383. 
Ditt  V.  Bowen,  305. 
Dis  V.  Atkins,  99. 
Dixie  Y.  Davis,  53,  54,  364. 
Dixey  v.  Spencer,  1193. 
Dixon  V.  Bell,  1288. 
Dixon  V.  Clayville,  634. 
Dixon  V.  Clow.  1277. 
Dixon  V.  McCue,  395. 
Dixon  V.  Merritt,  196. 
Dixon  V.  Nichols,  732,"  1044, 1077. 
Dixon  V.  Roe.  1208. 
Disonv.  U.S.,  918. 
Doane  v.  Badger,  1303. 
Dobbin  v.  Brown,  1098. 
Dobbins  v.  Dugan,  1095,  1114, 
Dobbyn  v.  Somers,  423. 
Dobson  T,  Blackmore,  1378. 


1438 


Table  of  Cases. 


Dobson  V.  Culpepper,  1386.  Doe  v. 

Dobson  V.  Litton,  360.  Doe  v. 

Dobson  V.  Swan,  364.  Doe  v. 

Dockham  v.  Parker,  1377,  1279.  Doe  v. 

Dod  V.  Monger,  1320,  1333.  Doe  v. 

Dodd  V.  Acklon,  1168.  Doe  v. 

Dodd  V.  Burchell,  431,  558.  Doe  d. 

Dodd  V.  Holme,  563,  563,  1376.  Doe  v. 

Dodd  V.  Linis,  687.  Doe  v. 

Dodd  V.  Watson,  977.  Doe  v. 

Dodge  V.  Bowers,  101.  Doe  v. 

Dodge  V.  McClintock,  470.  Doe  v. 

Dodge  V.  Lambert,  905,  907.  Doe  v. 

Dodwell  V.  Gibbs,  597.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Adams,  29.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Allen,  625,  1218,  1393.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Amey,  50,  456.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Archer,  118.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Ashmore,  497,  498.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Austin,  488.  Doe  v. 

Doe  d.  Small  v.  Allen,  388.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Bancks,  113.  Doe  v. 

Doe  Y.  Barton,  1386.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Bastard,  1042.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Batten,  116,  133,  1890.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Bayley,  105.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Baytup,  488.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Bell,  32,  113.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Benson,  396.  Doe  y. 

Doe  V.  Bernard,  654.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Bevan,  716,  717,  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Biggs,  112,  504.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V,  Bingham,  437.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Birch,  1394.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Bird,  799.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Brown,  219,  230.  Doe  v. 

Doe  v.  Burt,  896,  407,  408,  655.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Butler,  117,  450.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Calvert,  122,  303.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Carter,  151,  911.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Cawdor,  123.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  ChaUis,  1390.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Clarke,  911,  1043.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Cochrane,  1337.  Doe  v. 
Doe  V.  Collings,  106,  408,  418,  456.     Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Cooper,  123.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Cox,  118.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Crago,  96,  1043.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Crick,  117,  121.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Dardwicke,  294.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Day,  604.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Davis,  807.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Derry,  76.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Dixon,  97.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Dobell,  113.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Donovan,  111.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Dyre,  198.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Edwards,  488.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Ellis,  598.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Evans,  124.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Eyken,  455.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Forwood,  121.  Doe  v. 

Doe  V.  Forster,  113,  117.  Doe  v. 


Foster,  100,  456. 

Francis,  1043. 

Frowd,  124. 

Fuller,  486,  488. 

Goack,  1346. 

Gai-diner,  4696. 

Hartridge  v.  Gilbert,  398. 

Giles,  349. 

Gladwin,  709. 

Goldwin,  118. 

Gower,  124. 

Grafton,  110. 

Green,  109. 

Groves,  388. 

Grubb,  124. 

Hall,  121. 

Hare,  1064. 

Harlon,  1390,  1391. 

Hawk,  151. 

Hayes,  238. 

Hazel.  110. 

Hazell,  104. 

Hiscock,  896. 

Houghton,  458. 

Howard,  114. 

Hubbard,  655. 

Huddart,  1391. 

Hughes,  114,  121. 

Hulme,  121. 

Humphreys,  122. 

Jackson,  47,  62,  799,  801. 

Johnson,  114. 

Jones,  93,455,  799,  1393. 

Kenward;  921. 

KneUer,  617. 

Lambley,  113. 

Lawder,  39. 

Lea,  396. 

Lewis,  800,  807. 

Lines,  113. 

Long,  134. 

Luca8,131. 

Lumbly,  105. 

Mainby,  109. 

Maisey,  39. 

Maisley,  349. 

Martin,  411. 

Mastens,  1036. 

Masters,  1039. 

Matthews,  114,  1043. 

Meux,  713,  807. 

Miller,  93,  195. 

Mills,  488. 

Milward,  128. 

MofEatt,  456.     " 

Monyer,  150. 

Morse,  1019. 

Ongley,  121,  486,  488. 

Palmer,  122. 

Parker,  1194. 

Pasquali,  124. 

Paul,  1039. 

Peck,  455,  1393. 


Table  op  Cases. 


1439 


Doe  V.  Porter,  503,  S04,  654,  753. 

Doe  ^.  Pritchard,  713, 1393. 

Doe  d.  Pulteney   v.  Ladv  Cavan, 
393. 

Doe  V.  Pyke,  1153. 

Doe  V.  Eamsbotham,  489. 

Doe  V.  Read,  130. 

Doe  V.  Eeed,  445. 

Doe  V.  Rees,  445,  1393. 

Doe  V.  Rendle,  288. 

Doe  V.  Rhodes,  114. 

Doe  V.  Richards,  330,  343. 

Doe  V.  Ridout,  89. 

Doe  V.  Roe,  735. 

Doe  V.  Rollings,  134. 

Doe  V.  Rowlands,  895. 

Doe  V.  Ruffian,  84. 

Doe  V.  Samuel,  113. 

Doe  V.  Scott,  105. 

Doe  V.  Seaton,  498. 

Doe  V.  Smaridge,  109. 

Doe  V.  Smith,  60,  100,  456,  604. 
'Doe  V.  Smythe,  13. 

Doe  V.  Snowdon,  109,  114. 

Doe  V.  Somerton,  138. 

Doe  V.  Spence,  104,  114. 

Doe  V.  Spiller,  118. 

Doe  V.  Stamon,  759. 

Doe  V.  Stapleton,  114. 

Doe  V.  Steel.  117. 

Doe  V.  Steel,  123. 

Doe  V.  Stevens,  650. 

Doe  V.  Stratton,  103,  456. 

Doe  V.  Summersett,  131. 

Doe  V.  Sutton,  799,  807. 

Doe  V.  Taniere,  50,  456. 

Doe  V.  Thomas,  463. 

Doe  V.  Thompson,  134. 

l>oe  T,  ^timothy,  117. 

Doe  V.  Turford,  133. 

Doe  V.  Turner,  39, 

Doe  d.  Davis  v.  Vincent,  390. 

Doe  V.  Wandlass,  1036. 

Doe  V.  Watkins,  114,  131. 

Doe  V.  Watson,  489. 

Doe  V.  Walters,  120. 

Doe  V.  Watts,  456. 

Doe  V.  Weller,  105,  113,  333. 

Doe  V.  Wells,  94. 

Doe  V.  Whitcomb,  1393. 

Doe  V.  Whittick,  134. 

Doe  V.  Wilkinson,  118,  1043,  1043. 

Doe  d.  Earl  of  Egremont  v.  Wil- 
liams, 398,  300, 

Doe  d.  Hull  V.  Wood,  94. 

Doe  V.  Woodman,  133. 

Doe  V.  Woolbridge,  455,  1393. 

Doe  V.  Wrightman,  111,  115,  131. 

Doherty  v.  Dalan,  779. 

Dolby  V.  lies,  17. 

DoUen  v.  Batt,  753. 

DoUiver  v.  Ela,  1339. 

Dolman  v.  Dolinan,  1195. 


Dolphv.  White,  674, 1034. 
Dominick  v.  Michael,  303,  341,  343. 
Donaldson  v.  Smith,  1031. 
Donaldson  v.  Wilson,  1295. 
Doneraile  v.  Chartres,  947. 
Donford  v.  EUys,  1391. 
Donnell  v.  Johnson,  116,  133. 
DoneUan  v.  Read,  975,  1017,  1351. 
Doohttle  V.  Eddy,  67. 
DonKensley  v.  Levy,  1171. 
Dorance  v.  Jones,  736,  741. 
Dork  V.  Johnston,  467. 
Dorkin  v.  Williams,  686. 
Dorman  v.  Ames,  538,  1283. 
Dormer  v.  Fortescue,  1355. 
Dormer's  Case,  1039. 
Dorr  V.  Barney,  107. 
Dorrell  v.  Andrews,  1136. 
Dorrell  v.  CoUins,  576. 
Dorrell  v.  Johnson,  39. 
Dorrill  v.  Stephens,  34. 
Dorsey  v.  Eagle,  635. 
Dorsey  v.  Hays,  1316. 
Dorwin  v.  Potter,  832. 
Dorcher  v.  Shaw,  1183. 
Doty  V.  Burdick,  1396. 
Dougan  v.  Champlain  Trans.  Co., 

874. 
Dougherty  v.  Matthews,  584. 
Doughty  V.  Bowman,  671,  673. 
Douglas  V.  Lock,  300,  574,  579. 
Douglas  V.  Murphy,  707. 
Douglas  V.  Wiggins,  976,  980,  993. 
Douglas  V.  Branch  Bank,  194. 
Do  uglas  V.  Chne,  353. 
Douglas  V.  Shank,  603. 
Douglas  V.  Spears.  354. 
Douglas  y.  State,  535. 
Doappe  V,  fiiennjii,  389,  854,  860 

1131. 
Douse  V.  Earle,  799,  803,  815. 
Dove  V.  Dove,  955. 
Dove  V.  Williott,  478. 
Dow  V.  Kennedy.  979,  983. 
Dowdney  v.  Mayor,  961,  963. 
Dowell  V.  Dew,  578. 
Dowell's  Case,  573. 
DowUng  V.  Mill,  933.  , 

Downes  v.  Cooper,  491. 
Downes  v.  Turner,  1041. 
Downing  v.  Bissell,  339. 
Downing  v.  Marshall,  188,  311. 
Downings  v.  Seymour,  335. 
Downer  v.  Ford,  496. 
Doury  v.  Drury,  196,  340,  757. 
Doury  v.  Molins,  938. 
Douse  V.  Cale,  803,  815. 
Downshire  v.  Sandys,  996. 
Dowson  V.  Cropp,  1331. 
Dowtie's  Case,  400. 
Doyle  V.  Gibbs,  78. 
Doyle  V.  Lloyd,  434. 
Doyle  V.  Lord,  409,  861,  1118, 1114. 


1440 


Table  of  Cases. 


Dozier  v.  Gregory.  980,  983. 

Drake,  Ex  parte,  717. 

Drake  t.  Beere  1096. 

Drake  v.  Cocki-oft,  1064,  1097. 

Drake  v.  Drake,  1337. 

Drake  v.  Mitchell,  1063. 

Drake  v.  Munday,  336  395,  619; 

Drake  v.  Newton,  50,  340. 

Drake  t.  Eamsey,  303,  305. 

Drake  v.  WeUs,  470,  475. 

Drakeley  v.  Gregg,  369; 

Draper  v.  Crofts,  44,  1359. 

Drawbridge  Co.  v.  Halliday,  535. 

Drawn  v.  Smith,  978,  982. 

Dresser  v.  Norwood,  464. 

Drew  V.  Power,  1346. 

Drewett  v.  Sheard,  538. 

Driggs  Y.  Dwight,  949. 

Driscoll  V.  Marshall,  475. 

Drohan  v.  Drohan,  343. 

Duggs  V.  Dwight,  897. 

Drucker  v.  Simon,  1139. 

Drummond  v.  Duke  of  St.  Albans, 
390. 

Drummond  v.  Hopper,  330. 

Drury  v.  Macnamara,  433,  761. 

Drury  v.  Molins,  934. 

Drury  Lane  Theatre  Co.  v.  Chap- 
man, 1351. 

Druse  v.  Wheeler,  470. 

Duane  v.  Ruesler,  897. 

Dubois  T.  Kelly,  1347. 

Dubois  V.  Mitchell,  491,  496. 

Debuque  t.  Maloney,  437. 

Debuque  v.  Miller,  50,  189. 

Ducharme  v.  Harwood,  169. 

Duck  V.  BraddyU,  1358. 

Duckworth  v.  Alisin,  1057. 

Dudden  v.  Guardians,  &c.,  537. 

Dudding  v.  Hill,  1339. 

Dudley  v.  FoUiott,  768,  774,  781. 

Dudley  x.  Warde,  1346. 

Duel  V.  Rust,  1402. 

Duer  T.  James,  443. 

Duff  V.  Wilson,  1303,  1386. 

Duffy  V.  R.  E.  Co.,  674,  676. 

Duffy  V.  Shockey,  917,  918,  1054. 

gugar  V.  Norton,  311. 
ugdale  V.  Robertson,  566. 
Diugnan  v.  Walker,  930. 
Duke  V.  Harper,  46.  106,  493. 
Duke  V.  Palmer,  391. 
Dulancy  v.  Rogers,  335. 
Dvimas  r.  M'Loskey,  1306. 
Dumergue  v.  Rumsey,  1350,  1356. 
Dumart  v.  Dufore,  364. 
Dumper  v.  Syms,  195. 
Dumpor's  Case,  453, 584,  709. 
Dun  y.  Howard,  333. 
Dunbar  v.  Gumper,  677. 
Duncan  v.  Duncan,  437. 
Duncan  v.  Favrer,  167. 
Dmican  v.  Lyon,  1064. 


Duncan  v.  Sylvester,  170. 
Duncan's  Appeal,  318. 
Dundas  v.  Weymouth,  434. 
Dunham  v.  Lamphere,  537. 
Dunk  V.  Hunter,  339,  341,  1032, 

1307. 
Dunklee  v.  Wilton,  431. 
Dunlap  V.  BaUard,  730. 
Dunlop  V.  Gregory,  917, 1054. 
Dunlop  V.  Grote,  684. 
Dunlop  V.  Higgins,  897. 
Dunn  V.  Bank  of  Mobile,  579,  655. 
Dimn  T.  Bryan,  937. 
Dunn  T.  English,  504,  579,  655. 
Dunn  T.  Large,  1390. 
Duun  v.  Rathermel,  85,  351. 
Dunn  T.  Sayles,  699,  889. 
Dunn  V.  Spurrier,  97,  153, 161,  375. 
Dunn  V.  Tillery,  347. 
Dunn  V.  Ti-ustees,  13,  18,  47. 
Dunn  Y.  White,  335,  969. 
Dunning  y.  Ocean  Bank,  339,  S41. 
Dunraven  v.  Llewellyn,  530. 
Dunraven  y.  WiUiams,  1358. 
Dunshee  y.  Griandy,  493. 
Dunston  v.  Paterson,  1371. 
Dunton  y.  Brown,  301. 
Dunwoody  y.  Raynor,  1069,  1133. 
Dupas  Y.  Wassell,  495. 
Duppa  Y.  Mayo,  480, 1035, 1317. 
Durall  Y.  Myers,  358. 
Durant  y.  Palmer,  1383. 
Durat  Y.  Swift,  1051,  1053. 
Dm-el  Y.  Boisblanc,  433. 
Durell  Y.  Pritchard,  1001. 
Durgay  y.  Augone,  1339,  1356. 
Dm-ham,  &c.,  R.  Co.  y.  Walker,  575. 
Durker  y.  Rapp,  1085. 
Dury  Y.  Molins,  994. 
Dustan  y.  Cowdrey,  1396. 
Dutch  Church  y.  Mott,  317. 
Dutton  Y.  Gerrish,  860,  885,  1136. 
Dutton  Y.  Warshauer,  346. 
Dwiggins  v.  Shaw,  587,  683. 
Dwight  Y.  HamUton,  817. 
Dwight  Y,  Pomeroy,  789,  1347. 
Dwinel  y.  Veazie,  533. 
Dyas  Y.  Cruse,  368. 
Dyer  v.  Bowley,  186,  1066. 
Dyer  y.  Green,  593. 
Dyers  Co.  y.  King,  437. 
Dyett  Y.  Pendleton,  1098,  1121. 
Dyke  V.  Tyler,  716. 
Dyer  y.  Wightman,  779,  1034. 
Dymoke  y.  Withers,  397. 
Dyson  y.  Bradshaw,  444,  445. 
Eadie  y.  Addison,  336. 
Eads  Y.  WilUams,  373. 
Eagle  V.  Owen,  904. 
Eagle  Y.  Swayiie,  1393. 
Eagle  Y.  Swayze,  784. 
Eagie  y.  Thomas,  787. 
Eagleton  y.  Guttridge,  1307,  1330. 


Table  of  Cases. 


IMl 


Eakin  v.  Brown,  870. 

Earl  V.  Rogers,  1156, 

Earl  of  Aylesford's,  31. 

Earl  of  Cardigan  v.  Montague,  298, 

Earl  of  Derby  v.  Taylor,  180. 
Earl  of  Egremont  V.  Burrough,  306. 
Earl  of  Egremont  v.  Stephens,  398, 

304. 
Earl  of  Jersey  v.  Smith,  289. 
Earl  of  Sefton  v.  Court,  531. 
Earl  of  Shrewsbury  v.  Beazley,  300. 
Earl  of  Shrewsbury  v.  Knightly, 

399. 
Eai-le  V.  Hale,  493. 
Earle  v.  Nale,  489. 
Earle  v.  Washburn,  1187. 
Easly  V.  Dye.  816. 
East  V.  Ryal,  330. 
Easterly  v.  Samoson,  677. 
Easterling  v.  Blythe,  339. 
Easterly  v.  Heilbron,  655. 
East  Haven  v.  Hemmingway,  533. 
East  India  Co.  v.  Vincent,  161. 
Eastham  v.  Sparks,  1330. 
Eastland  v.  Vanarsdel,  361. 
E.    London    AVaterworks   Co.    v. 

Trustees,  503. 
Eastman  v.  Howard,  1333,  1338. 
Eastman  v.  Perkins,  113,  333. 
Baston  v.  Pratl,  296,  397,  797,  880. 
Eastwood  V.  Lever,  998. 
Eaton  V.  Jaques.  2.14,  667,  741, 1300. 
Eaton  V.  Lyman,  969. 
Eaton  V.  Lyon,  933,  933,  969. 
Eaton  T.  iSouthby,  131  a. 
Eaton  V.  Whitak'er,  331. 
Eaton  V.  Winne,  470,  508,  855, 
Eberlein  v.  Abel,  113. 
Eberwine  v.  Cook,   113. 
Eccleston  v  Chipsham,  175, 176, 681. 
Echols  V.  Cheney,  372. 
Ecke  V.  Fetzer,  670,  971. 
Ecke  V.  Fitze,  674. 
Ecker  v.  Chicago,  &c.  B.  R.   Co., 

736. 
Eckman  v.  Eckman,  444. 
Eddy  V.  Herrin,  3.S3.  333. 
Edge  V.  Pemberton,  888. 
Edgev.  Strafford,  18,350,  433, 1350. 
Edgerton  v.  Page,  1069,  1097,  1137. 
Edmonson  v.  Kile,  5,  16,  30,  1338. 
Edmonds  V.  Eastwood,  1031,  1039. 
Edmundson  v.  Nuttall,  1307,  1337. 
Edmundson  v.  Roberts,  317. 
Edney  v.  Benham,  8, 1019. 
Edney  v.  Billett,  8. 
Edward  v.  Lewis,  950. 
Edwrads  v.  Bailey,  501. 
Edwards  v.  Clemmons,  50,  1307. 
Edwards  v.  Candy,  1107. 
Edwards  v.  Coady,  1103. 
Edwards  v.  Etherington,  834,  885, 


Edwards  V.  Evans,  239. 
Edwards  v.  Gale,  805,  883. 
Edwards  v.  Hale,  37,  38,  56. 
Edwards  v.  Handley,  361. 
Edwards  v.  Hetherington,  1110. 
Edwards  v.  Milbank,  396. 
Edwards  v.  Morgan,  647,  666. 
Edwards  v.  New  York,  1389. 
Edwards  v.  N.  Y.  &  H.  R.  B.  Co., 

861,  863,  865,  1394. 
Edwards  v.  OmellhaUum,  488. 
Edwards  v.  Rees,  656. 
Edwards   v.  Wickmar,  483,  484, 

736,  1094. 
Egerton  v.  Sheafe,  1050. 
Eggleston  v.  Bradford,  399.  639. 
Eggleston  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  467,  470. 
Egler  V.  Marsden,  1339. 
Egremont  v.  Courtnay,  1166.  1167. 
Egremont  v.  Forwood,  119,  1167. 
Egremont  v.  Helling,  391. 
Egremont  v.  Langdon,  1185. 
Egremont  v.  "Williams,  580. 
Eg-ton  V.  Studd,  648. 
Eherts  v.  Eherts,  319. 
Eherts  v.  Fisher,  1314. 
Eiohart  v.  Baqus.  1038. 
Ela  V.  Banks,  47,  69. 
Elder  v.  Allison,  335. 
Elder  v.  Burns,  533. 
Elderton  v.  Emmons,  889. 
Eldred  v.  Leahy,  759, 1107. 
Eldredge  v.  See,  503. 
Eldridge  v.  Se.  Yup.  Co. ,  654. 
Eldridge  v.  Stacey,  1319, 1320, 1323. 
Electric  Tel.   Co.  v.  Overseers  of 

Salford,  405. 
Elfe  V.  Cole,  345,  346,  353,  255. 
ElfordV.  Clark,  1311. 
Elgar  V.  Watson,  V'l'jO. 
Ellard  v.  Lord  v.  Llundall,  363. 
Ellenbrook  V.  Flynn,  1.54,  1194. 
Elliott  V.  Aiken,  785,  1095,  1156. 
Elliott  V.  Bishop,  1318. 
Elliott  V.  Blake,  434. 
EUiott  V.  Con  well,  636. 
Elliott  V.  Danby,  339.    ', 
ElUott  V.  Doyle,  499. 
Elliott  V.  Fitchburg  R.  R.  Co.,  539. 
Elliott  V.  Horn,  208. 
Elliott  V.  Ince,  229. 
Elliott  V.  Johnson,  680,  736. 
Elliott  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  566. 
EUiott  V.  Rogers,  17. 
EUiott  V.  Smith,  138,  493,  1383. 
ElUs  V.  Burden,  300. 
EUis  V.  Carey,  530,  533. 
Ellis  v.  Jones,  918. 
Ellis  V.  Lambert,  600. 
ElUsv.  London,  &c.,  1006. 
Ellis  V.  Page,  39,  73,  105, 1263, 
Ellis  V.  Landham,  305. 
Ellis  V.  Taylor,  1309. 


1442 


Table  of  Cases. 


Ellis  Y.  Welch,  758, 772. 

Ellison  V.  Mobile,  &c.,  E.  R.  Co., 

463. 
Ellison  V.  Daniels,  255. 
Ellsworth  V.  Hinds,  219,  234. 
Elmer  v.  Locke,  1288. 
Elmore  v.  Eobinson,  1086. 
Elston  V.  Jasper,  229. 
Eltham  Parish  v.  Warreyn,  331. 
Elves  V.  Crofts,  918. 
Elwes  V.  Man,  1220, 1233, 1364. 
Elwood  V.  Forkel,  44. 
Ely  V.  Ely,  461,  808,  809,  1130. 
Ely  V.  Wilcox,  446. 
Embrey  v.  Owen,  537,  539.  541. 
Emerick  v.  Kohler,  398. 
Emerson  v.  Simpson.  584. 
Emerson  v.  Thompson,  1893. 
Emery  v.  Barnet,  1115. 
Emery  v.  Owings,  1300. 
Emett,  InIte,Q51. 
Emmatt  v.  Cole,  391,  1023. 
Emmerson  v.  Murray,  438. 
Emmes  v.  Feeley,  56. 
Emmettv.  Dewhurst,  366. 
Emmett's  Case,  138. 
Emmons  v.  Kiger,  330,  342. 
Emmena  v.  Murray,  204,  447. 
Emmons  v.  Scudder,  26,  47. 
Emerson  v.  Solden,  1011,  1350. 
Emzy  V.  Gorton,  854. 
Engel  V.  Buricker,  237. 
Engels  V.  McKinley,  726. 
Engels  V.  Mitchell,  113. 
England  v.  Slade,  488,491,  497. 
English  V.  Foote,1331. 
EngUsh  V.  McNair,  237. 
EngUsh  V.  Roche,  399. 
Eno  V.  Del  Vechio,  568. 
Enyes   v.   Donnithorpe,   151,  601, 

.668. 
Epley  V.  Eubanks,  735. 
Eppes  V.  Randolph,  446. 
Epping  V.  Devanny,  1038. 
Eppinger  v.  Habershaw,  1318. 
Ernst  V.  Bartle,  649,  655,  680. 
Erningtonv.  Aynesley,  371. 
Erskine  v.   Adean,  505,   506,  507, 

1393. 
Erskine  v.  Townsend,  246. 
Erwin  v.  Olmstead,  169. 
Erwin  v.  Saunders,  1347. 
Esling  V.  WiUiams,  547. 
Espey  V.  Fenton,  20,  1330. 
Esteby  v.  Sampson,  646. 
Estepv.  Estep,  19,  785,  834,  1331. 
Estyv.  Baker,  733,  1303. 
Etheridge  v.  Osborn,  1137. 
Etherton  v.  Popplewell,  1333. 
Eton  V.  Suyster,  1166. 
Ettmed  v.  Osborn,  1064. 
Eubank  v.  Hampton,  373, 
Eubrich  v.  Richter,  537. 


Eustace  v.  Scoyen,  167. 

Eustis  V.  Chiner,  470. 

Evangelical,  &c..  Home  v.  Buffalo 
Hyd.,  &c.,  190. 

Evans  v.  Bell,  511. 

Evans  v,  BidweU,  489. 

Evans  v.  Briscoe,  139. 

Evans  v.  Collins,  277. 

Evans  v.  Curtis,  765. 

Evans  v.  Dimonds,  483, 

Evans  v.  EUiott,  350,  251,  1309, 
1376. 

Evans  v.  Harris,  683. 

Evans  v.  Jackson,  343,  313,  316. 

Evans  v.  Kittrell,  364. 

Evans  v.  Merri weather,  539. 

Evans  v.  Norris,  1076. 

Evans  v.  Roberts,  350. 

Evans  v.  Thompson,  1161. 

Evans  v.  Vaughn,  764,  777,  781. 

Evans  v.  Walshe,  363. 

Evans  v.  Wright,  1321. 

Evelyn  v.  Eaddish,  816. 

Everts  v.  Agnes,  445. 

Evertsen  v.  Sawyer,  32,  39,  1331. 

Ewart  V.  Cochrane,  431,  557. 

Ewart  V.  Graham,  579. 

Ewees  v.  Brigg  Gas  Co.,  413. 

Ewer  V.  Chfton,  1063. 

Ewing  V.  Bailey,  605. 

Ewing  V.  Beauchamp,  373. 

Ewing  V.  Burnett,  658. 

Ewing  V.  Sandanal,  &c.,  411. 

Ewre  V.  Strickland,  433. 

Exis  V.  Maryck,  365. 

Exeter  v.  Clarke,  919. 

Ex  Parte  Branch,  400. 

Ex  parte  Clark,  931. 

Ex  parte  Calhoun,  469. 

Ex  parte  Committee  of  Lord  Brad- 
ford, 310. 

Ex  parte  Cooper,  299. 

Ex  parte  Cowper,  298. 

Ex  parte  Hooper,  375. 

Ex  parte  Skinner,  320,  321,  323. 

Ex  parte  Smyth,  158,  158,  310. 

Ex  parte  Wilson,  353. 

Eyre  v.  Eyre,  374. 

Eyre  v.  Marine  Ins.  Co. ,  640. 

Eyton  V.  Jones,  1200. 

Ezelle  V.  Parker,  46. 

Fabian  v.  Nunn,  378. 

Fabian  v.  Winston,  1039,  1310. 

Fabians  Case,  1036,  1037. 

Fabin  &  Windsor's  Case,  1210. 

Fahr  v.  Dean,  1298. 

Fairlie  v.  Denton,  1298. 

Fairman  v.  Fluck,  1068,  1132. 

Falkney  v.  Reynous,  1345. 

FallstafiE's  Case,  1018. 

Falmouth  v.  Roberts,  434,  461. 

Fahnouth  y.  Thomas,  696,  888. 
1368. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1443 


Palyer  v.  Robinson,  535. 
Fancy  v.  Scott,  574,  575. 
Fane  v.  Winslow,  217. 
Farley  v.  Ci-aig,  723, 1045. 
Farley  v.  Rogers,  491. 
Farley  v.  Stokes,  378. 
Farley  v.  Thompson,  723, 1045. 
Farmer  v.  Hunter,  1213. 
Farmer  v.  Rogers,  1156. 
Farmers'  Bank  v.  Ege,  1037. 
Farmers'  Bank  v.  Haight,  435. 
Farmers,  &c.,  v.  St.  Joseph,  &c., 

1333. 
Fameham  v.  Atkins,  196. 
Farnsworth  v.  Sharp,  461,  462. 
Farquharson  v.  Eichellberger,  897. 
Fair  V.  Glading,  361. 
Farrall  v.  Hilditch,  643  699. 
FaiTand  v.  Marshall,  560,  562. 
Farrant  v.  Lovell,  993. 
Farrant  v.  Olmius,  1056,  1057. 
Farrant  v.  Thompson,  1268. 
Farrar  v.  Bridge,  443,  443,  448. 
Farrar  v.  Chaufletete,  1235. 
Farrar  v.  Stackpole,  1333. 
Farrello  v.  Davenport,  378. 
Farrington  v.  Kimball,  751. 
Farrington's  Case,  137,  167. 
Farris  v.  Houston,  1336. 
Farris  v.  Walker,  1339. 
Farrow  v.  Edmundaon,  5,  13. 
Farson  v.  Goodale,  1165. 
Farwell  v.  Dickinson,  1031, 1022. 
Farwell  v.  Howard,  369,  276. 
Farwell  v.  Jacobs,  343. 
Farwell  v.  Rogers,  605,  1035. 
Fasgate  v.  Mfg.  Co.,  336. 
Fashey  v.  Ferguson,  338. 
Faukboner  v.  Faukboner,  624. 
Faulkner  v.  Llewellyn,  370,  380. 
Faulkner  v.  Morse,  488. 
Faulks  V.  Bums,  463. 
Faure  v.  Martin,  358. 
Faviell  v.  Gaskoin,  634,  889,  1366. 
Favrot  v.  Mettler,  829. 
Fawcett  v.  Hull,  180,  487. 
Fawcett  v.  Whitehouse,  950. 
Fawke  v.  Beck,  95. 
Fawkes  v.  Joyce,  1312. 
Fay  V.  Cheney,  345,  355. 
Fay  V.  HaUoran,  1031,  1071. 
Fay  V.  Outley,  288. 
Fay  V.  Prentice,  1278. 
Fay  V.  Taft,  312. 
Faybell  v.  Gaskoin,  1863. 
Featherstonhaugh  v.Bradshaw,  43, 

1330. 
Featherstonhaugh  v.  Fenwick,  950. 
Feinester  v.  Jolmson,  1236. 
Fellows  V.  Emperor,  1343. 
Feltham  v.  Cartwright,  557. 
Felthouse  v.  Bindley,  353. 
Feltman  v.  Cartwright,  1397. 


Felton  V.  Deall,  1382. 
Fenn  v.  Harrison,  368. 
Fenner  v.  Duplock,  163, 1305, 1385. 
Fenner  v.  Hepburn,  333. 
Fennings  v.  Humphrey,  355. 
Fenny  v.  Child,  836, 613. 
Fentunan  v.  Smith,  469,  557. 
Fenton  v.  Clegg,  343. 
Fenton  v.  Logan,  1312,  1336. 
Fenton  v.  Montgomery,  1005. 
Fenwick  v.  Reed,  1185. 
Fera  v.  Child,  853. 
Feret  v.  Hill,  377,  404,  482,  905. 
Ferguson  v.  Bell,  198. 
Ferguson  v.  CoUins,  337. 
Ferguson  v.  Cornish,  97,  153,  611. 
Ferguson  v.  Hardy,  1070. 
Ferguson  v.  Moore,  1318. 
Fernwood  Masonic  Hall  Ass'n  v. 

Jones,  939. 
Ferraby  v.  Holson,  315. 
Ferrea  v.  Knipe,  539. 
Ferth  v.  Greenwood,  373. 
Few  V.  Perkins,  800. 
Fewell  V.  Kessler,  444. 
Fife  V.  Irving,  1809. 
Fifty  Associates  v.  Howland,  30, 

666,  1029. 
Field  V.  Adams,  1313,  1326. 
Field  V.  Huston,  654. 
Field  V.  MiUs,  714. 
Field  V.  Schiefflin,  313. 
Field  v.Stagg,  463. 
Field  V.  Swan.  259. 
Fielden  v.  Tattersall,  926. 
Fields  V.  Low,  209. 
Fillebroun  v.  Hoar,  1335. 
FiUiter  v.  Phippard,  984,  986. 
Finch  V.  Ashton,  476. 
Finch  V.  Miller,  106,  612,  1310. 
Finch  V.  MiUer,  1036. 
Finch  V.  Throckmorton.  161, 712. 
Finch  V.  Underwood,  933. 
Finch's  Case,  244. 
Findlay  v.  Smith,  975. 
Findon  v.  McLaren,  1312. 
Finicum  Fishing    Co.  v.  Carter, 

547. 
Finlay  v.  Bristol,  456. 
Finlay  v.  Railway  Co.,  43, 192, 193. 
Fmlay  v.  King,  583. 
Finlayson  v.  Bayley,  117. 
Finney  v.  Cist,  943. 
Fipps  V.  McGehee,  447. 
Fireman's  Ins.  Co.  v.  Drake,  189. 
Firman  v.  Ormonde,  944,  946. 
Firth  V.  Bowling  Iron  Co. ,  852. 
Firth  V.  Greenwood,  370. 
Fishv.  Bellamy,  836. 
Fish  V.  Campion,  1167. 
Fish  V.  Dodge,  1380. 
Fisher  v.  Forbes,  1371. 
Fish  V.  Stratton,  1141. 


1U4: 


Table  of  Cases. 


Fisher  v.  Algar,  1325, 1337. 
Fisher  v.  Ameers,  666,  667. 
Fisher  v.  CuthiU,  119, 1143. 
Fisher  v.  Dickson,  1241. 
Fisher  v.  Dixon,  1346. 
Fisher  v.  Fisher,  241,  939. 
Fisher  v.  Giles,  117. 
1  Fisher  v,  Goebel,  894. 
Fisher  v.  HaU,  443,  443,  444. 
Fisher  t.  Lewis,  676. 
Fisher  v.  Lighthall,  833,  834. 
Fisher  v.  Magiiire,  784,  785. 
Fisher  v.  Milhken,  1176. 
Fisher  v.  Saffier,  1231. 
Fislier  v.  StaeflEer,  1341. 
Fisher  v.  Thirkell,  1283,  1290. 
Fisk  v.  Eldridge,  271. 
Fisk  V.  Moores,  11. 
Fitch  V.  Johnson,  071. 
Fitch  V.  Sargeant,  117;'i. 
Fitchburg  v.  McLain,  1137. 
Fitchburg  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Melvin,  247, 

723,  1333. 
Fitzgerald  v.  Bebee,  159. 
Fitzgerald  v.  O'Connell,  180,  947. 
Fitzgerald  v.  Peck,  365. 
Fitzgerald,  &c..t.  Brett.  374. 
Fitzgibbons  v.  Preisen,  779. 
Fitzgibbon  V.  Scanton,  95 1. 
Fitzherbert  v.  Shaw,  1333,  1363. 
Fitzmannice  v.  Bayley,  353. 
Fitzpatrick  v.  Beatty,  359. 
Fitzpatrick  v.  Carter,  1053. 
Fitzpatrick  v.  Cottingham,  1053. 
Fitzwalter's  Case,  536. 
Fitzwilliam's  Case,  289. 
Flagg  V.  Flagg,  1187. 
Flagg  V.  GeltmaXer,  13. 
Flanagan  v.  Philadelphia,  533. 
Fl&nders  v.  Train,  495,  496. 
Fleet  v;  Dowland,  139,  968. 
Fleet  V.  Hegeman,  538. 
Fleming  v.  Chnnn,  1071. 
Fleming  v.  Powell,  436. 
Fleming  v.  Snook,  924. 
Fletcher  v.  Ashley,  218. 
Fletcher  v.  Clai-k,  400. 
Fletcher  v.  Dyche,  1057. 
Fletcher  t.  Dvsart,  269. 
Fletcher  V.  Fletcher,  1271. 
Fletcher  v.  Hohnes,  353,  255. 
Fletcher  v.  McFarlane,  498,  1034. 
Fletcher  v.  Manning,  1360. 
Fletcher  v.  Marillier,  1315. 
Fletcher  v.  Rylands,  559. 
Fletcher  v.  Taylem,  897,  898. 
FHght  V.  Barton.  184,  335,  905, 1087. 
Flight  V.  Bentley,  745,  817. 
FUght  V.  Bolland,  381. 
Flight  T.  Booth,  363,  900. 
Flight  V.  Glossop,  679. 
Flinn  v.  Calow,  504,  624,  666. 
Flint  V-.  Brandon,  438,  584,  913. 


FUnt  V.  Pearce,  794. 

Flmt  V.  Sheldon,  449. 

Flood  V.  Flood,  81,  44. 

Flood  V.  Finlay,  367. 

Flood  V.  Yandee,  438, 

Flower  v.  Darby,  25,  109, 1141. 

Flower  v.  Peck,  701.  1214. 

Floyd  V.  Herring,  241. 

Floyd  V.  Taylor,  448. 

FlUreau  v.  Thornhill,  779,  783. 

Flury  T.  Grimes,  1318. 

Flynn  v.  Canton,  1389. 

Flynn  v.  Hatton,  1131. 

Flynn  v.  Powers,  205. 

Flynn  V.  Trask,  801.  838,  830,  831. 

Foard  v.  McComb,  335. 

Fogarty  v.  Sawyer,  346. 

Foley  V.   Addenbrooke,    175,   176, 

1367. 
Foley  V.  Cowgill,  648. 
Foley  V.  Mo  Keegan.  1051, 1053. 
Foley  V.  Wilson,  350.  . 
Foley  V.  Wyetb,  560,  561,  563,  563. 
Folger  T.  Kumer,  1333. 
Folger  V.  Pearson,  539,  533. 
Folkingham  v.  Croft,  709. 
Folsom  V.  Cadi,  1333. 
Folsom  V.  Carli,  18,  1338. 
Folsom  V.  Moore,  67. 
Folts  V.  Huntley,  1116. 
Folts  V.  Prouse,  1071. 
Fonda  V.  Van  Home,  199,211,313. 
Foudairlle  v.  Jourgensen,  779. 
Foord'sCase,   335.615. 
Foot  V.  Cincinnati,  1098. 
Footv.  N.  H.,&c.,Co.,  470. 
Foot  V.  Tewksbnry,  230. 
Foote  V.  Berkley,  601,  606. 
Footh  V.  Chapman,  502. 
Foquet  v.  Moor,  1023,  1158,  1357. 
Force  v.  Craig,  435. 
Ford  T.  Belmont,  054. 
Fon  V.  Cobb,  1331,  1350. 
Ford  v.  Gregory,  448. 
Ford  V.  Lynte,  "^990. 
Ford  V.  Tiley,  357.  943. 
Ford  V.  Tynte,  996,  1313. 
Fores  r.  Jones,  1343. 
Forest  v-.  Overseers,  405. 
Forester's  Case,  196. 
Forrer  v.  Nash,  370. 
Foss  T.  Driel,  5. 

Forster  t.  Rowland,  353.  355,  356. 
Foster  v.  Wandlass,  1036, 1037, 1209. 
Forsyth  v.  Dav.  485. 
Fortv.  McGrath,  1030. 
Forte  V.  Vme.  774,  776. 
Fortier  v.  Ballance.  1193. 
Foss  V.  Hildreth,  231,  233. 
Foster  v.  Batt,  787. 
Foster  T.  Browning,  467. 
Foster  V.  Fowler,  540. 
Foster  v.  Hilliard,  140. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1M5 


Foster  v.  Joice,  135. 

Foster  v.  Kelsey,  1375,  1380. 

Foster  V.  Mapes,  769,  774,  781. 

Foster  v.  Morris,  497,  498. 

Foster  v.  Peyser,  507,  837,  875, 1339. 

Foster  v.  Pierson,  768, 774,  776,  783 

Foster  v.  Rowland,  355. 

Foster  v.  Spooner,  574,  575. 

Fotaux  V.  Lepage,  1071. 

Foucher  v.  Chappen,  1100. 

Foulger  v.  Taylor,  1315. 

Foust  V.  Ti-ice.  498. 

Fowell  V.  Frank,  613. 

FoweU  V.  Tranter,  153,  1141. 

Fowle  V.  Freeman,  354. 

Fwole  V.  Welsh,  769,  775,  778,  781. 

Fowler  v.  Atkinson,  371. 

Fowler  V.  Bott,  835,  1033. 

Fowler  v.  Foy,  1187. 

Fowler  v.  Glover,  1033. 

Fowler  v.  Payne,  811. 

Fox  V.  Abott,  89, 

Fox  V.  Briscoe,  893. 

Fox  V.  Nathans,  90,  610. 

Fox  V.  Prick  wood,  303. 

Fox  V.  Turssell,  998,  999. 

Fox  V.  Scard,  917. 

Fox  V.  Swann,  717. 

Foy  V.  Jones,  1306. 

Foy  V.  Reddick,  1334. 

Frailey  v.  Waters,  370. 

Frame  v.  Dawson,  375,  377,  378. 

Frances  v.  Hawey,  491. 

Francis  v.  Cockrill,  859,  863,  1390. 

Francis  v.  Wiggell,  198. 

Franciscus  v.  Riegart,  1064. 

Frank  v.  Conradi,  834. 

Frank  v.  Kincaid,  30. 

Franklin  v.  Ball,  363. 

Franklin  v.     Brown,     833,    1136, 

1353. 
Franklin  v.  Carter,  453,  480,  955, 

1307. 
Franklin  v.  Fisk,  537. 
Franklin  v.  Medina,  493,  1385. 
FrankUn  v.  Nereda,  493. 
Franklin  v.  Osgood,  340. 
Franklin  v.  Palmer,  1386. 
Franklin  Tel.  Co.  v.  Pewtress,  8. 
Franklin  v.  Tiiton,  894. 
Franks  v.  Craven,  1335. 
Frankslinski  v.  Bull,  361. 
Frantz  v.  Wood,  13, 33, 95, 107. 
Frazer  v.  Ford,  354. 
Fraser  v.  Skey,  691,  693,  776. 
Frazer  v.  Hanlon,  1375, 1380. 
Frazier  v.  Spear,  166. 
Frederick  v.  CaUaghan,  733. 
Fi-eeking  v.  Holland,  330. 
Freeland  v.  Burt,  401,  639,  883. 
Freeland  v.  Mitchell,  683,  684. 
Freeman  v.   Bateman,  180,    1304. 
Freeman  v.  Foster,  971. 
II.— 39 


Freeman  v.  Hadley,  470. 
Freeman  v.  Hartman,  318. 
Freeman  v.  Heath,  493,  49'4. 
Freeman  v.  Jury,  46. 
Freeman  v.  Rosher  1318, 1336. 
Freeman  v.  West,  803,  616. 
Freeman  v.  Whitbread,  1094. 
Freery  v.  Cooke,  537. 
Fremantle  v.  London,  &c.,  987. 
French  v.  Carhart,  579,  655. 
Freeman  v.  Cooke,  1371. 
French  v.  Fuller,  1377. 
French  v.  Patton,  459,  594. 
Frentz  v.  Klotch,  1303. 
Frenzel  v.  Miller,  335. 
Frey  v.  Draha,  417. 
Frev  V.  Johnson,  699. 
Friar  v.  Gray,  151,  153,  585,  1143. 
Friedenberg  v.  Jones,  843,  845. 
Friedhow  v.  Smith,  31. 
Friend  v.  Estabrook,  490. 
Frietas  v.  Dos  Santas,  1355. 
Frink  v.  Cole,  369. 
Frisbey  v.  Thayer,  1315. 
Frisby  V.  BaUanoe,  358. 
Frogley  v.  Lovelace,  594. 
Frontier  v.  SmaU,  373,  487. 
Frost  V.  Earnest,  758,  773,  1098. 
Frost  V.  Moulton,  359. 
Frost  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  465. 
Frost  V.  Raymond,  694. 
Frusher  v.  Lee,  1334. 
Fry  V.  Breckenbridge,  1308. 
FuUam  v.  Steams,  1333. 
Fuller  V.  Abbott,  186,  309,  955. 
FuUer  v.  Eastman,  674. 
FuUer  v.  Eddy,  353. 
Fuller  V.  Fenwick,  1057. 
Fuller  V.  Giles,  948. 
Fuller  V.  Ruby,  1095,  1136. 
FuUer  v.  Sweet,  56,  493, 1030, 1338. 
FuUer  v.  Tabor,  1333. 
Fuller  V.  Taylor,  1331,  1338,  1341. 
Fuller  V.  WUson,  367,  376,  378. 
Fulton  V.  Loftus,  335. 
Fulton  V.  Stewart,  181,  731,  743. 
Fulton's  Case,  460. 
Funk  V.  Haldeman,  466. 
Funk  V.  Holdman,  465. 
Funk  V.  Kincaid,  1387. 
Funk  V.  Venda,  969. 
Funk  V.  Voneida,  694. 
Funkhouser  v.  Langkopf ,  533. 
Funk's  Lessee  v.  Kincaid,  490. 
Furbish  v.  Goodwin,  255,  579. 
Furhushe  v.  ChappeU,  1313. 
Furneaux  v.  Fotherby,  1316. 
Fumis  V.  Durgin,  463. 
Furnivall  v.  Creer,  944. 
Fumival  v.  Crew,  930,  935,  943. 
•Furnivall  v.  Grove,  484, 1153,  1169. 
Fussleman  v.  Worthington,  493. 
Gabay  V.  Lloyd,  640. 


1446 


Table  of  Cases. 


Gabell  v.  Shevill,  186. 

Gaffleld  v.  Hapgood,  1261. 

Gafifney  v.  Greenbaum,  438. 

Gagev.  Acton,  1188. 

Gage  V.  Smith,  1008,  1015,  1038. 

Gaines  v.  Buflford,  173. 

Gainsford  v.  Griifith,  693,  694. 

Gaisford  v.  Stone,  489. 

Gaither  v.  Staokbridge,  734. 

Gale  V.  Bates,  935,  937. 

Gale  V.  Burnell,  747. 

Gale  V.  Coburn,  503. 

Gale  V.  Edwards,  733,  1045. 

Gale  V.  Kalamazoo,  917. 

Galgay  v.  Gt.  Smith  &  W.  E.  Co., 

558. 
Gallagher  v.  Bennett,  493,  494. 
Gallagher  v.  Himelbergh,  1073. 
Gallagher  v.  Humphrey,  516. 
Gallagher  v.  Shipley,  1303. 
Gallatin  v.  Cummingham,  304. 
Gallaway  v.  Herbert,  13,  46,  117. 
Gallup  V.  Albany  R.  E.  Co.,  1098, 

1138. 
Gallaway  v.  Ogle,  489,  1383,  1384. 
Galpen  v.  Abbott,  447. 
Galswarthy  v.  Strutt,  1056. 
Gait  V.  Gandy,  695. 
Galting  v.  Newell,  625. 
Gamber  v.  Hackett,  1036. 
Gamon  v.  Vernon,  744. 
Gammon  v.  Freeman,  654. 
Gandy  v.  Jubber,  88,  790,  1380. 
Gane  v.  Hart,  1808. 
Ganion  v.  Eudd,  430. 
Gannett  v.  Albree,  584,  908. 
Gannion  v.  Hargadon,  53. 
Gano  V.  Aldridge,  400. 
Gano  V.  Vanderveer,  507. 
Ganod  V.  OUey,  117. 
Gardiner  v.  Williamson,  393,  1021. 
Gardner    v.    Commissioners,   &c., 

106. 
Gardner  v.  Corson,  585,  588,  683. 
Gardner  v.  Finley,  1236. 
Gardner  v.  Gardner,  439. 
Gardner  v.  Gardner,  269. 
Gardner  v.  Kennard,  591,  688. 
Gardner  v.  Kenward,  980. 
Gardner  v.  Ketelas,  31,  758,  763. 
Gardner  v.  Peaslee,  1330. 
Gardner  v.  Eowland,  473. 
Gardner  v.  Williams,  333. 
Garfield  v.  Williams,  756. 
Garland  v.  Crow,  134. 
Garland  v.  Finber,  514. 
Garner  v.  Hannah,  955,  956,  966. 
Garnhorn  v.  Finney,  1036. 
Garnock  v.  Cliff,  578. 
Garnet  v.  Macon,  361. 
Garrard  v.  Gruiling.  367. 
Garrard  v.  Tuck,  1185. 
Garraty  v.  Daffy,  514. 


Garrett  v.  Clark,  134. 
Garrett  v.  Hughlett,  1308. 
Garrett  v.  Lyer,  450. 
Garrett  v.  Scanton,  713,  1300. 
Garrison  v.  Garrison,  485. 
Garrison  v.  Eudd,  513. 
Garrison  v.  Sanford,  969. 
Garth  v.  Cotton,  996. 
Gartside  v.  Isherwood,  381. 
Garvey  v.  Dobyns,  1036. 
Garwin  v.,  Jennerson,  1073. 
Gas  Co.  V.  Thurber,  1321, 
Gask  V.  Keneda,  173. 
Gaskell  v.  Spry,  903,  905,  908. 
Gaskell  v.  Trainer,  1036, 1038,  1040. 
Gas  Light  Co.  v.  Turner,  464,  483, 

669. 
Gaston  V.  Frankven,  381. 
Gaston  v.  Smith,  101. 
Gatehouse  v.  Eees,  480,  716,  1303, 

1212. 
Gates  V.  Caldwell,  694,  699. 
Gates  V.  Green,  832,  835,  1847. 
Gates  V.  Solomon,  170. 
Gateward's  Case,  525. 
Gange  v.  Lockwood,  793,  799,  800, 

806. 
Gauntlett  v.  King,  1318,  1326. 
Gaved  v.  Martyn,  538. 
Gavit  V.  Chambers,  530. 
Gay  V.  Mitchell,  18,  46. 
Gayetty  v.  Bethune,  427,  575. 
Gayle  v.  Johnston,  177. 
Gaylord  v.  Sorogen,  465. 
Gazely  v.  Price,  587. 
Geary  v.  Bearcroft,  339. 
Geary  v.  Reason,  656. 
Gee  V.  Graves,  394. 
Geer  v.  Fleming,  1377. 
Geery  v.  Eeason,  644. 
Geiger  v.  Brown,  1073. 
Gelston  v.  Sigmund,  360. 
Genet  v.  Talhnadge,  212. 
Gemmings  v.  Lake,  421. 
Gent  V.  Lynch,  176. 
Genter  v.  Morrison,  441. 
Gentleman  v.  Soule,  547. 
George  v.  Putney,  498,  1116. 
Georgetown  v.  Alexandria  Canal 

Co    539 
Gerard  V.  Frankel,  390.* 
German  Society  v.  PhUadelphia, 

958. 
Gerrard  v.  Clifton,  633. 
Gerrish  v.  Brown,  536. 
Gerzbek  v.  Lord,  839. 
Geirllim  v.  Stone,  357. 
Gheghan  v.  Young,  1170. 
GhiradelU  v.  Greene,  500. 
Gibbes  v.  Jenkins,  950,  954. 
Gibbons  v.  Dayton,  110,  137. 
Gibbs  V.  Bryant,  183. 
Gibbs  V.  Estey,  1232. 


Table  op  Oases. 


liil 


Gibbs  V.  Ross,  1045,  1303. 

Gibson  V.  Bogg,,514. 

Gibson  v.  Couithorpe,  1334. 

Gibson  v.  Dreg,  912. 

Gibson  v.  Farley,  247,  1071. 

Gibson  v.  Hammersmith,  31. 

Gibson  v.  Holden,  671. 

Gibson  v.  Holland,  351,  353.  ^ 

Gibson  v.  Hurst,  1311. 

Gibson  v,  Iveson,  1311. 

Gibson  v.  Kirk,  1328,  1339,  1353. 

Gibson  v.  Kirk,  1331. 

Gibson  v.  Mullican,  455. 

Gibson  v.  Pearsall,  1343. 

Gibson  v.  Perry,  1130,  1133,  1134. 

Gibson  v.  Smith,  996. 

Gibson  v.  The  Hammersmith  E. 

Co.  1265. 
Gibson  v.  Vaugh,  1250. 
Gibson  v.  Vaughn,  1323. 
Gibson  v.  Wells,  69,  787,  891,  993. 
Giddens  v.  Dodd,  153, 1143. 
Gie  V.  Rider,  1165. 
Gie  V.  Rider,  1164. 
Gieger  v.  Green,  360. 
Gilbert  v.  Bulkly,  463. 
GUbertv.  Drew,  671. 
Gilbertson  v.  Richards,  616. 
Gilchrist  v.  Rea,  341. 
GifiEord  v.  Thorn,  336. 
GUes  V.  Comstock,  40,  1035,  1137. 
Giles  V.  Durgo,  970. 
Giles  V.  Ebsworth,  497,  1307,  1385. 
Giles  V.  Cooper,  646,  960. 
Giles  V.  Simonds,  470,  476. 
Giles  V.  Spencer,  1317. 
Gilford  V.  Lake  Co.,  547,  551. 
Gilham  v.  Aikwright,  1316. 
Gilhooley  v.  Washington,  789,1098, 

1110. 
GiU  V.  Logan,  313. 
Gill  V.  Middleton,  858. 
Gillespie  v.  Brooks,  435. 
Gillespie  v.  Thomas,  1098. 
Gillett  V.  Balcom,  1349. 
Gillett  V.  Johnson,  537,  539. 
Gillett  V.  Matthews,  1387. 
Gillett  V.  Stanley,  197,  198. 
GiUiam  v.  Tobias,  1318. 
GiUingham  v.  Dwyer,  1313. 
Gillis  V.  Hall,  917,  918. 
GiUoon  V.  Reilly,  858. 
Gilman  v.  Dwight,  917,  918. 
Gihnan  v.  Elton,  1313. 
Gihnan  v.  Hore,  488. 
Gilman  v.  Tilton,  544. 
Gihnan  v.  Wills,  353. 
Gilmore  v.  Johnson,  337. 
Gilmore  v.  Ontario  Iron  Co., 7, 939. 
Gilmore  v.  Wilber,  176. 
Ginibart  v.  Telot,  1337. 
Girandy  v.  Richardson,  131,  1343. 
Gisboum  v.  Hurst,  1313,  1336. 


Givens  v.  Mallyheaux,  493,  1385. 
Givens  v.  Van  Studdiford,  1383. 
GivilUe  v.  De  Rutzen,  43. 
Gladman  V.  Plumer,  363,  1301. 
Glasgow  V.  Hurlet,  698. 
Glass  V.  Ellison,  345. 
Gleaton  v.  Gleaton,  1383. 
Glein  v.  Rise,  493,  494,  498. 
Glen  V.  Durgay,  1331. 
Glern,  Matter  of,  1401. 
Glickauf  v.  Maurer,  829,  845. 
Glidden  v.  Bennett,  1331,  1350. 
Glimston  v.  Audley,  776. 
Glove  V.  Harding,  431. 
Glover  v.  Austin,  176. 
Glover  v.  Copse,  435,  733. 
Glun's  Case,  1035. 
Goade  v.  Howell,  109. 
Goatley  v.  Paine,  893, 1315. 
Godard  v.  Gould,  1234. 
Goddard  v.  Chase,  1223. 
Goddard  v.  Keate,  817,  1355. 
Goddard  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  109. 
Godfrey  v.  Cartwright,  174. 
Godfrey  v.  Hagerty,  856,  863,  86£ 

1385. 
GodseU  V.  Inglis,  115. 
Goebel  v.  Hough,  1085. 
Goff  V.  Harris,  1358,  '"' 
Goif  V.  KUts,  472. 
GoflE  V.  O'Connor,  1247. 
Goflf  V.  Obertufler,  467. 
Goldsborough  v.  Baker,  1055. 
Goldsmith  v.  Tunbridge,  &c.,  54h 
Gooch  V.  Marshall,  1001. 
Good  V.  Coombs,  170. 
Good  V,  Dodge,  545. 
Good  V.  Herr,  365. 
Good  V.  Hill,  575. 
Goodbehere  v.  Bevan,  715, 716,719. 
Good  V.  Euchle,  963. 
Goode  V.  Webb,  705. 
GoodeU  V.  Field,  371. 
GoodeU  V.  Wooruff,  268. 
Gobdenow  v.  Ewer,  346. 
Goodhill  V.  Brigham,  387. 
Goodhull  V.  Barnwell,  215. 
Goodland  v.  Blewett,  1070. 
Goodman  v.  Hendersan,  918. 
Goodrich  v.  Bodley,  1313. 
Goodright  v.  Cordwent,  133. 
Goodrich  v.  Jones,  1350. 
Goodrich  v.  Thompson,  341. 
Goodrich  v.  Burbank,  190, 430. 
Goodright  v.  Cator  ,  1039. 
Goodright  v.  Davies,  711,  1193. 
Goodright  v.  Forrester,  454. 
Goodright  v.  Mark,  438,  611. 
Goodright  v.  Noright,  1038,  1041. 
Goodright  v,  Richardson,  97,   153, 

611,  931. 
Goodright  v.  Straphan,  338. 
Goodright  v.  Vivian,  575,  979. 


1448 


Table  op  Cases. 


Goodright  v.  Walker,  1214. 
Goodson  V.  Goldsmith,  827. 
Goodtitle  v.  Bailey,  630,  655. 
Goodtitle  v.  Duncan.  288. 
Goodtitle  v.  Funucan,  398, 300, 476. 
Goodtitle  v.  Herbert,  46,  101. 
Goodtitle  v.  Morse,  486. 
Goodtitle  v.  North,  1390. 
Goodtitle  v.  Paul,  408.    ^ 
Goodtitle  v.  Southern,  408, 
Goodtitle  v.  Tombs,  1390,  1391. 
Goodwin  v.  Holbrook,  652,  683. 
Goodwin  v.  Hubbard,  626. 
Goodwin  v.  Lynn,  653,  683. 
Goodwin  V.  McClure,  439. 
Goodwin  v.  Eobinson,  235. 
Goody  V.  Carter,  69,  158. 
Goodyear  v.  Gary,  654. 
Goose  V.  Jones,  374. 
Gord  V.  Needs,  632. 
Gordon  v.  Bulkley,  267. 
Gordon  v.  George,  736. 
Gordon  v.  Harper,  386. 
Gordon  v.  Trevadyan,  353. 
Gordon  v.  Woodford,  990,  991. 
Gore  V.  Wright,  1168,  1173. 
Gore  V.  Gibson,  230. 
Gore  V.  Langton,  416. 
Gore  V.  Lloyd,  337,  887. 
Goreley  v.  Gorely,  266. 
Gorhani  v.  Arnold,  354. 
Gorham  v.  Brenan,  596, 
Goring  v.  Emery,  317. 
Goring  v.  Warner,  716,  719. 
Gofaer  V.  Smith,  437. 
Gorton  V.  Faulkner,  1312,  1386. 
Gorton  V.  Gregory,  673,  678,  744. 
Gorton  v.  Smart,  953. 
Goss  V.  Lord  Nugent,  353. 

Goswiller's  Case,  605. 

Gott  V.  Gandy,  507,  819,  834,  836. 

Gottsberger  v.  Radway,  803,   819, 
834,  1131. 

Goughv.  Howard,  933. 

Gould  V.  Boston   Duck    Co.,    543, 
553 

Gould  V.  Bradstock,  1319. 

Gould  V.  Day,  443. 

Gould  V.  James,  537. 

Gould  V.  Johnson,  1337. 

Gould  V.  Jones,  527. 

Gould  V.  Kemp,  358. 

Gould  V.  R.  E.  Co.,  406. 

Gould  V.  Thompson,  19,  59,  60. 

Gould  V.  Webster,  67,  1373. 

Gould  V.  Womack,  358,  360,  503. 

Gourley  v.  Somerset,  717,  953. 

Gonsales  v.  Douchanquette,  331. 

Governors,  &c.,  v.  Alderton,  1354. 

Governors,  &c.,  v.Harrold,959,1034 

Gowan  v.  Gerrish,  1053. 

Gowen  v.  Garrish,  1051. 

Gower  v.  Andrew,  382. 


Gower  v.  Carter,  1053, 1053. 
Gower  v.  Hunt,  1067. 
Gowzer  v.  Grantham,  189. 
Gozollo  V.  Chambers,  1299. 
Grabenborn  v.  Nicodemus,  1103. 
Grace  v.  Shii-ley,  1316. 
Graham  v.  Allsopp,  1066. 
Graham  v.  Anderson,  1136,  1137. 
Graham  v.  Call,  360. 
Graham  v.  Carondolet,  189. 
Graham  v.  Chataque  Bank,  213. 
Graham  v.  Dunnigan,  968. 
Graham  v.  Houghtaling,  213, 
Graham  v.  More,  489,  1383. 
Graham  v.  Nichelo,  1173. 
Graham  v.  Oliver,  Ill8. 
Graham  v.  Scott,  1185. 
Graham  v.  Swearingiu,  813. 
Graham  v.  Wade,  968. 
Grandierv.  Carter,  1137. 
Grand  Lodge,  &c.,  v.  Mason,  1221. 
Granes  v.  Tucker,  444,  445. 
Grange  v.  Tiving,  810. 
Granger  v.  ColUns,  691,   757,   887 

923. 
Granger  v.  Grovenor,  714. 
Granger  v.  Parker,  496. 
Graham  v.  Thomborough,  1050. 
Grant  v.  Chase,  409,  417,  438,  431. 
Grant  v.  Johnson,  587,  683,  683. 
Grant  v.  Maddox,  637. 
Grant  v.  Smith,  1085. 
Grant  v.  Thompson,  829. 
Grant  v.  Townsend,  386,  1193. 
Grant  v.  White,  110,  489. 1383. 
Grantland  v.  Wright,  235. 
Grantley  v.  Butler,  911. 

Grassell  v.  Lowden,  1054. 

Grasselli  v.  Lawden,  918. 

Grassmeyer  v.  Beeson,  175. 

Grate  v.  Chester,  863. 

Grau,  Ex  parte,  950. 

Gravenor  v.  Parker,  644. 

Gravenor  v.  Woodhouse,  1804. 

Graver  v.  Schoel,  545. 

Graves  v.  Berdan,  805,  1088,  1130. 

Qraves  v.  Dudley,  443. 

Graves  v.  Pierce,  1235. 

Graves  v.  Porter,  14,  31,  634,  733. . 

Graves  v.  Weld,  1370. 

Graves  v.  Wells,  154, 1194. 

Graves  v.  White,  683. 

Gray  v.  Acton,  1190. 

Gray  v.  Baldwin,  993. 

Gray  v.  Blanchard,  582. 

Gray  v.  Bompas,  123. 

Gray  v.  Boston  Gas  Light  Co.,  846, 
876. 

Gray  v.  Burdick,  530. 

Gray  v.  Clark,  648,  655. 

Gray  v.  Cuthbertson,  671,  673. 

Gray  v.  Friar,  932. 

Gray  v.  Goflf,  1084. 


Table  of  Oases. 


1449 


Gray  v.  Harris,  546. 
Gray  v.  Bompas,  37. 
Gray  v.  Stanion,  125,  1164,  1178. 
Grayson  v.  Richards,  463. 
Greason  v.  Keteltas,  314. 
Greaton  v.  Smith,  40. 
Greatrex  v.  Hayward,  543,  555. 
Great  Western  E.  R.  Co.  v.  Cripps, 

361,  365. 
Green  v.  Baker,  1198. 
Green  v.  BeU,  1133. 
Green  v.  Biddle,  1393. 
Green  v.  Bridges,  704. 
Green  v.  Cole,  573,  991,  1343. 
Green  v.  Collins,  465. 
Green  v.  Covilland,  373. 
Green  v.  Eales,  796,  809,  894. 
Green  v.  Eden,  795. 
Green  v.  Goodall,  318. 
Green  v.  James,  489,  490. 
Green  v.  Keen,  993. 
Green  v.  Liter,  177. 
Green  v.  Low,  371. 
Green  v.  Mussie,  1071. 
Green  v.  Price,  919,  1056. 
Green  v.  Smith,  365. 
Green  v.  Williams,  780. 
Greene  v.  Coole,  893. 
Greene  v.  Koppe,  371. 
Greenland  v.  Chapin,  853. 
Greenley  v.  HaU,  176. 
Greens  v.  Munson,  493,  1384. 
Green's  Case,  17,  1036. 
Greenslade  v.  HalKday,  557,  1056. 
Greenup  v.  Vernon,  1335. 
Greenway  v.  Adams,  709,  714,  731. 
Greenway  v.  Hart,  493,  673,  1305. 
Greenwood  v.  Tyber,  331,  333,  334. 
Greenwood's  Case,  173. 
Greer  v.  Boone,  365. 
Greer  v.  McBeth,  391. 
Greer  v.  Wroe,  1375,  1380. 
Greffenhoofe  v.  Daijbuz,  955. 
Gregg  V.  Coates,  798. 
Gregg  V.  Wells,  1371. 
Greggs  V.  Woodruff,  235. 
Gregory  v.  Brooks,  794. 
Gregory  v.  Crab,  497,  1385. 
Gregory  v.  Doidge,  490, 1043,  1304. 
Gregory  v.  Mighell,  375,  377,  379, 

784. 
Gregory  v.  Shelby  College,  311. 
Gregory  v.  Wilson,  703,  1000. 
Gregson  v.  Harrison,  480,  710, 1314. 
Greider's  Appeal,  1153. 
Grescott  v.  Green,  731,  741. 
Gresham  v.  Landees,  333. 
Greton  v.  Evans,  319. 
Greton  v.  Smith,  1103,  1330. 
Gretton  v.  Diggles,  745. 
Grey  v.  Acton,  336. 
Grey  v.  Bompas,  43. 
Grey  v.  Cuthbertson,  678,  737. 


Grey  v.  Friar,  688. 

Grice  v.  Scarborough,  970. 

Gridley  v.  Bloomington,  1391. 

Grier  v.  Cowan,  1307. 

Griffam  v.  Pierce,  396. 

Griffin  v.  Fellows,  455. 

GriiHn  v.  Ford,  393,  317. 

Griffith  V.  Frederick  Co.  Bank,  358, 

360. 
Griffin  v.  Griffin,  950,  951. 
Griffin  v.  Phoenix  Co.,  955. 
Griffin  v.  Richardson,  486. 
Griffin  v.  Scott,  1335. 
Griffin  v.  Sheffield,  493. 
Griffin  v.  Sketal.  993. 
Griffin  v.  Sketoe,  335. 
Griffin  v.  Spencer,  190. 
Griffin  v.  Stanhope,  581,  589,  590. 
Griffith  V.  Harrison,  390. 
Griffith  V.  Hodges,  133,  1130,  1136, 

1195. 
Griffith  V.  Kinseley,  1043. 
Griffith  V.  Lloyd,  1033. 
Griffith  V.  Parmley,  1883. 
Griffith  V.  Pritchard,  455, 480, 1036, 

1307. 
Griffith  V.  Schwenderman,  199. 
Griffith  V.  Tombs,  1366. 
Griffiths  V.  Chichester,  1063. 
Griffiths  V.  Morrison,  411. 
Griffiths  V.  Puleston,  1317,  1364. 
Griggs  V.  Smith,  486. 
Grigsly  v.  Clear  Lake  Co. ,  549. 
Grimman  v.  Legge,  1168, 1349, 1350. 
Grimson  v.  Legge,  1168. 
Grimstead  v.  Marlow,  535. 
Gi'inneU  v.  Buchanan,  374. 
Grist  V.  Hodges,  773,  773. 
Griswold  v.  C.  &  N.  R.  Co.,  863. 
Griswold  v.  Johnson,  170. 
Groat  V.  Ramsay,  21. 
Groom  v.  Bluck,  733. 
Grossman  v.  Lanber,  173, 1064. 
Grosvenor  v.  Hempstead,  408. 
Groustra  v.  Bourges,  65. 
Grove  v.  Watt,  381,  383,  383,  285. 
Grovendyke  v.  Cramer,  467. 
Grosvener  v.  Green,  185,  749. 
Grosvenor  v.  Woodhouse,  490. 
Groves  v.  Groves,  48. 
Grubb  V.  Bayard,  466. 
Gruffiy  V.  Tindar,  1010. 
Grumott  v.  Williams,  853. 
Gmndin  v.  Carter,  1137,  1386. 
Grundy  v.  Edwards,  643. 
Grundy  v.  Martin,  73. 
Grute  V.  Locroft,  165,  325,  603. 
Grymes  v.  Boweren,  1330,  1253. 
Grymes  v.  Peacock,  416. 
Guantham  v.  Elliott,  955. 
Guard  v.  Bradley,  381. 
Guardian  v.  Wilson,  181. 
Guardian,  &c.,  v.  Roberts,  317. 


1450 


Table  of  Cases. 


Gulibins  v.  Creed,  286. 
Gudgen  v.  Bessett,  1334,  1837. 
Guerand  v.  Dandelet,  918. 
Guerrant  v.  Anderson,  446. 
Guest  V.  Buson,  444. 
Guest  V.  Homfrey,  356. 
Gulick  V.  Grover,  269. 
Gullett  V.  Lopes,  522. 
GuUey  v.  Brother,  241. 
Gulliver  v.  Poyntz,  411. 
Gunn  V.  Scovill,  19,  1064, 1332. 
Gunning  v.  Gunning,  402. 
Gunnison  v.  Bancroft,  652. 
Gunter  v.  Hulsey,  375. 
Gunter  v.  WiUiams,  440. 
Gustin  V.  Burnham,  12. 
Guthman  v.  Castlebury,  1067, 1068. 
Guthrie  v.  Jones,  1223,  1223. 
Gutteridge  y.  Maynard,  881. 
Gutteridge  v.  Munyard,  797,  798, 

800. 
Guy  V.  Barnes,  628. 
Guy  V.  West,  1003. 
Gwathmey  v.  L.  M.  E.  E.  Co.,  867, 

1291. 
GwiUim  v.  Stone,  762. 
Gwinell  v.  Earmer,  1288,  1294. 
Gwynne  v.  Jones,  1384. 
Gwynne  v.  Maynestone,  609. 
Gybson  v.  Searls,  270,  271,  1165. 
Haas  V.  Chacessard,  545. 
Haberdasher's  Co.  v.  Isaac,  709. 
Hack  V.  Eunka,  400. 
Hacket  v.  Glover,  757. 
Hackett  v.  King,  231,  282. 
Haokett  v.  Monamara,  934. 
Hadden  v.  Shouty,  579. 
Hadden  v.  Scott,  898. 
Hadley  v.  Boxendale,  898. 
Haffner  v.  Dickson,  373. 
Haffner  v.  twin,  600. 
Hagar  v.  Buck,  678,  1041. 
Hager  v.  Dibble,  433. 
Haggart  v.  Scott,  381. 
Haigh  V.  London,  &c.,  1006. 
Haight  V.  Keokuk,  532. 
Haight  V.  Price,  538. 
Haines  v.  Burnett,  348. 
Hair  v.  La  Brouse,  624. 
Haiton  v.  Simpson,  1355. 
Halbert  v.  Brouce,  737. 
Halbret  v.  Forrest  City,  818. 
Halchman's  Appeal,  1234. 
Halcombe  v.  Johnson,  1042. 
Haldane  v.  Johnson,  1062,  1078. 
Haldane  v.  Newcombe,  797,  879. 
Haldeman    v.    Jemmings,     1055, 

1059. 
Haider  v.  Taylor,  656. 
Hale  V.  Bowen,  229. 
Hale  V.  Burton,  1307. 
Hale  V.  Hord,  398. 
Haley  v.  Boston  Belting  Co.,  15. 


Haley  v.  Hammersley,,  1259. 

Haley  v.  Young,  947. 

Halford  v.  Dunnett,  992. 

Halford  v.' Hatch,  44,  181,  731. 

Halifax  v.  Chambers,  696,  923. 

Hall  V.  Arrowsmith,  158, 159. 

Hall  V.  Augsbruy,  548. 

Hall  V.  Betly,  889. 

HaU  V.  Betty,  355.  759. 

Hall  V.  Bukley,  294. 

Hall  V.  Bulkley,  289. 

HaU  V.  Burgess,  1093,  1139,  1350. 

Hall  V.  City  of  London  Brewery 

Co.,  757. 
Hall  V.  Combs,  397. 
Hall  V.  Davey,  492. 
Hall  V.  Foster,  399,  622. 
Hall  V.  FuUer,  257. 
HaU  V.  Goodwin,  134. 
Hall  V.  Gould.  1119, 1137. 
HaU  V.  Hall,  95,  98. 
HaU  V.  HufEman,  635. 
Hall  V.  Jacobs,  16,  1330. 
HaU  V.  Jones,  311. 
HaU  V.  London  Brewery  Co.,  767 

781,  782. 
HaU  V.  Lund,  396,  431,  695. 
HaU  V.  Mayor  of  Swansea,  193. 
HaU  V.  Myers,  86,  98,  106,  109. 
Hall  V.  Piddock,  171. 
HaUv.  E.  E.  Co.,  374. 
Hall  V.  Eichardson,  602. 
HaU  V.  Boss,  361. 
HaU  V.  SavUl,  245,  246. 
HaU  V.  Seabright,  336,  395,  476. 
HaU  V.  Southmayd,  1334. 
HaU  V.  Spaulding,  921. 
HaU  V.  Vanness,  268. 
HaU  V.  Wadsworth,  99. 
HaUv.  Warren,  358. 
HaU  V.  Westn.  Trans.  Co.,  1331. 
HaUv.  Woods,  271. 
HaUeck  v.  Hater,  1052. 
HaUen  v.  Bunder,  1260,  1268. 
HaUett  V.  WyUe,  642,  795,  1180 

1338. 
Halley  v.  Hawley,  326. 
HaUiday  v.  MarshaU,  938. 
HaUigan  v.  Wade,  1109. 
HaUoweU  v.  MoreU,  655. 
HaUs  V.  Thompson,  235. 
Halsey  v.  MoCormick,  405. 
Halzderber  v.  Forrestal,  350. 
Ham  V.  Goodrich,  374. 
Hamel  v.  Lawrence,  1383. 
Hamer  v.  KJaowles,  562. 
HamUton  v.  Austin,  984. 
Hamilton  v.  Cardross,  203. 
Hamilton  v.  Clamicarde,  367,  368, 
Hamilton  v.  Congers,  625. 
Hamilton  v.  Denny,  950. 
Hamilton  v.  EUiott.  583,  713. 
HamUton  v.  Marsden,  494,  1885. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1151 


Hamilton  v.  Newcastle  B.  R.  Co. , 

191. 
Hamilton  v.  Royse,  373. 
Hamilton  v.  Wudolph,  470,  476. 
Hamitt    v.    Lawrence,    109,  116. 

489,  1383. 
Hamley  v.  Hendon,  914. 
Hamlin  v.  Jones,  218. 
Hammell  v.  Hammell,  443. 
Hammer    v.    Breidenbach,    1053, 

1055. 
Hammer  v.  McEldowney,  359, 360. 
Hammerton  v.  Stead,  13,  100,  340, 

1169. 
Hammond  v.  CoUis,  1307. 
Hammond  v.  Hannin,  369. 
Hammond  v.  Ridgely,  633. 
Hamond  v.  Dod,  774. 
Hampshire  v.  Wickens,  348. 
Hampton  v.  Evanzeller,  605. 
Hanbury  v.  Litchfield,  368. 
Hanchett  v.  Whitney,  53,  90,  109, 

118. 
Hancock  v.  Austin,  75,  1319. 
Hancock  v.  Coffin,  691,  765. 
Hancock  v.  Coflfyn,  335,  695,  944. 
Hancock  y.  Euturstle,  1057. 
Hancock  v.  Watson,  579,  651,  653. 
Hancock  v.  Walton,  503. 
Hand  v.  Liles,- 1070. 
Handley  v.  Cunningham,  605, 1035. 
Handraban  v.  O'Regan,  834. 
Handschy  v.  Sutton,  805,  883. 
Handyside  v.  Powers,  830. 
Hanly  v.  Newton,  624,  635. 
Hanger  v.  Edwards,  1338. 
Hanham  v.  Sherman,  1168. 
Hankev.  Ex  parte,  733,  736. 
Hanleyv.  Wood,  723. 
Hankey  v.  McBrindley,  249. 
Haman  v.  Osborn,  173. 
Hannen  v.  Ewalt,  14. 
Hanrahan  v.  O'Reilly,  1336, 1346. 
Hanshaw  v.  Willis,  258. 
Hanslip  v.  Paderick,  356. 
Hanson  v.  Cooper,  396. 
Hanson  v.  I.  W.  R.  R.  Co.,  408. 
Hanson  v.  Stevenson,  1334. 
Hapgood  V.  Harley,  445. 
Haralson  v.  Bridges,  318. 
Harbin  v.  Barton,  165. 
Harcourt  v.  Wyman,  334,  649. 
Hardcastle   v.    South   Yorkshire, 

&c.,  1006. 
Hardeman  v.  Ford,  375. 
Harder  v.  Harder,  980. 
Harder  v.  Howard,  1054. 
Hardin  v.  Hays,  329. 
Harding  v.  Crethom,  18,  1144. 
Harding  v.  Wilson,  415,  416,  439, 
Hardy  v.  Nelson,  782. 
Hardy  v.  Sayer,  582,  583. 
Hare  v.  Buages,  931,  932. 


Hare  v.  Cator,  681,  744,  1209. 

Hare  v.  Celey.  476. 

Hare  v.  Graves,  1133,  1136. 

Hare  v.  Groves,  810. 

Hare  v.  Horton,  448,  503,  1359. 

Harger  v.  Edmonds,  833. 

Hargrave  v.  King,  593,  715. 

Harkins  v.  Pope,  84,  35,  37. 

Harlan  v.  Harlan,  1334. 

Harland  v.  Brownley,  1175. 

Harle  v.  McCoy,  1383. 

Hai-ley  v.  Estes,  246. 

Harley  v.  King,  667,  743,  1141. 

Harlow  v.  Thomas,  962,  970. 

Harman  v.  Harman,  333. 

Harmer  v.  Bean,  483,  736,  1065. 

Harmony  Lodge  v.    White,    909, 

1033. 
Hamett  v.  Maltland,  696. 
Harnett  v.  Yielding,  359,  933. 
Harper  v.  Reno,  447. 
Harper  v.  Smith.  341. 
Harper  v.  TasweU,  1323. 
Harrington  v.  Edwards,  533. 
Harrington  v.  Watson,  1033,  1340. 
Harrington  v.  Wise,  593,  617, 1049, 

1199. 
Harris  v.  Arnold,  446. 
Harris  v.  Bradford,  460. 
Harris  v.  Bryant,  946. 
Harris  v.  Carson,  1371. 
Harris  v.  Caulborn,  676,  798,  807. 
Harris  v.  Dub,  628. 
Harris  v.  Evans,  610. 
Harris  v.  Frink.  16,  19,  47. 
Harris  v.  Goodwin,  668,  689. 
Harris  v.  Goodwyn,  7-32,  734. 
Harris  v.  Goshn,  674,  978,  981. 
Harris  v.  Greathead,  400. 
Harris  v.  Haynes,  1334. 
Harris  v.  Heackman,  1341. 
Harris  v.  Hiscock,  1154. 
Harris  v.  James,  1288. 
Harris  v.  Jones,  797,  798,  800,  881. 
Harris  v.  Mantle,  887,  888,  992. 
Harris  v.  Masters,  1041,  1209. 
Harris  v.  Morrice,  390. 
Harris  v.  Nicholas,  811,  813. 
Harris  v.  Norton,  448. 
Harris  v.  Ransom,  236. 
Harris  v.  Sanders,  443. 
Harris  v.  Shipway,  1063. 
Harris  v.  Tremenhere,  379,  380,  281. 
Harris  v.  Wing,  1164. 
Harris  v.  York  M.  Ins.  Co.,  139. 
Harrison  v.  Barnaby,  174,  175. 
Harrison  v.  Barry,  1307,  1335. 
Harrison  v.  Blackburn,  478,  1358. 
Harrison  v.  Bulcock,  959. 
Harrison  v.  Cose,  1086. 
Harrison  v.  Gt.  Northern  R.  R.  Co., 

853. 
Harrison  v.  Jackson,  367. 


1452 


Table  of  Oases. 


Harris  v.  JefEerys,  1815. 
Harrison  v.  Lord,  831. 
Harrison  v.  Middleton,  119. 
Harrison  v.  Muirell,  29,  30,  1358. 
Harrison  v.  Myers,  1100. 
Harrison  V.  North,  839,  883,  1099. 
Harrison  v.  Palmer,  1386. 
Harris  v.  Eyding,  564,  565,  566. 
Harrison  v.  Wright,  1051. 
Harrison  v.  Wyse,  249. 
HaiTison's  Case,  1096,  1137. 
Harrod  v.  Myers,  197,  199. 
Harrop  v,  Cooke,  1184. 
Harrow  v.  Baker,  1375,  1380. 
Harshaw  v.  McKesson,  267. 
Harsha  v.  Eeid,  670. 
Hai-t  V.  Curtis,  420. 
Hart  V.  Farmers,  &c.,  Bank,  446. 
Hart  V.  Hai-t,  949. 
Hart  V.  Lindley,  113. 
Hart  V.  Lyon,  671. 
Hart  V.  Robinson,  173. 
Hart  V.   Windsor,  139,   693,    886, 

1393. 
H.  &  N.  Y.  B.  S.  B.  Co.  T.  Mayor, 

&c.,  836. 
H.  &  N.  Y.  Steamboat  Co.  v.  New 

York,  786. 
Hartford  &  Salisbury  Ore  Co.  v. 

MiUer,  171. 
Hartford,  &c.,  v.  New  York,  843. 
Hartlev  v.  Allen,  1093. 
Hartley  v.  Pehall,  916. 
Hartman  v.  Kendall,  204. 
HartneU  v.  Yielding,  367. 
Hartnett  v.  Maitland,  891, 893,  989. 
Hartshome  v.  Watson,    453,    732, 

1198. 
Harting  v.  Wittle,  674. 
Harting  v.  Chicago,  &c.,  Ry.  Co., 

1395. 
Harvard  CoUege  v.   Boston,  957, 

965. 
Harvie  v.  Banks,  363. 
Harvie  v.  Osurl,  1313,  1314. 
Harvey  v.  Bridges,  30,  1357. 
Harvey  v.  Francis,  99. 
Harvey  v.  Gratham,  1348. 
Harvey  V.  Harvey,  1253. 
Harvey  v.  McGraid,  731. 
Harvey  v.  MitcheU,  399,  633. 
Harvey  v.  Murray,  55. 
Harvey  v.  Pocock,  1313,  1336. 
Harvey  v.  Reynolds,  558. 
Harvey  v.  Thomas,  324. 
Hasbrouck  v.  Tappan,  1161, 1195. 
Haseler  v.  Lemovne,  1318. 
HaskeU  v.  Bailey,  257. 
Hasker  v.  Storer,  181. 
Haskins  v.  Pond,  1311. 
Haskins  v.  Pope,  106. 
Haslage  v.  Knigh,  1071. 
Hasler  v.  Lemoyne,  130. 


Hasslett  v.  Burt,  1355. 
Hassell  v.  Gaitliwaite,  1046. 
Hassel  v.  Long,  656. 
Hassel's  Executrix,  666,  667. 
Hastings  v.  Bangor  House,  368. 
Hastings  v.  Crunckleton,  975. 
Hastings  v.  Douglass,  334. 
Hastings  v.  Lavering,  1341. 
Hastings  v.  Lovejoy,  641. 
Hastings  v.  Perry,  993.   • 
Hastings  v.  Stetson,  1388. 
Hastings  v.  Vaughn,  436. 
Hastings  v.  Weber,  353,  353. 
Hasty  V.  Wheeler,  974. 
Hatch  V.  Bates,  444. 
Hatch  V.  Bullock,  489. 
Hatch  V.  Dwight,  359,  530,  554. 
Hatch  V.  Gurza,  400. 
Hatch  V.  Hale,  1070,  1309,  1310. 
Hatch  V.  Hatch,  443,  460,  463. 
Hatch  V.  Pendergast,  489,  493. 
Hatchett  v.  Heykes,  1383. 
Hatchett  v.  McNamara,  343,  244. 
Hatfield  v.  Lockwood,  723,  1303. 
Hatfield  v.  Sohier,  137. 
Hathaway  v.  Payne,  444. 
Hatherton  v.  Bradburn,  1033. 
Haths  V.  Ash,  603. 
Haughabaugh  v.  Honald,  167,  168 
Haughery  v.  Lee,  333,  341,  395. 
Hausenv.  Bantley,'389. 
Hansen  v.  Meyer,  672,  737. 
Hauxhurst  v.  Lebru,  25,  39. 
Haven  v.  Adams,  360. 
Haven  V.  Boston,  &c.,  E.   E.   Co., 

358. 
Havens  v.  Dale,  503. 
Havland  v.  Bromley,  1160. 
Haw  V.  Ogle,  196. 
Hawes  v.  Sm;ith,  655. 
Hawkes  v.  Orton,  776. 
Hawkins  v.  KeUy,  1092. 
Hawkins  v.  Kemp,  373,  388,  289. 
Hawkins  v.  Large,  269. 
Hawkins  v.  Sherman,  731,  735,741. 

903. 
Hawley  v.  Burgess,  319. 
Hawley  v.  Cramer,  1355. 
Hawley  v.  Preston,  1334. 
Hawley  v.  Robeson,  113. 
Hawralty  V.  Warren,  360. 
Haws  V.  Shaw,  493,  1383,  1386. 
Hay  V.  Cohoes  Co.,  560,  562. 
Hay  V.  Cumberland,  406,  410. 
Hay  V.  Holt,  808. 
Hayard  v.  Haswell,  440. 
Haycock  v.  Richards,  963. 
Haycroft  v.  Criddle,  183. 
Hayden  v.  Bradley,  807. 
Hayden  v.  Cabot,  182. 
Hayden  v  Patterson,  20,  21. 
Hayden  v.  Shiff,  737. 
Hayes  v.  Brickerstaffe,698, 775,933. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1453 


Hayes  v.  Caryll,  873. 

Hayes  v.  Doane,  1223. 

Hayes  v.  Kershaw,  646. 

Hayes  v.  Sturges,  338,  240. 

Hayes  v.  Tindall,  374. 

Hayes  v.  Waldron,  541. 

Hayford  v.  Griddle,  184,  748. 

HayUng  v.  Obey,  67. 

Hayling  v.  Okey,  1373. 

Hayne  v.  Gumming,  106,  340,  590, 
1199. 

Hayne  v.  Maltby,  668. 

Hayne  t.  Matby,  1116. 

Hayner  v.  Smith,  1137. 

Haynes  v.  Seachrist,  268. 

Hayes  v.  Bowman,  530. 

Hays  V.  Waldron,  544. 

Hayton  v.  Benson,  1181. 

Hayward  v.  Merrill,  1295. 

Hayward  v.  Parke,  TO?,  1087. 

Hayward  v.  Parks,  181. 

Hayward  v.  Sedgeley,  1300. 

Hayward  v.  Young,  917,  918. 

Hayward  v.  Gope,  353,  365. 

Haywood  v.  HasweU,  338. 

Hayward  v.  Miller,  76,  80. 

Hazard  Powder  Go.  v.  Loomis,  149. 

Hazelrigg  v.  Donaldson,  232. 

Hazlett  V.  PoweU,  854,  1098,  1293. 

Hazlett  V.  Sinclare,  674. 

Heading  y.  Mayor  of  London,  195. 

Healy  v.  Grant,  1194. 

Healey  v.  Front,  157. 

Health  Department  v.  Police  De- 
partment, 8. 

Heap  V.  Barton,  1251,  1361,  1363. 

Heaphy  v.  Hill,  373. 

Heard  v.  Gamplin,  886. 

Heard  v.  Ghapman,  1135. 

Hearle  v.  Greenbank,  317,  310. 

Heam  v.  AUen,  411,  416,  431. 

Heam  v.  McClelland,  1104. 

Hearne  v.  Tomlin,  47,  63,  1337. 

Heath  v.  Elliott,  531. 

Heath  v.  Mayden,  998. 

Heath  t.  West,  301. 

Heath  v.  Whidden,  181,  677. 

Heath  v.  Williams,  13,  493,  495. 

Hebden  v.  Hartsink,  1063. 

Hebert  v.  Lavalle,  533. 

Hedges  v.  Rieker,  314. 

Hedden  yf  Shouty,  655. 

Heermance  v.  Vernoy,  1233. 

Heffelfinger  v.  Shute,  457. 

Hegan  v.  Johnson,  340,  1023,  1307. 

Hegeman  v.  McArthur,  18,  1147, 
1175. 

Heiehen  v.  Hamilton,  917. 

Helmig  v.  Johnson,  867. 

HelloweU  v.  Eastwood,  1333,  1138, 
1340. 

Hellier  v.  Gasbard,  617. 

Helling  v.  Lumley,  363,  365. 


Hembling's  Case,  816. 
Hemingv.  Brett,  81. 
Heminway  v.  Stevens,  1361. 
Hemmenway  v.  Hemmenway,  374. 
Hemmings  v.  Deemford,  893. 
Hemmingway  v.  Fernandes,  739. 
Hemphill  v.  Flinse,  13. 
Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  31,  85,  107. 
HemphiU  v.  Giles,  89. 
Henck  v.  Mulin,  458. 
Hender  v.  Pinkerton,  437. 
Henderson  v.  Cardwell,  1869. 
Henderson  v.  Chamock,  109,  888. 
Henderson  v.  Charwick,  117. 
Henderson  v.  GreweU,  447. 
Henderson  v.  Hay,  335,  348,  358. 
Henderson  v.  Mayor,  448. 
Henderson  v.  Mears,  1101, 1104. 
Henderson  v.  R.  R.  Go.,  378. 
Henderson  v.  Squire,  18. 
Hendrick  v.  Cannon,  115,  154. 
Hendrickv.  Stark,  970. 
Hendrickson  v.  Hendrickson,  1380. 
Hendrix  v.  Money,  229. 
Hendy  v.  Dinkerhoff,  1336. 
Henfree  v.  Bromley,  458,  459. 
Henkel  v.  Murr,  874. 
Henniker  v.  Turner,  175. 
Henniker  v.  Watts,  581,  591,  1199. 
Hemming  y.  Guther,  1544. 
Hennings  v.  Brabason,  609. 
Henry  v.  Root,  199,  305. 
Henson  v.  Cooper,  625,  653. 
Henstead's  Case,  73,  164, 316. 
Henwood  v.  Cheeseman,  18,  1339 

1333. 
Herryong  v.  Goodand,  1167. 
Hepbem  v.  Hepbern,  968. 
Hepburn  v.  McDowell,  470. 
Herbert  v.  Herbert,  443. 
Herbert  v.  Kennan,  1139. 
Herbert  v.  Laughluyn,  535. 
Herbert  v.  McLean,  767,  995. 
Herbin  v.  Chard,  165,  335,  603. 
Herlakenden's  Case,  980,  1343. 
Hermance  v.  Vernay,  473,  1376. 
Hermitage  v.  Tomkins,  335,  487. 
Hern  v.  Nichols,  464. 
Hemdon  v.  Kimball,  445. 
Heme  v.  Benkow,  69,  980, 989. 
Heme  v.  Benham,991. 
Hew  V.  Greek,  669. 
Herrell  v.  Sizeland,  8,  45,  48. 
Herrick  v.  Baldwin,  460. 
Herrick  v.  Hopkins,  503. 
HeiTick  V.  Moore,  970. 
Herrin  v.  Libbey,  1394. 
Herron  v.  Abbey,  1292. 
Hersey  v.  Giblett,  153,  353. 
Hershaw  v.  Clark,  493. 
Hertford  v.  Hunt,  698. 
Hertzbrig  v.  Brisinberg,  778. 
Herz  V.  Union  Bank,  1001. 


1454 


Table  op  Cases. 


Hess  V.  Newcomer,  805,  890. 

Hesse  v.  Stevenson,  657. 

Hesseltine  v.  Leary,  1170. 

Hesseltine  v.  Seaver,  1153. 

Hester  v.  Hester,  242. 

Hester  v.  Hooker,  358. 

Hetfield  v.  Central E.  R.  Co.,  467, 

468,  469. 
Hetherington  v.  Vane,  522. 
Hetriok  v.  Deshler,  543. 
Hetriok  v.  Doucbler,  537. 
Hetts  V.  Miller,  438. 
Hewitt  V.  Isham,  578,  579. 
Hewitt  V.  Eankin.  252. 
Hewlins  v.  Shipman,  469.  557. 
Hext  V.  GiU,  413,  564,  566. 
Hexter  v.   Knox,   793,   829,   1131, 

1338. 
Hey  V.  Wyche,  704. 
Heywood  v.  Cope,  860. 
Heywood  v.  Heywood,  1075. 
Hubbard  v.  Newman,  841. 
Hibblewhite  v.  M'Morine,  481. 
Hickman  v.  Isaacs,  909. 
Hickman  v.  Machin,  257,  258. 
Hickman  v.  Eoyle,  587. 
Hickman  v.  Thome,  528. 
Hicks  V.  Doty,  722. 
Hicks  V.  Downing,  180,  892,  747. 
Hicks  V.  Harvey,  603. 
Hide  V.  Thomborough,  568. 
Higgin  V.  Mortimer,  979. 
Higginbotham  v.  Barton,  23,  351. 
Higgins  V.  Andrews,  474. 
Higgins  V.  Grant,  415. 
Higgins  V.  Halligan,  605. 
Higgins  V.  Laurels,  362. 
Higgins  V.  Senior,  271,  854. 
Higgins  V.  Turner,  489,  1886. 
Higginson  v.  Clowes,  866. 
Higginson  v.  Weld,  1055, 1059. 
Higgs  V.  Terry,  119. 
Higham  v.  Baker,  416. 
Higher  v.  Eice,  449. 
Highley  v.  Barrow,  206. 
Hilary  v.  Gray,  30,  1296,  1856. 
Hilburn  v.  Fogg,  65,  493,  1387. 
Hill  V.  Bannister,  371. 
Hill  V.  Barclay,  373,  894, 1000, 1041. 
Hill  V.  Barry,  391. 
Hill  V.  Bexley,  252. 
HiU  V.  Bishop,  805. 
Hill  V.  Bolton,  167. 
Hill  V.  Bonday,  953. 
HiU  V.  Browne,  775. 
HiU  V.  Carr,  648. 
HiU  V.  Cawdry,  716. 
HiU  V.  Cowdery,  716. 
HiU  V.  Davis,  176. 
Hill  V.  Grange,  416,  431,  1086. 
HiU  V.  Hanke,  1099. 
HiU  V.  Hewitt,  353. 
HiU  V.  HiU,  1233. 


Hill  V.  Jordan,  360. 

HiU  V.  KempshaU,  1208. 

HiU  V.  North,  465. 

HiU  V.  Patten,  594. 

HUl  V.  Robertson,  253,  254. 

HiU  V.  Eobinson,  1180. 

HiU  V.  Saunders,  163, 1308. 

HiU  V.  Schwald,  1235. 

HiU  V.  Sewald,  1346. 

Hill  V.  Shultz.  402. 

HUl  V.  South  StafiEordshire  E.  Co., 

12. 
HiU  V.  Spear,  465. 
HiU  V.  Stacking,  1400. 
HiU  V.  Taylor,  977,  979,  982. 
HiU  V.  Tupper,  465,  467. 
HiU  V.  Waldron,  943. 
HiU  V.  Wand,  543. 
HiU  V.  Ward,  544,  545. 
HiU  V.  Wentworth,  1331. 
HiU  V.  West,  489. 
Hillanv.  N.  Y.,&c.,1131. 
HiUary  v.  Gay,  1144. 
HUlian  v.  N.  Y.,  &c.,  1103,  1340. 
HiUman  v.  Hore,  487. 
HiU's  Case,  417. 
HiUs  V.  MiUer,  432. 
Hills  V.  Mon-is,  892. 
Hills  V.  Eowland,  924. 
HUls  V.  Sughme,  1099. 
Hilsendegen  v.  Scheioh,  126. 
Hiltord  V.  Goodrich,  1043. 
Hiltord  V.  Lord  GranviUe,  565. 
Himely  v.  Wyatt,  1811. 
Himes  v.  Ainent,  1245. 
HinchclifEe  v.  Kinnval,  327. 
Hinohman  v.  Isles,  70. 
Hinckley  v,  Beokwith,  806. 
Hind  V.  Gray,  696,  698,  919. 
Hindle  v.  PoUitt,  926. 
Hindley  v.  Emery,  369,  994,  995. 
Hindley  v.  Eickarby,  718. 
Hinds  V.  Schultz,  547. 
Hines  v.  Ament,  1221. 
Hinley  v.  Margaritz,  304. 
Hinter  v.  Strigel,  817. 
Hintner  v.  Ege,  803. 
Hintz  V.   Thomas,   497,   668,   737, 

1885. 
Hippie  V.  DePrice,  1096. 
Hirst  V.  Horn,  1359,  1364 
Hiscocks  V.  Hiscocks,  633. 
Hise  V.  Foster,  1051,  1054. 
Hitch  V.  Barr,  440. 
Hitchcock  V.  Coker,  918,  919. 
Hitchcock  V.  Harrington,  258,  355. 
Hitchens  v.  Shaller,  467. 
Hitchman   v.   Walton,  449,   1250, 

1267. 
Hitner  v.  Ege,  787. 
Hoag  V.  Delorme,  550,  551. 
Hoag  V.  Hoag,  1385. 
Hoagland  v.  Crum,  1090, 1333. 


Table  of  Oases. 


1455 


Hoare  v.  Lee,  1336. 
Hobson  V.  Cowley,  1178. 
Hobson  V.  Middleton,  771. 
Hoby  V.  Eoebuck,  344,  675,  1851. 
Hockenbury  v.  Snyder,  493,  1384. 
Hooker  v.  Jamison,  460. 
Hodge  V.  Gilman,  461. 
Hodges  V,  Hodges,  538. 
Hodges  V.  Howard,  353. 
Hodges  V.  Lawrence,  1314. 
Hodges  V.  Raymond,  544. 
Hodgkin  v.  Queenborough,  758. 
Hodgkins  v.  Jordan,  1875,  1380. 
Hodgkins  v.  Price,  131. 
Hodgkins  v.   Eobson,   1096,  1136, 

1137. 
Hodgkinson  v.  Ennor,  559. 
Hodgkinson  v.  Crowe,  348. 
Hodgson  V.  Anderson,  1063. 
Hodgson  V.  E.  India  Co.,  766,  783. 
Hodgson  V.  Jeffries,  468. 
Hodgson  V.  Moulson,  913. 
Hodgson  V.  Rawson,  593. 
Hodgson  V.  Temple,  1345. 
Hodson  V.  Staples,  1185. 
Hoen  V.  Simmond,  489,  1883. 
Hoff  V.  Ladd,  88. 
Hoflell  V.  Armistead,  110. 
Hoffman  v.  Hammer,  634. 
Hoffman  v.  Hummer,  373. 
Hoffman  v.  Eeihl,  398. 
Hog  V.  Hoag,  497. 
Hogan  V.  Fitzgerald,  180. 
Hogg  V.  Uross,  599. 
Hogg's  Appeal,  504,  651. 
Hoitt  V.  Holcomb,  335. 
Holbrook  v.  Chamberlain,806,1383. 
Holbrook  v.  Tinell,  463. 
Holbrook  v.  Waters,  917.  918. 
Holbrook    v.   Young,    831,    1068, 

1133. 
Holcomb  V.  Coryell,  170. 
Holcomb  V.  Jolmson,  607. 
Holcomb  V.  Eamlins,  1393. 
Holcombe  v.  Henson,  916,  106o. 
Holden  v.  Liv.  Gas  Co.,  989. 
Holden  v.  Shattuck,  1005. 
Holden  V.  SmaUbrook,  1046. 
Holden  v.  Coates,  1010. 
Holden  v.  Soulby,  180. 
Holden  v.  Taylor,  643,  839. 
Holding  V.  Hgott,  634,  899,  1365. 
Holford  V.  Dunnett,  883,  889. 
Holford  V.  Hatch,  681,  744. 
Holgate  V.  Kay,  450,  479,  761, 1094. 
Holland  v.  Bin,  1809. 
Holland  v.  Bouldin,  583. 
Holland  v.  Cole,  716,  717. 
Holland  v.  Hopkins,  1033. 
Holland  v.  Falser,  618,  1036. 
Holland  v.  Worsley,  714, 715. 
HoUenbeck  v.  Eowley,  513. 
Holley  V.  Younge,  336,  343. 


HoUingsworth  v.  Stennett,  11,  38, 

78, 106. 
HoUis  V.  Carr,  633,  643,  699. 
JHollis  V.  Poole,  84,  39,  50,  53. 
Holloway  v.  Galliar,  498. 
HoUoway  v.  Lacy,  655. 
Holman  v.  Creagmiles,  970. 
Holmanv.  Johnson,  1345. 
Holme  V.  Guppuy,  1057. 
Hohnes  v.  Blogg,  300,  307, 308. 
Holmes  v.  Guion,  1186. 
Hohnes  v.  Holloway,  1375, 1380. 
Holmes  v.  Field,  217. 
Holmes  v.  Misroom,  375. 
Hohnes  v.  Seeley,  213,  417,  575. 
Holmes  v.  Tremper,  474,  1347. 
Holmes  v.  Turner's  Falls  Co.,  358. 
Holmes  v.  Seller,  774. 
Hohnea  v.  Shepard,  946. 
Holmes  v.  Stout,  447. 
Holsman  v.  Abrams,  943. 
Holsman  v.  Boiling  Springs    Co., 

541. 
Holtzapffel  v.  Baker,  809,  810. 
Holt  V.  Holt,  950. 
Holt  V.  Martin,  1386. 
Home  V.  Howell,  171. 
Home  V.  Russell.  1329,  1333. 
Home  V.  Scarrott,  1808. 
Home  Life  Lis.  Co.  v.  Sherman, 

1117. 
Homer  v.  Ashford,  918. 
Homer  v.  Knowles.  564.  566,  568. 
Homer  v.  Leeds,  497. 1385. 
Homes  v.  Pearce,  483. 
Homes  v.  Smith,  605. 
Home,  &c.,  Ins.  Co.  v.  Sherman, 

840,  1186. 
Honees  v.  Hall,  478. 
Honeyman  v.  Maiyatt,  359. 
Hood  V.  Kendall,  934. 
Hood  V.  Mathias,  493. 
Hood  V.  Mathis,  1383. 
Hood  V.  Ladd,  35,  37,  106,  154. 
Hook  V.  Craighead,  267. 
Hooker  v.  Cimamings,  529. 
Hooks  V.  Bellamy,  486. 
Hooper  v.  Brodrick,  911. 
Hooper  v.  Clark,  676,  738,  739. 
Hooper  v.  Cummings,  454. 
Hooper  v.  Hobson,  533. 
Hooper  V.  Hopper,  858. 
Hooper  v.  Meyer,  173. 
Hooper  v.  Wilkinson,  545. 
Hooper  V.  Wilson,  253,  255. 
Hooper  v.  Alderson,  514. 
Hooton  V.  Holt,  78. 
Hope  V.  Atkins,  504,  634. 
Hope  V.  Booth,  57. 
Hope  V.  Eddington,  1137. 
Hope  V.  Hayley,  747. 
Hope  V.  Hope,  371. 
Hopecraft  v.  Keys,  1117. 


1456 


Table  of  Cases. 


Hopewell  v.  Ack,  390. 
Hopkins  v.  Bradford,  806. 
Hopkins  v.  Calloway,  1380. 
Hopkins  v.  GUman,  674. 
Hopkins  v.  Halloway,  1375. 
Hopkins  v.  Organ,  786. 
Hopkins  v.  Young,  585,  653,  683. 
Hopkiason  v.  Lee,  649,  650. 
Hoppes  V.  Cheek,  773. 
Hodpus  V.  Cheek,  758. 
Hopwood  V.  Barefoot,  758. 
Hopwood  V.  Schofield,  1378. 
Hopwood  V.  Whaley,  673,  755. 
Hore  V.  Groves,  646. 
Horn  V.  Baker,  1333. 
Hornback  v.  Westbrook,  573. 
Hornby  v.  Houlditch,  666,  667. 
Horneby  v.  Clifton,  571. 
Horner  v.  Flintoflf,  1047,  1053. 
Horner  v.  Graves,  917,918,919,1058. 
Hornidge  v.  WUson,  673,  755. 
Horry  V.  Frost,  643. 
Horsefall  v.  Mather,  696,  784,  993. 
Horsefall  v.  Testar,  686,  800,  891. 
Horsefall  v.  Hey,  1360,  1370. 
Horton  v.  Cooley,  1333. 
Horton  V.  N.  Y.  C,  &c.,  E.  R.,  1197. 
Horwitz  V.  Anderson,  809,  810. 
Horwitz  V.  Bennett,  390. 
Hosier  v.  Eead,  367. 
HoskiDS  V.  Brovsm,  411. 
Hoskins  v.  Paul,  1311,  1313. 
Hosneer  v.  True,  1051,  1053. 
Hotchkiss  V.  Etting,  310. 
Hotham  v.  East  India  Co.,  500,683, 

944. 
Hotley  'v.  Scott,  304,  1304. 
Houck  V.  Houck,  340. 
Hough  V.  Binge,  19. 
Hough  V.  Birge,  61,  1330,  1337. 
Hougherey  v.  Lee,  343. 
Houghton  V.  Cooper,  978,  981,  983. 
Houghton  V.  Moore,  403.  406. 
Hounsee  v.  Hammond,  541. 
Hounsford  v.  Fisher,  586, 683. 
House  V.  Bun,  930,  945,  949,  954. 
House  V.  Dexter,  381. 
House  V.  House,  1335. 
House  V.  Metcalf ,  1380. 
House  V.  Palmer,  573. 
Houston  V.  Ferris,  499. 
Houston  V.  LafEer,  468,  470. 
Houzer  v.  Reynolds,  303. 
Hovey  v.  Hobson,  339. 
Hovey  v.  Smith,  1384. 
How  V.  Kennett,  1338,  1331,  1333. 
How  V.  Whitfield,  398. 
Howard  v.   Carpenter,   7,   11,  36, 

395. 
Howard  v.  Doolittle,  771.  875, 1131. 
Howard  V.  EUis,  5,  905,  1800. 
Howard  v.  Fessenden,  1347. 
Howard  v.  Hodges,  1343. 


Howard  v.  IngersoU,  683. 
Howard  v.  Moore,  358. 
Howard  v.  Morris,  69. 
Howard  v.  Ramsay,  1311. 
Howard  v.  Shaw,  19,  63,  94. 
Howard  v.  Shephard,  731. 
Howard  v.  Sherwood,  46, 1147. 
Howard  v.  Thomas,  635. 
Howard  v.  Woodard,  917. 
Howard's  Case,  603. 
Howe  V.  Greek,  155,  1337. 
Howe  V.  Green,  993. 
Howe  V.  Russell,  1338. 
Howe  V.  Scarratt,  333. 
Howell  V.  Ashmore,  497,  1385. 
Howell  V.  Howell,  57,  68. 
Howell  V.  McCovs,  541. 
Howell  V.  Richa'rds,  757, 1056, 1060. 
Howell  V.  Schenck,  1371,  1373. 
Howeth  V.  Aderson,  660,  813,  819. 
Howland  v.  Coffin,  674. 
Howland  v.  Leach,  587,  683. 
Howlett  V.  Tarte,  1050. 
Hoyle  V.  Stowe,  301,  303. 
Hoyne  v.  Cummings,  696. 
Hoyt  V.  HoUy,  917. 
Hoyt  V.  Wilkinson,  753. 
Hubbard  v.  Bell,  530,  533,  535. 
Hubbard  v.  Cummftigs,  804. 
Hubbard  v.  MUler,  9l7,  918. 
Hubbard  v.  Norton,  969. 
Huddlestone  v.  Briscoe,   354,  859. 
Huddlestone  v.  Johnson,  1173. 
Huddlestone  v.  Woodrosse,  413. 
HudsoA  V.   Chicago,  &c.,  E.  Co., 

874. 
Hudson  V.  Hills,  209. 
Hudson  V.  Hudson,  888. 
Hudson  V.  Poindexter,  436,  437. 
Hudson  R.  R.  Co.,  v.  Laeb,  541. 
Hudson  V.  Warner,  446. 
Hudson  V.  Wheeler,  493. 
Hudson  V.  Young,  515. 
Huerstel  v.  Lorillard,  1044. 
Hurf  V.  Baum,  1073,  1074. 
Huff  V.  McCauley,  468. 
HufE  V.  Nickerson,  648. 
Hu£E  V.  Walker,  313. 
Hufifell  V.  Armistead,  104,  116, 137. 
Huffman  v.  Harrington,  1213. 
Huffmann  v.  Stark,  351,  386. 
Huges  V.  Corbett,  116. 
Hugg  V.  Berkle,  941. 
Hugh  V.  Brige,  63. 
Hughes  V.  Bucknall,  261,  363. 
Hughes  V.  Bucknell,  350,  351. 
Hughes  V.  Bucknett.  361. 
Hughes  V.  Chatham,  79,  80. 
Hughes  V.  Clark,  433,  669. 
Hughes  V.  Debnam,  485. 
Hughes  V.  Clarksville,  498. 
Hughes  V.  Crowther's  Case,  613. 
Hughes  V,  Edwards,  584. 


Table  OF  Oases. 


1457 


Hughes  V.  Fisher,  1055.' 
Hughes  V.  Hood,  780. 
Hughes  V.  Hughes,  1304. 
Hughes  V.  Palmer,  452,  479. 
Hughes  V.  Parker,  353. 
Hughes  V.  Richman,  935.' 
Hughes  V.  Robotham,  1189. 
Hughes  V.  Watt,  489.  , 
Hughes  V.  Young,  968. 
Hulbret  v.  Post,  342. 
Hull  V.  Alexander,  1384. 
Hull  V.  Babcock,  473. 
Hull  V.  Burns,  808. 
Hull  V.  Culver,  391. 
Hull  V.  Dan,  970. 
Hull  V.  Lund,  693. 
Hull  V.  Noble,  447. 
Hull  V.  Seabright,  466. 
Hull  V.  Vaughn,  19,  59,  60. 
Hull  V.  Wadsworth,  50,  53. 
Hull  V.  Western  Trans.  Co.,  31. 
Hull  V.  Wood,  46,  97,  115,  1180. 
Hulseman  v.  Griffiths,  1336. 
Humbard  v.  Humbard,  358. 
Humberstone  v.  Dubois,  1307. 
Humble  v.  Glover,  1353. 
Humble  v.  Langston,  750,  751,  753. 
Hume  V.  Eundell,  657. 
Hume  V.  Shrieve,  554. 
Humphrey  v.  Dale,  271. 
Humphrey  v.  Wait,  847,  863,  873. 
Humphreys  v.  Fi-ank,  34,  118. 
Humphreys  v.  Newman,  1335, 1239. 
Humphries  v.  Brodgen,  564,  565, 

568. 
Humphries  v.  Humphries,  45,  53. 
Hungerford  v.  Clay,  263. 
Hunham  v.  Sherman,  1175. 
Hunlocke  v.  Blacklov^e,  919. 
Hunt  V.  Adams,  460. 
Hunt  V.  Allen,  774. 
Hunt  V.  Allgood,  135. 
Hunt  V.  Amidon,  677,  955. 
Hunt  V.  Bailey,  33,  43,  108,  154. 
Hunt  V.  Bishop,  587,  676,  819,  1300. 
Hunt  V.  Colsen,  75. 
Hunt  V.  Comstock,  30. 
Hunt  V.  Cope,  1096,.  1108. 
Hunt  V.  Danforth,  735,  737. 
Hunt  V.  Gardner,  465,  1179. 
Hunt  V.  Gray,  463. 
Hunt  V.  HaiTis,  340. 
Hunt  V.  Morton,  99. 
Hunt  V.  Mullanphy,  1226. 
Hunt  V.  Orwig,  783. 
Hunter  v.  Osterhoudt,  40. 
Hunt  V.  Otis  Co.,  639. 
Hunt  V.  Peake,  561,  566. 
Hunt  V.  Remnant,  734,  1316. 
Hunt  V.  Eenant,  139. 
Hunt  V.  Silk,  278. 
Hunt  V.  Thompson,  1044,  1339. 
Hunt  V.  Watkins,  139. 


Hunt  V.  Wolfe,  32. 
Hunter  v.  Atkins,  280,  281. 
Hunter  v.  Biglyon,  635. 
Hunter  v.  Galhers,  716,  1193. 
Hunter  v.  Hopetown,  945. 
Hunter  v.  Hunt,  1088. 
Hunter  v.  Le  Conte,  1309. 
Hunter  v.  Miller,  935. 
Hunter  v.  Osterhout,  713. 
Hunter  v.  Eeiley,  1097. 
Hunter  v.  Sar,  605. 
Huntingdon  v.  Huntingdon,  319. 
Huntington  v.  Asher,  410. 
Huntington  v.  Finch,  458,  463. 
Huntington  v.  Havens,  503,  503. 
Huntley  v.  Raper,  1089. 
Huntley  v.  Russell,  984,  1231. 
Huntley's  Case,  173. 
Huppoit  V.  Morrison,  473. 
Hurd  V.  Curtis,  670. 
Hurd  V.  Fletcher,  781. 
Hurd  V.  Miller,  1339. 
Hurd  V.   Rutland,  &c.,  E.  R.  Co., 

1005. 
Hurger  v.  Edmonds,  1131,  1132. 
Hurlbut  V.  Post,  331,  335. 
Hurleston  v.  Woodrosse,  415,  416. 
Hurley  v.  Ramsey,  436. 
Hurst  V.  Clifton,  489. 
Hurst  V.  Hurst,  1051,  1058,  1065. 
Hurst  V.  Rodney,  674,  1030. 
Hussey  v.  Jewett,  303. 
Hussy  V.  Ryan,  1385. 
Hutchings  v.  Dixar,  579,  655. 
Hutchins  v.  Chambers,  1331. 
Hutcliins  V.  Gilman,  374. 
Hutchins  v.  Groom,  638. 
Hutchins  v.  Martin,  1156,  1168. 
Hutchins  v.  Masterton,  1224. 
Hutchins  v.  Scott,  481,  627,  1320. 
Hutchins  v.  Smith,  1283. 
Hutchinson  v.  Dearing,  259. 
Hutchinson  v.  Kay,  593,  1350. 
Hutchinson  v.  Morritt,  314. 
Hutchinson  v.  Read,  587,  684. 
Hutchison  v.  Bowker,  640,  611. 
Huttermer  v.  Albro,  431. 
Huth  V.  Carondelet,  303,  306. 
Hutt  V.  Morrell,  1336. 
Hutton  V.  Parker,  919. 
Hutton  V.  Warren,  634,  889,  1365. 
Huyser  v.  Chase,  110,  137. 
Hyatt  V.  Griffith,   104,   106,  1192, 

1364. 
Hyatt  V.  Wood,  25,  37,  39,  1313. 
Hyde  v.  Hill,  955,  967. 
Hyde  v.  Jamaica,  515. 
Hyde  v.  Moakes,  16,  17,  45,  1181. 
Hyde  v.  Palmer,  1041. 
Hyde  v.  Skinner,  678,  944,  953. 
Hyde  v.  Watts,  453,  701,  1314. 
Hydeville  Co.   v.   Eagle  R.  R.   & 

State  Co.,  438,  581,  1329. 


M58 


Table  of  Cases. 


Hynds  v.  Shultz,  548,  549. 
Ibbett  V.  De  la  Salle,  771. 
Ibbetson  v.  Peat,  558.  559. 
Ibbs  V.  Richardson,  18,  45,  94. 
Ichiguin  v.  BurneU,  937. 
Iggulden  V.  May,  617,  757,  1030. 
Illinois  L.  &  L.  Co.  v.  Bonner,  S05. 
Inches  v.  Dickinson,  337. 
IngersoU  v.  Sargeant,  1024. 
Ingham  v.  Child,  1347. 
Inguersen  v.  Eankia,  1383. 
Ingle  V.  Jones,  341. 
Ingraham  v.  Baldwin,  239,  1384. 
Ingram  v.  Threadgill,  526,  533. 
Ingram  v.  Ingram,  373. 
Ingram  v.  Little,  493. 
Ingram  v.  Tothill,  1049. 
Inhabitants  v.  String,  194. 
Inman  v.  Stamp,  350,  433,  456. 
In  Re  Banks,  58. 
In  Re  Huddell,  455. 
In  Re  Stroud,  396. 
In  Re  Turner,  180,  730,  747. 
Insane  Asylum^  v.  Higgins,  194. 
Ins.  Co.  V.  Fitzgerald,  434. 
Iowa  R.  R.  Co.  V.  Stewart,  373. 
Ireland  v.  Bircham,  781. 
Ireland  v.  Johnson,  1326. 
Iremonger  v.  Newsam,  666. 
Irish  Society  v.  Needham,  1035. 
Irons  V.  Rayburn,  368. 
Irvine  v.  Irvine,  197,  203. 
Irvine  v.  Wood,  864,  1282,  1283. 
Irving  V,  Humphrey,  605. 
Irwin  V.  CavodTe,  138. 
Isaac  V.  Clarke,  494. 
Iseham  v.  Morrice,  488. 
Isenberg  v.   East  India  Co.,  437, 

1001. 
Isham  V.  Morrice,  326,  486. 
Isherwood  v.   Oldknow,  395,  396. 

1307. 
Isteed  V.  Stoneley,  944. 
Isteel  V.  Stoneley,  648. 
Ivay  V.  Hedges,  861. 
Ive  y.  Sams,  577. 
Ivens  V.  Elwes,  644. 
Ive's  Case,  1163. 
Ives  V.  Farmers'  Bank,  463. 
Ives  V.  Ives,  30. 
Ives  V.  Sams,  1156,  1162. 
Ives  V.  Van  Auken,  573. 
Ives  V.  Wood,  1296. 
Izen  V.  Gorton,  785. 
Izon  V.  Gorton,  509,  835,  1350. 
Jack  V.  HudnaU,  177. 
Jack  V.  Mclntyre,  410. 
Jacklin  v.  Cartwright,  90. 
Jaokman  v.  Arlington,  1380,  1288. 
Jacks  V.  Smith,  1306. 
Jackson  v.  Aldrich,  37,  47. 
Jackson  v.  Allen,  455,  712,  1213. 
Jackson  v.  Anoher,  978. 


Jackson  v.  Andrews,  974,  976. 
Jackson  v.  Ashbumer,  11,  334,  395. 
Jackson  v.  Ayres,  486. 
Jackson  v.  Baker,  1054. 
Jackson  v.  Brodt,  45,  51. 
Jackson  v.  Bronson,  455,  1376. 
Jackson  v.  Brownson,  711,  1383. 
Jackson  v.  Bryan,  74,  86. 
Jackson  v.  Burchin,  203,  206. 
Jackson  v.  Burtis,  340. 
Jackson  v.  Campbell,  190. 
Jackson  v.  Cantillon,  1396. 
Jackson  v.  Carpenter,  301,  203. 
Jackson  v.  Caton,  161,  993,  997. 
Jackson  v.  Clark,  633. 
Jackson  v.  Cobbin,  691,  695. 
Jackson  v.  Combs,  311,  313. 
Jackson  v.  Cooley,  1385. 
Jackson  v.  Corliss,  719. 
Jackson  v.  Davis,  134,  731,  1386. 
Jackson  v.  Delacroix,  335, 336,  887. 
Jackson  v.  Delaney,  399. 
Jackson  v.  De  Watts,  1385. 
Jackson  v.  Dobbin,  1385. 
Jackson  v.  Duke  of  Granville,  433. 
Jackson  v.  Dunlap,  443. 
Jackson  v.  Eddy,  1097,  1103, 1106. 
Jackson  v.  Farmer,  30,  1313. 
Jackson  v.  French,  134. 
Jackson  v.  Gardner,  1154,  1173. 
Jackson  v.  Given,  340. 
Jackson  v.  Harder,  1884. 
Jackson  v.  Harper,  489,  493,  1383. 
Jackson  v.  Harrington,  547. 
Jackson  v.  Harrison,  583, 1037, 1396. 
Jackson  v.  Hartwell,  188. 
Jackson  v.  Hathaway,  419. 
Jackson  v.  Hinman,  493. 
Jackson  v.  Hudson,  504,  651. 
Jackson  v.  Huges,  449. 
Jackson  v.  Hughes,  394. 
Jackson  v.  Huntington,  336. 
Jackson  v.  Jackson,  369. 
Jackson  v.  Kingsley,  47. 
Jackson  v.  Kipp,  1038,  1395. 
Jackson  v.  Ladd,  198. 
Jackson  v.  Laun,  405. 
Jackson  X.  Leek,.  493,  1385. 
Jackson  v.  Lodge,  345,  246. 
Jackson  v.  Loomis,  399. 
Jackson  v.  McClellan,  583. 
Jackson  v.  McLaUan,  592. 
Jackson  v.  McLeod,  24,  116,  1385. 
Jackson  v.  MaUn,  457,  459. 
Jackson  v.  Mancius,  1193. 
Jackson  v.  Marsh,  622. 
Jackson  v.  MoUn,  460.'^ 
Jackson  v.  Mordant,  231. 
Jackson  v.  Mowry,  5,  13,  18,  1330. 
Jackson  v.  Mulin,  458. 
Jackson  v.  Munroe,  645. 
Jackson  v.  Murray,  334. 
Jackson  v.  Newcastle,  1001. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1459 


Jackson  v.  Odell,  870, 1339. 
Jacksoa  v.  Oglander,  359. 
Jackson  v.  Osborne,  462. 
Jackson  v.  Page,  463. 
Jackson  v.  Parkhurst,  24,  274. 
Jackson  v.  Perrine,  629. 
Jackson  v.  Pesked,  1277,  1278. 
Jackson  v.  Phipps,  449. 
Jackson  v.  Port,  737. 
Jackson  v.  Ramsbotham,  99,  162, 

491. 
Jackson  v.  Randall,  1391. 
Jackson  v.  Ransom,  399. 
Jackson  v.  Rogers,  46. 
Jackson  v.  Root,  399. 
Jackson  v.  Rowland,  444,  497,  1385. 
Jackson  v.  Ryan,  53. 
Jackson  v.  Salmon,  31,  88,  107. 
Jackson  v.  Schutz,  455,  711. 
Jackson  v.  Sheldon,  442. 
Jackson  v.  Silvernail,  715. 
Jackson  v.  Spear,  486. 
Jackson  v.  Stanford,  440. 
Jackson  v.  Sternbergh,  969. 
Jackson  v.  Sternterns,  47. 
Jackson  v.  Stewart,  489,  643,  1383. 
Jackson  v.  StUes,  124,  492, 1383. 
Jackson  v.  Striker,  419. 
Jackson  v.  Tapping,  579. 
Jackson  V.  Tibbits,  974,  978,  982. 
Jackson  v.  Todd,  203. 
Jackson  v.  Topping,  503,  653. 
Jackson  v.  Trullinger,  410. 
Jackson  v.  Tyler,  6,  14,  20. 
Jackson  v.  Van  Hoesen,  334. 
Jackson  v.  Vermilyea,  554. 
Jackson  v.  Vincent,  1194. 
Jackson  v.  Vosburgh,  489,  1383. 
Jackson  v.  Walsh,  446. 
Jackson  v.  Welsh,  950. 
Jackson  v.  West,  446. 
Jackson  v.  Whedon,  492,  495. 
Jackson  v.  Wheeler,  74. 
Jackson  v.  Whitock,  198. 
Jackson  v.  Willard,  253. 
Jackson  v.  Williamson,  99 
Jackson  v.  Wilsey,  50. 
Jacob  V.  King,  1326. 
Jacobs  V.  Graham,  605. 
Jacobs  V.  Locke.  881. 
Jacobs  V.  Phillips,  117. 
Jacomb  v.  Harwood,  238. 
Jacombv.  Knight,  1001. 
Jacques  v.  Gould,  809,  810. 
Jacques  v.  Short,  447. 
Jacques  v.  Withy,  690. 
Jaffa  V.  Harteau,  508,  833,  1339. 
Jalabret  v.  Chandos,  714. 
James,  Ex  parte,  951. 
James  v.  Cochran,  699. 
James  v.  Dean,  69,  753,  950. 
James  v.  Emery,  176,  654,  681. 
James  v.  Fowks,  1337; 


James  v.  Landon,  219,  667,  1141, 
James  v.  Mourey,  1187. 
James  v.  Plant,  416,  427,  428. 
James  v.  Pope,  1181. 
James  v.  Thome,  906. 
Jansen  v.  McCahill,  439. 
Jaques  v.  Methodist,  &c.,  220. 
Jaquith  v.  Hudson,  1055. 
Jarrett  v.  State,  209. 
Jarvis  v.  Gunning,  1096. 
Jarvis  v.  Hamilton,  1380. 
Jarvis  v.  Wilkins,  621. 
Jay  V.  Boston  Penny  Sav.  Bank, 

671. 
Jay  V.  Richardson,  766,  787,  905, 

998. 
Jay  V.  Rider,  1164. 
Jayne  v.  Gregg,  448. 
Jaynes  v.  Gould,  1048. 
Jaynes  v.  Stotham,  368. 
Jefford  V.  Ringold,  202. 
Jeffrey  v.  Neale,  957,  966. 
Jeffreys  v.  Bigelow,  278. 
Jeffreys  v.  Bucknell,  487. 
Jeffrey's  Case,  959. 
Jeffries  v.  Williams,  468. 
Jeffrus  V.  Whittick,  124. 
Jeffreys  v.  Evans,  765,  777,  782. 
Jeffrys  v.  Stephens,  370. 
JeUison  v.  LaFonta,  176. 
Jenckes  v.  Cook,  494. 
Jenison  v.  Lexington,  1045. 
Jenkins  v.  Calvert,  1063. 
Jenkins  v.  Eldrich,  330. 
Jenkins  v.  Gething,  1230. 
Jenkins  v.  Green,  576. 
Jenkins  v.  Hart,  436. 
Jenkins  v.  Hermitage,  666. 
Jenkins  v.  Hopkins,  969,  970. 
Jenkins  v.  Hunt,  437. 
Jenkins  v.  Jenkins,  198. 
Jenkins  v.  Pell,  1318. 
Jenkins  v.  Portman,  817. 
Jenkins  v.  School  District,  272. 
Jenkins  v.  Staufler,  240. 
Jenkins  v.  Temple,  917,  918. 
Jenner  v.  Clegg,  36,  123,  1317. 
Jenner  v.  YoUand,  1334. 
Jenners  v.  Howard,  228,  230. 
Jenney  v.  Brook,  577. 
Jennings  v.  Alexander,  21,  731. 
Jennings  t.  Brogg,  217,  218,  327. 
Jennings  v.  McComb,  351. 
Jennings  v.  Major,  1310. 
Jennings    v.    Throgmorton,    131, 

1343. 
Jervaise  v.  Clark,  313. 
Jervis  v.    Tompkinson,   662,   791, 

913,  1143. 
Jessen  v.  Sweigert,  1284. 
Jesser  v.  Gifford,  1277. 
Jesus  College  v.  Gibbs,  189. 
Jewel  V,  Stead,  930. 


1460 


Table  of  Cases. 


Jewel's  Case,  1017, 1018, 1047. 

Jewett  V.  Alton,  273. 

Jewett  V.  Barry,  1033. 

Jewett  V.  Spencer,  651. 

Jewett  V.  Stockton,  170. 

Jewitt  V.  Davis,  235. 

Jinks  V.  Edwards,  355,  757,  781. 

Job  V.  Bannister,  932, 937, 945, 1000. 

Jodderell  v.  ToweU,  666. 

Joffe  V.  Harteau,  860. 

John  V.   Jenkins,   339,  341,  1158, 

1316. 
Johns  V.  McDaniel.  112. 
Johns  V.  Stevens,  539. 
Johns  V.  Whitley,  480,  1195. 
Johns  V.  Whitney,  454. 
Johns  V.  Whittey,  453,  1371. 
Johnson  v.  Barber,  986. 
Johnson  v.  Baytup,  489. 
Johnson  v.  Bingham,  572. 
Johnson  v.  Branch,  444. 
Johnson  v.  Carter,  26,  476. 
Johnson  v.  Cheley,  1385. 
Johnson    v.    Churchwardens,    36, 

890,  1147. 
Johnson  v.  Conger,  937. 
Johnson  v.  Gurley,  1295. 
Johnson  v.  Dixon,  785,  787,  788. 
Johnson  v.  Dosey,  317. 
Johnson  v.  Douglass,  111. 
Johnson  v.  Farey,  448. 
Johnson  v.  Hannahan,  1296. 
Johnson  v.  Hinman,  1384. 
Johnson  v.  Hopkins,  372. 
Johnson  v.  Houston,  253. 
Johnson  v.  Johnson,  138,  220,  976, 

1093. 
Johnson  v.  Jones,  99, 186, 251, 1066. 
Johnson  v.  Jordan,  419. 
Johnson  v.  Lewis,  540. 
Johnson  v.  Mason,  491. 
Johnson  v.  Mehaffy,  1227. 
Johnson  v.  Oppenheimer,  647, 1122, 

1347. 
Johnson  v.  Owens,  1308. 
Johnson  v.  Proctor,  693,  694. 
Johnson  v.  Sherman,  734,  744,  745. 
Johnson  v.  Simpson,  399. 
Johnson  v.  Smart,  361. 
Johnson  v.  Smith,  1045,  1086. 
Johnson  v.  Stiles,  489. 
Johnson  V.  U.  S.,  486. 
Johnson  v.  Upham,  1309,  1321. 
Johnson  v.  Warwick,  242. 
Johnson  v.  Wiseman,  1222. 
Johnson  v.  Wyatt,  427,  1001. 
Johnston  v.  Bates,  455. 
Johnston  v.  Johnston,  374. 
Johnston  v.  HaU,  907. 
Johnston  v.  Smith,  722. 
Johnstone  v.  Hudlestone,  611, 1172, 

1360. 
Johnstone  v.  Koane,  545. 


Jolly  V.  Arbuthnot,  156,  487,  1308. 

Jones  V.  Barkley,  683. 

Jones  V.  Bird,  890. 

Jones  V.  Bones,  908. 

Jones  V.  Brewer,  301. 

Jones  v;  Bush,  444. 

Jones  V.  Butler,  202,  306. 

Jones  V.  Cannock,  685. 

Jones   V.  Carter,   480,  731,  1198, 

1393. 
Jones  V.  Chapman,  1356, 1357. 
Jones  V.  Clark,  70,  713,  1387. 
Jones  V.  Clerk,  890. 
Jones  V.  Cowper,  161. 
Jones  V.  Crawford,  436. 
Jones  V.  Crouch,  1013. 
Jones  V.  Crow,  541. 
Jones  V.  Da  vies,  1188. 
Jones  V.  Doe,  584. 
Jones  V.  Edney,  916. 
Jones  V.  Festiniog  B.  Co.,  988. 
Jones  V.  Fi-anklin,  693,  694. 
Jones  V.  Friedenberg,  843. 
Jones  V.  Goldbeck,  1313. 
Jones  V.  Green,  933,  1056.  1057. 
Jones  V.  Gundrim,  173,  1306,  1310. 
Jones  V.  Hamp,  1324. 
Jones  V.  HiU,  69,  893,  991. 
Jones  V.  Hoey,  628. 
Jones  V.  Jenkins,  422,  434. 
Jones  V.  Johnston,  971. 
Jones  V.  Jones,  8,  18,  57,  1185. 
Jones  V.  Just,  886,  1126. 
Jones  V.  Logwood,  486. 
Jones  V.  Marsh,  121. 
Jones  V.  MUls,  110,  117,  125. 
Jones  V.  Muldrow,  30. 
Jones  V.  Nixon,  109,  153,  1142. 
Jones  V.  Noble,  360. 
Jones  V.  Phipps,  120. 
Jones  V.  Phoenix  Bank,  301. 
Jones  V.  Plummer,  219. 
Jones  V,  Powell,  952. 
Jones  V.  Price,  356. 
Jones  V.  Reed,  1037,  1038. 
Jones  V.  Eeynolds,  75,  386,  1333. 
Jones  V.  Robbins,  378. 
Jones  V.  Roberts,  862. 
Jones  V.  Robin,  521,  523. 
Jones  V.  Shay,  45,  46. 
Jones  V.  Shears,  36,  41,  655,  912. 
Jones  V.  Thomas,  258,  259,  383. 
Jones  V.  Thome,  910. 
Jones  V.  Tipton,  19,  63,  1337. 
Jones  V.  Water  Lot  Co.,  533. 
Jones  V.  Willis,  86. 
Jones  d.  Cowper  v.  Verney,  396. 
Joor  V.  Sullivan,  374. 
Jordan  v.  Deaton,  359. 
Jordan  v.  Jordan,  463. 
Jordan  v.  Mead,  5,  16. 
Jordan  v.  Pollock,  445. 
Jordan  v.  Stewart,  461. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1461 


Jordan  v.  Twells,  776,  1116,  1139. 

Jordan  v.  Ward,  25,  161,  1147. 

Jordan  v.  Wilkes,  331,  332. 

Jordian  v.  Wood,  99. 

Jourdain  v.  Steeres,  163. 

Jourdain  v.  Wilson,  678,  787. 

Journey  v.  Brackley,  734. 

Joyce  V.  DeGinewide,  854. 

Joyce  V.  Martain,  1280,  1288. 

Judah  T.  Gibbons,  339. 

Judd  V.  Woodruff,  355. 

Judson  V.  McMullen,  504. 

Judson  V.  Stone,  1393. 

Jumer  v.  Clegg,  1033. 

Junction  R.  R.  Co.  V.  Harris,  331. 

Jungerman  v.  Borre,  624,  635, 1330. 

Jurdain  v.  Steere,  167. 

Justice  V.  Lang,  354. 

Eabley  v.  Worcester  Gas  Light 

Co.,  381. 
Kahn  v.  Levi,  1392. 
Kain  v.  Aid,  658. 
Kain  v.  Hoxie,  731. 
Kaiser  v.  Hirth,  863. 
Kaiser  v.  Kirth,  847. 
Kaiser  v.  New  Orleans,  1279. 
KaJer  \f.  Beaman,  553. 
Kalo  V.  Shattuck,  1284. 
Kane  v.  Hamilton,  946. 
Kane  v.  Hood,  586. 
jE^ane  v.  Machin,  448. 
Kansas  City,  &c.,  v.  Union  Pacific 

R.  R.  Co.,  1197. 
Kansas  h.  Assn.  v.  Book,  346. 
Kavanagh  v.  Gudge,  1199, 1357. 
Kay  V.  Oxley,  515. 
Kaye  v.  Button,  691,  695. 
Kea  V.  Robeson,  633. 
Kearney  v.  Kearney,  139,  140. 
Kearney  v.  Port,  14,  738. 
Keates  v.  Cadogan,  695,  819,  1292. 
Keating  v.  Keating,  237,  343. 
Keates  v.  Lynch,  680. 
Keay  v.  Goodwin,  24,  25,  733, 1302. 
Keeble  v,  Cummins,  228. 
Keech  v.  HaU,  94,  248,  357. 
Keech  v.  Sanford,  951. 
Keeler  v.  Eastman,  975. 
Keeler  v.  Fassett,  199,  210. 
Keeler  v.  Green,  912. 
Keeling  v.  Morrice,  817. 
Keen  v.  Priest,  1312,  1316. 
Keeney  v.  Wood  Mfg.  Co.,  540, 
Kehlor  v.  Kemble,  376. 
Keich  V.  HaU,  39. 
Keighley  v.  Watson,  681. 
Keister  v.  MiUer,  1153. 
KeUe  V.  Ambrose,  636. 
Kellam  v.  Jamson,  1213. 
Kellenberger  v.  Foresham,  1096. 
Keller  v.  Fisher,  373. 
KeUer  v.  Webber,  1311. 
Kelley  v.  Dutch,  897. 
II.— 40 


Kellogg  v.'Currioo,  604. 

KeUogg  V.  Larkin,  918. 

Kellogg  V.  MaUn,  970. 

Kellogg  V.  Robinson,  674,  676. 

Kellogg  V.  Rockwell,  849. 

KeUy  V.  Clubbe,  1353. 

Kelly  v.  Coote,  208. 

Kelly  v.  Mills,  648.  i 

KeUy  V.  Todd,  1082. 

Kelly  V.  Waite,  50,  57,  69. 

Kelly  V.Webster,  373. 

Kelset  V.  Nicholson,  388. 

Kelsey  v.  Bank,  &c.,  869. 

Kelsey  v.  Durkee,  693. 

Kelsey  v.  Haply,  331. 

Kelsey  v.  Ward,  805, 1133,  1144. 

Kelso  V.  KeUy,  94r.- 

Kemble  V.  FarriJi,  1051,  1058. 

Kemble  Coal  .&Wron.Co.  v.  Scott, 

617.  .  , 

Kemp  V.  CraWes,  1812. 
Kemp  V.  Derrett,  91,  386,  607. 
Kemp  V.  Sober,  907. 
Kemp  V.  Walker,  444. 
Kempe  v.  Pittard,  219. 
Kempton  v.  Walker,  694. 
Kenada  v.  Gardner,  1385. 
KendaU  v.  Garland,  1046,  1303. 
KendaU  v.  HiU,  347,  361. 
KendaU  v.  KendaU,  469,  460. 
KendaU  v.  Kingsley,  605. 
Kendall  v.  Lawrence,  198. 
KendaU  v.  MiUer,  210. 
KendaU  v.  Moore,  35. 
Kendig  v.  Kendig,  1083. 
Kenior  v.  Kimble,  369. 
Kennedy  v.  Kennedy,  636. 
Kennedy  v.  Owen,  674. 
Kennensley  v.  Orpe,  712. 
Kennett  v.  Plummer,  253,  254. 
Kenney  v.  Barns,  820. 
Kenney  v.  Browne,  383. 
Kenney  v.  May,  1838. 
Kenney  v.  Sweeney,  37. 
Kennuller  v.  Pratz,  437. 
Kenny  v.  Forde,  936,  987. 
Kensington  v.  Brindley,  1316. 
Kenson  v.  Reading,  571. 
Kent  V.  Judkins,  516. 
Kent  V.  Manchester;,  369. 
Kent  V.  Todd,  1381. 
Kent  V.  Welch,  694. 
Kepp  V.  Wiggitt,  1057. 
Ker  V.  Lord  Duergannon,  280,  281. 
Kerby  v.  Harding,  1823. 
Kern  v.  Bumham,  336. 
Kerne  v.  Benbow,  1267. 
Kerne's  Case,  944. 
Kerr  v.  Birnel,  444. 
Kerr  v.  Clark,  340. 
Kerr  v.  Colton,  275. 
Kerr  v.  Kingsbury,  1230,  1348.  . 
Kerr  V.  Merchants  Exch. ,  1033, 1181. 


1462 


Table  of  Cases. 


Kerr  v.  Merchants  Ins.  Co.,  883. 

Kerr  v.  Eobinson,  653. 

Kerr  v.  Shaw,  773. 

Kerr  v.  Simraons,  1148. 

Kerrains  v.  People,  11,  76,  79,  80. 

Kershaw  v.  Kershaw,  595. 

Kerslake  v.  White,  416,  432,  683. 

Kessehnan  v.  Aid,  488. 

Kesslar  v.  McConachy,  1098,  1137. 

Kessler  v.  McConachy,  761,  1311. 

Ketaltas  v.  Coleman,  701. 

Ketsey's  Case,  196,  199,  300. 

Keux  V.  Nash,  667. 

Key  V.  Goodwin,  1045. 

Key  V.  Morehouse,  1356. 

Keyhley  v.  Bulkley,  72. 

Kidd  V.  Dennison,  978,  980,'993. 

Kidd  V.  Lard,  539. 

Kidd  V.  Temple,  363,  355. 

Kidder  v.  West,  411. 

Kidgill  V.  Moor,  1278. 

Kid  well  V.  Burmmagin,  343. 

KidweUy  V.  Brand,  1087, 1307, 1310. 

Kiek  V.  Taylor,  19. 

Kier  v.  Patterson,  1080. 

Kierman  v.  Germain,  1841. 

Kiersted  v.  Orange E.  E.  Co.,  1329. 

Kilcrease  v.  Shebly,  301. 

Kille  V.  Ege,  443. 

Killenberger  v.  Forseman,  785. 

Killian  v.  Harshan,  648. 

Killick  V.  Flexney,  950. 

KOlman  v.  Brown,  436. 

Killon  V.  Town,  853. 

Kimball  v.  Cross,  1155. 

Kimball  v.  Yales,  467,  470. 

Kimberly  v.  Jennings,  858. 

Kimm  v.  Osgood,  605. 

Kimmel  v.  Bm-femd,  1293. 

Kimpton  v.  Eve.  147. 

Kimpton  v.  Walker,  646. 

Kincade  v.  Coffley,  338. 

Kincaird  v.  Scott,  983. 

Kind  V.  Ammery,  1317. 

Kine  v.  Balfe,  375,  377. 

King  V.  Anderson,  1071. 

King  V.  Ashworth,  366. 

King  V.  Brooks,  367. 

King  V.  Dunsford,  567. 

King  V.  Eddington,  354. 

King  V.  England,  1310,  1334,  1335. 

King  V.  Frazer,  1.339. 

King  V.  Grafton,  91,  93. 

King  V.  Hamilton,  368,  865. 

King  V.  Housatonic E.  E.  Co.,  1070. 

King  V.  Jenkins,  389. 

King  V.  Jones,  677. 

King  V.  King,  654. 

King  V.  Morford,  858. 

King  V.  Mumf  ord,  859. 

King  V.  Murray,  13,  492,  495. 

King  V.  Newton,  473. 

King  V.  Eeynolds,  756,  762. 


King  V.  St.  Michaels,  353,  234, 
King  V.  Smith,  526. 
King  V.  Sharp,  138. 
King  V.  Stubbs,  81. 
King  V.  Tiffany,  538,  543,  554. 
King  V.  Wharton,  536. 
King  V.  Wilcomb,  95,  96. 
King  V.  Williams,  1264. 
King  V.  Wilson,  373,  1118. 
King  V.  Woodruff,  635. 
Kingdon  v.  Nottle,  677,  679,  758. 
Kingman  v.  Abington,  1386. 
Kingsbury  v.  CoUins,  67,  1869. 
Kingsbury  v.  Westfall,  1084, 1085. 
Kingsland  v.  Clarke,  1098. 
Kingsley  v.  Ames,  34,  35,  39. 
KingsmiU  v.  Millard,  1358. 
Kinkeadv.  U.  S.,  1348. 
Kinbyside  v.   Thornton,  667,  993, 

1367. 
Kinnersly  v.  Orpe,  714. 
Kinney  v.  Doe,  497,  1385. 
Kinsey  v.  Mirmick,  1147,  1181. 
Kintrea  v.  Preston,  733,  754. 
Kinwelly  v.  Brandt.  1036. 
Kip  V.  Merwin,  814,  840. 
Kirby  v.  Boylston,  846,  876,  1387. 
Kirby  v.  Green,  1086. 
Kirby  v.  Hansaker,  776. 
Kirkham  v.  Sharp,  515. 
Kirkland  v.  Paunsett,  47,  57,  58, 

61,  63. 
Kirkmanv.  Benham,  378. 
Kirkman  v.  Jervis,  1347,  1349. 
Kirkman  v.  Eeignold,  600. 
Kirkpatrick  v.  Peshin,  680. 
Kisselbrack  v.  Livingston,  367. 
Kitchen  v.  Compton,  178. 
Kitchen  v.  Lee,  204,  314. 
Kitchin  v.  Buckley,  173. 
Kite  V.  Tubbes,  450. 
Kittle  V.  St.  John,  1165. 
Kittley  v.  EUiott,  208. 
Kleckner  v.  Klapp,  271. 
Kempton  v.  Eve,  994,  995. 
Kline  v.  Beele*  304. 
Khne  v.  Jacobs,  830. 
Kline  v.  McGuerkin,  353. 
Khne  v.  Moulton,  239. 
KUng  V.  Dress,  794,  797,  807. 
Kluge  V.  Lachenaur,  490. 
Klum  V.  Lawez,  1394. 
Knapp  V.  Marlboro,  636,  758,  773, 
Knevett  v.  Pool,  1146, 1371. 
Knight  V.  Beach,  1033. 
Knight  V.  Bennett,  13,  50, 456, 1306. 
Knight  V.  Broughton,  1093. 
Knight  V.  Egerton,  1337. 
Knight  V.  Mory,  717. 
Knight  V.  Quigley,  11,  73,  117, 
Knight  V.  Eowe,  703. 
Knight's  Case,  381,  1033,  1038, 
Knipe  v.  Palmer,  380,  441. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1463 


Knolle's  Case,  1045. 
Knots  V.  Geiger,  446. 
Knotts  V.  Curtis,  1327. 
Knower  v.  Emerson,  655. 
Knowleden  v.  Leavitt,  648. 
Knowlea  v.  Pierce,  1313. 
Knox  V.  Caloner,  536. ' 
Knox  V.  Chaloner,  529^ 
Knox  V.  Hexter,  903,  1336. 
Koagstree  v.  Lucas,  437. 
Kobinson  v.  Learoyd,  1361. 
Kohler  v.  Knapp,  1071. 
Kooystra  v.  Lucas,  415,  575. 
Koplitz  V.  Gustavus,  21. 
Korbe  v.  Barber,  1328. 
Korhm  v.  Hohl,  1085. 
Komegay  v.  Collier,  733. 
Kortz  V.  Carpenter,  772. 
Kounslar  v.  Ward,  545. 
Kramer  v.    Cook,  809,  810,   1111, 

1346. 
Krank  v.  Nichols,  1171. 
Krause  v.  Ross,  1235. 
Kreis  v.  Seligman,  465. 
Krevet  v.  Meyer,  1398. 
Krider  v.  Lafferty,  503. 
Krueger  v.  Ferrant,  860, 1136,1339. 
Kruse  v.  Wilson,  400. 
Kuhlman  v.  Meier,  940. 
Kunkle  v.  Phila.  Eifle  Co.,  8. 
Kunzie  v.  Wixon,  92. 
Kuny  V.  Brown,  391. 
Kuper  V.  Schwartz,  343. 
Kutter  V.  Smith;  940. 
Kutz  V.  McCune,  970. 
Kyle  V.  Roberts,  353,  354. 
Lacey  V.  Lear,  1397,  1356. 
Lacey  v.  Pear.  1143,  1144. 
Lackman  v.  Wood,  486. 
Lacy  V.  Giboney,  1334. 
Ladd  V.  Smith,  1173. 
Ladd  Y.  Thomas,  1309. 
Laduc  V.  Detroit,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co., 

255. 
Lady  Oimond  v.  Hutchinson,  381. 
Lady  RusaeU's  Case,  390. 
LaFarge  v.  Halsey,  1067,  1137. 
LaFarge  v.  Park,  19,  1339,  1331. 
Lafflin  v.  Griffiths,  1225. 
LaForge  v.  Mansfield,  693. 
Lajoye  v.  Princan,  485. 
Laguerenne  v.  Dougherty,  13,  88, 

106. 
Laird  v.  Boyle,  941. 
Lake  v.  Butler,  920. 
Lake  v.  Smith,  1149, 1359, 1360. 
Lake  Co.  v.  Yoimg,  548. 
Lamar    v.   McNamee,  1153,  1158. 

1168. 
Lamb  v.  Burbank,  326. 
Lamb  v.  Reaston,  401, 
Lamb  t.  Ricketts,  530. 
Lambert  v.  McDonnell,  1182. 


Lambert  v.  Norris,  675,  1050,  1334. 
Lambeth  v.  Warner,  978,  983. 
Lamette  v.  Anderson,  939. 
Lametti  y.  Anderson,  673. 
Lament  v.  Rowley,  865. 
Lamorere  v.  Cox,  734. 
Lamott  V.  Sterett,  1102,  1130,  1130. 
Lamper  v.  Cooke,  656. 
Lampman  v.  Cochran,  1055. 
Lfimpman  v.  Wilks,  423,  423.  , 

LamsQn  v.  Clarkson,  56. 
Lancashiate  v.  Glover,  776. 
Lancashire  V.  Mason,  496, 498, 1386. 
Lancashire  Tel.  Cq.  v.  Overseers 

of  Manchester,  405i, 
Lancaster  v.  DeTraflford,  3^. 
Lancaster  v.  Eve,  1220. 
Lancaster  v.  Eve,  980. 
Landas  v.  HoUingshead,  1175. 
London  v.  Greyme,  974. 
Landsdowne  v.  Landsdown,  1355, 
Lane  v.  Atlantic  Works,  1288. 
Lane  v.  Brace,  1064. 
Lane  v.  Cowper,  196,  197. 
Lane  v.  Edmonston,  13. 
Lane  v.  Howard,  966. 
Lane  v.  Kmg,  261,  1349. 
Lane  v.  Miller,  468. 
Lane  v.  Thompson,  339,  398. 
Lane  v.  Wingate,  1055. 
Laney  v.  Clifford,  539,  535. 
Lang  V.  Henny,  353. 
Lang  V.  PhilUps,  605. 
Lang  V.  Whidden,  238. 
Langdon  v.  Goole,  621.   • 
Lange  v.  Werk,  917. 
Langer  v.  Filton,  486. 
Langford  v.  Sehnes,  490,  714,  730. 
Langley  v.  Hammond,  575. 
Langley  v.  Ross,  588. 
Langmead  v.  Maple,  997. 
Langton  v.  Hughes,  1341. 
Langton  v.  McKinne,  486. 
Langworthy  v.  Chadwick,  140. 
Lanison  v.  Tremere,  491. 
Lankford  v.  Green,  20,  1330. 
Lankins  v.  Biddle,  269. 
Lanning  v.  Lanning,  771, 
Lansing  v.  Lovering,  771,  774. 
Lansdowne  v.  Lansdowne,  991. 
Lansing  v.  Montgomery,  485,  486. 
Lansing  v.  Rattoon,  1319. 
Lansing  v.  Van  Alstyne,  1116. 
Lapham  v.  Curtis,  538. 
Lapham  v.  Norton,  6,  1323. 
Lapish  V.  Bangor  Bk.,  531. 
Larabee  v.  Castleton,  584. 
Large  v.  Penn,  400. 
Larkin  v.  Avery,  110, 1396. 
Larkin  v.  Misland,  360. 
Lame  v.  Farren  Hotel,  1287. 
Larned  v.  Hudson,  13,  45,  46. 
Larsden  v.  Sharp,  438. 


1464 


Table  of  Cases. 


LaSala  v.  Holbrook,  560,  563,  568. 
Laski  V.  Goldman,  485. 
LasseU  v.  Read,  67,  1303. 
Latham  v.  Atwood,  1369. 
Latham  v.  Blakeley,  1235. 
LathrOp  v.  Bryant,  354. 
Lathrop  v.  Clews,  1318. 
Latimer  v.  Moore,  249,  259. 
Latimer  v.  Woodward,  1213. 
Lattimore  v.  Garrand,  691,  695. 
Latwetoh  v.  Autton,  329. 
Laubenheimer  v.  Mann,  918,  1055. 
Laue's  Case,  148. 

Laugher  v.  Humphrey,  1024.        / 
Laugher  v.  Pointer,  1301. 
Laugher  v.  Williams,  817. 
Laughia  v.  Kief,  835. 
Laughlin  v.  Kief,  1126. 
Launsberry  v.  Snyder,  1161. 
Laurant  v.  Ins.  Co.,  605. 
Laurissini  v.  Doe,  449. 
Larat  v.  Ranelagh,  953. 
Law  V.  ElweU,  1296. 
Law  V.  Grant,  276. 
Law  V.  Hempstead,  615. 
Law  V.  Perkins,  272. 
Las7  V.  Treadwell,  363. 
Lawcett  v.  KJmmey,  463. 
Lawes  v.  Penser,  1337. 
Lawlor  v.  Moller,  1080. 
Lawlor  v.  Potter,  548. 
Lawrence  v.  Brown,  1160. 
Lawrence  v.  Burrell,  1112,  1340. 
Lawrence  v.  Faux,  1178. 
Lawrence  v.  French,  1116. 
Lawrence  v.  Hyman,  627. 
Lawrence  v.  Kemp,  1222. 
Lawrence  v.  Kidder,  917. 
Lawrence  v.  Knight,  940. 
Lawrence  v.  Lawrence,  463 
Lawrence  v.  McArter,  198. 
Lawrence  v.  Miller,  497,  1385. 
Lawrence  v.  Tucker,  465. 
Lawrence  v.  Twentiman,  810. 
Lawrence  V.  Wood,  807. 
Lawry  v.  WiUiams,  447. 
Lawson  v.  Laude,  366. 
Lawton  v.  Gordon,  463. 
Lawton  v.  Lawton,  1227. 
Lawton  V.  Rivers,  515. 
Lawton  V.  Salmon,  1232, 1247, 1253. 
Lawton  v.  Sutton,  689. 
Lay  V.  King,  528. 
Layfleld  v.  Cowper,  1010. 
Layman  t.  Whitney,  450. 
Layton  v.  Field,  73,  74. 
Lazare  v.  Jacques,  626. 
Leach  v.  Leach,  1068, 1133. 
Leach  v.  Thomas,  787,  989,  1251. 
Leadbeater  v.  Roth,  1103. 
Leader   v.    Homewood,  31,  1251, 

1265. 
Leader  v.  Moxon,  1278,  1300. 


Leaff  V.  Hewitt,  1321. 

Lear  v.  Caldicott,  1321,  1326. 

Learned  v.  Tallmage,  389. 

Learoyd  v.  Godfrey,  1281. 

Leather  Cloth  Co.  v.  Xorsout,  903. 

Leavitt  v.  Fletcher,  660,  785,  831. 

Leavitt  v.  Leavitt,  85,  86,  97. 

Lecott  V.  Stewart,  1384. 

Ledoux  V.  Jones,  1086. 

Lee  V.  Alexander,  460. 

Lee  V.  Benson,  1026. 

Leeds  v.  Burrows,  1367. 

Lee  V.  Cooke,  ,1321. 

Lee  V.  Hernandez,  47. 

Lee  V.  Nixon,  649. 

Lee  V.  Norris,  324. 

Lee  V.  Page,  730. 

Lee  V.  Payne.  734. 

Leev.  Risdon,  1219,  1243,  1268. 

Lee  V.  Smith,  46,  106,  345, 1317. 

Lee  V.  Stevenson,  557. 

Lee  V.  Vernon,  951,  952. 

Lee  V.  Ware.  231. 

Leech  v.  Leech,  1154, 

Leeds  v.  Anherst,  991. 

Leeds  v.  Cheetham,  786,  810,  1130 

Leeds  v.  Compton,  710. 

Leeming  v.  Skicrow,  489,  491.  ' 

Leers  v.  Hind,  715,  716. 

Lees  V.  Mosley,  649. 

Lees  V.  NuttaU,  376. 

Leeson  v.  Sayer,  115,  117, 

Lefevre  v.  Lefevre,  470, 

Leforge  v.  West,  993. 

LaFoot  V.  Delafield,  240. 

Legal  V.  Miller,  368. 

Leger  v.  Doyle,  446. 

Legg  V.  Legg,  330. 

Legg  V.  Strudwick,  89,  90, 610. 

Legge  V.  Horlock,  1057,  1058, 

Legge  V.  Legge,  1011. 

Legge  V.  Strudwick,  87. 

Leggett  V.  Harding,  635. 

Leggett  V.  Kenton,  540. 

Legh  V.  Hewitt,  696,  697,  933. 

Legh  V.  lalhe,  936. 

Legrand  v.   Sidney  College,    189, 

193. 
Lehmann  v.  McArthur,  710, 
Leibshutz  v.  Moore,  736. 
Leicester  v.  Biggs,  115,  599. 
Leicester  v.  Rehoboth,  156,  334, 
Leigh  V.  Crump.  358,  861. 
Leigh  V.  Earl  of  Balcanes,  308. 
Leigh  V.  Hind,  919. 
Leigh  V.  Shepherd,  1308. 
Leighton  v.  Theed,  73. 
Leishman  v.  White,  1136,  1137. 
LeKeux  v.  Nash,  647,  743,  749. 
Leland  v.  Gassett,  1347. 
Lely  V.  Green,  89. 
Lenatman  v.  Ambler,  340. 
Lent  V.  Howard,  1397. 


Table  op  Cases. 


1465 


Leoder  v.  Kemp,  836. 

Leonard  v.  Bates,  586. 

Leonard  v.  Burgess,  1044.     ' 

Leonard  v.  Kingsman,  10. 

Leonard  v.  Leonard.  515. 

Leonard  v.  Storer,  864,  1283,  1387. 

Leonard  v.  White,  417. 

Lepuy  V.  Silver,  1133. 

Lerned  v.  Waunernacher,  351. 

Lesley  v.  Randolph,  53,  99,  433. 

Leslie  v.  Pounds,  1301. 

Lester  v.  Foxcraft,  360,  375. 

Lester  v.  Garland,  604. 

Lester  v.  Kiane,  369. 

Lester  v.  Young,  984. 

Le  Travemer's  Case,  839. 

Lettick  V.  Hounold,  1116. 

Leven  v.  Mihel,  1313. 

Levering  t.  Heighe,  304. 

Levett  V.  Wirthington,  757. 

Levey  v.  Dyess,  811,  818. 

Levick  v.  Coppin,  317,  337,  340. 

Levitzky  v.  Canning,  947,  1103. 

Levy  V.  Beard,  1064. 

Levy  V.  Bond,  1067. 

Levy  V.  Home,  489. 

Levjr  V.  Lewis,  16,  18,  91, 1331. 

Lewis  V.  Baird,  579. 

Lewis  V.  Bannister,  333. 

Levsds  V.  Beard,  57,  64. 

Lewis  V.  Bingham,  434,  458. 

Lewis  V.  Bond,  373. 

Lewis  V.  Bowles,  393. 

Lewis  V.  Campbell,  677,  782. 

Lewis  V.  Cawdor,  135. 

Lewis  V.  Cook,  674. 

Lewis  V.  Gurgell,  1311. 

Lewis  V.  Harris,  1314. 

Lewis  V.  Lozee,  1309. 

Lewis  V.  MoNatt,  1370. 

Iiewis  V.  Marshall,  177. 

Lewis  V.  Oakley,  400. 

Lewis  V.  Page,  460. 

Lewis  V.  Payn,  457,  458,  761,  1137. 

Lewis  V,  Read,  1818,  1326. 

Lewis  V.  Rees,  1358. 

Lewis  V.  Rerchy,  359,  360. 

Lewis.  V.  Ridge,  735,  744. 

Lewis  V.  Rogers,  747. 

Lewis  V.  Seahury,  505. 

Lewis  V.  Starke,  1187. 

Lewis  V.  Stein,  541. 

Lewis  V.  Welden,  587. 

Lewis  V.  Wilkins,  733,  1045. 

Lewis  V.  Willis,  1337. 

Leyman  v.  Abeel,  535. 

L'Hussier  v.  FaUee,  1399. 

Libbey  v.  Talford,  693,  819,  834, 

1392. 
Lichden  v.  Winsmore,  1188. 
Liddell  v.  Sims.  688. 
Liebenrood  v.  Vines,  914,  924. 
Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  Wilson,  360. 


Liford's  Case,  574,  659,  1393. 
Liggins  V.  Inge,  473,  558. 
Lightfoot  V.  Heron,  361. 
Lightfoot  V.  Tenant,  625, 1341, 1345. 
Liley  v.  Mayers,  1138. 
Lilley  v.  Fifty  Associates,  1076. 
Lilley  v.  Leigh,  373. 
LiUeyv.  Whitney,  634. 
Lillywhite  v.  Trimmer,  541. 
Linahan  v.  Barr,  1334,  1339. 
Lincoln  v.  Buckmaster,  339. 
Lincoln  v.  Chadburne,  533,  553. 
Linden  v.  Hepburn,  179. 
Linder  v.  Pryor,  910. 
Lindley  v.  Lacey,  505,  506. 
Lindley  v.  Miller,  1069. 
Lindley  v.  Tibbals,  351. 
Lindsay  v.  Lindsay,  227,  448. 
Lii^dsay  v.  Lynch,  374,  378. 
Lindsay  v.  State,  436. 
Line  v.  Stephenson,  657,  762,  992. 
Lineham  v.  Cotter,  368. 
Lingham  v.  Warren,  1321. 
Lingwood  v.  Stowmarket  Co.,  541, 

998,  1003. 
linley  v.  Palden,  1337. 
Linn  v.  Ross,  808,  835,  1121,  1130. 
Linsley  v.  Tibbals,  438. 
Linthicum  v.  Ray,  430. 
Linton  v.  Hart,  1117. 
Linwood  v.  Squire,  669. 
Lisbume  v.  Davies,  1358. 
Lison  v.  Yawn,  1885. 
ListoflE  V.  Halt,  463. 
Listwol  V.  Gibbings,  5b7. 
Lively  v.  Ball,  494,  1384. 
Liverpool,  &c..  Bank  v.  Eccles,  854. 
Livingston  v.  Ketchum,  533,  535. 
Livingston  v.  Eisselbrack,  335, 394. 
Livingston  v.  Livingston,  1355. 
Livingston  v.  MiUer,  1075,  1078. 
Livingston  v.  Potts,  808, 1158, 1160. 
Livingston  v.  Reynolds,  138,  974, 

1376. 
Livingston  v.  Stickles,  589. 
Livingston  v.  Sulzer,  986,  1330. 
Livingston  v.  Tanner,  35,  29. 
Livingston  v.  Ten  Broeck,  533. 
Litchfield  v.  Ready,  45,  478,  1330. 
Lithgow  V.  Mood,  154. 
Lithgow  V.  Moody,  116. 
Little  V.  Herndon,  461. 
Little  V.  Martin,  13,  1331. 
Little  V.  Pallister,  70,  1277. 
Little  V.  Pearson,  18,  19,  64,  1337. 
Littler  v.  Holland,  689. 
Littleton  v.  Clayton,  500. 
Littleton  v.  Wynn,  5,  12,  13,  18. 
Llewellyn  v.  Rous,  1098. 
Llewelyn  v.  Williams,  603. 
Lloyd,  Ex  parte,  1342. 
Lloyd  V.  Cozens,  97,  1033. 
Lloyd  V.  Crisp,  711,  715,  730. 


1466 


Table  of  Cases. 


Lloyd  V.  Daires,  1303. 

Lloyd  V.  Ingleby.  716,  1203. 

Lloyd  V.  Jones,  335,  1358. 

Lloyd  V.  Langford,  1033, 1152, 1167. 

Lloyd  V.  Passingham,  1153. 

Lloyd  V.  Powell,  707,  719,  1195. 

Lloyd  V.  Rosbee,  1148,  1149,  1358. 

Lloyd  V.  Say,  599. 

Lloyd  Y.  Taylor,  443. 

Lloyd  V.   TomMes,  769,  774,  775, 

781. 
Lloyd  V.  Tompkins,  1137. 
Lloyde  v.  Gregory,  1164. 
Load  V.  Green,  453,  480,  1198. 
Loader- V.  Kemp,  1131. 
Lobdell  V.  Baker.  378. 
Lock  V.  Fui-ge,  453,  601,  782. 
Lock  V.  Venables.  1093. 
lockard  v.  Barton,  335. 
Locke  V.  Matthews,  73. 
Locke  V.  Stearns,  278. 
Locke  V.  Wright,  433. 
Lockett  V.  Howard,  678. 
Lockett  V.  Tobey,  634. 
Lockey  v.  Lockey,  1355. 
Lockier  v.  Patterson,  1335. 
Lockrow  V.  Horgan,  795,  843. 
Locks  V.  Alexander,  373. 
Lockwood  V.  Clarke,  151,  614,  716. 
Lockwood  V.  Lockwood,  50,  389, 

1073. 
Lockwood  V.  Sturdevant,  1187. 
Lockwood    V.   Walker,    489,    491, 

1384. 
Lodge  V.  White,  666. 
Lofft  V.  Dennis,  786,  810,  1032. 
Loftsky  V.  Manjer,  1309. 
Loftus'  Case,  325,  226,  1048. 
LiOgan  V.  Barr,  1153. 
Logan  V.  Caldwell,  239. 
Logan  V.  HaU,  183,  184,  749,  902. 
Logan  V.  Herron,  42,  116,  133. 
Logan  V.  Simmons,  218. 
Lombard  v.  Kenzie,  415. 
London  v.  Mitford,  933,  946. 
London  v.  Nash,  370,  894. 
London  v.  Pratt,  1232. 
London  v.  The  Chapter,  &c.,  415. 
London  v.  Webb,  990,  991. 
London  Ga,s  Light  Co.  v.  Chelsea 

Vestry,  683. 
London  &  N.  W.  Ry.  Co.  v.  West, 

488. 
London,  &c.,  v.  Drake,  1183,  1361. 
London,  &c. ,  R.  Co.  v.  Garnet,  908. 
London,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Winter,  366. 
Long  V.  Bonner,  1331. 
Long  V.  Bowring,  363,  370. 
Long  V.  Cobum,  275. 
Long  V.  Fletcher,  368. 
Long  V.  Hartwell,  267. 
Long  V.  Long,  437. 
Long  V.  Ramsay,  436. 


Longee  v.  Colton,  1314. 
Longfellow  v.  Longfellow,  493, 498. 
L.  I.  R.  R.  Co.  V.  Marquand,  1027, 
Longstaff  v.  Meagoe,  1358,  1271. 
Longuemore  v.  Daugherty,  32. 
Longwell  v.  Bentley,  485. 
Loomis  V.  Jackson,  399. 
Loomis  V.  Ruelter,  807. 
Loomis  V.  Wilbor,  977,  983. 
Looney  v.  McLean,  857,  859,  862, 

873. 
Lord  V.  Morris,  257. 
Lord  V.  Com'rs  of  Sidney,  555. 
Lord  V.  Crago,  85,  99,  107,  456. 
Lord  Davey  v.  Askwith,  138. 
Lord  V.  Gaddis,  1052,  1059. 
Lord  V.  Holmes,  950. 
Lord  Downe  v.  Thompson,  263. 
Lord  Egremont  v.  StepTiens,  810. 
Lord  Kingsland  v.  Barnewall,  281. 
Lord  Muskerry  v.  Chinnery,  296. 
Lord  Selsey  v.  Rhodes.  379, 281, 283. 
Lord  TankerviUe  v.  Wingfield,  305. 
Loring  -v.  Blaie,  290. 
Lorman  y,  Benson,  530,  538,  535. 
Lormer  v.  Dawson,  352. 
Lome  V.  Farren  Hotel,  1292. 
Losee  v.  Buchanan,  853. 
Lothrop  V.  Thayer,  54,  1301. 
Louch  V.  Farnum,  594. 
Loughran  v.  Ross,  803,  1261,  1263. 
Loughran  v.  Smith,  433,  441. 
Louhat  V.  Kapp,  444. 
Louis  V.  Castleman,  486. 
Louis  V.  Marshall,  640. 
Lounsbury  v.  Snyder,  101, 773, 1136. 
Loupe  V.  Wood,  846,  848,  863. 
Lovatt  V.  Raneleigh,  1038. 
Love  V.  Dennis,  496. 
Love  V.  Edmaston,  496. 
Love  V.  Edmundston,  18,  57,  491. 
Love  V.  Gest,  198. 
Love  V.  Howard,  960. 
Love  V.  Ross,  478. 
Love  V.  Sierra  Nevada,  &c.,  Co., 

439. 
Loveday  v.  Winter,  308. 
Lovelace  v.  Reynolds,  392. 
Lovelard  v.  Reynolds,  1031. 
Lovelock  V.  Franklyn,  336. 
Levering  v.  Langley,  709. 
Lovering  v.  Levering,  761. 
Lovett  V.  Church,  346. 
Low  V.  Conn.,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  268. 
Low  V.  Elwell,  1213. 
Lowder  v.  Blackford,  363. 
Lowe  V.  Browne,  938. 
Lowe  V.  Carpenter,  548. 
Lowe  V.  Griffith,  200. 
Lowe  V.  L.  &  N.  W.  R.  R.  Co.,  96, 

190  193 
Lowe  v!  Ross,  18,  1828,  1355. 
Lowell  V.  Hilton,  643. 


Table  op  Oases. 


1467 


Lowell  V.  Parkhurst,  633. 

Lowell  V.  Spaulding,  836,  866, 1387. 

Lowell  V.  Strahan,  403. 

Lowes  V.  Peers,  1050. 

Lowndes  v.  Chisholm,  365. 

Lowndes  y.  Dickerson,  538. 

Lowndes  v.  Fountain,  935. 

Lownley  v.  Bond,  947. 

Lowther  v.  Troy,  1164. 

Lubbering  v.  Kohlbreoker,  460. 

Lucan  v.  Mertlns,  950. 

Lucas  V.  Bishop,  419. 

Lucas  V.  Brooks,  16,  493. 

Lucas  V.  Burnett,  360. 

Lucas  V.  Commerford,  371,745,894. 

Lucas  V.  Condor,  884. 

Lucas  V.  Doe,  341. 

Lucas  V.  How,  1306. 

Lucas  V.  Tarleton,  1335,  1337. 

Luce  V.  Carey,  546. 

Luce  V.  Corley,  547. 

Lucy  V.  Leviston,  781. 

Lucy  V.  Wilkins,  1171. 

Ludford  v.  Barber,  13,  169,  487. 

Ludlow  V.  McCrea,  649,  680. 

Ludlow  V.  N.  y.,  &c.,  E.  E.  Co., 

584. 
Ludwell  V.  Newman,  757,  761, 781. 
Lull  V.  Matthews,  349. 
Lumley  v.  Gye,  1388. 
Lumley  v.  Hodgson^  484. 
Lumley  v.  Scarborough,  487. 
Luner  v.  Brown,  ,390. 
Lungendyck  v.  Burhans,  1391. 
Lunn  V.  Gage,  793,  1133. 
Lunsford  v.  Alexander,  490. 
Lunsford  v.  La  Motte  Lead  Co. ,  438. 
Lunsford  v.  Turner,  497,  1386. 
Lunt  V.  Norris,  643. 
Lush  V.  Druse,  1036,  1078. 
Lusk  T.  Druse,  397. 
Luther  v.  Winnisimmet  Co.,  537. 
Luxmore  v.  Eobson,  793,  799,  806, 

898.' 
Luxmore  v.  Saiyle,  1013. 
Lyburn  v.  Warrington,  594. 
Lyde  v.  Eussell,  1351,  1370. 
Lydiatt  v.  Foach,  934. 
Lyman  v.  Lopmis,  399. 
Lyman  v.  Snurr,  1338. 
Lyman  v.  Townsend,  1343. 
Lyman  v.  Warrington,  438. 
Lynch  v.  Baldwin,  1068, 1095, 1133. 
Lynch  v.  Darrell,  703. 
Lynch  v.  Knight,  1388. 
Lynch  V.  Livingston,  503. 
LjTQch  V.  Lynch,  1154. 
Lynch  v.  Onondaga  Salt  Co.,  659. 
Lynde  v.  Budd,  304,  305,  314. 
Lynde  v.  Hough,  584,  714. 
Lynde  v.  McCrezon,  331. 
Lynde  v.  McGregor,  318,  331. 
Lynde  v.  Thompson,  1054, 1059. 


Lyndon  V.  Stanbridge,  503. 

Lynes  v.  Hayden,  359,  360. 

Lynn  v.  Burgoyne,  374. 

Lynn's  Appeal,  138. 

Lyon  V.  Jerome,  374. 

Lyon  V.  Miller,  634. 

Lyon  V.  Eeed.  1154,  1158,  1169. 

Lyon  V  Tomkies,  1337. 

Lyon  V.  Weldon,  1333. 

Lyster  v.  Brown,  1815. 

Lyter  v.  Goldwin,  364,  1360. 

Lytle  V.  Lytle,  134. 

Maberley  v.  Maberley,  339,  243. 

Mabie  v.  Mattison,  539.  544. 

Macbryde  v.  Weekes,  373. 

Macdonnel  v.  Welden.  603. 

Machell  v.  Durton,  735. 

Macintosh  v.  Midland  Co.  E.  Co., 

688,  1057. 
Macintosh  v.  Trotter,  1343,  1364. 
Mack  V.  Patchin,  691, 779,  897, 1110. 
Mack  V.  Eoek,  1397. 
Mack  V.  Witzler,  353,  355. 
Maekay  v.  Bloodgood,  438. 
Mackayv.  McKerth,  89, '747,  944. 
MacKeUar  v.  Sigler,  1170. 
Mackerbm  v.  Whitcroft,  1095. 
Mackey  v.  Proctor,  198. 
Mackhem  v.  Whitcroft,  1139. 
Mackubin  v.  Wheetcraft,  1038. 
Maclean  v.  Dunn,  376,  355. 
Macomber  v.  Godfrey,  537. 
Macy  V.  Whaling  Ins.  Co.,  640. 
McAdro  V.  CaUum,  931. 
McAfee  v.  Ferguson,  318. 
McAlpin  V.  Woodruff,  1103. 
McAlpine  V.  Powell,  841,  860, 1339. 
McAlpine  v.  Swift,  946. 
McAithur  V.  Lowe,  176. 
McBean  v.  Morrison,  371. 
McBride  v.  Daniels,  934. 
McCaleb  v.  Pralat,  436. 
McCallamv.  Hutchinson,  866, 1383. 
McCahnont  v.  Whittaker,  554. 
McCamont  v.  Patterson,  446. 
McCampbell  v.  McCampbell,   137. 
McCarthy  v.  New  York  Co.  Savings 

Bk.,  826,  1339. 
McCarty  v.  Ely,  1131,  1134. 
McCarty  v.  Kyle,  861. 
McCarty  v.  Syracuse,  843. 
McCIain  v.  Doe.  154. 
McClenahan  v.  New  York,  1340. 
McClehg's  Appeal,  917. 
McClintock  v.  Cowen.  390. 
McClintock  v.  Cummins,  383. 
McClintock  V.  Graham,  1331. 
iVlcCloskey  v.  Miller,  1339. 
McClung  V.  Price,  1136. 
McClurev.  Calclough,  443,  448. 
MoConnell  V.  Bowdry,  13, 493, 1383. 
McCord  V.  Ochiltree,  317. 
McCormic  v.  Leggett,  301. 


1468 


Table  of  Cases. 


McCormick  v.  Caswell,  1038. 
McCormick  v.  Stowell,  725,  898. 
McCormick  v.  Young,  734. 
McCracken  v.  HaU,  1242. 
McCrancy  v.  Eansom,  490. 
MoCrary  v.  Foster,  219. 
McCravey  v.  Eemson,  1384. 
McCreary  v.  Marstpn,  500. 
McCreavy  v.  Eoss,  175. 
McCrelish  v.  Churchman,  587,  683. 
McCuUough  V.  Endlay,  446. 
McCullough  V.  Good,  1318. 
McCuUough  V.  Irvine,  974,  983. 
McCullough  V.  WaU,  530. 
McDaniel  v.  CaUan,  1013. 
McDaniel  v.  Hughes,  1337. 
McDaniel  v.  Moody,  1222. 
McDavid  v.  Wood,  1285. 
McDevitt  V.  Sullivan,  1385. 
McDonald  v.  Askeny,  553. 
McDonald  v.  Heylin,  139. 
McDonald  v.  King,  241. 
McDonald  v.  Lindhall,  515. 
McDowell  V.  Goldsmith,  336. 
McDowell  V.  Simpson,  50. 
McEldeiy  v.  Flanagan,  11, 1098. 
McEwen  v.  Lewis,  400. 
McFadden  v.  Hawley,  166. 
McFadden  v.  McCann,  1143. 
McFadden  v.  Vincent,  229. 
McFarlan  v.  Watson,  731. 
McFarland  v.  Chase,  56. 
McFarlane  v.  Williams,  595. 
MoGarr  v.  Marshal,  301. 
McGarrell  v.  Murphy,  169, 173. 
McGarry  v.  Hastings.  773. 
McGee  v.  Gibson,  47,  48,  75. 
McGill  V.  Woodward,  203. 
McGlosham  v.  Talmadge,  693, 1339. 
McGlynn  v.  Brock,  1032,  1174. 
McGlynn  v.  Moore,  1393. 
McGrath  v.  Barton,  331,  333. 
McGregor  v.  Board  of  Education, 

803. 
McGregor  v.  Brown,  974,  980,  983. 
McGregor  v.  Montgomery,  624. 
McGregor  v.  Eawle,  947. 
McGuire  v.  Grant,  560,  563,  568. 
McGurrigle  v.  Blake,  1335. 
McIUdowny  v.  WiUiams,  489. 
Mcintosh  V.  McLawn,  809, 813, 826. 
Mclntyre  v.  Park,  440. 
Molntyre  v.  Patton,  489,  1383. 
McKay  v.  Simpson,  369. 
McKee  v.  Angelbrodt,  14,  744. 
McKeebin  v.  Whitcroft,  761. 
McKenzie  v.   FarreU,   1083,   1158, 

1166. 
McKenzie  v.  Lexington,  1153, 1183. 
McKenzie  v.  McLeod,  988. 
McKenna  v.  Hammond,  1335. 
MoKeon  v.  Whitney,  14,  1137. 
McKesson  v.  MendenhaU,  1069. 


McKey  v.  Welch,  170. 
McKibbin  v.  Brown,  360. 
McKildon  v.  Durracott,  455,  1393. 
MoKing  v.  Mumf  ord,  44. 
McKmn  v.  Mason,  354,  257,  1235. 
McKinnel  v.  Eobinson,  1345. 
McKinney  v.  Eeader,  1153,  1168. 
McKinney  v.  Ehoades,  444. 
McKircher  v.  Hawley,  254. 
McKissack  v.  BuUington,  5,  8,  14. 
McKnight  v.  Eatchff,  471. 
McLachlan  v.  McLachlan,  583. 
McLaren  v.  Spalding,  1098. 
McLaughlin  v.  Bishop,  629. 
McLaughlin  v.  Craig,  1115. 
McLean  v.  Barton,  236, 
McLean  v.  Eockey,  149. 
McLeish  v.  Tate,  1307,  1317. 
McLeod  V.  Jones,  475. 
McLevitt  V.  Sullivan,  497. 
McMann  v.  Anteureith,  1139,  1336. 
McManus  v.  Carmichael,  539,  533. 
McManus  v.  Cassidy,  955. 
M'Martin  v.  Hannay,  861. 
McMenna  v.  Hammond,  1339. 
McMenty  v.  Frank,  267. 
McMillan  v.  Eichards,  345,  346. 
McMillan  v.  Bobbins,  968. 
McMUlan  V.  Solomon,  814, 883, 1033. 
McMillen  v.  Parkell,  624. 
McMinn  v.  BliBS,  1375,  1380. 
McMorris  v.  Crawford,  381. 
McMurphy  v.  Minat,  668, 734, 1033. 
McMurtie  v.  Bennett,  358,  360. 
McNab  V.  Young,  463. 
McNainy  v.  Hicks,  1101. 
McNamara  V.  Vincent,  895, 898, 900. 
McNeal  v.  Emerson,  475. 
MeNeil  v.  Kendall,  145,  731. 
McPherson  v.  Atlantic,  &c.,  956. 
McQuester  v.  Maugher,  1039. 
McQuigley  v.  Morton,  1034. 
McEae   v.    National,    &c..   Bank, 

1334. 
McWhorter  McMahan,  358,  361. 
Maddook  v.  MuUett,  453,  480. 
Maddox  v.  McQueen,  360. 
Maddox  v.  Simmons,  338. 
Madely  v.  Booth,  368,  748. 
Maers  v.  Wait,  978,  981. 
Magee  v.  Fisher,  1085. 
Magee  v.  Welsh,  198. 
Maggert  v.  Hausberger,  660,  819. 
Maggott  V.  Hemsberger,  811. 
Magill  V.  Hinsdale,  373,  1302, 1387. 
MagiU  V.  Hotston,  1065. 
Magnay  v.  Edwards,  574,  1334. 
Magnolia  v.  Marshall,  530. 
Magor  V.  Chadwick,  541,  555. 
Magrane  v.  Archbold,  934. 
Magrath  v.  Muskerry,  946. 
Magruder  v.  Peter,  210. 
Mahew  v.  Hardesty,  659. 


Table  of  Oases. 


1469 


Mahoney  v.  Atlantic,  &c.,  1283. 

Maier  v.  Homan,  917. 

Main  v.  Davis,  14. 

Main  v.  Feathers,  674,  1030. 

Main  v.  Schwarzwalder,  1223. 

Main  v.  Weathers,  1034. 

Maine  v.  Guischin,  217. 

Maine  v.  Homan,  918. 

Main's  Case,  807,  809,  943. 

Mairs  v.  Sparks,  685. 

Maitland  v.  Maokinnon,  416,  431. 

Maitland  v.  Wilcox,  1330,  1382. 

Major  V.  Grigg,  774. 

Major  V.  Selisbury,  500. 

Makin  v.  Wilkinson,  829,  860. 

Mallam  v.  Arden,  1039. 

Mallan  v.  May,  649.  917,  918. 

MaUey  v.  Thalheimer,  877,  913. 

Mallory  v.  Stodder,  445. 

Mallory's  Case,  1048. 

Malin  v.  Malin,  460. 

Malone's  Case,  603. 

Malony  v.  Kernan,  380. 

Manby  v.  Scott,  317. 

Manchester  v.  Doddridge,  18,  46, 

57. 
Manchester  College   v.    TraflEord, 

613. 
Mandeville  v.  Solomon,  1303. 
Manget  v.  Lightower,  734. 
Manlove  v.  Bale,  950. 
Mann  v.  Bremer,  1838. 
Mann  v.  Lovejoy,  43,  50,  93,  456. 
Mann  v.  Nunn,  505. 
Mann  v.  Walters,  119,  120. 
Manners  v.  Mizam,  130. 
Manning  v.  Brown,  683. 
Manning  v.  Deuer,  115. 
Manning  v.  Flight,  666. 
Manning  v.  Lovejoy,  18,  25,  100. 
Manning  v.  Lunn,  960. 
Manning's  Case,  225. 
Mann's  Appeal,  219,  224. 
Mansel  v.  Norton,  674, 1362. 
Manaell  v.  O'Brien,  950. 
Manser  v.  Dix,  1040. 
Mansfield  v.  Blackburn,  1232, 1247. 
Mansfield  v.  Watson,  331. 
Mansory  v.  U.  S.  Bank,  349,  353. 
Mantle  v.  Wallington,  174, 175. 
Mantz  V.  Goring,  797,  798.  900. 
Manfg.  Co.  v.  Gleason,  1333. 
Manville  v.  Gay,  759. 
Maples  V.  Milton,  1223,  1249. 
Mapp  V.  PhiUips,  269. 
Marable  v.  Jordan,  318. 
Marble  v.  Scott,  970. 
March  v.  Brace,  669. 
March  v.  McCoy,  1336. 
Marcly  v.  Shultz,  548,  549. 
Marcy  v.  Darling,  469. 
MarfeU  v.  SouQi  Wales  R.    Co., 

1006. 


Marghy  v.  Haner,  335. 
Margrave  v.  Archbold,  243. 
Mariner  v.  Burton,  1337. 
Mariner  v.  Crocker,  729. 
Mariner'v.  Schultz,  530. 
Mark  v.  Bent,  108. 
Markby  Re,  1093. 
Marker  v.  Kendiick,  992. 
Markham  v.  Gonaston,  459. 
Markham  v.  Howell,  388. 
Markland  v.  Crump,  181,  674,  697. 
Marks  v.  Bryan,  1274. 
Marks  v.  Ryan,  1230. 
Marks  v.  SeweU,  170. 
Marie  v.  Flake,  1353. 
Marlow  v.  Wiggins,  440,  1356. 
Marquart  v.  La  Farge,  30. 
Marquette  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Harlow,  1073, 

1830. 
Marquis  v.  Bute  v.  Guest,  348. 
Marquissee  v.  Ormston,  1318. 
Marriatt  v.  Faschal's  Case,  195. 
Man-iott  v.  Cotton,  794,  807,  895. 
Marriott  v.  Edwards,  453, 480, 1205. 
Marriott  v.  Stanley,  1301. 
Marrow  v.  Turpin,  666. 
Marsack  v.  Read,  120. 
Marsan  v.  French,  1282. 
Marseilles  v.  Kerr,  1176. 
Marsh  v.  Brace,  666,  669. 
Marsh  v.  Bruce,  733. 
Marsh  v.  Curteys,  1199. 
Marsh  v.  HoUey,  171. 
MarshaU  v.  Cohen,  848,  851,  1283. 
Marshall  v.  CoUett,  365. 
Marshall  v.  Craig,  643. 
Marshall  v.  Giles,  1306. 
MarshaU  v.  Lloyd,  1329. 
Marshall  v.  Lynn,  353. 
Marshall  v.  MiUs,  504. 
Marshall  v.  Queensborough,  375. 
Marshall  v.  Trumbull,  171,  514, 573. 
Marston  v.  Humphrey,  355. 
Martin  v.  Baker,  181,  674,  677,  679. 
Martin  v.  Bigelow,  543,  553. 
Martin  v.  Black,  1315. 
Martin  v.  Blanchett,  476. 
Martin  v.  Bliss,  533,  535. 
Martin  v.  Blyth,  335. 
Martin  v.  Coutts,  110. 
Martin  v.  Crompe,  173,  175,  176. 
Martin  v.  Gilham,  696,  892,  992. 
Martin  v.  Hill,  1067. 
Martin  v.  HoUey,  359,  894. 
Martin  v.  Martin,  218,  772,  1028. 
Martin  v.  Mayo,  302. 
Martin  v.  Mitchell,  354. 
Martin  v.  O'Connor,  178,  179,  728. 
Martin  v.  Pinckney,  746. 
Martin  v.  Pycroft,  353,  368. 
Martin  v.  Roe,  1233,  1264. 
Martin  v.  Smith,  100. 
Martin  v.  Sterling,  615. 


14T0 


Table  of  Cases. 


Martin  v.  Thornton,  1337. 

Martin  v.  WaddeU,  537. 

Martin  v.  Washburne,  902. 

Martia  v.  Watts,  13,  74,  106,  718. 

Martin  v.  Weston,  253. 

Martineau  v.  May,  626. 

Martyn  v.  Clue,  671,  738,  1351. 

Martyn  v.  WiUiams,  731,  738,  744. 

Martyr  v.  Bradley,  1250,  1367. 

Marwick  v.  Andrews,  713. 

Marwood  v.  Waters,  44,  45,  1338. 

Marx  V.  Marx,  247. 

Maryon  v.  Carter,  1099. 

Mary's  v.  Anderson,  153,  154. 

Mascal's  Case,  817. 

Masher  v.  Foundling  Hospital,  710. 

Maslin  v.  Roe,  727,  745. 

Mason  v.  Breslin,  21. 

Mason  v.  Corder,  720. 

Mason  v.  Dease,  237. 

Mason  v.  Fenn,  1344. 

Mason  v.  Hanes,  1395. 

Mason  v.  Hill,  537,  538,  541,  557. 

Mason  v.  Holt,  1296. 

Mason  v.  Moyers,  1371. 

Mason  v.  Stiles,  1300. 

Maspn  V.  Treadway,  1156. 

Ma^bn  v.  White,  399. 

Mass.  Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  Wilson,  257, 

359. 
Massey  v.  Gadyer,  563. 
Massey  v.  GoodaU,  891,  925. 
Massie  v.  Long,  173. 
Massure  v.  Noble,  486. 
Mastem  v.  Gibbs,  177. 
Master,  &c. ,  of  Sussex,  Sec,  College 

V.  Davenport,  195. 
Masters  v.  Miller,  459,  460. 
Masters  v.  Pollie,  1010. 
Maston  v.  Gladwin,  701. 
Masury  v.  Southworth,  703,  724. 
Mather  v.  Fraser,  1219. 
Mather  v.  Munster,  450. 
Mathias  v.  Mesnard,  1312. 
Mathis  V.  Mathis,  460. 
Matthews  v.  Coalter,  461,  462. 
Matthews  y.  Goodday,  745. 
Matthews  v.  Jackson,  1149,  1360. 
Matthews  v.  Mayor,  &c. ,  189. 
Matthews  v.  Mori-is,  1039. 
Matthews  v.  Sawell,  1168,  1172. 
Matthews  v.  Smart,  453,  480,  1207. 
Matthews  v.  Stone,  1311. 
Matthews  v.  Tobenor,  1175. 
Matthews  v.  Tohener,  1120. 
Matthews  v.  Ward,  449. 
Matthewson  v.  Thompson,  92. 
Matthewson's  Case.  176. 
Matter  of  Anderson,  341. 
Matter  of  Andi-ews,  213. 
Matter  of  Celina,  310. 
Matter  of  College  Street,  957,  660. 
Matter  of  Dodge,  309. 


Matter  of  Hunter,  360. 
Matter  of  Mayor,  966. 
Matter  of  Mayor  of  New  York,  957, 
Matter  of  Place,  241. 
Matter  of  State,  140. 
Mattock  V.  Kinglake,  683. 
Mattoon  v.  Munroe,  1311. 
Mattox  V.  Hightshur,  170. 
Matts  v.  Hawkins,  1004. 
Matures  v.  Westwood,  738. 
Maule  V.  Ashmead,  691,  761. 
Maundrell,  Ex  parte,  1363. 
Maverick  v.  Gibbs,  187. 
Mayville  v.  Gay,  1118. 
Maid  V.  Ulyatt,  997. 
Maxwell,  Re,  1093,  1094. 
MaxweU  v.  Griswold,  333. 
Maxwell  v.  Port  Tobacco,  &c.,  Co. 

363. 
Maxwell  v.  Ward,  938,  946,  947. 
May  V.  Caldin,  310. 
May  V.  Drain,  1137. 
May  V.  Rice,  1138. 
Maybee  v.  Sniffen,  461,  463. 
Mayer  v.  Morgan,  269. 
Mayer  v.  Moller,  788. 
Mayer  v.  MuUer,  625,  692. 
Mayfield  v.  Wadsley,  1368. 
Mayford  v.  Richardson,  1296 
Mayhew  v.  Asby,  1000. 
Mayhew  v.  Hardesty,  729. 
Mayhew  v.  Suttle,  75,  76. 
Mayhew's  Case,  160. 
Mayhur  v.  Hardesty,  708. 
Maynard  v.  Eshler,  424. 
Maynard  v.  Maynard,  444. 
Mayo  V.  Buckhurst,  734,  740.  . 
Mayo  V.  Fletcher,  249,  255, 357. 
Mayo  V.  Shattuck,  260. 
Mayor  v.  Bailey,  539. 
Mayor  v.  Corlies,  1301. 
Mayor  v.  Lord,  1801. 
Mayor  v.  Richardson,  527. 
Mayor  v.  Tyler,  1347. 
Mayor  of  London  v.  Tench,  296. 
Mayor  of  Stafford  v.  Bolton,  195. 
Mayor  of  Stafford  v.  TiU,  7,  193, 

193. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Blamire,  194,  195. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Brooke,  528. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Cashman,  964. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Carlton,  1061. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Hedger,  998,  994. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Lawton,  189. 
Mayor,   &c.,   v.   Mabie,   758,    774, 

1067. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Parker,  1064. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Pattison,  669,  679, 

740. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Tyler,  35,  36,  107. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  White,  1115,  1137. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Whitt,  1098. 
Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Wood,  1068. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1471 


Meade  v.  Senthall,  390. 
Meadville  v.  Boush.  6. 
Means  v.  Church,  579,  055. 
Mebane  v.  Yansey,  219. 
Mechler  v.    Foundhng    Hospital, 

910,  912. 
Mechelen  v.  Wallace,  128, 587, 1348. 
Mecum  t.  Peoria,  &c.,  R.  E.  Co., 

586,  683. 
Mediaa  v.  Norman,  855. 
Medina  ^r.  Poison,  46,  1347. 
MedUcott  ^.  O'Donnell,  381,  282. 
Medlin  v.  Platte,  460. 
Medway,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Adams,  194. 
Meduin  v.  Sandham,  348. 
Meech  v.  Fowler,  448. 
Meehan  v.  Forrester,  269, 
Meek  v.  Atkinson,  333. 
Meek  v.  Carter,  704. 
Meeker  v.  Meeker,  358, 
Meeks  v.  Bowerman,  789,  870, 1112. 
Meeks  v.  Hahn,  239. 
Mehans  v.  Patrick,  547. 
Meig's  Appeal,  1224. 
Mellen  v.  Mon-01,  826,  864,  1289. 
Mellett  V.  Parker.  444. 
MelUng  V.  Leak,  46,  70. 
Mellons  v.  May,  613,  1167. 
Mellor  V.  Watkins,  1183. 
Melvin  v.  Whiting,  527. 
Memphis  E.  E.  Co.  v.  Hicks,  536. 
Mendel  v.  Friek,  833. 
Meni  v.  Eathbone,  1209,  1212. 
Monough's  Appeal,  1026. 
Mercer  v.  Irving,  1050,  1057. 
Merceron  v.  Dowson,  743,  744. 
Merchant's  F.   Ins.  Co.  v.  Grant, 

204. 
Merchant's  Ins.  Co.  v.  Merzange, 

728. 
Meres  v.  Ansell,  366,  634,  653. 
Meriton  v.  Coombes,  1358. 
Merony  v.  Ferguson,  900. 
Merrick  v.   Burlington,  &c.,  Co., 

189,  193. 
Merrifleld  v.  Cudleigh,  709. 
Merrifleld  v.  Lombard,  541. 
Merrill  v.  Forbes,  1375, 1380. 
Merrill  v.  Frame,  657,  765,  887. 
MerriU  v.  Goodwin,  472. 
MerriU  v.  Merrill,  1055. 
Merritt  v.  BrinkerhofE,  537,  544. 
Merritt  v.  Emery,  583,  584. 
Merritt  v.  Judd,  1330,  1264. 
Merritt  v.  Lambert,  194. 
Merritt  v.  Parker,  538,  540. 
Merritt  v.  Wright,  275. 
Mertz  V.  Dorney,  548,  550,  551. 
Messenger  v.  Armstrong,  115, 1360. 
Messenf  V.  Eeynolds,  691,  760,  887. 
Messero  r.  Oestreich,  779. 
Metrop.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Brown,  1250. 
Metrop.  Ass.  v.  Patch,  1578. 


Metz  V.  Delorme,  551. 
Metz  V.  Dorney,  547. 
Meyer  v.  Smith,  1171. 
Meyrick  v.  Meyrick,  416. 
Michael  v.  Mills,  783. 
Michaels  v.  Bacon,  1344. 
Michel  V.  Dunton,  533. 
Michigan  Ins.  Co.  v.  Brown,  357. 
Mickie  v.  Wood,  137. 
Mickles  v.  MUes,  1030. 
Micklethwaite   v.    Micklethwaite, 

991. 
Middlebrook  v.  Corwin,  67,  1253, 

1302. 
Middlemore  v.  Goodale,  181,  677, 

737. 
Middleton  v.  Findla,  440. 
Middleton  v.  Flat  Eiver  Booming 

Co.,  530,  536. 
Middleton  v.  Greenwood,  368. 
Middleton  v.  Magnay,  369. 
Mddleton  v.  Page,  530. 
Middleton  v.  Pritchard,  415,  530. 
Midgeley  v.  Lovelace,  173, 
Midgett  V.  Brooks,  643, 
Midland  E.  Co.  app.,  1006. 
Midlothean  v.  Finney,  63?, 
MUbourne  v,  Simpson,  502. 
Milburn  v.  Edgar,  57. 
Miles  V,  Elkin,  1330,  1333,  1337, 
MUes  V.  Lingerman,  198,  205, 
Miles  V.  Miles,  138,  486. 
Milford  V.  Holbrook,  845, 
Milford,  &c,,  Co.  v.  Brush,  194, 
Milkman  v.  Ordway,  720, 
MiU  V.  White,  374. 
Millan  v.  Kephart,  116,  119. 
Millard  v.WiUard,  1035. 
Miller  v.  Auburn,! &c.,  E,  R.  Co,, 

469, 
Miller  v.  Baker,  95, 
MUler  V.  Bear,  373. 
Miller  v.  Blinder,  437. 
Miller  v.  Bonsadon,  494. 
MiUer  v.  Bonsandell,  1386. 
Miller  V.  Buchanan,  1073. 
MiUer  v.  CampbeU,  359. 
Miller  v.  Oottin,  359. 
Miller  v.  Craig,  239, 
Miller  v.  Green,  504. 
MiUer  v.  Havens,  1198, 
MiUer  v,  Lang,  1386. 
Miller  v.  Lapham,  540,  553, 
MiUer  v,  Laubach,  849. 
MiUer  v.  McBrian,  490, 1384, 
Miller  v,  McBrier,  1385. 
MiUer  v,  Maden,  115, 
MiUer  v,   Maynewaring,   25,   160, 

606. 
Miller  v.  Miller,  168. 
Miller  v.  Morris,  813. 
MUler  V.  Myers,  1357. 
MiUer  v.  Pratt,  571,  573. 


U12 


Table  of  Cases. 


Miller  v.  Scammon,  335. 

Miller  v.  Shields,  787,  788. 

Miller  v.  State,  470. 

MOler  V.  Stewart,  457. 

MUler  V.  Travers,  631. 

MiUer  v.  Whittier,  381. 

Miller  v.  Williams,  493,  497. 

Millership  v.  Brookes,  1337. 

MillhaUer  v.  Jones,  493. 

Millhouse  v.  Patrick,  490,  494. 

Milliken  v.  Thorndyke,  759. 

Millin  V.  Fawdry,  474. 

Milling  V.  Beeker,  1155. 

Millner  v.  Robinson,  169. 

Mills  V.  Auriol,  666, 1180. 

Mills  V.  Baehr,  1098. 

Mills  V.  Catlin,  504,  651,  653. 

Mills  V.  Cotton,  579. 

Mills  V.  E.  London  Union,  894,  898. 

Miller  v.  Elliott,  1054. 

MUls  V.  Goff,  105. 

Mills  V.  Merryman,  1071. 

Mills  V.  Starr,  457. 

Milner  v.  GUmour,  538,  539. 

Milnes  v.  Branch,  181. 

Milnes  v.  Grey,  369. 

Milsinton  v.  Mulgrave,  314. 

Milton  V.  Hayden,  495,  1385,  1386. 

Milward  v.  CaflSn,  959. 

Milward  v.  Earl  of  Thanet,  373. 

Minard  v.  Mead,  354. 

Miner  v.  Beekman,  353. 

Miner's  Bank  v.  Heilner,  1017, 1033. 

Miners,  Royal  Societies  v.  Magnay, 

1179. 
Mining  Co.  v.  Bank,  369. 
Minor  v.  Sharon,  508,  834,  1393. 
MinshaU  v.  Lloyd,  1319,  1340. 
Minshull  v.   Oakes,  674,  678,  734, 

738. 
Minturn  v.BayUss,  359. 
Mirick  v.  Hoppin,  347. 
Mitcalfe  v.  "Westaway,  575.  576. 
Mitchell  V.  BiUingsby,  1333,  1349. 
Mitchell  V.  Gates,  337. 
Mitchell  V.  Hazen,  648. 
Mitchell  T.  Kingman,  338. 
Mitchell  V.  Land  Co.,  191. 
Mitchell  V.  Mayor,  569. 
Mitchell  V.  Nelson,  943. 
Mitchell  T.  Nicholson,  365. 
Mitchell  V.  Parks,  539,  547. 
Mitchell  V.  Pendleton,  30,  1330. 
Mitchell  V.  Read,  381. 
Mitchell  V.  Reed,  950,  953. 
Mitchell  V.  Reynolds,  584,  919. 
Mitchell  V.  Robertson,  450. 
Mitchell  V.  Ryan,  444. 
Mitchell  V.  Stevens,  629. 
Mitchell  V.  Steward,  766,  767,  995. 
Mitchell  V.  Warner,  181,  669,  773, 

970. 
Mitchinson  v.  Carter,  715,  716,  719. 


Mizell  V.  Simmons,  400,  631. 
Mizner  v.  Monroe,  67,  69,  74. 
Moberly  v.  Peek,  455. 
Mobile  V.  Dargan,  958. 
Moderly  v.  Booth,  184. 
Medlen  v.  Snowball,  380. 
Moens  v.  Heyworth,  277. 
Moflatt  V.  Smith,  1031,  1131,  1277. 
Moffat  V.  Strong,  497,  1115.1386. 
Mohana  v.  Blunt,  375,  377,  378. 
Mohr  V.  Tiilip,  339. 
Molder  v.  Carondelet,  691. 
Molineux  v.  Molineux,  1309. 
Mollett  V.  Brayne,  1168. 
Molony  v.  Kearnan,  380. 
Molton  V.  Camroux,  339. 
Monok  V.  Geekie,  34,  90,  610,  1147. 
Mones  V.  Huish,  230. 
Money  v.  Darling,  473. 
Monk  V.  Cooper,  810,  813,  882,  835. 
Monk  V.  Noyes,  799,  800. 

800. 
Montague  v.  Dent,  1333. 
Montague  v.  Gay,  738,  1045,  1303. 
Montague  V.  Wullaham,  1097, 1186 
Montague's  Case,  454. 
Montgomery  v.  Crai^,  69,  1193. 
Montgomery  v.  Hamilton  Co.,  33. 
Montgomery  v.  Johnson,  899. 
Montgomery  v.  Milliken,  341. 
Montgomery's  Case,  487. 
Moody  V.  McClelland,  560. 
Moody  V.  Matthews,  381,  950. 
Mooney  v.  Coolidge,  576. 
Mooney  v.  Olsen,  1338. 
Moore  v.  Basely,  33. 
Moore  v.  Beasley,  107,  489,  1883. 
Moore  v.  Campbell,  352. 
Moore  v.  Clark,  819,  1007. 
Moore  v.  Dimond,  391. 
Moore  v.  Drmkwater,  1310,  1318. 
Moore  v.  Foley,  933,  938,  936. 
Moore  v.  Fursden,  175. 
Moore  v.  Gholson,  374. 
Moore  v.  Goedel,  847,  853,  1301. 
Moore  v.  GrifSn,  503,  654. 
Moore  v.  Harvey,  1339. 
Moore  v.  Jourdan,  446. 
Moore  v.  Lawder,  34,  25,  59,  117. 
Moore  v.  Lesem,  436,  487. 
Moore  v.  Mason,  29,  1396. 
Moore  v.  Piatt  Co.,  1055,  1059. 
Moore  v.  Plymouth,  579,  1205. 
Moore  v.  Sanborne,  580,  584,  535. 
Moore  v.  Sauel,  583. 
Moore  v.  Smith,  1226,  1233. 
Moore  v.  Titman,  347,  363. 
Moore  v.  Townshend,  806. 
Moore  v.  Webb,  538. 
Moore  v.  Webber,  790,  819,  1098, 

1110. 
Moorecroft  v.  Meux,  1314. 
Moore's  Case,  716. 


Table  op  Cases. 


1473 


Moores  v.  Choat,  735,  745,  817. 
Moores  v.  Wait,  978. 
Mordant  v.  Nilee,  1407. 
More  V.  Bonet,  917. 
Morecraft  v.  Meux,  686,  713,  893. 
Morehead  v.  Watkins,  110. 
Morehouse  v.  Yeager,  235. 
Morey  v.  Homan,  655. 
Morey  v.  MeG-uire,  249. 
Morgan  v.  Abergavenny,  1312. 
Morgan  v.  Elam,  463. 
Morgan  y.  Griffith,  505,  606. 
Morgan  v.  Hunt,  758,  771. 
Morgan  v.  King,  529,  530,  534. 
Morgan  v.  Morgan,  447. 
Morgan  v.  Morse,  801. 
Morgan  v.  Pike,  669. 
Morgan  v.  Powell,  333,  334. 
Morgan  v.  Reading,  530. 
Morgan  v.  Rhodes,  953. 
Morgan  v.  Slaughter,  709. 
Morgan  v.  Smith,  1084,  1086. 
Morgan  v.  Smyth,  1175. 
Morgan  v.  United  States,  1248. 
Morgan  v.  Varick,  1892. 
Morkley  v.  Swartzlander,  442. 
Morlat  V.  Lyons,  270,  862. 
Morley  v.  Tincombe,  1310. 
Moroney  v.  Ferguson,  898. 
Morphett  v.  Jones,  353,  374,  375, 

377. 
Morrell  v.  Peck,  874. 
Morrill  v.  Otis,  460. 
Morr,is  v.  Antrobus,  1023. 
Morris  v.  Bacon,  246. 
Morris  v.  Barry,  163. 
Morris  v.  Clay,  229. 
Morris  v.  Edgington,  415,  427,  773. 
Morris  v.  Harris,  694,  699. 
Morris  v.  Morris,  991. 
Morris  v.  Niles,  50. 
Morris  v.  Smith,  914. 
Morris  v.  Tillson,  785,  1021,  1101. 
Morris  v.  Vanderen,  458. 
Morrison  v.  Bowman,  272. 
Morrison  v.  Chadwick,  887,  1096, 

1167. 
Morrison  v.  Coleman,  918. 
Morrison  v.  ColUery  Co.,  1000. 
Morrison  v.  Kelly,  444. 
Morrison  v.  Marquardt,  422,  423, 

424. 
Morrison  v.  Peay,  861,  378. 
Morrison  v.  Robinson,  1390. 
Morrison  v.  Rossignole,  932. 
Morrison  v.  Shattuck,  446. 
Morse  v.  Elendorf,  1118. 
Morse  v.  Garner,  670. 
Morse  v.  Maddock,  834. 
Morse  v.  Morse,  918. 
Morse  v.  Roberts,  493,  1383. 
Mortag  V.  Lum,  461. 
Mortal  V.  Lyons,  374,  379. 


Mortimer  v.  Brunner,  1166,  1111, 

1136. 
Mortimer's  Case,  598. 
Morton  v.  Woods,  69, 156,  487, 1808. 
Mosby  V.  Leeds,  1818. 
Mosby  V.  Wall,  269,  366. 
Moseley  v.  Allen,  1246. 
Moseley  v.  Virgin,  371,  894. 
Mosely  v.  Motteux,  503. 
Mosher  v.  Riding,  138. 
Moshier  v.  Reding,  5,  8,  116,  1384. 
Mosley  V.  Attenborough,  889, 1271. 
Mosley  v.  Marshall,  140. 
Moss  V.  Barton,  153,  154. 
Moss  V.   GalUmore,   70,  259,  484. 

726. 
Moss  V.  Sheldon,  597. 
Moss  V.  Worthing,  267. 
Motes  V.  Bates,  428. 
Mott  V.  Hick,  189. 
Mott  V.  Palmer,  1250. 
Moule  V.  Garrett,  752. 
Moulton  V.  Faught,  576. 
Moulton  V.  Libbey,  527. 
Moulton  V.  Norton,  1319. 
Mound's  Lease,  1036,  1037. 
Mountjoy's  Case,  466,  839,  1019. 
Mountney  v.  ColUer,  489. 
Mousley  v.  Ludlam,  l'&65,  1366. 
Moxey  v.  Bigwood,  362. 
Moxon  V.  Scott,  220. 
Moye  V.  Herndon,  458. 
Moye  V.  Tappan,  470. 
Moyer  v.  Mitchell,  924. 
Moyle  V.  Ewer,  65. 
Mucclestone  v.  Thomas,  685. 
Mulcarry  v.  Eyres,  712, 1192. 
Mule  V.  GaiTett,  751. 
Mulford  V.  LeFrance,  579,  655. 
Mulhallen  v.  Marum,  286. 
Mallam  v.  Ai-den,  1074. 
Mullen  V.  Rainear,  859. 
Mullen  V.  St  John,  868, 1284. 
Mullen  V.  Strickler,  422,  424. 
MuUen  v.  Brumer,  214. 
MuUer  v.  Vettel,  860. 
MuUins  V.  Calniess,  586,  682,  683. 
Mulpas  V.  Acklahd,  818. 
Mulvany  v.  Dillon,  950,  951. 
Mumford  v.  Brown,  788,  833,  1131. 
Mumford  v.  Gething,  918. 
Mumford  v.  Oxford,  1278. 
Mumford  v.  Whitney,  468,  470. 
Munceyv.  Dennis,  634,  889,  1365. 
Munch  V.  Cookerell,  315. 
Mundy  v.  Culver,  1053,  1054. 
Mundy  v.  Joliffe,  378. 
Municipality  v.  Curvell,  960. 
Municipality  No.  One  v.  N.  O.  331, 

342. 
Munifas  v.  Baker,  476. 
Munn  v.  Fabian,  374,  375, 
Munnv.  Worrell,  235. 


1474 


Table  of  Cases. 


Munroe  v.  Armstrong,  1197. 
Munson  v.  Baldwin,  527. 
Mjuasea  tt  Hmrgerftrd ,  533;  531". 
Munson  v.  'Washband,  200. 
Munson  v.  Wray,  380,  395. 
Muntz  V.  Goring,  880. 
Mui-chie  v.  Black,  560. 
Murdook  v.  GifiEord,  1227. 
Murdock  v.  Stickney,  531. 
Murdy  v.  Shultz,  550. 
Murgatroyd  v.  Eobinson,  538,  543. 
Murley  v.  McDermott,  1004. 
Murphy  v.  Minat,  744. 
Murphy  v.  Thomas,  239. 
Murray  v.  Armstrong,  109. 
Murray  v.  Barbe,  381. 
Murray  v.  Bridges,  1167. 
Murray  v.  Cherrington,  53. 
Murray  v.  Haraway,  709. 
Murray  v.  King,  1063. 
Murray  v.  Mace,  886. 
Murray  v.  Murray,  710. 
Murray  v.  Pennington,  1116. 
Murray  v.  Richards,  826,  853. 
Murray  v.  Shaw,  1170. 
Murray  v.  Stair,  448. 
Murray  v.  Waller,  840,  841. 
Murrell  v.   MHward,    1158,    1163, 

1173.       • 
Murrill  v.  Ireland,  447. 
Muscot  V.  Ballet,  776. 
Musgrave  v.  Cave,  523. 
Muskeny  v.  Sheeny,  296. 
Muskett  V.  Hill,  722. 
Musser  v.  Johnston,  437. 
Mussey  v.  Holt,  170,  463. 
Mussey  v.  Scott,  30,  439,  1218. 
Mustard  v.  Wahlford,  198. 
Mustiu  V.  Gladwin,  184,  748,  1214. 
Mut.  Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  U.   S.,  1096. 
Myer's  Appeal,  241. 
Myers  v.  Bums,  14,  741,  827.  1131. 
Myers  v.  Estell,  252. 
Myers  v.  Forbes,  359,  360. 
Myers  v.  Gemmel,  422,  423,  1132. 
Myers  v.  Hays,  1051, 1054. 
Myers  v.  Ladd,  399. 
Myers  v.  McBride,  394. 
Myers  v.  M^lcom.  989. 
Myers  v.  Mansfield,  1306. 
Myers  v.  White,  246,  257. 
Naederhouser  v.  State,  534,  535. 
Naish  V.  Tattook,  1334. 
Name  v.  Alexander,  1329. 
Nance  v.  Alexander,  20,  1330. 
Napier  v,  Bulwinkle,  423,  569, 
Napier  v.  DarUngton,  678. 
Nargett  v.  Nias,  1313,  1326. 
Nash  V.  Birch,  455,  633, 1214, 
Nash  V.  Gray,  1037. 
Nash  V.  Hermasella,  1055. 
Nash  V.  Hodges,  1054. 
Nash  V.  Lucas,  1319. 


Nash  V.  Palmer,  769,  775,  781, 

Nash  V.  Turner,  491.    • 

Nason  v.  Grants  46a 

Nathan  v.  Stem,  351. 

Nation  v.  Tozer,  18. 

Natonia,  &c.,  v.  Clarkin,  993. 

Naumberg  v.  Young,  396,  505,  833. 

Nave  V.  Barry,  811,  812,  904. 

Naylor  v.  Arnitt,  314. 

Naylor  v.  Collinge,  804,  1250. 

Neal  V.  Viney,  1269. 

Neale  v.  Mackenzie,  362,  452,  1119. 

Neale  v.  Ratcliflfe,  587, 684, 795, 883. 

Neale  v.  Wylie,  182,  829,  1277. 

Nearderhouser  v.  State,  530. 

Neate  v.  Harding,  484. 

Neave  v.  Avery,  999. 

Neave  v.  Moss,  488,  491. 

Nedriff  v.  Hogan,  1057. 

Needham  v,  AUifeon,  67,  1303. 

Neeve  v.  Moss,  22. 

Negro  Jerx-y  v.  Thompson,  229. 

Neidelt  v.  Wales,  785,  884. 

Neil  V.  Henry,  545. 

Neld  V.  Cooper,  600, 

Neller  v.  Hiatt,  969. 

Nellis  V.  Lathrop,  498. 

Nelson  v,  Booth,  266. 

Nelson  v.  Eaton,  201. 

Nelson  v.  Hagertown  Bank,  372. 

Nelson  v.  Liverpool  Brewery  Co., 

862,  1289. 
Nelson  v.  Ourn,  683. 
Nelson  v.  Thomnson,  1173. 
Nemelty  v.  Niiylor,  1126. 
Nesbit  V.  Meyer,  362,  373. 
Nesbit  V.  Nesbit,  669. 
Nesbitt  V.  Tredennick,  950. 
Nettleton  v.  Bilhngs,  648. 
Nettleton  v.  Sikes,  475. 
Nevins  v.  Dunlap,  1347. 
Newall  V.  Wright,  723,  1303. 
Newbald  v.  Brown,  984. 
Newbald  v.  Sadler,  473. 
Newberry  v.  Cowan,  1332. 
I^ewborough  v.  Walker,  779. 
Newburg  Petroleum  Co.  v.  Weare, 

740. 
Newby  v.  Jackson,  57. 
Newcombe  v.  Harvey,  1354. 
Newell  V.  Clark,  1313. 
Newell  V.  Mayberry,  457. 
NeweU  v.  Sa,nford,  28,  35,  43. 
Newlands  v.  Paynter,  330. 
Newlin  v.  Osborne,  448. 
Newly  V,  Vestal,  1339. 
Newman  v.  Anderson,  391. 
Newman  v.   Anderton,  131,  1033. 

1307. 
Newman  v.  Chapman,  446. 
Newman  v.  French,  1338. 
Newman  v.  Mackin,  491,  1384. 
Newman  v,  Butter,  713,  1386. 


Table  of  Cases. 


U15 


Newman  v.  Zachary,  1288. 

Newmarch  v.  Brandling,  391. 

New  Orleans  v.  Guillotte,  189. 

Newport  v.  Hardy,  1335,  1337. 

New  River  Co.  v.  Johnson,  558, 559. 

New  Salem  v.  Eagle  Mill,  1283. 

Newson  v.  Smythies,  684,  686,  924, 
1364. 

Newton  v.  AUin,  1139. 

Newton  v.  Bealen,  443. 

Newton  v.  Harland,  30,  1143,  8357. 

Newton  v.  Osborne,  648,  1030. 

Newton  v.  Eeardon,  175. 

Newton  v.  Wilmot,  580,  698,  777. 

Newton  v.  Wilson,  137,  1021. 

New  York  v.  Price,  625. 

N.  Y.  Dry  Docks  Co.  v.  Hicks.  450. 

N.  Y.  Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  St.  George's 
Church,  1197. 

N.  Y.  L.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Milnor,  515. 

Niblet  V.  Smith,  1326. 

Nioall  Y.  Burke,  396. 

Nichells  t.  Atherstone,  1169,  1170, 
1174. 

Nichol  V.  Alexander,  779,  971. 

Nicholas  v.  Chamberlain,  417,  430. 

Nicholas  v.  PuUin,  774. 

Nicholas  v.  Simtmds,  1371. 

Nicholas  v.  Williams,  47. 

NichoU  V.  McKing,  45. 

NichoUs  V.  Johnson,  458,  459. 

NichoUsv.  Mark,  589,  594,  1143. 

Nicholls  V.  NiehoUs,  443. 

NichoUs  V.  Stretton,  919. 

Nichols  V.  Dusenbury,  1069,  1096, 
1132. 

Nichols  V.  McKaey,  8. 

Nichols  V.  Smith,  170. 

Nichols  V.  Thomas,  229. 

Nicholson  v.  Munigle,  56,  1030. 

Nicholson  v.  Nicholson,  1093. 

Nicholson  v.Eose,  997. 

Nickells  v.  Atherstone,  1157,  1168. 

Nickerson  v.  PirreU,  1295. 

Nickols  V.  Marsland,  1290. 

NicoU  V.  Burke,  786. 

Nicoll  V.  N.Y.,  &c.,  E.  E.  Co.,  188. 

Nicolls  Y.  Saunders,  1044. 

Nightingale  v.  Lauson,  950. 

Nind  V.  MarshaU,  658. 

Niver  v.  Eossman,  1053. 

Nixon  Ex  parte.  927. 

Nixon  V.  Denham,  898. 

Nixon  V.  Freeman,  1319. 

Nixon  V.  Hyserant,  272. 

Nixon  V.  Potts,  174. 

Noah  V.  Amador,  487. 

Noah  V.  Shofford,  489. 

Noble  V.  King,  776. 

Noble  V.  Smith,  770. 

Noble  V.  Ward,  352. 

Noble  Y.  Warren,  1138, 

Noble's  Case,  839. 


Nobles  V.  Bates,  917,  918. 
Nobles  V.  McCarty,  9. 
Noel  V.  McCravy.  106,  1296. 
Noke  V.  Awder,  677,  738,  782. 
Noke's  Case,  693,  694,  774. 
Nokes  V.  Gibbon,  894. 
Nolton  V.  Western  E.  E.  Co.,  863, 
Noonan  y.  Orton,  947. 
Norbury  v.  Kitchen,  538,  539. 
Norcross  v.  James,  670. 
Norcross  v.  Norcross,  253. 
Norcross  v.  Thorns,  846,  876. 
Norfleet  v.  Cromwell,  830. 
Norfolk  V.  Hawke,  730,  907. 
Norris  v.  Garotry,  603. 
Norris  v.  Harrison,  1035,  1091. 
Norris  v.  Jackson,  370,  372. 
Norris  v.  LeNeve,  951. 
Norris  v.  Melvef,  454. 
Norris  v.  Vance,  304. 
North  V.  Nichols,  14. 
Northampton  Gas  Co.  v.  Parnell, 

669. 
Northcote  v.  Ambler,  715/ 
Nothcote  V.  Underbill,  669. 
Northfleet  v.  Cromwell.  671. 
N.  R.  Meadow  Co.  v.  Shrewsbury. 

&c.,461. 
Northrup  v.  Northrup,  587. 
N.  W.  Distilling  Co.  v.  Brant,  191, 
N.  W.  R.  R.  Co.  V.  McMichael,  208. 
Norman  v.  Fisher,  782. 
Norman  v.  Foster.  776. 
Norman  v.  Wells,  670,  671. 
Norman  v.  Wills,  340,  674. 
Norton  v.  Acland,  733. 
Norton  v.  Ackeane,  666,  667. 
Norton  v.  Harland,  30. 
Norton  v.  Schofleld,  541. 
Norton  v.  Turvil,  219. 
Norton  v.  Valentine,  538,  540. 
Norton  v.  Welsler,  408,  416,   504, 

634. 
Norton  v.  Woodruff,  624. 
Nerval  v.  Pascoe,  738. 
Norway  v.  Rowe,  993. 
Norway  Plains  Co.  v.  Bradley,  544, 

547. 
Norwich  v.  Hubbard,  253. 
Norwood  V.  Byrd,  639. 
Norwood  V.  Fairservice,  462. 
Norwood  V.  Kirby,  499. 
Nowell  V.  Wentworth,  112. 
Nowlan  v.  Trevor,  1096. 
Noyes  v.  Terry,  1226. 
Nunan  v.  Huderton,  138. 
Nunn  V.  Fabian,  377. 
Nunn  V.  Truscott,  373. 
Nunnery  v.  Cotton,  458. 
Nurse  v.  Seymour,  366. 
Nurstie  v.  liall,  667.       " 
Nute  V.  Nute,  446. 
Nutt  V.  Butler,  1368. 


1476 


Table  of  Cases. 


KuttaJl  V.  Staunton,  1314,  1317. 
Nutting  V.  Herbert,  637. 
Nutvell  V.  Tongue,  486. 
Oakapple  v.  Copous,  113. 
Oakes  v.  Oakes,  5. 
Oakley  v.  Monck,  107,  890. 
Oakley  v.  Stanley,  417. 
Oaks  V.  Oaks,  18. 
Oastler  v.  Henderson,  1175. 
Oates  V.  Frith,  1047,  1048. 
Obermyer  v.  NichoUs,  683. 
Obert  V.  Hammell,  336. 
O'Brien  V.  Briestenbach,  1345, 1346. 
O'Brien  v.  Capwell,  847,  1394. 
O'Brien  v.  Kustener,  1335. 
O'Callaghan  v.  Booth,  1375,  1380. 
O'ConneU  v.   MoGrath,  157,  1194. 
O'Conner  v.  Corbitt,  1338. 
O'Conner  v.  Kelly,  1038.  1041. 
O'Connor  v.  Gourard,  864. 
O'Connor  v.  Spaight,  1355. 
O'Connor  v.  Towns,  604. 
Odell  V.  Buck,  339. 
OdeU  V.  Durant,  615,  616. 
Odell  V.  Morin,  359. 
Odell  V.  Solomon,  803,  1386. 
Odell  V.  Wake,  667,  737,  749. 
Odiorne  v.  Mason,  447. 
Odiome  v.  Maxey,  368,  370. 
O'Donnell  v.  McMurdie,  1333, 
O'Donnell  v.  Sybert,  1311. 
O'Dougherty  v.  Felt,  353. 
Oettinger  v.  Levy,  803. 
Ogden  V.  Fossick,  362,  371. 
Ogden  V.  Jennings,  406,  415,  417, 

■  419. 
Ogden  V.  Eowe,  1083,  1176. 
Ogden  V.  Sanderson,  1139. 
Ogden  V.  Smith,  238. 
Ogilvie  V.  Foljambe,  353. 
Ogilvie  V.  HaU,  1096. 
Ogilvie  V.  HuU,  1108. 
Ognel's  Case,  667,  1308. 
O'Halloran  v.  Fitzgerald,  1304. 
O'Hare  v.  Fahy,  534. 
O'HerUny  v.  Hedges,  953. 
Ohio  V.  Baum,  359. 
Oland  V.  Burdurck,  65,  66. 
Gland's  Case,  65,  66,  1371. 
Old  Colony  R.  E.  Co.  v.  Evans,  354, 

363,  595. 
Oldershaw  v.  Holt,  1093. 
O'Leary  v.  Delany,  830. 
O'Linda  v.  Lathrop,  515. 
Oliver  v.  Handlett,  198. 
OUver  V.  Oliver,  1347. 
Oliver  v.  Fovrell,  493. 
Oliver  v.  Stone,  442. 
Olmstead  v.  Loomis,  553. 
Olney  v.  Fenner,  543. 
Olney  v.  Gardner,  547. 
Ombony  v.  Jones,  1372. 
O'Meara  v.  No.  American  Co.,  440. 


Omelvany  V.  Jaggers,'540,  554. 
Omerod  v.  Hardman,  396. 
Onderdonk  v.  Gray,  249. 
O'Neil  V.  Jones,  947. 
Onions  v.  Cohens,  766. 
Ongley  v.  Chambers,  416. 
Onley  v.  Jones,  186. 

Onslovir  V. ,  928. 

Onslow  V.  Corrie,  647,  667,  744,  749, 
Onslow  V.  Currie,  1028. 
Onslow  V.  Eaton,  1213. 
Opperman  v.  Smith,  1316'. 
Orly  V.  Mahun,  289,  1029. 
Ord  V.  "White,  721. 
Ordway  v.  Remington,  1035. 
Oregon  Iron  Co.  v.  TerwUUger,  540. 
Oregon  Iron- Co.    v.     TruUinger, 

433,  433. 
O'Reiley  v.  Thompson,  377. 
OrgiU  V.  Kemshead,  667,  750. 
O'Riley  v.  McChesney,  541. 
Orme  v.  Broughton,  355. 
Ormes  v.  Beadle,  '369. 
Ormond  v.  Huth,  377,  1371. 
O'Rouke  V.  PercSival,  377.  , 
Orphan  Asylum  v.  "Waterbury,  936.. 
Orr  V.  Hadley,  353. 
Orth  V.  Jennings,  446. 
Orthout  V.  Ballard,  1035. 
Ortmayer  v.  Johnson,  853.  . 
Orton  V.  Noonan,  947. 
Osborn  v.  Allen,  309. 
Osborn  v.  Garden,  213. 
Osborn  v.  Robbins,  333. 
Osborn  v.  Wise,  391,  396,  633. 
Osborne  v.  Earnshaw,  115. 
Osbourn  v.  Rider,  603. 
Osgood  V.  Demey,  32. 
Osgood  V.  Dewey,  19,  43,  1333. 
Ostrander  v.  Livingston,  939,  940, 
Oswald  V.  Gilbert,  964. 
Oswald  V.  Godbald,  1330. 
Otaway  v.  Braithwaite,  595. 
Ottawa  Gas  Co.  v.  Thompson,  541, 
Ottinger  v.  Levy,  1131. 
Otto  V.  Grier,  1378. 
Overbach  v.  Heermance,  314. 
Overby  v.  Overby,  368. 
Overdeed  v.  Lewis,  35,  1313. 
Overman  v,  Osborn,  14. 
Overman  v.  Sanborn,  734 
Overton  v.  Ely,  810. 
Overton  v.  Lewis,  31. 
Overton  v.  Sydal,  666. 
Owen  V,  Aprice,  1355. 
Owen  V.  Hyde,  978,  982. 
Owen  V,  Thomas,  353, 
Owens  V,  Cowan,  341. 
Owings  V.  Arnott,  460. 
O wings  V.  Baldwin,  361. 
Owmgs  V.  Jones,  865,  866,1385. 
Oxford  V.  Wise,  959. 
Oxford's  Case,  194, 195, 


Table  of  Cases. 


1477 


Oxley  V.  James,  87,  94,  731, 1308. 

Packer  v.  Gibbons,  1350. 

Packington's  Case,  990,  996. 

Paddeford  v.  Paddleford,  981. 

Paddleford  v.  Paddleford,  977,  978. 

Paddock  v.  Fraley,  633. 

Page  V.  Broom,  381. 

Page  V.  DePuy,  1213. 

Page  V.  Ellsworth,  1179. 

Page  V.  Esty,  722,  986,  1045. 

Page  V.  Hughes,  737. 

Page  V.  Kinsman,  498. 

Page  V.  More,  612,  1360. 

Page  V.  Parr,  1096, 1137. 

Page  V.  Stedinan,  169. 

Pago  V.  Waymouth,  605. 

Page  V.  Wright,  57. 

Paget  V.  Crumpton,  959. 

Paget  V.  Gee,  1092. 

Paige  V.  Dupuy,  1297. 

Paige  V.  Wright,  69. 

Pain  V.  Combs,  355,  378,  1000. 

Paine  v.  Barton,  433. 

Paine  v.  Miller,  356. 

Paintor  v.  Nimby,  368. 

Pair  V.  Peebles,  1316. 

Paler  v.  Hemersham,  500. 
.    Palethrop  v.  Bergner,  587,  588. 

Palk  V.  Marchetti,  1183, 1201; 

Palk  V.  Shinner,  1278. 

PaUen  v.  Brewer,  70. 

PaUiser  v.  Ord,  273. 

Palmer  v.  Bowker,  1386,  1387. 
.  Palmer  v.  Earith,  958. 

Palmer  v.  Edwards.  156,  728, 1207.' 

Pahner  v.  Ekins,  487,  488. 
'•Palmer  v.  Fleshees,  568. 

Palmer  v.  Marquette,  &c.,  351. 

Pahner  v.  Miller,  198. 

Pahner  v.  MuUigan,  529,  530,  542. 

Pahner  v.  Stenier,  237,  725. 

Pahner  v.  Wetmore,  1113, 1132. 

Pahner  v.  Whittenhall,  1355. 

Palmer  v.  Young,  950. 

Pahner's  Case,  1008. 

Pannell  v.  Mill,  580. 

Panton  v.  HoUand,  562,  563. 

Panton  v.  Isham,  70,  93,  985,  992. 

Panton  v.  Jones,  17. 

Papaskey  v.  Mankurtz,  779. 

PapiUon  v.  Brunton,  122,  1333. 

Paquetel  v.  Gauche,  493,  1383. 

Paradine  v.  Jane,  810,  836,  1099. 

Paradise  v.  Jones,  831,  839,  1388. 

Paramond  v.  Yardley,  343. 

Pargeter  v.  Harris,  487,  676. 

Parish  v.  Steeman,  349,  963. 

Park  V.  Baker,  1236. 

Park  V.  Castle,  40. 

Parkes  v.-  Boulton,  62. 

Parker  v.  Brooke,  950. 

Parker  v.  Cane,  463. 

Parker  v.  Chambless,  993. 

11—41 


Parker  v.  Constable,  78,  93. 
Parker  v.  Dunuj  771, 
Parker  v.  Foot.  546. 
Parker  v.  Gibbms,  809,  1347. 
Parker  v.  Griswold,  540,  1376. 
Parker  v.  Harris,  73,  1029. 
Parker  v.  Holhs,  106,  357. 
Parker  v.  Hotchkiss,  540,  543. 
Parker  v.  Ibbitson,  889. 
Parker  v.  McLaughUn,  '491. 
Parker  v.  Manning,  488. 
Parker  v.  MiU  Dam  Co.,  527. 
Parker  v.  Moore,  462. 
Parker  v.  NichoUs,  ,454. 
Parker  v.  Parker,  176. 
Parker  v.  Harmalee,  586,  683. 
Parker  v.  Plummer,  412. 
Parker  v.  Redfleld,  478. 
Parker  v.  Shepherd,  613. 
Parker  v.  TasweU,  340,  431,  999. 
Parker  v.  Walker,  53. 
Parker  v.  Watkins,  265. 
Parker  v.  Webb,  648,   666,  738. 
Parker  v.  White,  903., 
Parker  v.  Whyte,  7661  767,  995. 
Parker  v.  Winlow,  37  ,  373, 
Parkes  v.  White,  319. 
Parhurst  v.  Smith,  653. 
Parkhurst  v.  Van  Cortlandt,  351. 
Parkinson's  Case,  189. 
Parkman  v.  Aicardi,  157,  183,  905. 
Parks  V.  Boston,  1098. 
Parks  V.  MoKaney,  364. 
Parks  V.  WiUard,  447. 
Parmalee  v.  Oswego R.  R.  Co.,  585 

683,  712. 
Parmalee  v.  Simpson,  446. 
Parmeter  v.  Webb,  714. 
Parmeter  v.  Webber,  393,  1028. 
Parmenter  v.  Webber,  728,  730. 
Parris  v.  Cobb,  228. 
Parrish  v.  Sleeman,  966. 
Parrot  v.  Anderson,  1063. 
Parrot  v.  Thatcher,  640. 
Parrott  v.  Barney,  54,  930. 
Parry  v.  Ashton,  1290. 
Parry  v.  Duncan,  1316. 
Parry  v.  Hazell,  127. 
Parry  v.  Hodson,  213. 
Parry  v.  House,  488. 
Parshall  v.  Shirts,  457. 
Parsley  v.  Davis,  326. 
Parsley  v.  Day,  264,  449„478. 
Parsons  v.  Copeland,  1235. 
Parsons  v.  Gingell,  1811,  1312. 
Parsons  v.  Hill,  198. 
Parsons  v.  Miller,  588. 
Partington  v.  Woodcock,  250,  354 

453. 
Partridge  v.  Bere.  366. 
Partridge  v.  Scott,  560,  568. 
Partridge  v.  Shaw,  1088. 
Pascoe  V.  Pascoe,  156,  392,  730. 


1478 


Table  of  Oases. 


Pastell  V.  Skirving,  167. 
Patch  V.  Wild,  266. 
Pateriche  v.  Pawlet,  819. 
Paton  V.  Rogers,  1118. 
Paton  V.  Sheppard,  1091. 
Patrick  v.  Balls,  148. 
Patrick  v.  Colerick,  471,  474. 
Patrick  V.  Grant,  648. 
Patrick  V.  Horton,  359. 
Patrick  v.  Sherwood,  139. 
Patridge  v.  Bere,  449. 
Patten  v.  Brewer,  70. 
Patten  v.  Deshon,  731,  737,  1044. 
Patten  v.  HaU,  1805. 
Patten  v.  Reid,  755. 
Patterson  v.  Ackerman,  835. 
Patterson  v.  Ackerson,  833,  1133. 
Patterson  v.  Boston,  1098. 
Patterson  v.  Edmonson,  1095, 
Patterson  v.  Hansel,  13,  1383. 
Patterson  v.  Hunsell,  493. 
Patterson  v.  Stoddard,  18,  46,  57, 

1333 
Pattison'v.  HaU,  416. 
Pattison  v.  HaU,  409. 
Paul  V.  Chickering,  966. 
Paul  V.  Meek,  483. 
Paul  V.   Nurse,  667,  673,  710,  749. 
Paul  V.  Varmie,  1189. 
Paul  V.  Whitman,  176. 
Paule  V.  Bentley,  335. 
PauUn  V.  Hardy,  486. 
Paxton  V.  Newman,  371. 
Paxton  V.  Newton,  894. 
Paxton  V.  Popham,  636. 
Payler  v.   Homersham,  503,   598, 

649,  656. 
Payne  v.  Beale,  1044. 
Payne  v.  Bettisworth,  683. 
Payne  v.  Burridge,  965. 
Payne  v.  Clark,  449. 
Payne  v.  Dor,  990. 
Payne  v.  Haine,  674,  797,  807,  901. 
Payne  v.  Harris,  337. 
Payne  v.  Rogers,  1387,  1391. 
Payne  v.  Taylor,  545. 
Payne  v.  Walker,  813. 
Payton  v.  Ayres,  579. 
Payton  v.  Steth,  117. 
Peabody  v.  Minat,  170, 
Peabody  v.  Speyers,  353, 
Peacock  v.  Monk,  319. 
Peacock  v.  Penson,  365. 
Peacock  v.  Raflfan,  111. 
Peacock  v.  Ruffin,  104.  127. 
Pearce  v.  Brooks,  1345. 
Pearce  v.  Chamberlain,  337. 
Pearce  v.  Chesslyn,  335,  338,  343. 
Peai-ce  v.  Golden,  939. 
Pearce  v.  Nix,  494. 
Pearce  v.  Savage,  313. 
PearsaU  v.  Post,  523. 
Pearse  v.  Boulter,  130,  123. 


Pearse  v.  Coker,  1390,  1391. 

Pearse  v.  Morrice,  667. 

Pearson  v.  Reis,  180,  337,  341. 

Pearson  v.  Spencer,  415,  439,  558. 

Pease  v.  Coates,  908. 

Pease  v.  Lawson,  485. 

Pease  v.  Pilot  Knob  Iron  Co.,  353, 

255. 
Peasley  v.  Robbins,  329. 
Peavey  v.  TUton,  444. 
Peck  V.  Austin,  189. 
Peck  V.  Batchelder,  1226. 
Peck  V.  Goodwin,  445. 
Peck  V.  HUer,  1107,  1114,  1136. 
Peck  V.  Ledwidge,  884. 
Peck  V.  MaUams,  398,  633. 
Peck  V.  Sherwood,  968. 
Peggot  V.  Mason,  953. 
Pegler  V.  White,  361. 
PeUrington  v.  ShaUer,  817. 
PeU  V.  PeU,  1086. 
PeUar  v.  Wanford,  604. 
PeUatt  V.  Boosey,  1311. 
Pellecat  v.  Angell,  1345. 
Pemberton  v.  Edwards,  136. 
Pemberton  v.  King,  1344. 
Pemberton  v.  Piatt,  774. 
Pemberton  v.  Van  Rensselaer,  1035, 

1074. 
Pemberton  v.  Vaughan,  918. 
Pembroke  v.  Berkly,  593. 
Pence  v.  Arbuckle,  463. 
PendUl  V.  Union  Mining  Co.,  1213. 
Pendleton  v.  Bank  of  Kentucky, « 

194. 
Pendleton  v.  Dyatt,  1106, 1109. 
Pendleton  v.  Dyete,  1096. 
Pendred  v.  Griffith,  947,  953. 
Penford  v.  Abbott,  696,  699,  757. 
Pauley  v.  Watts,  183, 749, 903, 1377, 
Penn  v.  Citizens'  Bank,  924. 
Penn  v.  DiveUen,  1383. 
Penn  v.  Glover,  758,  775. 
Penn  v.  Kearney,  841. 
Penn  v.  Preston,  643. 
Pennants'  Case,  481,  713,  1306. 
Pennel  v.  Perm,  338. 
PenniaU  v.  Harborne,  701,  1214. 
Penning  v.  Plat,  774. 
Pennington  v.  Cardale,  479. 
Pennington  v.  GaUand,  430. 
Pennington  v.  Lamere,  13. 
Pennington  v.  Taniere,  46, 398,  793. 
Pennock  v.  Ela,  373. 
Pennock  v.  hjons,  584. 
m.  Ir( 

630. 

Pennybecker  v.  McDougal,  1334. 
Penruddoch  v.  Newman,  1166. 
Penry  v.  Brown,  795,  804,  1337. 
Penton  v.  Robert,  1010,  1337,  1263. 
Pentz  V.  Aetria  Ins.  Co.,  1301. 
Pentz  V.  Cuester,  1385. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1479 


People  T.  Alberty,  980. 

People  V.  Annis,  80. 

People  V.  Bennett,  1394. 

People  V.  Boardman,  1404. 

People  V.  Bostwick,  1347. 

People  V.  Brockway,  918. 

People  V.  Canal  Appraisers,  530, 

532. 
People  V.  Davison,  978,  982. 
People  V.  De  Camp,  1399, 1401. 
People  V.  Dudley,  1036, 1039, 1187. 
People  V.  Gedney,  1098,  1137. 
People  V.  Gillis,  831,  334.  343. 
People  V.  Globe  Mut.  Life  Ins.  Co., 

725. 
People  V.  Goelet,  154. 
People  V.  Green,  189. 
People  V.  Haskins,  1025. 
People  V.  Hovey,  1406. 
People  V.  Kelsey,  331,  342,  343. 
People  V.  Ketaltas,  1400. 
People  V.  Landt,  209. 
People  ^.  Love,  194. 
People  V.  Manning,  583. 
People  V.  Marshall,  168. 
People  V.  Marvin  Safe  Co.,  1402. 
People  V.  Matthews,  1401. 
People  V.  Mayor  of  Brooklyn,  957. 
People  V.  Mussey,  458. 
People  V.  Muzzy,  460. 
People  V.  New  York,  605. 
People  V.  Piatt,  526,  534. 
People  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  605. 
People  V.  Eickert,  21.  96, 100,  461. 
People  V.  Robertson,  179,  604. 
People  V.  Runkle,  194. 
People  V.  Schacko,  92,  110,  127. 
People  V.  Siner,  489,  1383. 
People  V.  Smith,  1375,  1380. 
People  V.  Stephens,  1118. 
People  V.  Tebbetts,  527,  530,  533. 
People  V.  Union  Ins.  Co.,  189. 
People  V.  Vilas,  1085. 
People  V.  Wilcox,  213. 
People's  Bank  v.  Mitchell,  585,  588. 
Pepper  v.  Rowley,  1137. 
Pequaket  Bridge  v.  Mathes,  458, 

460. 
Peratto  v.  Gonochio,  492,  493. 
Percy's  Case,  572,  576. 
Perfect  v.  Smith,  340. 
Perkins  v.  Clay,  917. 
Perkins  v.  Governor.  490,  1384. 
Perkins  v.  Lyman,  1051,  1052. 
Perkins  v.  Perkins,  1154. 
Perkins  v.  Swank,;407, 1221. 
Perkins  v.  Wright,  361,  363. 
Perley  v.  Chandler,  516. 
Perrin  v.  Corey,  317. 
Perrin  v.  Garfield,  650. 
Perrin  v.  Lepper,  721,  1044. 
Perrine  v.  Cheeseman,  435. 
Perrine  v.  Haniknson,  1328. 


Perring  v.  Brook,  334,  337,  338. 

Perrot  v.  Perrot,  434. 

Perry  v.  AUen,  609. 

Perry  v.  Bowen,  875. 

Perry  v.  Carr,  67, 1302. 

Perry  V.  Davis,  1197. 

Perry  v.  Duncan,  1315. 

Perry  v.  Edwards,  769,  774,  775. 

Perry  v.  GiU,  241.  [ 

Perry  v.  Hazell,  117.  : 

Perry  v.  Hindle,  223. 

Perry  v.  Skinner,  403. 

Perry  v.  Tynen,  1404. 

Perry  vi  WaU,  1348. 

Perryn  v.  AUen,  609,  1165. 

Person  v.  Chase,  201,  302. 

Petch  V.  Tutin,  747. 

Peter  v.  Beverly,  238. 

Peter  v.  KendaU,  389,  1171,  1176. 

Peters  v.  Barnes,  1153,  1156. 

Peters  v.  Elkins,  254. 

Peters  v.  Newkuk,  1309. 

Peterson  v.  Edmondson,  831,  1377. 

Peterson  v.  Laik,  301,  303. 

Peterson  v.  McCuUough,  569. 

Peterson  v.  Smart,  833. 

Petrel  v.  Bury,  176. 

Petrie  v.  Bury,  650. 

Petrie  v.  Daniel,  1366. 

Petrie  v.  Dawson,  1348,  1360. 

Petrie  v.  Wright,  190. 

Pettingill  v.  Evans,  355,  356,  257. 

Pettis  V.  Bloomer,  1054. 

Petty  V.  Boothe,  654. 

Petty  V.  Evans,  476. 

Peyram  v.  Newman,  398. 

Peyroux  v.  Howard,  531. 

Peyton  v.  Ayres,  653. 

Peyton  v.  Mayor,  &c. ,  1278. 

Pfauner  v,  Sturmer,  945. 

Phurd  V.  HerUnger,  1336. 

Phelps,  Ex  parte,  950. 

Phelps  V.  Conent,  5,  12,  18. 

Phelps  V.  Frankerhouser,  240. 

Phelps  V.  Prothere,  732. 

Phelps  V.  Taylor,  493. 

Phene  v.  PoppleweU,  1171. 

Phenix  v.  Clark,  993. 

Phenix  Ins.  Co.  v.  Continental  Ins., 

671. 
Pheysey  v.  Vicary,  438,  558. 
Pha.,  &0.,  R.  R.  Co.  V.  Catawissa 

E.  E.  Co.,  737. 
Philipot  V.  Hoare,  743. 
Philips  V.  Benjamin,  1183. 
Philips  V.  Green,  303. 
Philip's  Academy  v.  King,  188. 
PhiUbrick  v.  Emswller,  396. 
PhUlbrick  v.  Ewing,  431,  1333. 
Phillip  V.  Benjamin,  335,  343. 
Phillips  V.  Barrvmore,  1336. 
Phillips  V.  Bridge,  1040. 
Phillips  V.  Castley,  639. 


1480 


Table  of  Cases. 


PhiUips  V.  Doe,  1038, 1209. 
Phillips  V.  DooUttle,  1038,  1041. 
PhiUips  T.  Edwaxds,  365,  379. 
Philhps  V.  Everard,  381. 
PhUlips  V.  Green,  198. 
PhiUips  V.  Hartley,  339,  343,  344, 

345. 
PhilUps  V.  Monges,  32,  34,  802. 
Phillips  V.  Mosley,  32,  99,  1041. 
PhiUips  V.  Pearce,  490. 
PhiUips  T.  Robertson,  489, 1383. 
PhiUips  V.  RoUings,  124, 125. 
Phillips  V.  EothweU,  491,  1384. 
PhUlips  V.  Smith,  975,  989,  1015. 
Phillips  V.  Stephens,  811. 
PhUUps  V.  Stevens,  795,   808,  1130. 
PhiUpot's  Case,  275. 
Phinzey  v.  City  of  Augusta,  852. 
Phipps  V.  Buckman,  363. 
Phipps  V.  Sculthorpe,  1168. 
Phipps  V.  Tanner,  621. 
Phyfe  V.  WardweU,  625,  950,  953. 
Pickard  v.  CoUins,  1392, 1307. 
Pickard  v.  Shears,  1371. 
Pickardt  v.  Kleis,  453. 
Picker  v.  KeUy,  466. 
Pickering  v.  Nowles,  950. 
Pickering  v.  Pickering,  176,  858, 

372. 
Pickering  v.  Vowles,  951. 
Pickett  V.  Bartlett,  108. 
Pickett  V.  Ferguson,  500,  1341. 
Pickett  V.  Pearson,  275. 
Pickett  V.  Sutler,  230. 
Piene  v.  Faunce,  400. 
Pier  V.  Carr,  1175. 
Pierce  v.  Brown,  253,  254. 
Pierce  v.  Dyer,  876. 
Pierce  v.  George,  407,  1234. 
Pierce  v.  Kinney,  538. 
Pierce  v.  Pierce,  19,  20, 1329, 1332. 
Pierce  v.  SeUeck,  417. 
Pierce  v.  Shaw,  106. 
Pierce  v.  Somerworth,  194. 
Pierce  v.  Travers,  549,  551. 
Pierce  v.  WUson,  625. 
Pierce  v.  Woodward,  918. 
Pierpont  v.  Barnard,  486. 
Piesch  V.  Dixon,  637. 
Pierson  v.  Turner,  154. 
Pigg  V.  Corder,  358. 
Piggot  -y.  Eastern  R.  Co.,  987. 
Piggot  V.  Mason,  678,  930,  932,  944. 
Piggott  V.  Straiten,  998,  1181. 
Pigot  V.  Garnish,  210,  211. 
Pigot  V.  RusseU,  201. 
Pigot's  Case,  457,  459. 
Pike  V.  Butler,  939. 
Pike  V.  Eyre,  178,  187,  487. 
Pike  V.  Monroe,  504,  579,  653. 
Pilkmgton  V.  Hastings.  1071,  1810. 
Pilkington  v.  Scott,  919. 
PUkington  t.  Shaller,  180.  181. 


PUIatt  V.  Boosey,  1097. 
PiUing  V.  Armitage,  161,  374. 
PUhtt  V.  Forrest,  1031. 
Pillsbury  v.  MitcheU,  971. 
PUlsworthv.  Pyatt,,598. 
Pilmer  v.  Bank,  634. 
Pincomb  v.  Thomas,  577. 
Pincombe  v.  Rudge,  694. 
Pindar  v.  Ainsley,  785,  884,  1136. 
Pinero  V.  Judson,  13, 105, 346, 1333. 
Pingney  v.  Watkins,  1034. 
Pinhom  v.  Souster,  70,  159. 
Pmner  v.  Arnold,  1260. 
Pistor  V.  Cator,  49,  433,  687,  791. 
Pitcher  v.  Donovan,  109. 
Pitcher  v.  Lycock,  201,  303. . 
Pitcher  v.  Tavey,  647,  741,  743. 
Pitcher  v.  Toney,  1028,  1033. 
Pitkin  V.  Ohnstead,  533. 
Pitkin  V.  Yaw,  450. 
Pitman  v.  Sutton,  703,  793,  893. 
Pitman  v.   Woodbury,    441,    669, 

1337. 
Pitt  V.Hogg,  717. 
Pitt  V.  Jackson,  275. 
Pitt  V.  James,  195. 
Pitt  V.  Laming,  701,  715,  717. 
Pitt  V.  Shaw,  1310.  1335. 
Pitt  V.  Shewin,  701. 
Pitt  V.  Shrew,  1368. 
Pitt  V.  Smith,  330. 
Pitt  V.  Snowden,  1308. 
Pittsburgh,  &c.,  Co.  v.  WooUey, 

190. 
Pitty  V.  Booth,  504. 
Pixley  V.  Clark,  545. 
Place  V.  Fagg,  1260. 
Plat  V.  Sleap,  1188. 
Piatt  V.  Dawes,  239. 
Piatt  V.  Farney,  863. 
Piatt  V.  James,  428. 
Piatt  V.  New  Jersey,  &c.,  407, 1231. 
Piatt  V.  Root,  543. 
Pleasant  v.  Bonson,  89,  131, 1153, 
Pleasanton's  Appeal,  90. 
Plevin  v.  Brown,  1304. 
Plimpton  V.  Converse,  428. 
Plimpton  V.  Richards,  338. 
Plowden  v.  Cartwright,  395. 
Pluck  V.  Digges,  156,  180. 
Plumbe  V.  Neild,  1093. 
Plumer  v.  Lord,  485. 
Plumer  v.  Nainby,  111,  610. 
Plumer  v.   Plumer,  67,  490,  493 

1383. 
Plumleigh  v.  Cook,  674. 
Plumleigh  v.  Dawson.  540. 
Plummer  v.  Harper,  1382. 
Plummer  v.  Whiteley,  1093. 
Pocock  V.  Eustace,  9.55. 
Pocock  V.  Hendricks,  336. 
Pocock  V.  Lee,  219. 
Poe  V,  Davis,  1384. 


Table  of  Oases. 


1481 


Poer  V.  Peebles,  1307. 

Poindexter  v.  Blackham,  139, 

Polack  V.  Pioche,  806,  809. 

Polden  V.  Bastard,  415,  431,  558. 

Pole  V.  Davis,  263. 

Polk  V.  Marchetti,  954. 

PoUard  v.  Gibbs,  268. 

Pollard  V.  Greenville,  303,  804. 

Pollard  V.  Merrill,  227. 

PoUen  V.  Brewer,  30,  1297,  1357. 

Pollitt  V.  Forrest,  1039,  1056, 1307. 

PoUitt  V.  Long,  543. 

Pollock  V.  Stacy,  180,  393,  731, 1333. 

Pomeroy  v.  Mills,  515. 

Pomeroy  v.  Paxtineton,  289,  297, 

309. 
Pomfred  v.  Ricroft,  69. 
Pomfret  v.  Eisnap,  875. 
Pomfret  v.  Eioroft,  413,  693,  812, 

991. 
Ponsonby  v.  Adams,  907. 
Ponton  V.  Ballard,  447. 
Pool  V.  Lewis,  554. 
Pool  V.  Morris,  1191. 
Poole  V.  Archer,  808,  810. 
Poole  V.  Bentley,  189,  335. 
Poole  V.  Longueville,  1313. 
Poole  V.  Tumbridge,  1079. 
Poole  V.  WaiTen,  1150,  1359,  1360. 
Pfeole  V.  Whitt.  758. 
Pool's  Case,  1337, 1246,  1360. 
Poor  V.  Oakman,  1825. 
Fope  V.  Biggs,  249,  350,  497,  1116. 
Pope  V.  Briggs,  251. 
Pope  V.  Garrard,  1333. 
Pope  V.  Harkins,  489,  1383. 
Pope  V.  Jeickson,  1333. 
Pope  V.  Whitehead,  170, 171. 
Pople  V.  Garland,  53. 
Poppin  V.  Haight,  587. 
Porch  V.  Frees,  993. 
Porcher  v.  Daniel,  393. 
Potdage  V.  Cobe,  433,  656,  683. 
Pordage  v.  Cook,  623, 
Porrisv.  Allen,  1165. 
Port  V.  Jackson,  788. 
Porter  v.  Androscoggin  R.  R.  Co., 

191. 
Porter  v.  Bieler,  13, 17. 
Porter  v.  Blakelcy,  194. 
Porter  v.  Blielery,  100. 
Porter  v.  Buckingham,  443. 
Porter  v.  Gordon,  50. 
Porter  v.  Noyes,  970. 
Porter  v.  Seavey,  446. 
Porter  v.  Shehan,  537. 
Porter  v.   Shepard,  153,  687,  932, 

1143. 
Porter  v.  Spencer,  1355. 
Porter  v.  Swetnam,  617,  646,  1080. 
Portington's  Case,  580. 
Portland  v.  Richardson,  1389. 
Portman  v.  Mill,  408. 


Portmore  v.  Morris,  1347. 

Post  V.  Kearney,  668,  743,  965. 

Post  V.  Kimberley,  1355. 

Post  V.  Martins,  440. 

Post  V.  Phelan,  15. 

Post  V.  Vetter,  625,  785,  789,  1181 

Postlewaite  v.  Lewthwaite,  930. 

Postman  v.  Harrell,  1315. 

Potter  V.  Archer,  111,  158,  393. 

Potter  V.  Arden,  158. 

Potter  V.  Cromwell,  1233. 

Potter  V.  Taylor,  969. 

Potter  V.  Thomas,  291. 

Potter  V.  Tuttle,  373. 

Potkin's  Case,  89. 

Potts  V.  N.  J.  Arms  Co.,  1334. 

Potts  V.  Smith,  777. 

Poulter  V.  KiUinbeck,  1367. 

Poultney  v.  Hohnes,  179,  180,  393 

1033. 
Poultney  v.  Warren,  1391. 
PouneU  V.  Moores,  936. 
Pouseley  v.  Blackman,  250. 
Powell  V.  Burroughs,  1053. 
PoweU  V.  English,  848. 
PoweU  V.  Go?sen,  268. 
Powell  V.  King,  154,  1204. 
PoweU  V.  Lasn,  551. 
Powell  V.  Lovegrove,  358,  375. 
PoweU  V.  Lumley,  138. 
PoweU  V.  Mfg.  Co.,  1233. 
Powers  V.  Dennison,  1345. 
Powers  V.  Fresh,  536. 
Powers  V.  Ware,  585,  588. 
Powers  V.  Witty,  1399. 
Powis  V.  Smith,  173, 174, 175, 1043, 
Powley  V.  WaUier,  696,  697,  933. 
Powseley  v.  Blackman,  364. 
Powys  V.  Blagrave,  991.  998. 
Poynter  v.  Buckley,  1333,  1337. 
Pontz  V.  Fortune,  378. 
Pragers  v.  Phrasier,  390. 
Prater  v.  MiUer,  359. 
Pratt  V.  Brett,  937,  994. 
Pratt  V.  Clemens,  436. 
Pratt  V.  Farrar,  1396. 
Pratt  V.  Keith,  997,  1067,  1809. 
Pratt  V.  Lawson,  539. 
Pratt  V.  PhiUbrook,  336. 
Pratt  V.  Sampson,  553. 
Pratt  V.  Skolfield,  353,  354. 
Pray  v.  Clark,  360,  941. 
Pray  V.  Gt.  FaUs,  &c.,  Co.,  896, 694. 
Pray  v  Northern  Liberties,  966.j 
Praye  v.  Bancroft,  830. 
Preble  v.  Brown,  537. 
Preble  v,  Hay,  116. 
Preece  v.  Barrie,  156. 
Preece  v.  Corrie,  393,  780,  1033. 
Prentice  v.  EUiott,  1139. 
Prentiss  v.  Russ,  636. 
Prentiss  v.  Warne,  18, 1175. 
Presbyterian  ■  Church  v.    Pickettj 

653. 


1482 


Table  of  Cases. 


Prescott  V,  Elm,  110. 
Prescott  V.  Hayes,  398,  503. 
Prescott  V.  Otterstatter,  820. 
Prescott  V.  Phillips,  542. 
Prescott  V.  "Wells,  1321, 1223. 
President,  &c.,  v.  Myers,  194. 
Press  V.  Parker,  431,  631,  655. 
Preston  v.  Hawley,  9. 
Preston  v.  Huntington,  594.  ' 
Preston  v.  Lote,  25,  161. 
Preston  v.  Merceau,  866,  396,  624, 

653. 
Pretty  v.  Bickmore,  863, 1288. 
Prettyman  v.  Wallston,  668,  673, 

968. 
Prevot  V.  Lawrence,  230,  493. 
Price  V.  Asspeton,  363,  379. 
Price  V.  Brayton,  1349. 
Price  V.  Corrie,  179,  180. 
Price  V.  Dyer,  153,  353,  611, 1141. 
Price  V.  Green,  917. 
Price  V.  Griffith,  353. 
Price  V.  McAUister,  1311. 
Price  V.  Nicholas,  1197. 
Price  V.  Pickett,  1371. 
Price  V.  Price,  11,  39,  73, 138. 
Price  V.  Salusbury,  375. 
Price  V.  Williams,  764, 1089. 
Price  V.  Woodhouse,  1326. 
Price  T.  Worward,  455,  1212, 1393, 
Pritchard  v.  Powell,  531. 
Priest  V.  Nichols,  846,  876,  1392. 
Priest  T.  Wheelock,  253,  255. 
Prime  v.  League,  85. 
Primm  v.  Barton,  373. 
Primm  v.  Walker,  171. 
Prince  v.  Case,  465,  472,  1339. 
Prince's  Case,  344. 
Prindle  y.  Anderson,  50, 105. 
Prior  V.  Ongley,  261, 262, 490, 1205. 
Prior  V.  Pickett,  66. 
Pritchard  v.  Dodd,  14, 394, 476, 617. 
Pritchard  v.  Oney,  930. 
Procter  v.  Newhall,  173. 
Proctor  V.  Jennings,  555. 
Proctor  V.  Johnson,  693. 
Proctor  V.  Keith,  819,  1038,  1040, 

1130. 
Proctor  V.  Newton,  776. 
Proctor  V.  Pool,  400. 
Proctor  V.  Sargent,  917,  918. 
Profit  V.  Henderson,  973,  977,  983. 
Propert  v.  Parker,  347,  354,  903. 
Proprietors,  &c. ,  v.  Lowell,  872, 875. 
Proprietors,  &c.,  v.  McFaxland,  18, 

46,  57. 
Protection  L.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Palmer, 

604,  605. 
Proud  V.  Bates,  560,  566,  575. 
Proudfoot  V.  Wrightman,  375. 
Prout  V.  Wiley,  203,  305. 
Prouty  V.  Edgar,  301,  306. 
Provost  V.  Calder,  1080. 


Provost  V.  HaUett,  974. 

PrugnaU  v.  Gosse,  919. 

Pryor  v.  Coulter,  271. 

Pugh  V.  Acton,  1251. 

Pugh  V.  Duke  of  Leeds,  105, 303, 616 

Pugh  V.  Griffith,  1320. 

Pugh  V.  Stringfield,  649. 

Pugh  V.  Wheeler,  539,  540. 

Pugsley  V.  Aiken,  50. 

PuUen  V.  Bonney,  1375. 

Pullen  V.  BuU,  1233. 

PuUenv.  Palmer,  165, 175, 1308. 

PuUen  V.  Ready,  365. 

Pulliam  V.  Owen,  358. 

Pulteney  v.  Shelton,  121. 

Pulthrop  V.  Bergner,  808. 

Pumy  V.  Corwithe,  457. 

PurceU  V.  English,  847,  863,  874. 

Purinton  v.  Northern  lU.  R.  R.  Co., 

360. 
Purtz  V.  Cuester,  497. 
Purvis  V.  Rayer,  357,  753. 
Putland  V.  HUder,  117,  1185. 
Putnam  v.  Ritchie,  169,  213. 
Putnam  v.  Smith,  629. 
Puttman  v.  Haltey,  360. 
Pybus  V.  Smith,  319. 
Pyer  v.  Carter,  415,  431.  558. 
Pyke  V.  Northwood,  999. 
Pyke  V.  Thomas,  917,  918. 
Pyle  V.  Moulding,  605. 
Pyle  V.  Pennock,  1346. 
Pym  V.  Blackburn,  808,  809,;810. 
Pym  V.  Campbell,  505. 
Pynchon  v.  Steams,  983. 
Pysonv.  Watts^358. 
Quackenboss  v.  Clark,  731. 
Quadring  v.  Downs,  311. 
Quaxrington  v.  Arthur,  913,'914. 
Quimby  v.  Stebbins,  30,  1330. 
Quincey,  Ex  parte,  1353. 
Quinette  v.  Carpenter,  13,  33,  88, 

154. 
Rae  V.  Lewis,  45. 
Rae  V.  Prindeaux,  294. 
RaUroad  v.  Bo"yer,  138. 
R.  V.  Collett,  93. 
R.  V.  Fillongley,  93. 
R.  R.  Co.  V.  Iliff,  448. 
R.  R.  Co.  V.  McLaughlin,  468. 
R.  R.  Co.  V.  Sohmaele,  1098. 
R.  R.  Co.  V.  Watson,  894. 
Railway  Co.  v.  M'Michael,  200, 201. 
Railway  Co.  v.  Slatterly,  1395. 
Raine  v.  Alderson,  1278. 
Rainey  v.  Copps,  14. 
Rains  v.  Keller,  1192. 
Rains  v.  Keneller,  158,  1039,  1300. 
Rainsford  v.  Rainsf ord,  304. 
Ralston  v.  Boady,  465,  1343,  1844. 
Ramires  v.  Kent,  1383. 
Ramirez  v.  Murray,  1073. 
Ramfidell  v.  Maxwell,  1386. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1483 


Eamsey  v.  Henderson,  117. 
Kand  v.  Rand,  605. 
Band  v.  Vaughan,  1316. 
EandaU  v.  Alburtis,    1095,    1098, 

1103,  1136. 
EandaU  v.  Elwell,  1334. 
Bandall  v.  Latham,  894. 
Randall  v.  Lynch,  643,,  645. 
Bandall  v.  McLaughlin,  431. 
Bandall  v.  Eich,  1170. 
Bandall  v.  Bigby,  675. 
BandaU  v.  Boper,  898. 
Bandall  v.  BusseU,  944. 
EandaU  v.  Smith,  628. 
Eandel  v.  Canal  Co.,  643,  643,  650, 

653. 
Bandel  v.  Bich,  1175. 
Eandle  v.  Lory,  1204. 
Bandolph  v.  Bramtree,  587. 
Eandolph  v.  Carlton,  497, 1385. 
Ranelagh  v.  Melton,  371. 
Eankin  v.  Brindley,  893, 1315. 
Bankin  v.  Lay,  934. 
Kankin  v.  Newson,  180. 
Bannie  v.  Iwing,  918. 
Eantin  v.  Eobeirtson,  758. 
Baper  v.  Birkbeck,  459. 
Eashleigh  v.  So.  Eastern  E.  Co., 

889. 
Eashleigh  v.  WiUiams,  775,  776. 
EataviaMfg.  Co.  v.  Newton,  671. 
Battle  V.  Popham,  394,  595. 
Baulett  V.  Cook,  87,  946,  947. 
Eavisies  v.  Alston,  458. 
Eawley  v.  Adams,  647. 
Bawley  v.  Brown,  15. 
BawUngs  v.  DuvaU,  737. 
Eawlings  v.  Morgan,  803,  879,  893. 
BawUngs  v.   Walker,    337,    1163, 

1187. 
BawUn's  Case,  334,  486. 
Bawlins  v.  Briggs,  966. 
Bawlston  v.  Brady,  130. 
Bawlyn's  Case,  156,  488,  1138. 
Bawson  v.  Eick,  351,  345,  395. 
Bawson  v.  Picke,  339. 
Bawson  v.  Taylor,  537. 
Eawston  v.  Bentley,  945,  946. 
Eawstron  v.  Taylor,  541,  557,  849. 
Bay  V.  Ayers,  1376, 1377. 
Bay  V.  Fletcher,  547. 
Bay  land  v.  Justices,  &c.,  346. 
Eaymond  v.  Fitch,  753. 
Raymond  v.  Kerker,  1070. 
Eaymond  y.  Thomas,  1036. 
Eaymond  v.  White,  1333. 
Eayner  y.  Stone,  370,  914,  937. 
Baynor  v.  WUson,  463. 
Ee  Crommellin  Estate,  396. 
Be  Cross,  319. 

Be  North  Lqndon  E.  Co.,  398,  299. 
Bead  y.  Brookman,  459. 
Bead  y.  Ervington,  603, 


Bead  y.  Farr,  710. 

Bead  y.  Landerb,  ljl36. 

Bead  Y.  Eidout,  84, 1168. 

Beade  y.  Johnson,  1338. 

Eeader  y.  Sayre,  108. 

Beading  of  Judge  Trowbridge,  347. 

Beadman  y.  Conway,  859. 

Eead'sCase,  1813. 

Bector  y.  Buckhart,  1384. 

Eed  Y.  Shepley,  1384. 

Redden  y.  Barker,  1339. 

Eede  y.  Fail-,  479,  1198. 

Rede  y.  Lawnse,  1023. 

Bedfern  v.  Smith,  989. 

Eedfleld  y.  Davis,  374. 

Eedfield  v.  Utica,  &c.,  E.  E.  Co., 

12. 
Eedgely  y.  StetweU,  97. 
Redmon  y.  Bedford,  735. 
Redpath  v.  Roberts,  133, 1130, 1169. 
Eedshaw  y.  GoYernor,  &c.,  934. 
Redwine  y.  Brown,  409. 
Reed  y.  Brookman,  434. 
Reed  y.  Deene,  594. 
Eeed  y.  Farr,  718. 
Beed  y.  Greenberry,  538. 
Reed  y.  Kemp,  460. 
Eeed  y.  Latson,  487, 
Eeed  y.  Eeed,  138. 
Eeed  y.  Eudmun,  363. 
Reed  y.  Shepley,  493. 
Reed  y.  Tuttle,  453. 
Reed  v.  Ward,  1117, 
Reed  y.  West,  171. 
Reeder  y.  Sayre,  1073, 1370. 
Rees  Y.  Erwiagton,  1193. 
Rees  Y.  Lord  Dacre,  930,  933. 
Rees  V.  OYerbaugh,  459,  460. 
Rees  Y.  WUUams,  1185. 
Reese  y.  Reese,  359,  374. 
Reeve  v.  Bird,  1168,  1171. 
Reeves  v.  Greenwich  Tanning  Co., 

370. 
Reeves  y.  McKenzie,  1307, 1311. 
Regents,  &c.  y.  District,  &c.,  191. 
Begina  y.  Austin,  1048. 
Beg.  Y.  Bowser,  1376,  1378. 
Begina  v.  Chawton,  90,  109,  609, 

611. 
Reg.  Y.  Everest,  1019. 
Regina  y.  Griffith,  1376. 
Reg.  Y.  Harland,  1376. 
Eeg.  v.  Metrop.  Brd.  of  Workfe,  558, 

559. 
Eeg.  Y.  Morris,  465. 
Eeg.  V.  Morrish,  385,  476. 
Eeg.  Y.  NeviU,  503. 
Begina  v.  Olser,  866. 
Regina  v.  Ponsonby,  76. 
Regina  v.  Rees,  76. 
Reg.  V.  Recorder  of  Eiclunoud,  138. 
Reg.  Y.  Eowe,  413. 
Eeg.  Y.  Saffron,  920, 


1484 


Table  op  Cases. 


Eeg.  V.  Slaustone,  123. 
Eegina  v.  Spurrell,  80,  81. 
Eeg.  V.  Stoke-upon-Trent,  638. 
Eegina  v.  Watts,  1301. 
Regina  v.  Westbrook,  1019,  1030, 

1021. 
Eegnart  v.  Porter,  98,  1033,  1806, 

1307. 
Eehoboth  v.  Eehoboth,  188. 
Eeichenbacher  t.  Pahmeyer,  869. 
Reid  V.  Butt,  443. 
Eeid  V.  Hubbard,  368. 
Eeid  V.  Kirk,  1330. 
Eeid  V.  Marble,  448. 
Eeid  V.  Parsons,  453,  480,  1198. 
Eeindell  v.  ScheU,  1050, 1051, 1056. 
Eeineman  v.  Blair,  1348. 
Eeiff  V.  Eeiff,  1370. 
Eeignolds  v,  Edwards,  515. 
Eeitenbailgh  v.  Ludwick,  349. 
Eeithmun  v.  Brandenburgh,  88. 
EeU  V.  Eberley,  335. 
Eelph  V.  Gist,  436. 
Eemsen  v.  Conklin,  1036, 1038. 
Eenard  v.  Brown,  347. 
Eenaul  v.  Daskon,  1143. 
Eenaud  v.  Daskam,  930,  945. 
Eenfro  v.  Harrison,  444. 
Eennick  v.  Keam,  466. 
Eennie  v.  Eobinson,  491. 
Eemington  v.  uardale,  1198. 
Eenols  v.  Cowlinshaw,  679. 
Eenoud  v.  Durham,  931. 
Eenwick  v.  Morris,  556. 
Eenwick  v.  Eenwick,  938. 
Eep  V.  Cobb.  310. 
Eeresbj  v.  Farrer,  830,  331, 
EeservQJr  Co.  v.  Chase,  336. 
Eess  V.  Adams,  648. 
Eeuss  V.  Picksley,  853. 
Eeutzen  v.  Lewis,  1315. 
Eevell  V.  Hussey,  368. 
Eex  V.  Aldborough,  186, 
Eex  V.  Bake,  1876. 
Eex  V.  Baker,  1375. 
Eex  V.  Banbury,  1173. 
Eex  V.  Bandwell,  75. 
Eex  V.  Beok,  457,  481. 
Eex  V.  Bigg,  193. 
Eex  V.  Bishop  of  Bangor,  1374. 
Rex  V.  Brettel,  567. 
Eex  V.  Bucknall,  788. 
Eex  V.  X^hawton,  90. 
Eex  V.  Chestnut,  75,  76,  81'. 
Eex  V.  Chipping-Norton,  189. 
Eex  V.  Collett,  45. 
Eex  V.  CoUett  R.  &  E.  C.  C,  8. 
Eex  V.  Cotton,  1309,  1335. 
Eex  V.  Edington,  347. 
Rex  V.  Fillogley,  45. 
Eex  V.  Filloughby,  48. 
Eex  V.  Fillongley,  8,  93. 
Rex  V.  Hedges,  1253. 


Eex  V.  Herndon-on-the-hill,  4bi.*. 

Eex  V.  Herstmonceaux,  1261. 

Eex  V.  Iken,  76. 

Eex  V.  Inhabitants,  210,  567. 

Eex  V.  Jobling,  8,  45. 

Eex  V.  Jones,  1378. 

Rex  V.  Kelstern,  75,  76,  81. 

Rex  V.  Londonthorpe,  1330. 

Rex  V.  Iiongnor,  8, 439. 

Rex  V.  Lubbenham,  485. 

Rex  V.  Manners,  311. 

Eex  V.  Minister,  81. 

Eex  V.  Mirfleld,  1030. 

Rex  V.  Northwingfleld,  635. 

Rex  T.  Oakley,  211,  1378. 

Rex  V.  Old  Arlesford,  412. 

Rex  V.  Otley,  1330,  1231,  1337. 

Rex  V.  Pedley,  1380. 

Rex  V.  St.  Earth.  Hosp.,'959. 

Rex  V.  St.  Dunstan,  1353. 

Reedv.  St.  John,  942. 

Rex  V.  St.  Lukes  Hospital,  959. 

Rex  V.  St.  Martin,  99. 

Rex  V.  Seacroft,  76. 

Rex  V.  Sherrington,  211. 

Rex  V.  Shipdam,  75. 

Rex  V.  Smith,  530,  531. 

Rex  V.  Smyth,  1879. 

Rex  V.  Snape,  75. 

Rex  V.  Stock,  75,  76. 

Rex  V.  Sutton,  211,  313. 

Rex  V.  Thorpe,  210. 

Rex  V.  Topping,  1802, 1357. 

Rex  V.  Trafiford,  555. 

Rex  V.  Tynemouth,  76. 

Rey  V.  V.  C.  of  Cambridge,  189. 

Rey  V.  Watson,  1290. 

Rex  V.  Whitstable,  1355. 

Rex  V.Wilson,  178,  1375,  1378. 

Reynaut  v.  Porter,  47. 

Reynel,  Ex  parte,  1260. 

Reynold's  Case,  388. 

Eeynolds  v.  Bridge,  1056,  1059. 

Eeynold  v.  Buckle,  1096. 

Reynolds  v.  Dunkirk^  354. 

Reynolds   v.    Glasgow    Academy 

191. 
Reynolds  v.  Mc Arthur,  533. 
Reynolds  v.  Shuler,  1333. 
Reynolds  v.  Swain,  1316. 
Reynolds  v.  Thuler,  1363. 
Eeynolds  v.  Waring,  379. 
Ehea  v.  Sheward,  474. 
Ehinelander  y.  Seaman,  1134, 1840 
Ehoades  v.  Beau  voir,  381,  383. 
Ehode    Island   v.    Massachusetts 

366. 
Ehodes  v.  Bullard,  413,  659,  785. 
Rhodes  v.  Loutham,  267. 
Ehodes  v.  Otis,  580,  588,  585. 
Ehodes  v.  Eobinson,  120. 
Ehodes  v.  Whitehead,  545,  554. 
Eice  V.  Adams,  1333. 


Table  op  Oases. 


1485 


Rice  V.  Dudlejr,  1168. 

Eice  V.  Loomis,  1034. 

Rice  V.  Peet,  328. 

Rice  T.  Rawlings,  361. 

Eifce  V.  Ruddington,  535. 

Rich  V.  Atwater,  485,  645. 

Rich  V.  Basterfleld,  790,  826,  864, 

1284. 
Rich  V.  Bolton,  45,  73,  85,  99. 
Rich  v.  Jackson,  366,  396,  653. 
Rich  V.  Keyser,  1296. 
Rich  V.  Makepeace,  574. 
Rich  V.  Wooley,  1322. 
Richard  v.  Torbett,  978. 
Richards  v.  Bluck,  689. 
Richards  v.  Cole,  923,  1057. 
Richards  v.  Folsom,  270. 
'Richards  v.  Harper,  564,  565. 
Richards  V.  Johnson,  1271. 
Richards  v.  Sedy,  609. 
Richards  v.  Torbett,  981,  990. 
Richards  v.  Vanderpool,  233. 
Richardson  v.  Anthony,  471,  474. 
Richardson  t.  Borden,  407,  1221, 

1223. 
Richardson  v.  Dorr,  969. 
Richardson  v.  Duncan,  233. 
Richardson  v.  Evans,  710. 
Richardson  v.  GiflEord,  12, 100,  432, 

891. 
Richardson  v.  Hall,  1334. 
Richardson    v.   Harvey,    13,    492, 

1383. 
Richardson  v.  Jackson,  1310. 
Richardson  v.  Kerr,  538. 
Rich  V.  Keyser,  1295. 
Richardson  v.  Langridge,  48,  51, 

97,  610. 
Richardson  v.  MUburn,  449. 
Richardson  v.  Palmer,  396,  654. 
Richardson  v.  Pond,  516,  517. 
'  Richardson  v.  Richaxdson,  476. 
Richardson  v.  Strong,  229. 
Richardson  v.  Suydenham,  986, 944. 
Richey  v.  Hynde,  1339. 
Richmond  Co.  v.  Treat,  1831. 
Richmond,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Rich- 
mond, 191. 
Richmond,    &c.,    Road    Co.     v. 

Rogers,  16,  1329. 
Ricker  v.  Kelly,  470,  478. 
Ricketson  V.  Richardson,  1052, 1055. 
Rickett  V.  Losteller,  779. 
Rickettsv.  East,  &c.,  1006. 
Ricketts  v.  Richardson,  1197. 
Ricketts  v.  Salwey,  530. 
Ricketts  v.  Weaver,  753. 
Rickman  v.  Garth,  161. 
Riddle  v.  Litchfield,  425,  436. 
Riddle  v.  Littlefleld,  405. 
Riddle  v.  Walden,  1311. 
Rider  v.  Powell,  1347. 
Rider  v.  Smith,  788. 


Ridgeley  v.  McLaughlin,  446. 

Ridgely  v.  Stillwell,  50,  97,  1026. 

Ridgway  v.  Stafford,  1324,  1327. 

Ridgway  v.  Wharton,  370,  356. 

Riding  v.  Sniith,  1388. 

Riggs  V.  Bell,  16,  211,  345, 1147. 

Riggs  V.  Pinsell,  719. 

Riggs  V.  Russell,  745. 

Right  V.  Bair,  73. 

Right  V.  Bawden,  1041, 1043. 

Right  V.  Baurd,  32,  47,  61,  63. 

Right  V.  Cuthell,  167,  611. 

Right  V.  Darby,  33,  42,  74,  104. 

Right  V.  Rawdon,  33. 

Right  d.  Bassett  v.  Thomas,  306. 

Rigney  v.  Smith,  485. 

Rinard  v.  Walker,  448, 

Ringer  v.  Cann,  746,  1333. 

Ripka  v.  Sargeant,  510,  545. 

Rippy  V.  Gaunt,  239. 

Risden  v.  TufBn,  150,  615. 

Risely  v.  Ryle,  36,  93,  101. 

Rising  V.  Stanard,  24,  57,  71,  74. 

Ritter  v.  Barrett,  654. 

Rivard  v.  Walker,  443. 

Rivers  v.  Thayer,  227. 

Rives  V.  Dudley,  188. 

Rivis  V.  Watson,  616,  1803. 

Roach  V.  Damson,  473. 

Roach  V.  Wadham,  181,  671,  778. 

Roach  V.  Williams,  163. 

Road  V.  N.  Y.,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  409. 

Roane  v.  Han,  227. 

Robalina  v.  Armstrong,  209. 

Robb  v.  Montgomery,  586. 

Robbins  v.  Jones,  847,  848. 

Robbins  v.  Mount,  692,  853,  1292. 

Robbins  v.  Webb,  671. 

Robb's  Appeal,  1071. 

Roberts  v.   Barker,   104,  637,  889, 

1365. 
Roberts  v.  Brett,  792. 
Roberts  v.  Collins,  366. 
Roberts  v.  Davey,  452,  458,  1198, 

1207. 
Roberts  v.  Forsythe,  184. 
Roberts  v.  Gers,  720. 
Roberts  v.  Gt.  Western  R.  Co. ,  1006 
Roberts  v.  Haines,  565,  568. 
Roberts  v.  Hayward,  33,  118. 
Roberts  v.  Jackson,  1187. 
Roberts  v.  Levy,  409,  968,  970. 
Roberts  v.  Rose,  470,  557. 
Roberts  v.  Row,  467. 
Roberts  v.  Termell,  1307. 
Roberts  v.  Unger,  461. 
Roberts  v.  Wiggin,  197,  198,  203. 
Robertson  v.  Amazon,  507. 
Robertson  v.  Banks,  371. 
Robertson  v.  French,  649,  655. 
Robertson  v.  Gaines,  340. 
Robertson  v.  Gardiner,  119, 
Robertson  v.  MiUer,  540. 


1486 


Table  of  Cases. 


Robertson  v.  Phillips,  1221. 
Robertson  v.  Pope,  271. 
Robertson  v.  St.  John,  931. 
Robie  V.  Smith,  57,  69. 
Robinv.  Sedgwick,  188. 
Robins  v.  Cox,  1353. 
Robins  v.  Eaton,  201,  204. 
Robins  v.  Quinlinen,  137. 
Robinson  v.  Anderton,  1271. 
Robinson  v.  Chamberlain,  842. 
Robinson  v.  Gould,  448. 
Robinson  v.  Hathaway,  489,  1383. 
Robinson  v.  Harman,  782, 897. 
Robinson  v.  Hoffman,  1308. 
Robinson  v.  Kettletas,  316. 
Robinson  v.  Learoyd,  1^58. 
Robinson  v.  L'Engle,  836,  1100. 
Robinson  v.  McManus,  1404. 
Robinson  v.  Page,  352,  368. 
Robinson  v.  Perry,  157,  709,  721. 
Robinson  v.  Phoenix  Co.,  460. 
Robinson  v.  Robinson,  249. 
Robinson  v.  Rosher,  785. 
Robinson  v.  Waddington,  1323. 
Robinson  v.  Wheeler,  54,  983, 1277. 
Robinson  v.  Wright,  1231. 
Robson  V.  Collins,  367. 
Robson  V.  FUght,  299,  767,  995. 
Robson  V.  Jones,  473. 
Robson  V.  Whittingham,  1001. 
Roby  V.  Cossitt,  268. 
Roby  V.  Maisey,  117. 
Rochester  v.  Gray,  435. 
Rochester  v.  Pierce,  189,  193. 
Rockingham  v.  Pearce,  1093. 
Rockingham  v.  Penrice,  1035, 1091. 
RockweU  V.  Wilson,  563. 
Rockwood  V.  Wilson,  563,  852. 
Rodd  V.  Archer,  1142. 
Rode  V.  Farr,  713. 
Roden  v.  Eyton,  1323,  1324. 
Rodgers  v.  Parker,  1325,  1337. 
Rodgers  v.  Pitcher,  1043. 
Rodgers  v.  Wallace,  294. 
Rodman  v.  Zilley,  361. 
Roe  V.  Archbishop  of  York,  463. 
Roe  V.  Chamock,  109. 
Roe  V.  Foster,  207. 
Roe  V.  Haley,  675. 
Roe  V.  Harrison,  710.  716. 
Roe  V.  Hayley,  181,  677,  678. 
Roe  V.  Hurstamonceaux,  921. 
Roe  V.  Jerome,  485. 
Roe  V.  Lees,  46. 
Roe  V.  Lewis,  51. 
Roe  V.  Paine,  800,  807. 
Roe  V.  Pierce,  117. 
Roe  V.  Prideaux,  275,  1383. 
Roe  V.  Ward,  105,  113. 
Roe  V.  Wiggs,  1391. 
Roe  V.  Wilkinson,  109. 
Roebuck  v.  Dupoy,  694,  699. 
Rofley  V.  Henderson,  557, 1266. 


Roger,  Re,  1093, 1094. 
Rogers  v.  Atkinson,  366. 
Rogers  v.  Birkmire,  1314,  1326. 
Rogers  v.  Brokaw,  1234. 
Rogers  y.  Cadwallader,  251,  256. 
Rogers  V.  Conger,  197. 
Rogers  v.  Crow,  1222. 
Rogers  v.  Gillinger,  1223. 
Rogers  v.  Grazebrook,  265. 
Rogers  v.   Humphries,   247,   263, 

1308. 
Rogers  v.  Jones,  446,  527. 
Rogers   v.    Kingston    upon  HuU 

Dock  Co.,  111. 
Rogers  v.  McKenzie,  722. 
Rogers  v.  Moore,  247,  254,  615. 
Rogers  v.  Ostrom,  1097, 1106,  1113. 
Rogers  v.  Pitcher,  490,  1061,  1304. 
Rogers  v.  Price,  1013. 
Rogers  v.  PuUen,  11,  59. 
Rogers  v.  Sanders,  358. 
Rogers  v.  Saunders,  358,  360. 
Rogers  v.  Sebastean,  584. 
Rogers  v.  Smith,  1282. 
Rogers  v.  Snow,  815. 
Rogers  v.  Waller,  489,  1383. 
Rokesthaw  v.  Brewer,  950. 
Rolfe  V.  Peterson,  923,  1055,  1057. 
RoUason  v.  Lion,  340,  431,  1307. 
Rolleston  v.  New,  995. 
Rollins  V.  Phelps,  272. 
Romeo  v.  Chapman,  194. 
Rood  V.  N.  Y.  &  Erie  R.   R.  Co., 

416. 
Roof  V.  Stafford,  197,  198,  201. 
Roome  v.  Philhps,  239. 
Roosevelt  v.  Abbott,  692,  834, 1344. 
Roosevelt  v.  Hopkins,  718. 
Rootin  V.  Robertson,  773. 
Roper  V.  Coombes,  357,  943. 
Roper  V.  Lloyd,  1096. 
Roscorla  v.  Thomas,  695. 
Roscorler  v.  Thomas,  691. 
Rose  V.  Davis,  489,  491,  1384. 
Rose  V.  Pulton,  441,  688. 
Rose  V.  Ware,  267. 
Rose  V.  Wynn,  779. 
Roseboom  v.  Mosher,  238,  240. 
Roseboom  v.  VanVetchen,  137. 
Rosenbaum  v.  Gunter,  1292. 
Rosenthal  v.  Freeburgher,  377, 378. 
Rosenthal  v.  Freehanger,  375. 
RosweU  V.  Prior,  865,  1281. 
Ross  V.  Alderwick,  163. 
Ross  V.  BedeU,  435. 
Ross  V.  Fedden,  848,  849,  1303. 
Ross  V.  Gill,  213. 
Ross  V.  Madison,  190. 
Ross  V.  Overton,  808,  809,  813. 
Ross  V.  Union  Pacific,  &c.,  361. 
Ross  V.  Worsopf ,  946. 
Rosse's  Case,  162. 
Rossiter  v.  Walsh,  281. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1487 


Eothwell's  Case,  486. 
Roule  V.  Wynne,  855. 
Eoulston  V.  Clark,  1307. 
Eoundtree  v.  McLain,  358. 
Eow  V.  Duthelly,  944,  950. 
Eowan  v.  little,  26,  28, 1153. 
Eowan  v.  Lytle,  1160. 
Eowan  v.  Eiley,  1070. 
Eowbotham  v.   Wilson,  560,   561, 

566. 
Eowe  V.  Becket,  290. 
Eowe  V.  Chichester,  944,  950. 
Eowe  V.  Oranite  Bridge  Co.,  531. 
Eowe  V.  Hunking,  861. 
Eowe  V.  Huntin^on,  603. 
Eowe  V.  Lewis,  290. 
Eowe  V.  Young,  1062, 1079. 
Eowland  v.  Eowland,  449. 
Eowley  v.  Stoddard,  1086. 
Eowls  V.  Gells,  959. 
Eoxburghe  v.  Eobertson,  637. 
Eoyce  v.  Guggenheim,  847,  848, 

1113. 
Eoylance  v.  Lightf oot,  264. 
Eube  V.  Fyler,  166. 
Eubery  v.  Jervaise,  944,  946. 
Eubery  v.  Stevens,  753,  755. 
Eubottom  V.  Borrow,  239. 
Eucker  v.  McNally,  624. 
Eudd  V.  Golding,  158,  1193,  1201, 
Eude  V.  Farr,  452,  453. 
Eudolph  V.  CQvell,  358. 
Euffey  V.  Henderson,  1257. 
Euggles  V.  Lesure,  469. 
Euggles  V.  Washington,  268. 
EumbaU  v.  Wright.  1337. 
Eumford  v.  Wood,  189. 
Euntin  v.  Eobertson,  772,  774. 
Eunyan  v.  Mensereau,  253. 
Eupp  V.  Maisey,  72. 
Eushden's  Case,  666. 
Eussell  V.  AJlard,  497,  1385. 
Eussell  V.  Allen,  347,  252,  259. 
Eussell  V.  Darwin,  936. 
Eussell  V.  Doty,  1025. 
Eussell  V.  Erwin,  493,  635. 
Eussell  V.  Fabyan,  19,  1136, 1331. 
EusseU  V.  Gulevel,  623. 
Eussell  V.  McCartney,  385. 
Eussell  V.  Eogers,  636. 
Eussell  V.  Ryder,  1322. 
Eussell  V.  Scott,  438,  547,  554. 
Eussell  V.  Shenton,  1004,  1289. 
Eussell  V.  Stokes,  261,  314,  676. 
Eussell  V.  Titus,  493. 
Rutgers  v.   Hunter,  980,  935,  940. 
Eutfond  V.  Wythe,  306. 
Rutson  V.  Lewis,  712. 
Eutzen  v.  Lewis,  893.  1205. 
Eyan  v.  Clark,  449,  478. 
Eyan  v.  Howe,  445. 
Ryan  v.  Marsh,  1839,  1333. 
Ryan  v.  Shilcock,  1319. 


Ryan  v.  Thompson,  1066. 
Ryan  v.  Wilson,  860,  863,  869. 
Ryckman  v.  Gills,  659. 
Ryder  v.  Jenny,  35,'  905,  935.  943. 
Ryder  v.  ManseU,  489,  497,   1386. 
Eyerson  v.  Eldred,  498, 1384. 
Eyerson    v.    Quackenbash,    1944, 

1048. 
Eylands  v.  Fletcher,  849,  850,  851, 

853. 
Ryot  V.  St  John,  802. 
Ryress  v.  Farwell,  497,  1385. 
Sabbarton  v.  Sabbarton,  298. 
Sacheverel  v.  Dale,  572. 
Sacheverel  v.  Frogate,  162,   165, 

1048. 
Saoheveril  v.  Day,  575. 
Sackett  v.  Sackett,  892. 
Sackrider  v.  Beers,  544. 
SadUer's  Co.  v.  Badcock,  703. 
Safifan  v.  Naglee,  709. 
Sahler  t.  Signer,  H87. 
Saint  V.  PiUey,  1261. 
St.  Albans  v.  Ellis,  633,  643,  697. 
St.  Albans  v.  Shore,  688,  632. 
St.  Andrews  Church's  Appeal,  676. 
St.  Aubyn  v.  Aubyn,  1093. 
St.  Germains  v.  Willan,  1363,  1864. 
St.  John  V.  Benedict,  359. 
St.  John  V.  Quitzon,  489,  1386. 
St.  Johns  College  v.  Murcott,  1818. 
St.  Joseph  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Ryan,  917, 

918. 
St.  Louis  V.  Morton,  189,  1884. 
St.  Louis  Bridge  Co.  v.  Curtis,  411. 
St.  Louis  Hospital  v.  Williams,  194. 
St.  Louis  Q.  R.  Co.  v.  Ludwig,  88. 
St.  Michaels,  &c.,  v.  Behrews,  1112. 
St.  Paul  V.  Lord  Dudley,  392. 
St,  Saviour's  Southwark  v.  Smith, 

735. 
Saiater  v.  Ferguson,  355, 1058. 
Sales  V.  Milkman,  360. 
Salisbury  v.  Andrews,  579. 
Salisbury  v.  Gladstone,  565. 
Salisbury  V.  Marshall,  834, 835, 1110. 
Sallade  v.  James,  1372. 
Salman  v.  Bradshaw,  776. 
Salme  v.  Bullock,  416. 
Salmon  v.  Claggett,  446. 
Saknon  v.  Matthews,  1031,  1032. 
Salmon  v.  Rudd,  552. 
Salmon  v.  Smith,  1096,  1187,  1138. 
Salmon  v.  Swan,  1188. 
Saknon  v.  Watson,  1369. 
Salsbury  v.  Herchender,  845. 
Salters  v.  Del.  &  Hud.  Canal  Co., 

874. 
Saltarm  v.  Houston,  633,  656,  699. 
Saltonstall  v.  Banker,  1386. 
Sampson  v.  Easterly,  642,  739, 740. 
Sanipson  v.  Henr^p-,  80,  1296. 
Sampson  v.  Hoddinott,  538,  555.      , 


1488 


Table  op  Oases. 


Sampson  v.  ShaefEer,  1329,  1338. 
Sams  V.  Fripps,  354 
Samson  v.  Clarkson,  1387. 
Samson  v.  Rose,  731. 
Samuel  v.  Scott,  833. 
Samuels  t.  iiradford,  554. 
Samwelson  v.  Cleveland,  &c.,  1395. 
Sanborn  v.  Flagler,  353. 
Sanders  v.  Karnell,  104. 
Sanders  v.  Paple,  946. 
Sanders  v.'  Partridge,  741,  751. 
Sanderson  v.  Chicago,  &c.,  1127. 
Sanderson  v.  Dobson,  649. 
Sanderson  v.  Griffith,  366. 
Sanderson  v.  Symonds,  459. 
Sandhill  v.  Franklin,  1043. 
Sandiman  v.  Breach,  503. 
Sands  v.  Hughes,  124. 
Sands  v.  Lyon,  604. 
Sandwith  v.  De  Silver,  674, 1030. 
Sane  v.  Morse,  1399. 
Sanford  v.  Handy,  635. 
Sanf  ord  v.  McLean,  198. 
Sangster  v.  Birkhead,  959. 
Sanquivico  v.  Beneditti,  363. 
Sanruda  v.  Lawford,  370. 
Santos  V.  Holhnshead,  18. 
Sapsford  v.  Fletcher,  185,  186,  755, 

1066. 
Sargeant  v.  Ashe,  1333. 
Sargeant  v.  Pray,  966. 
Sargent  v.  Adams,  628,  629. 
Sargent  v.  Stark,  548. 
Sarles  v.  Sarles,  138. 
Sarsfield  v.  Healey,  44. 
Sassyn  v.  Adams,  336. 
Satterfield  v.  Keller,  371. 
Satterlee  v.  Matthewson,  495, 1386. 
Sattonstall  v.  Banker,  836,  1383, 
Saunder's  Case,  138,  243,  572. 
Saunders  v.  Houghton,  139. 

Saunders    v.    Merryweather,   361, 
495. 

Saunders  v.  Musgrove,  58,  59,  98. 

Saunders  v.  Newman,  541,  544. 

Saunders .V.  Norwood,  893. 

Saunders  v.  Oleffe,  416. 

Saunders  v.  Stullings,  1235. 

Saunderson  v.JHansen,  186,  955. 

Sauverbye  v.  Arden,  443. 

Savage  v.  D.upuis,  46. 

Savage  v.  Foster,  378. 

Savage  v.  Rix,  273. 

Savage  v.  Stapleton,  608. 

Savel  V.  Cordell,  609. 

Saveland  v.  Green,  369. 

Savery  v.  Turnley,  373. 

Saward  v.  Leggatt,  801. 

Sawyer  v.  Kendall,  622. 

Saxon  V.  Blake,  272,  355. 

Say  V.  Barwick,  230. 

Say  V.  Guy,  343. 

Say  V.  Mattram,  643,  699. 


Say  V.  Smith,  601,  609,  614. 
Say  V.  Stoddard,  54. 
Scales  V.  Anderson,  1339. 
Scales  V.  Lawrence,  799,  803. 
Scarlett  v.  Hunter,  373. 
Scarlett  v.  Lamarque,  1380. 
Scarth,  Ex  parte,  1360. 
Shaeflfee  v.  Henkel,  1338. 
Schwarer  v.  Boylston  Market,  514, 

515. 
Schaisler  v.  Ames,  1398. 
Scheflfer  v.  Tithian,  463. 
ScheUing  v.  Holmes,  13. 
Schemerhorn  v.  BueU,  1376. 
Schemmer  v.  North,  1347. 
Schenley's  Appeal,  1316. 
SchiefEelin  v.  Carpenter,  793,  806, 

1157,  1170. 
Sohieflain  v.  Dietz,  1394. 
Schilling  v.  Holmes,  1099. 
Schilling  v.  Holmes,  121. 
Schmitz  V.  McManamy,  463. 
Schrietz  v.  Arratt,  494. 
Scholefleld  v.  Eedfern,  1094. 
Scholes  V.  Hargreaves,  530. 
School  Trustees  v.  Rowlands,  894, 

898. 
Shrader  v.  Decker,  198. 
Schroder  v.  Ward,  797. 
Schroeder  v.  King,  719,  911. 
Schultz  V.  Elliot,  498. 
Schumann  V.  Garratt,  485. 
Schuricht  v.  Broadwell,  1065. 
Schurniuer  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  530. 
Schutt  V.  Lang,  446. 
Schuyler  v.  Leggett,  46,  100,  433 

1308. 
Schuyler  v.  Smith,  43,  91,  108. 
Scissor  V.  McLans,  449. 
Scofield  V.  Lansing,  535,  536. 
Soot  V.  Scot,  1210. 
Scott  V.  Lunt,  1045,  1303. 
Scott  V.  Benion,  1142. 
Scott  V.  Bental,  431. 
Scott  V.  Bourdillon,  649. 
Soott  V.  Buchanan,  198. 
Scott  V.  Buckley,  1319. 
Scott  V.  Doe,  445. 
Scott  V.  Hale,  54. 
Soott  V.  Hausman,  113. 
Scott  V.  Majn,  944. 
Scott  V.  Millan,  671. 
Scott  V.  MorreU,  197. 
Scott  V.  Hephere,  1288. 
Scott  V.  Simmons,  847,  869,  1339 
Scott  V.  Steward,  307. 
Scott  V.  Wilson,  527,  529,  533. 
ScoveU  V.  Cabell,  583. 
Scrantonv.  Booth,  1333. 
Scranton  v.  Stewart,  196,  253. 
Scribner  v.  Holmes,  970. 
Scriven  v.  Gregoire,  515. 
Scruggs  V.  Brackin,  436. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1489 


Scudder  V.  Trenton,  &c„  976. 

Scully  V.  Murray,  346,  395. 

Sea  Ins.  Co.  v.  Stebbins,  346. 

Seabrook  v,  Gregg,  207. 

Seabrook  v.  Mayer,  1117. 

Seago  V.  Deane,  866,  819. 

Seagood  v.  Meale,  375. 

Sealey  v.  Randolph,  96. 

Seals  V.  Cashier,  346. 

Seaman  v.  Browning,  774. 

Seamen  v.  Hogeboom,  503. 

Seamen's  Case,  634.  ' 

Searing  v.  Butter,  269,  276. 

Searle  v.  Laverrick,  886, 1126, 1290. 

Sears  v.  Smith,  351. 

Seaver  v.  Phelps,  338. 

Seavey  v.  Central  Ins  Co. ,  407. 

Seavey  v.  Lafflin,  1059. 

Second  Congl.  Soc.  v.  Providence, 

957. 
Sedgwick  v.  HoUenbeck,  758. 
Seeger  v.  Petit,  1246. 
Seem  v.  McLees,  105,  110,  137. 
SeUrecht  v.  New  Orleans,  194. 
Seidensparger  v.  Spear,  465. 
Seifke  v.  Koch,  709. 
Seitz  V.  Miles,  1313. 
Seitzniger  v.  Weavsr,  694,  970. 
Selby  V.  Browne,453, 480, 1199, 1837. 
Selby  V.  Chute,  773. 
Selby  V.  Greaves,  405,  1023. 
Selby  V.  Selbv,  354. 
Selden  v.  Delaware,  &c.,  468,  470, 
Selden  v.  Myres,  635. 
Seldon  v.  Senate,  623,  653,  773,  775. 
Sellers  v.  Brickford,  689. 
Selsey  v.  Rhoades,  283. 
Semayh's  Case,  1319. 
Sencerbox  V.  McGrade,  373. 
Senior  v.  Armytage,  634, 888,  1365. 
Sepping  v.  Nokes,  731. 
Sepulveda  v.  Sepulveda,  326. 
Series  v.  Strancham,  694. 
Sessions  v.  Richmond,  1054. 
Seven  v.  Mihil,  1063. 
Severn  v.  Clark,  623,  699. 
Severn's  Case,  644. 
Sewall  V.  Gibbs,  637. 
Seward  v.  Leggatt,  798,  800,  878. 
Sewell  V.  Taylor.  907. 
Seymour  v.  Bell,  839. 
Seymour  v.  Delancey,  358. 
Seymour  v.  Lewis,  431. 
Seymour  v.  Wyckoff,  369. 
Shadwell  v.  Hutchinson,  516,  1S73. 
Shallcross  v.  Palmer,  594. 
Shallies  v.  Wilcox,  1068. 
Shaneleffer  v.  Council  Grove  Co., 

538. 
Sharmon  v.  Bradstreet,   196,  388, 

294, 
Sharp  V.  Kellogg,  326. 
Sharp  V.  Key,  1044, 1061. 


Sharp  V.  Milligan,  347,  373,  1143 

Sharp  V.  New  York,  278. 

Sharp  V.  Pratt,  238,  340. 

Sharp  V.  Sharp,  837. 

Sharp  V.  Spier,  966. 

Sharp  V.  Waterhouse,  699. 

Sharpe  v.  Kelley,  13. 
•Sliattuck  V.  Lovejoy,  711,  714. 

Shaw  V.  Barber,  158. 

Shaw  V.  Bowman,    1363. 

Shaw  V.  Coffin.  346,  590,  593. 

Shaw  V.  Crawford,  530,  533. 

Shaw  V.  Cummiskey,  539,  1397, 

Shaw  V.  Farnsworth,  3.82,  348. 

Shaw  V.  Hoadley,  355. 

Shaw  V.  Hoffman,  779,  1140. 

Shaw  V.  Kay,  607,  791,  878. 

Shaw  V.  Mudd,  275. 

Shaw  V.  Partridge,  218. 

Shaw  V.  Shaw,  211,  213. 

Shaw  V.  Stenton,  769,  773,  781. 

Shaw  V.  Summers,  301. 

Shawmut  Nat'l  Bk.  v.  City  of  Bos- 
ton, 404,  1038. 

Shearman  v.  Ranger,  970. 

Shed  V.  Leslie,  552. 

Shee  V.  Burtchell,  411. 

Shee  V.  Hale,  716,  717,  719. 

Sheecomb  v.  Hawkins,  301. 

Sheehan  v.  Davis,  438,  440. 

Sheen  v.  Rickie,  1218,  1268. 

Sheets  v.   Sheldon's   Lessee,    105, 
426,  1035. 

Shelbourne  v.  Jones.  66,  1371. 

Shelburn  v.  Biddulph,  930. 

Shelbury  v.  Scotsford,  1116. 

Shelby  v.  Heme,  674,  679,  817. 

Shelby's  Case,  599. 

Sheldon  v.  Davy,  73. 

Sheldon  v.  Edwards.  1187. 

Sheldon  v.  Newton,  201. 

Sheldon  v.  Sheldon,  115. 

Shelley  v.  Smith,  366. 

Shelley  v.  Wright,  645. 

Shelton  v.  Allcox,  645. 

Shelton  v.  Carrol,  490. 

Shelton  v.  Carnal,  498. 

Shelton  v.  Codman,  674. 

Shelton  v.  Deering,  460. 

Shepard  v.  Briggs,  157. 

Shepard  v.  Elmore,  964. 

Shepard  v.  Gas  Light  Co.,  779,  780. 

Shephard  v.  Martin,  490,  1383. 

Shepard  v.  Pratt,  449. 

Shephard  v.  Philbrick,  1249. 

Shepard  v.  Spaulding,  1261,  1263. 

Shepardson  v.  Rowland,  170. 

Shepherd  v.  Cummings,  101. 

Shepley  v.  Fifty  Associates,  845. 

Sheppard  v.  Allen,  612,  1196,  1215. 

Sheppard  v.  Doolan,  931,  933. 

Sheppard  v.  Watrous,  283,  233. 

Sherlock  v.  Thayer,  1031, 1034. 


1490 


Table  of  Cases. 


Sherman  v.  Fitch,  191. 
Sherman  v.  Hicks,  391. 
Sherman  v.  Wilkins.  406, 1102,1137. 
Sherman  v.  Williams,  409. 
Sherwood  v.  PhilUps,  33,  1319. 
Sherwood  v.  Scullan,  854. 
Sherwood  v.  Seaman,  1131. 
Sherwood  v.  Sehman,  785. 
Sheritt  v.  Buckley,  504. 
Shields  v.  Amdt,  537. 
Shields  V.  Lozear,  353,  497. 
Shiell  V.  McNitt,  1055. 
ShiUbeer  v.  Javis,  375,  380. 
Shilling  V.  Hohnes,  1073. 
Shind  Cheek  v.  Moon,  847, 
Shindelbeek  v.  Moon,  866. 
Shian  v.  Eoberts,  .'588. 
Shipley  v.  Fifty  Associates,  1287. 
Shipman  v.  Horton,  301. 
Shipman  v.  Mitchell,  85. 
Shippey  v.  Derrison,  351. 
Shipwick  V.  Blanchard,  1326. 
Shipwith  V.  Steed,  331. 
Ship  worth  v.  Green,  314, 
Shirley  v.  Ayres,  448. 
Shoneberger  v.  Hay,  648. 
Shopland  v.  Rider,  39,  311,  271. 
Shore  v.  Porter,  74,  85,  89. 
Shore  v.  Wilson,  680,   659. 
Shorey  v.  Farrell,  93,  110, 137. 
Shortbridge    v.    Lampleigb,    883, 

900. 
Shortridge  v.  Catlelt,  436. 
Shortwefi  v.  Murray,  365. 
Shreve  v.  Brereton.  1055. 
Shrewsbury  v.  Gould,  645,  913^. 
Shrewsbury's  Case.  598,  891,  993. 
Shrieve  v.  Stokes,  560,  563. 
Shreve  v.  Voorhees,  545, 
Shrunk  v.  SchuylkiU  Co.,  533. 
Shulrick  v.  Salmond,  653,  810,  832. 
Shuetze  v.  Bailey,  267. 
Shults  V.  Barker,  981. 
Shultz  V.  Arnot,  1385. 
Shultz  V.  Barker,  978. 
Shultz  V.  EUiott,  495. 
Shumway  v.  Collins,  714, 908, 1136i. 
Shury  v.  Brown,  1033. 
Shury  v.  Pigott,  430. 
Shute  V.  Grimes,  355. 
Shuts  V.  Selden,  605. 
Sibthorp  v.  Brunei,  684. 
Sicklemore  v.  Simonds,  666.- 
Sickles  V.  Fort,  1064. 
Sienteaud  v.  Jeanneaud,  73T. 
Sieutes  v.  Odier,  624,  625, 1383:. 
Sigmund  v.  Bank,  759. 
Signorette  v.  Maguire,  603. 
Sigourney  v.  Munn,  447. 
Silloway  v.  Brown,  262. 
Silsby  V.  AUen.  53. 
Silsby  V.  Trotter,  466. 
Silver  v.  Sumner,  1,883. 


Silvey  v.  Thomas,  1386. 
Simer  v.  Salters,  1386. 
Simkin  v.  Ashurst,  45. 
Simmons  v.  Norton,  974,  1014. 
Simmons  v.  Eobertson,  493. 
Simon  v.  Farren,  908,  1116,  1139. 
Simonds  v.  Turner,  965,  966. 
Simons  v.  Johnson,  500,  619,  656. 
Simons  v.  Marshall,  892. 
Simons  v.  Patchett,  897. 
Simper  v.  Foley,  1001. 
Simpkins  v.   Ashurst,  24,  26,  99, 

1147. 
Simpkins  v.  Eogers,  465. 
Simpson    v.    Butcher,    158,    162, 

712. 
Simpson  v.  Clayton,  681,  943, 1307. 
Simpson  v.  Gutteridge,  238. 
Simpson  v.   Hai-topp,   1310,   1312, 

1336. 
Simpson  v.  Leaney,  552. 
Simpson  v.  Literell,  592. 
Simpson  v.  McGatheny,  445. 
Simpson  v.  Margison,  611. 
Simpson  v.  Savage,  1278. 
Simpson  v.  Seavey,  177. 
Simpson  v.  Titterell,  581,  932, 1199. 
Sims  V.  Glazner,  489,  1383. 
Sims  V.  Hampton,  604. 
Suns  V.  McLure,  229. 
Sims  V.  Marryat,  1271. 
Sinclair  v.  Jackson,  268,  334. 
Singer  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Sayne,  44. 
Singleton  v.  Scott,  310,  317. 
Singleton  v.  Williamson,  1313, 1326. 
Sinker  v.  Long,  457. 
Sir  Moyle  Fhich's  Case,  337. 
Skaggs  V.  Elkers,  84. 
Skaggs  V.  Emerson,  1137. 
Skally  V.  Shute,  1348. 
Skerry  v.  Preston,  1063, 1309, 1319. 
Skidmore  v.  Hart,  961. 
Skidmore  v.  Bamline,  229. 
Skingley,  In  Re,  993. 
Skinner  v.  Kilbys,  776. 
Skinner  v.  McDowall,  359. 
Skipwith  V.  Green,  485. 
Skull  V.  Glenister,  409, 416,  423. 
Slack  V.  Crowe,  2T0. 
Slack  v.  Gray,  1336. 
Slack  V.  Sharp,  1090,  1183,  1348. 
Slamper  v.  GrifHn,  17. 
Slater  v.  Rawson,  674. 
Slater  v.  Stone,  684,  816. 
Slator  V.  Brady,  196, 198,  303. 
Slator  V.  Trimble..  196,  198,  201. 
Sleap  V.  Newman.  755. 
Sleddon  v.  Oruikshank.  1220, 1360 
Sleigh  V.  Bateman,  1156. 
Slingerley  v.  Fox,  1069,  1133. 
Slingsby's  Case,  175,  176,  681. 
Slipper  V.  Tottenham,  716. 
Sloan  V.  CantweU,  119, 


Table  of  Cases. 


1491 


Sloan  V.  Lawrence  Furnace  Co.,     Smith  v. 

573.  Smith  v. 
Slocum  Y.  Branch,  1180.               .       Smith  v. 

Slocum  V.  Hooker,  1086.  Smith  v. 

Slocum  V.  Smith,  624.  Smith  v. 

Slossfleld  V.  Mayor,  &c.,  1361.  Smith  v. 

Small  Y.  Edrick,  605.  Smith  v, 
Smallman  v.  Agborow,  165,  333.         Smith  v. 

Smart  v.  Norton,  564,  565,  566.  Smith  v. 

Smart  v.  Rea,  358.  Smith  v. 

Smart  v.  Wathen,  176.  Smith  v. 

Smarth  v.  Williams,  249,  744.  Smith  v. 

Smead  v.  Foord,  897,  898.  Smith  v. 

Smiley  v.  Lanthlin.  1333.  Smith  v. 

Smiley  v.  McLanathan,  938.  Smith  v. 

Smiley  v.  Van  Winkle,  729,  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Adams,  589.  Smith  v. 
Smith  V.  Agawam  Canal  Co.,  545.     Smith  v. 

554.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Ahlt,  89.  Smith  v. 

Smith  "v.  Allen,  366.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Alt,  108,  351,  1073.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Ambler,  1318.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Arnold,  674.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Ashforth,  1831,  1333.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Attick,  13,  35.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Aylesworth,  1035.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Baker.  436.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Bale,  575,  578.  Smith  v. 
Smith  V.  Barrett,  188,  189.  1157. 

Smith  V.  Benson,  1239,  1347.  Smith  v. 
Smith  V.  Bland,  1071.  884. 

Smith  V.  Brannan,  454.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Brinker,  1030.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Bowin,  196,  940.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Bumham.  356.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Calson,  1306.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Campbell,  770.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Carroll,  1331.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Carter,  993.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Chambers,  693,  694.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Chance,  935.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Chatham,  399.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Chichester,  950.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Clark,  131.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Compton,  770.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Cooley,  815.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Crandall,  360,  374.  Smith  v. 
Smith  V.  Day,  303,  336,  477,  601.  696. 

Smith  T.  Dickerson,  439.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Doe,  1089.  Smith  v. 
Smith  V.  Doe  d.  Earl  of  Jersey,  304,      Smith  v. 

305.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Douglas,  878.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Doolin,  1154.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Earl  of  Jersey,  634.  Smith  v. 
Smith  V.  Eldridge,  1338, 1331, 1347,      Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Floyd,  533,  523.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Fyler,  1306.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Galloway,  400.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Goodwin,  1310.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Hardestry.  568.  Smith  v. 

Smith  V.  Harrow,  176.  Smith  v. 


Hawich,  699. 

Heiskell,  1333. 
Higlee,  624. 
Holbrook,  1187. 
Houston,  18,  46, 1329. 
Hull,  446. 
Humbert,  1380. 
Humble,  186,  955. 
Jersey,  136. 
Jones,  484. 
Kendrick,  563. 
Kenrick,  559. 
Kerr,  1163. 
King,  341. 
Kinkard,  1331. 
Law,  485,  486. 
Lewis,  537. 
Littlefleld,  107. 
London,  &c.,  987. 
LoveU,  1184. 
Low,  208,  310,  488. 
McCann,  449. 
McCurdy,  493,  494,  1385. 
McGowan,  460. 
Mace,  457. 
Male,  353. 
MaUnes,  1188. 
Malings,  1115. 
Mapleback,  179, 180, 1033, 

Marrable,  128,  386,  788, 

Martin,  411,  417,  418. 

Meanor,  1309. 

Mills,  145. 

Morse,  194. 

Never,  1179. 

Nevins.  1170. 

Newsam,  1023. 

Niles,  938. 

Norr,  438. 

Ogg,  117. 

O'Hara.  553. 

Pearce,  1065. 

Peat,  793,  806,  881. 

Pendergast,  1149,  1186. 

Perry,  367. 

.    Pocklington,    693,    694 

Putman,  719. 

Raleigh,  1137, 1189,  1335. 

Rector,  &c.,  1273. 

Render,  1267. 

Rice,  15. 

Richards,  235. 

Ridgeway,  416. 

Ross,  550. 

Russell,  1313. 

Scott,  470. 

Sharpe,  981. 

Shepard,  1116,  1117. 

Sheriff,  1306. 

Simons,  394,  395. 


1492 


Table  of  Cases. 


Smith  V.  Singleton,  37. 

Smith  V.  Smith,  991. 

Smith  V.  So.  EoyaJton  Bk.,  444. 

Smith  V.  Stewart,  18,  19,  63,  1337. 

Smith  V.  Stigleman,  1111,  1137. 

Smith  V.  Stowel,  331. 

Smith  V.  Strong,  783. 

Smith  V.  Sublett,  374. 

Smith  V.  Taylor,  347,  357,  259. 

Smith  V.  Teft,  1890. 

Smith  T.  Turner,  375. 

Smith  V.  Twoart,  1338,  1331,  1333. 

Smith  V.  TyndaU,  390. 

Smith  V.  Wainwright,  1065. 

Smith  V.  Wheeler,  1171. 

Smith  V.  Whitback,  1088,  1040. 

Smith  V.  White,  130, 131,483, 1840. 

Smith  V.  Wiggin,  515. 

Smith  V.  Wilson,  396,  633,  915. 

Smith  V.  Wood,  361. 

Smith  V.  Wunderhch,  783. 

Smith's  Case,  1037. 

Smithson  t.  Cage,  408. 

Smith  &  Bustard's  Case,   1309. 

Smythe,  Ex  parte,  1089, 1093. 

Smyth  V.  Carter,  974,  993. 

Smyth  -v.  Kaugle,  933,  951. 

Smyth  V.  Taylor,  311. 

Snedaker  y.  Powell,  9. 

Snediker  v.  Warring,  1331. 

Sneesly  v.  Thorne,  365,  373. 

Sneezum  v.  Marshall,  593. 

SneU  V.  Bickley,  1371. 

SneU  V.  Tom,  117. 

SneU  V.  Young,  597. 

Snodgrass  v.  Reynolds,  757,  779. 

Snook  V.  Sutton,  313. 

Snow  V.  Cutler,  301. 

Snow  V.  Parson,  540,  541,  543. 

Snyder  v.  Kunkleman,  1309. 

Snyder  v.  Middleton,  1033,  1176. 

Snyler  v.  Lane,  969. 

Society  v.  Pawlet,  16. 

Society,  &c.,  v.  Law,  361. 

Sockerson  v.  Stewell,  359. 

Soden  v.  Smith,  937. 

Sohier  v.  Coffin,  336. 

Sohier  v.  WiUiams,  381. 

Solby  V.  Forbes,  500,  630. 

Soloman  v.  Glover,  349. 

Solomon  v.  Vinters'  Co.,  560,  568. 

SomersT.  BuUen,  115. 

Somerset  v.  Fogwell,  389,  390. 

Somerville  v.  Chapman,  934. 

Somes  V.  Skinner,  449. 

Soprain  v.  Skurro,  441, 1116, 

Sore  V.  Eykins,  1315. 

Sorsbie  v.  Park,  649,  681. 

Sortwell  V,  Gughes,  465. 

Sotilichos  V.  Kemp,  641. 

Soulsby  V.  Neving.  1359,  1361. 

Souter  V.  Drake.  64,  355,  759. 

South  V.  Law,  486. 


Southall  V.  Leadbeater,  957,  959 

1035. 
Southard  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  454,  584. 
South  Berwick  v.  Huntrees,  463. 
S.  Carolina  R.  E.  Co.  v.  Toomer 

291. 
Southcoate  v.  Hoare,  176. 
Southcomb  v.  Bp.  of  Exeter,  873. 
Southern  v.  Ballasis,  1091. 
Southern  Ins.  Co.  v.  Cole,  359. 
Southgate  v.  Chaplin,  775. 
Southwark  v.  Smith,  731,  741. 
Southwel  V.  Brown,  484. 
Spaulding  v.  Abbott,  419. 
Spaulding  v.  Conzelman,  377. 
Sparhawk  v.  Allen,  1071. 
Spai-k  V.  Spark,  433,  609. 
Sparkes  v.  Smith,  181,  745. 
Sparks  v.  State  Bank,  1223. 
Sparrow  v.  Paris,  1058. 
Spartale  v.  Benecke,  639.    « 
Speake  V.  Sheppard,  653,  683. 
Spear  v.  Fuller,  713. 
Spears  v.  Alhson,  1114. 
Speckles  v.  Sax,  788,  805,  819. 
Speers  v.  Lewell,  339. 
Spencer  V.  Bayes,  181,  737. 
Spencer  v.  ChnefeUer,  939. 
Spencer  v.  Darhngton,  719. 
Spencer  v.  Field,  373. 
Spencer  v.  Godwin,  1301. 
Spencer  v.  McGowen,  474.  1311. 
Spencer  v.  Marriott,  766,  767,  771, 

1087. 
Spencer  v.  Murreatt,  181. 
Spencer's  Case,  128,  391,  702,  1033. 
Spendlomes  v.  Burkit,  188.' 
Sperry  v.  Miller,  803. 
Sperry  v.  Sperry,  1173. 
Spice  V.  Webb,  1330. 
Spioer  v.  Cooper,  640. 
Spicer  v.  Lea,  111,  1143. 
Spies  V.  Domm,  406. 
Spooner  v.  French,  1040. 
Spragg  V.  Hammond,  955. 
Sprague  v.  Baker,  971. 
Spratt  V.  Jeffery,  733. 
Spreckles  v.  Sax,  1131,  1347. 
Spring  V.  Seavey^  530. 
Springdale  v.  Smith,  1054. 
Springfield  v.  Harris,  589,  553. 
Springstein  v.  Schermerhorn,  803, 

1153,  1158. 
Spurr  V.  Andrew,  971. 
Spyre  v.  Popham,  598,  599. 
Squier  v.  Mayor,  1351. 
Squire  v.  Campbell,  366. 
Staats  V.  Freeman,  993. 
Stacey  v.  Buttrick,  1384. 
Stacey  V.  Vt.  Centl.  B.  Co.,  1830 

1337. 
Stackpole  v.  Curtis,  554. 
Stackwell  v.  Hunter,  1033,  1033. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1493 


Stacy  v.Bostwick,  489, 
Stadhajrt  v.  Lee,  686. 
Stafford  v.  Lick,  445. 
Staggv.  Car  Co.,  1384. 
Stagg  V.  Eureka  Tanning  Co.,  493. 
Stafiter  v.  Cowman,  436. 
Staines  v.  Morris,  666,  733,  1038. 
Stainforth  v.  Fox,  334,  335,  342. 
Stalk  V.  Locke,  794. 
Stambaugh  v.  Hallabai]gh,i<476. 
Stamp  V.  Clinton,  578. 
Stamper  v.  Griffin,  46. 
Standen  V.  Christmas,  260,788, 1306. 
Stanhope  v.  Skeggs,  715,  716. 
Stanley  v.  Aymer,  131,  788. 
Stanley  v.  Chamberlain,  464. 
Stanley  v.  Green,  579. 
Stanley  v.  Hayes,  761,  763,  777. 
Stanley  v.  Koehler,  1176. 
Stanley  v.  Towgood,  793,  798,  880, 

900. 
Stanley  v.  Wharton,  1315. 
Stannard  v.  Forbes,  693,  694. 
Stansbury  v.  Taggart,  19. 
Stansell  v.  Jollard,  560,  568. 
Stansfield  v.  Mayor,  1251,  1366, 
Stanton  v.  Button,  447. 
Stanton  v.  Miller,  359. 
Stanway  v.  Rock,  46,  47,  63,  69, 
Staple  V.  Heydon,  437,  515. 
Staples  V.  Anderson,  870, 1134, 1344. 
Staples  V.  Spring,  1382. 
Starkpate  v.  Arnold,  354. 
Starkweather  v.  Martin,  436. 
Stames  v.  Morris,  785. 
Starr  v.  Jackson,  1277. 
State  V.  Bonham,  1231, 
State  V.  Boring,  460. 
State  V.  Canterbiu-y,  533. 
State  V.  Cargill,  1375. 
State  V,  Elliott,  1347. 
State  V.  Freeport,  536. 
State  V.  Gasconde,  604,  605. 
State  V.  Glen,  537. 
State  V.  Halloway,  235. 
State  V.  Kinkel,  236. 
State  V.  Laval,  346. 
State  V.  McCay,  1398. 
State  V.  Martin,  668,  742. 
State  V.  MiUer,  460. 
State  V.  Moore,  93,  1370. 
State  V.  Page,  15. 
State  V,  Plaisted,  198. 
State  V.  Pollock,  1375, 1380. 
State  V.  Bagland,  353. 
State  V.  Schmeile,  604. 
State  V.  Sluder,  233. 
State  V.  Wheeling  Bridge  Co.,  530. 
State  V.  Williams,  1381. 
State  V.  Wilson,  573, 
State  Bank  v.  Evans,  444. 
Statham  v.  Liverpool,  &c.,  945, 946. 
Staveley  v  AUcock,  1308, 

II.— 42 


Stavers  v.  Curling,  933, 

Stead  V,  Dowher,  353, 

Stead  V.  Nelson,  330. 

Steadman  v.  Gassett,  159. 

Steam  Nav.  Co.  v.  Wright,  917, 918, 

Stearns  v,  Godfrey,  493. 

Stearns  v.  Morse,  447. 

Stearns  v.  Sampson,  1313, 1396. 

Steams  v.  Stearns,  340. 

Steams  v.  Warren,  1237. 

Stebbins  v.  Park,  1331. 

Stebbins  v.  Peck,  1339,  1333. 

Stedman  v.  Bates,  169. 

Stedman  v.  Gassett,  25,  1387. 

Stedman  v.  Mcintosh,  53,  98. 

Stedman  v.  Page,.  165, 

Stedman  v.  Smith,  1004. 

Steel  V,  Frick,  336, 

Steel  V.  Payne,  374. 

Steele  v.  Biggs,  373. 

Steele  v.  Mart,  606,  663. 

Steele  v..Midland,  &c.,  E.  E.  Co., 
408. 

Steele  v.  Miller,  443. 

Steen  v.  Wadsworth,  496. 

Steffens  v.  Earl.  104. 

Steffins  v.  Colhns,  633,  636. 

Steightz  V.  Eggington,  367. 

Stein  V.  Burden,  539,  540,  544. 

Steinhauser  v.  Kuhn,  113. 

Stophain  v.  Brown,  1389. 

Stephens  v.  Bridges,  1189. 

Stephens  v.  Elliott,  337,  328. 

Stephens  v.  Huss,  448. 

Stephens  v.  Ormaii ,  335. 

Stephens  v.  Reynolds,  949, 

SterUngv.  Warden,  1313. 

Sterling  HydrauUo  Co,  v.  Wil- 
liams, 671. 

Stern  v.  Freeman.  205. 

Stelson  V.  Day,  983. 

Stevens  v.  Barrett,  1055. 

Stevens  v.  Cooper.  789,  1347. 

Stevens  v.  Copp,  740. 

Stevens  v.  Hatch,  443. 

Stevens  v.  Stevens,  468. 

Stevenson  v.  Hancock,  734. 

Stevenson  v.  Lombard,  648,  666, 
736,  1115. 

Stevenson  v.  SUvernail,  719. 

Stevenson's  Case,  642. 

Steward  v.  Winters,  905,  907. 

Steward  v,  Wolveridge,  1030. 

Stewart  v.  Aston,  483,  483,  1154, 

Stewart  v.  Astor,  463,  464. 

Stewart  v.  Clark,  134. 

Stewart  v.  Doughty,  66,  1370, 1373. 

Stewart  v.  Drake,  773,  969, 

Stewart  v.  Finch,  16, 

Stewart  v.  Fitch,  1339, 

Stewart  v.  Hall,  446. 

Stewart  v.  Lombe,  1358. 

Stewart  v.  Mumford,  1171. 


1494 


Table  of  Cases. 


Stewart  v.  Murray,  634. 
Stewaxt  V.  Preston,  458. 
Stewart  v.  Putnam,  836, 1389. 
Stickney  v.  Monroe,  1301. 
Stiles  V.  Brown,  442. 
Stiles  V.  Cowper,  161,  397. 
Stiles  V.  Hooker,  544,  547,  551, 
Stiles  V.  Probat,  443. 
Stm  V.  Probst,  458. 
StiUman  v.  Hamer,  1338, 1341. 
Staiwell  V.  ChappeU,  1067. 
Stinson  v.  Smith,  958. 
Stinson  v.  Stinson,  1071. 
Stirling  v.  Warden,  471,  478. 
Stitt  V.  Little,  235. 
Stobie  V.  DUls,  1176. 
Stockbridge  Iron  Works  v.  Hudson 

Iron  Co.,  465. 
Stockdale  v.  Onwhyn,  1343. 
Stockett  V.  Watkins,  20,  1331. 
Stockport  Water  Works  v.  Potter, 

467,  541,  542. 
Stockton  V.  Briscoe,  447. 
Stockton  V.  Martin,  596. 
Stockwell  V.  Campbell,  1233, 1386. 
Stockwell  V.  Hunter,  404,  871,  883. 
Stockwell  V.  Mark,  29. 
Stockwell  V.  Marks,  116. 
Stoddard  v.  Waters,  31. 
Stoddert  y.  Vestry,  &c.,  353,  354. 
Stokes  V.  Appomatox,  546. 
Stokes  V.  Cooper,  1335. 
Stokes  V.  Cowper,  1137. 
Stokes  V.  Grissell,  920. 
Stokes  V.  Moore,  353. 
Stokes  V.  Eussell,  314,  669,  676. 
Stomfil  V.  Hicks,  89. 
Slomsil  V.  Hicks,  87. 
Stone  V.  Evans,  740,  744, 1333. 
Stone  V.  Patterson,  260,  361,  1073. 
Stone  V.  Sprague,  19. 
Stone  V.  Theed,  950. 
Stone  V.  Whiting,  1173. 
Stone  V.  Whitney,  1168. 
Stone  V.  Wilson,  460. 
Stoner  v.  Cairn,  219. 
Stoops  V.  Delvin,  493,  498. 
Stopplekamp  v.  Marryeat,  108. 
Storch  V.  Caru,  1393. 
StoTer  V.  Hunter,  1351. 
Storey  v.  Robinson,  1313, 
Story  V.  Johnson,  303, 
Story  V.  Odin,  433,  423. 
Stott  V.  Rutherford,  489. 
Stouffer  V.  Latshard,  233. 
Stoughton  Y.  Baker,  374. 
Stoughton  V.  Leigh,  572. 
Stoughton  V.  Lynch,  486. 
Stout  V.  Kean,  1044. 
Stout  V.  McAdams.  545. 
Stout  V.  Merrill,  205,  493, 
Stoutenburg  v.  Tompkins,  361. 
Stover  V.  EUis,  461. 


Stover  V.  Whitman,  1038. 
Stow  V.  Wyse,  645. 
StoweU  V.  Robinson,  356. 
Stowman  v.  Landie,  1079» 
Btrabe  v.  Fehl,  981. 
Straohe  v.  Fehl,  331. 
Strafford  v.  Wentworth,  1093, 
Strahan  V.  Smith,  23,  99, 1041, 1043, 
Straight  v.  Burn,  427. 
Strang  ways  v.  Bishop,  348. 
Stranks  v.  St.  John,  357,  695. 
Straper  v.  Williams,  1051. 
Stratford  v.  Bosworth,  359. 
Stratic  v.  Fehl,  977. 
Stratton  v.  Pettitt,  103. 
Strickcomb  v.  Marsh,  274. 
Strickland  v.  Hudson,  16. 
Strickland  v.   Maxwell,   115,  600, 

1363. 
Strickler  v.  Todd,  420. 
Stringfellow  v.  Curry,  1333. 
Strode  v.  Eussell,  635. 
Strade  v.  Seaton,  163,  487,    491, 

674. 
Strokes  v.  Clarke,  950. 
Stromaiher  v.  Zeppenfield,  941. 
Strong  v.  Benedict,  553. 
Strong  V.  Crosby,  46, 100,  105, 434. 
Strong  V.  Garfield,  1330. 
Strong  V.  Grannis,  333. 
Stroyman  v.  Knowles,  562,  568. 
Struges  V.  Bridgman,  570. 
Struper  v.  Williams,  1052. 
Stryper  v.  Vanderbilt,  604. 
Stuart  V.  Clark,  530,  533,  535. 
Stubbs  V.  Parsons,  186,  955,  1309. 
Studen  v.  Chrismas,  483. 
Stukeley  v.  Butter,  571. 
Stuttz  V.  Dickey,  66,  1371. 
Sturgeon  v.  Wingfields,  324,  490, 
Sturgess  v.  Farrington,  185,  1066, 
Sturgess  v.  Tatchell,  243. 
Sturgis  V.  Warren,  1233. 
Stuyvesant  v.  Davis,  1313. 
Stuyvesant  v.  Mayor,  181,  359. 
Style  V.  Hearing,  693. 
Styles  V.  Wardle,  606,  1035. 
Suchmuker  v.  Sibert,  595. 
Suffern  v.  Butter,  439. 
Suffleld  V.  Brown,  556,  557. 
Sidl  V.  Cass,  626. 
Sulhvan  v.  Bishop,  1033, 1358. 
SuUivan  v.  Carberry,  67. 
Sullivan  v.  Jones,  16,  17,  100. 
Sulzbacher  v.  Dickie,  839. 
Summer  v.  Bromilow,  1219,  1351. 
Summers  v.  Clark,  1070. 
Summers  v.  Humphrey,  328. 
Sumner  v.  Bromilow,  1266. 
Sunderland  v.  Newton,  1233. 
Sunderson  v.  Lighe,  ,156. 
Supervisors  v.  Herrington,  1386. 
Surcome  v.  Penniger,  378. 


Table  op  Cases, 


Surplice  v.  Faxnsworth,  831,  886, 

1125. 
Sury  V.  Brown,  1049,  1050. 
Sutclifife  V.  Atwood,  668,  673,  736. 
Sutcliffe  V.  Booth,  655.  556. 
Sutherland  v.  Briggs,  354,  378. 
Sutlifie  V.  Atwood,  1031. 
Sutphin  V.  Seeboss,  833, 1136,  1340, 
Sutton  V.  Chaplain,  1093. 
Sutton  V.  Harvey,  301, 
Sutton  V.  Jones.  299. 
Sutton  V.  Temple,  139,  788,789,  790. 
Sutton's  Case,  155,  390. 
Suydam  v.  Jackson,  841, 1133, 1133. 
Suydam  v.  Jones,  674,  677, 
Swain  v.  Dolman,  320. 
Swaine  v.  Gt.  North'n  E.  Co.,  1001. 
Swaine  v.  Hohnajti,  1167. 
Swan  V.  Stransham,  694,  696,  699. 
Swann  v.  Falmouth,  1330. 
Swann  v.  Kidd,  456. 
Swasey  v.  Crooks,  181. 
Swatman  v.  Ambler,  441,  669. 
Swazy  V.  Brooks,  599. 
Sweeney  v.  Garrett,  1036,  1039. 
Sweeney  v.  Old  Colony  R.  R.  Co., 

868. 
Sweeper  v.  Randall,  158. 
Sweet  V.  Anderson,  946. 
Sweet  V.  Seagar,  965,  1065. 
Sweetman  v.  Gush,  893. 
Sweetser  v.  LameU,  448. 
Sweetser  v.  Lowell,  355,  356. 
Sweetzer  v.  Jones,  1332. 
Swett  V.  Cutts,  349. 
Swett  V.  Patrick,  176. 
Swift  V.  Dean,  490,  498,  1385. 
Swift  V.  East  Waterloo  Hotel,  791, 

1339. 
Swift  V.  Eyres,  400,  401. 
Swift  V.  Gage,  489. 
Swift  V.  Thompson,  1327. 
Swindles  v.  Beswick,  503. 
Swinfen  v.  Swinfen,  1189. 
Swinnerton  v.  MiUer,  113S. 
Swinten  v.  Bacon,  1350. 
Swinton  v.  Pedie,  1384. 
Swire  v.  Leach,  1311,  1336. 
Swords  V.  Edgar,  843,  866,  1288. 
Sybrey  v.  White,  1301, 
Sybum  v.  Slade,  1185. 
Syckel  v.  Emery,  977,  981. 
Syers  v.  Jonas,  637, 
Sylvester  V.  Eawlston,  1334. 
Symcock  v.  Payne,  1328. 
Syme  v.  Harvey,  1230,  1250, 
Symonds  v.. Harris,  1235. 
Symons  v.  Symons,  158,  1093. 
Sym's  Case,  225. 
Tabey  Fum.  Co.  v.  Roure,  1341. 
Tabor  v.  Bradley,  417. 
TafEe  v.  Warwick,  1227. 
Taggard  v.  Roosevelt,  50,  100,  433, 


? 


1495 


Taintor  v.  Cole,  170, 

Talbot  V,  Denis,  219. 

Talbot  V.  Whipple,  1170, 1180, 1^61. 

Tale  V,  Crowson,  1038, 

Taler  v.  Seabrook,  1077, 

Tallman  v.  Bressler,  726, 

Tallman  v.  Coffin,  583,  669,  673. 

Tallman  v.  Franklin,  351. 

Talmage  v.  N.  A.  Coal  Co.,  194. 

Tahnan  v.  Goshineler,  1112,  1133. 

Talson  v.  Gamer  338, 

Tancred  v,  Christy,  19,  44,  1147. 

Tanfleld  v.  Rogers,  1033. 

Tanner  v,  Valentine,  468, 

Tanner  v,  W-ashboume,  1366, 1368. 

Tanney  v.  Roberts,  873. 

Taplin  v.  Florence,  557. 

Taplis  V.  Grane,  1318. 

Tappan  v.  Deblois,  317. 

Tappan  v.  Redfield,  489. 

Targus  v.  Paget,  599. 

Tarte  v.  Darby,  1178. 

Tasker  v.  Bartlett,  435. 

Tasker  v.  Burr,  115. 

Tassey  v.  Chiirch,  371. 

Tate  V.  Austin,  219. 

Tate  V.  Gleed,  1313. 

Tate  V.  McCormick,  145. 

Tatern  v.  ChapUn,  673,  738,  911. 

Taturn  v.  Catamore,  694. 

Taunton  V.  Coster,  30,  1144,  1297, 

1056. 
Tausey  v.  Roberts,  859. 
Tavener's  Case,  836. 
Tawney  v.  Crowther,  359, 
Tayler  v.  Stendall,  1004. 
Tayleur  v.  Wildin,  123. 
Taylor  v.  Adams,  340. 
Taylor  v.  Ashton,  377. 
Taylor  v.  Atlantic  Ins.  Co.,  842. 
■Taylor  v.  Bailey,  853. 
Taylor  v.  Blanchard,  917,  918. 
Taylor  v.  Briggs,  640. 
Taylor  v.  Cabanne,  395. 
Taylor  v.  Caldwell,  75,  465,  466. 
Taylor  v.  Carondelet,  189. 
Taylor  v.  Chapman,  1173. 
Taylor  v.  Clemsen,  1335. 
Taylor  v.  Cole.  30,  1276, 1377, 1396. 
Taylor  v.  De  Bue,  669f 
Taylor  v.  Dulwich  Hospital,  320, 

934. 
Taylor  v.  Eckford,  447. 
Taylor  v.  Galloway,  240. 
Taylor  v.  Glazer,  437. 
Taylor  v.  Johnson,  1315. 
Taylor  v.  Leith,  235. 
Taylor  v.  Mayor,  &c.,  1282. 
Taylor  v.  Morton,  436. 
Taylor  v,  Needham,  488,  491, 
Taylor  v.  Partington,  360,  370. 
Taylor  v.  Patrick,  230. 
Taylor  v.  Peters,  1318. 


1496 


Table  op  Oases. 


Taylor  v.  Preston,  643. 
Taylor  v.  Salmon,  376. 
.Taylor  v.  Sandiford,  1055, 
Taylor  v.  Shaford,  486. 
Taylor  v.  Shum,  647,  740, 755, 1028. 
Taylor  v.  StendaU,  1378. 
Taylor  v.  Stibbert,  933. 
Taylor  v.  Townsend,  1328. 
Taylor  v.  Welch,  538. 
Taylor  v.  Whitehead,  1005. 
Taylor  v.  Winter,  949. 
Taylor  v.  Zamira,  253,  955, 
Taymouth  v.  Kochler,  190. 
Tchieder  v.  Biddle,  943. 
Tear  v.  Winterton,  1355. 
Tempest  v.  Eawhngs,  343, 845,  891. 
Temple  v.  Brown,  357,  764. 
Temple  v.  Johnson,  374. 
Templeman  v.  Biddle,  66,  1371. 
Tenant  v.  Blacker,  439. 
Tenant  v.  Goldwin,  788. 
Tennant  v.  Field,  1309,  1333. 
Tenney  v.  E.  Warren,  &c. ,  Co. ,  399. 
Tenny  v.  Beard,  629. 
Terrant  v.  HelUer,  1196. 
Terrell  v.  Legion,  1305. 
Terry  v.  Hopkins,  318. 
Terry  v.  Hazlewood,  460. 
Terry  v.  Bobbins,  1232. 
Terry  TT.  Russell,  346. 
Tevis  V.  Richardson,  355. 
Tew  V.  Jones,  45,  47,  94,  1335. 
Tewksbury  v.  Bucklin,  1005. 
Tewksbui-y  v.   MagrofE,  489,  490, 

493. 
Tewsbury  v.  Magraflf,  1383. 
Thackeray  v.  Wood,  765,  770,  771. 
Thames  Haven  Dock  Co.  v.  Bry- 

mer,  684. 
Thasker  v.  Henderson,  1044. 
Thayer  v.  Cramer,  245,  246. 
Thayer  v.  Payne,  420. 
Thayer  V.  Society,  &c.,  124, 1885. 
Thayer  v.  Torrey,  400. 
The  Banks  v.  Poitaux,  189,  193. 
The  Daniel  v.  Ball,  529,  533. 
The  Gaslight  Co.  v.  Turner,  1341. 
The  Montebello,  529,  533. 
Theed  v.  Starkley,  959. 
Theibald  v.  Erst  National  Bk.,  33, 
Thenner  v.  iSautre,  1223. 
Theobald  v.  DufEy,  615. 
Theol.  Inst.  v.  Barbom,  1331. 
Thetf  ord  v.  Thetf  ord,  233. 
Thetford  v.  Tyler,  34. 
Thieband  v.  Vevay,  108. 
Thielman  v.  Carr,  1324, 1239, 
Thomas  v.  Amey,  104,  106. 
Thomas  v.  Brackney,  543. 
Thomas  V.  Cadwallader,  684,   818. 
Thomas  v.  Cooke,  666,  1163,  1170. 
Thomas  v.  Grout,  1244. 
Thomas  v.  Field,  1149. 


Ttomas  v.  Frederick,  1044. 
Thomas  v.  Haines,  1309. 
Thomas  v.  Harris,  1320. 
Thomas  v.  Hayden,  1035. 
Thomas  v.  Hayward,  675,  738,  746, 
Thomas  v.  Hooker,  &c.,  957. 
Thomas  v.  Howell,  598. 
Thomas  v.  Kerneys,  392. 
Thomas  v.  Kingsland,  829,  860, 864, 
Thomas  v.  Marshfield,  546. 
Thomas  v.  Miles,  917. 
Thomas  v.  Nelson,  101, 1175. 
Thomas  v.  Packer,  111,  581,  1195, 
Thomas  v.  Parker,    104,   105,    106, 

1192. 
Thomas  v.  Pemberton,  1334 
Thomas  v.  PuUey,  305, 
Thomas  v.  PuUis,  303. 
Thomas  v.  Ringle,  96. 
Thomas  v.  Roberts,  87, 199,  314. 
Thomas  V.  Thomas,  113,  185,  137, 

560. 
Thomas  v.  VanKapff,  676,  703. 
Thomas  v.  Wiggers,  409. 
Thomas  v.  Williams,  1349. 
Thomas  v.  Wright,  98,  433. 
Thomlinson  v.  Dighton,  394. 
Thompkins  y.  Snow,  1383. 
Thompson  v.  Amey,  13,  100,  433, 

1193. 
Thompson  v.  Boardman,  239. 
Thompson  v.  Brown,  689. 
Thompson  v.  Bullock,  446. 
Thompson  v.  Crocker,  540,  545. 
Thompson  v.  Dowing,  721. 
Thompson  v.  Field,  1037. 
Thompson  v.  Gibson,  1383. 
Thompson  v.  Gray,  586. 
Thompson  v.  Guyon,  945. 
Thompson  v.  Hakewill,  611,  649. 
Thompson  v.  Hammond,  442.  ' 
Thompson  v.  Lapworth,  965. 
Thompson  v.  Leach,  433,  1152. 
Thompson  v.  Linscott,  201. 
Thompson  v.  Lockwood,  233. 
Thompson  v.   Maberley,  85,    109, 

610. 
Thompson  v.  MUes,  810. 
Thompson  v.  Pettit,  1279,  1810. 
Thompson  v.  Power,  1334. 
Thompson  v.  Sanborn,  88. 
Thompson  v.  Strickland,  306. 
Thompson  v.  Thompson,  584,  1061. 
Thompson  v.  Tod,  360. 
Thompson  v.  Trafford,  1163. 
Thompson  v.  WhaUey,  427. 
Thompson  v.  Waterlow,  428. 
Thompson  v.  White,  1347. 
Thompson  v.  Wilson,  1168. 
Thompson  v.  Amery,  43,  263, 1147. 
Thomson  v.  Wilcox,  629. 
Thorn  V.  Woolcombe,  392,  728,1191, 
Thomcide  v.  Allinton,  1018. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1497 


Thorndek  v.  Allison,  1355. 

Thomdike  v.  Burrage,  793,  795. 

Thome  v.  Masher,  605. 

Thornton  v.  Adams,  1315. 

Thornton  v.  Appleton,  328. 

Thornton  v.  Payne,  334. 

Thornton  v.  Sherratt,  915. 

Thornton  v.  Thornton,  168. 

Thoroughgood  v.  Walker,  1054, 
1059. 

Thorp  V.  Feltz,  349. 

Thorp  V.  Field,  815. 

Thorp  V.  Freed,  553. 

Thorp  V.  Pettit,  371. 

Thorpe  v.  Brumflt,  513,  517. 

Thorpe  v.  Eyre,  1366. 

Thorpe  v.  Sughi,  1347. 

Thrall  v.  Newell,  631. 

ThraU  v.  Omaha  Hotel,  489. 

Threr  v.  Barton,  393,  1183. 

Thresher  v.  E.  London  Waterworks 
Co.,  804,  1250. 

Throckmorton  v.  Tracey,  595,  600. 

Thropp  V.  Field,  407. 

Thunder  v.  Belcher,  349,  250,  355. 

Thm-ber  v.  Dwyer,  100,  105. 

Thurber  v.  Martin,  558,  554. 

Thurman  v.  Morrison,  535. 

Thnrsby  V.  Plant,  667,  735,  733. 

Thurston  v.  Dickenson,  139. 

Thurston  v.  Hancock,  560,563,  568. 

Thurston  v.  Masterson,  576. 

Thurston  v.  Mink,  423,  1424. 

Thurston's  Case,  324,  835. 

Thyer  v.  Society  of  United  Breth- 
ren, 13,  493,  1384. 

Thynn  v.  Chalmley,  1050. 

Thyme  v.  Glengall,  859,  380. 

Tibbals  v.  Jacobs,  444. 

Tibbetts  v.  Percy,  634. 

Tibbitts  V.  Moore,  370. 

Tidey  v,  Mallett,  340,431,  587,  319. 

Tidrick  v.  Eice.  269. 

Tidwell  V.  Whitworth,  957,  966. 

Tilden  v.  Tilden,  809. 

Tildesly  v.  Clarkson,  361. 

TQeston  v.  Newell,  683.  683. 

Tiley  v.  Movers,  1101,  1107. 

Tilgbman  v.  Little.  497,  1385. 

Tillett  V.  Charing  Cross  Bridge  Co. 
369. 

Tillinghast  v.   Holbrook,  197,  303, 

Tillmes  v.  Marsh,  515. 

TiUotson  V.Boyd,  743. 

Tillotson  V.  Doe,  493. 

TiUoton  Newell,  587. 

TUt  V.  Stratton,  25,  49,  73,  116. 

Tilton  V.  Foote,  933. 

Tilton  V.  Tilton.  366. 

Timbrell  v.  Bullock,  1096, 1163. 

Timm  v.  Barr,  543. 

Timm  v.  Bear,  543. 

Timmins  v.    Eawlinson,  74,   93, 


1390. 
Timmins  v.  Steele,  597,  698. 
Tinckler  V.  Prentice,  189,  955, 1037. 
Tipling  V.  Pexal,  195. 
Tipping  V.  Eckersleyj  995,  996, 

998. 
Tisdale  v.  Essex,  395,  768,  774. 
Tison  V.  Yaun,  494. 
Tissonv.  Ins.  Co.,  369. 
Tittle  V.  Grovett,  72. 
Tobey  v.,  Co.  of  Bristol,  358. 
Tobey  v.  Webster,  13,  78, 
Tobie  V.  Smith,  18. 
Todd  V.  Flight,  1391. 
Todd  V.  Hight,  1288. 
Todd  V.  Jackson.  154. 
Todd  V.  Philhamer,  639. 
T:odd  V.  Stokes,  671. 
Toddv.  Summers,  587,  1682. 
T.  &  B.  R.  R.  Co.v.  B.,  H.T.  &  W. 

R.  R.  Co.,  748. 
Toler  V.  Slator,  223. 
Tomes  v.  Chamberlain,  47,  63,  74, 

93. 
Tomkins  v.  Pincint,  1310. 
Tomlin  v.  Dubuque,  533. 
Tomlinv.  R.  E.  Co.,  539. 
Tomlinson  v.  Day,  453,  1110,  1347. 
Tomhnson's  Case,  615. 
Tompkins  v.  EUiott,  683,683. 
Tompkins  V.  Lawerence,  88,  91. 
Tompkins  v.  Snow,  493. 
Tompkinson  v.  Straight,  375. 
Tondro  v.  Cushman,  489,  1383. 
Tooker  v.  Smith,  101,  346. 
Toole  V.  Beckett,  843,  845,  876. 
Toole  V.  MedHcott,  374,  878. 
Toomes  v.  Conset,  366. 
Toplady  v.  Sealy,  474. 
Torrey  v.  Buck.  335. 
ToiTey  V.  Torrey,  35,  39. 
ToiTey  V.  WalUs,  674,  960. 
Torriano  v.  Young,  784,  893,  993, 

1181. 
Tortelot  v.  Phelps,  553. 
Town  V.  Butterfield,  493. 
Towne  v.  Butterfield,  57, 124, 1384. 
Towne  v.  Campell,  93.  104,  116. 
Town  V.  DeHeinrioh,  1331,  1353. 
Townrow  v.  Benson.  1067. 
Towsend  v.  Albens,  18.  1175. 
Townsend  v.  Cowler,  625. 
Towsend  v.  Davis,  1383. 
Townsend  v.  Downer,  443. 
Townsend  v.  Early,  717. 
Townsend  v.  Gilsey,  1111. 
Townsend  v.  Hill,  813. 
Townsend  v.  Hubbard,  375. 
Townsend  v.  Nickerson,  1114. 
Townsend  v.  Soholey,  711. 
Townsend  v.  Stangroom,  366,  367. 
Tracy  v.  Albany,  629.  931,  949. 
Tracy  v.  Atherton,  514,  647. 


1498 


Table  of  Cases. 


Tracy  v.  Dulton,  316. 

Tracy  v.  Talbot,  131'7, 

Tracy  v.  Talmage,  1343,  1345. 

Tramp  v.  Hurlburt,  447. 

TrapnaU  v.  Merrick,  883. 

Trappes  v.  Harter,  1232, 1237, 1338. 

Trask  v.  Patterson,  318,  321,  514. 

fTrask  v.  Wheeler,  465,  731, 1045, 

1        1195. 

Travinger  v.  McBurney,  1345. 

Ti-eackle  v.  Coke,  647,  1038. 

Ti-eade  v.  Coke,  743. 

Treadway  y.  Shaun,  1344. 

Tread  way  T.  Tread  vvay,  1338. 

Treadwell  v.  Davis,  851. 

Treat  v.  Lord,  535. 

Treat  v.  Shoninger  &c,  Co.  917,  918 

Tremain  v.  Cohoes  Co.,  563. 

Tremeere  v.  Morison,  755. 

Trenchard  v.  Hoskias,  655. 

Trent  v.  Hunt,  359,  1333,  1360. 

Treport's  Case,  487,  488,  1305. 

Tier  v.  Barton,  1305. 

Tresham  v.  Lamb,  403. 

Tress  v.  Savage,  43,  50,  106,  793, 

Trever  v.  Eoberts,  476. 

TrevUlian  v.  Andrew,  1144. 

Trevivan  v.  Lawerence,   334,  480. 

Tribbs  v.  Frame,  1396. 

Trigg  V.  Hally,  813. 

Trigg  V.  Bead,  365. 

Trimm  v.  Marsh,  353,  354,  745. 

Trinity  Church  v.  Higgias,  805. 

Tristan  d.  Gove  v.  Baltinglas,  306. 

Titton  V.  Foot,  983,  935,  937, 

Trottv.  Wood,  640. 

Troviuger  v.  McBurney,  1343. 

Trower  v.  Chadwick,  563. 

Truly's  Appeal,  1081. 

Trueblood  v.  Trueblood,  199,  314. 

Tmeman  v.  Loder,  641. 

TruesdeU  v.  Booth.  841,  1109, 1136. 

Truhen  v.  Miller,  1393. 

Trull  v.  Bigelow,  446. 

Trull  V.  Fuller,  1334. 

TruU  V.  Granger,  351,  779,  780. 

Truss  V.  Old,  311. 

Trustees  v.  Bootle,  530. 

Trustees  v.  Cowen,  671,  675. 

Trustees  v.  Dickinson,  530, 

Trustees  v.  Lynch,  671. 

Trustees  v.  Peaselee,  194. 

Trustees  v.  Robinson,  635. 

Trustees  v.  Youmanns,  539,  545. 

Trustees,  &c.,  v.  Thacher,  671. 

Tryon  v.  Nursson,  353. 

Tubb  V.  Fort,  1070. 

Tubervil  v.  Stamp,  985,  986. 

Tubervil  v.  Stockton,  1167. 

Tucker  v.  Adams,  47. 

Tucker  v.  Keeler,  355. 

Tucker  v.  Moore,  393. 

Tucker  v.  Moreland,  301,  303,  303. 


Tucker  v.  Morse,  99, 161, 1147. 
Tucker  v.  Newman,  1878. 
TuU  V.  Granger,  343. 
TuUett  V.  Armstrong,  330. 
TuUy  V.  Dunn,  386. 
Tully  V.  Howling,  880. 
Tunis  V.  Grandy,  1111, 1136, 
Tupper  V.  Caldwell,  300. 
Tupper  V.  Faulkes,  369,  440, 
Turby  v.  Rogers,  1384. 
Turnbull  v.  Gadsden.335. 
Turner  v.  Allday,  1036. 
Turner  v.  Barnes,  1317. 
Turner  v.  Bennett,  57,  70. 
Turner  v.  Cameron,  478, 1336, 1330. 
Turner  v.  Clay,  358. 
Turner  v.  Coal  Co.,  45, 1337. 
Turner  v.  Davis,  5. 
Turner  v.  Duplock,  1043. 
Turner  v.  Field,  436. 
Turner  v.  Ford,  1309, 1310,  1335. 
Turner  v.  Hai-dy,  1143,  1178,  1337, 
Turner  v.  Hutchinson,  369,  370. 
Turner  v.  Lamb,  793,  806,  898. 
Turner  v.  Lucas,  799,  1347. 
Turner  v.  McCarty,  831, 1377, 
Turner  v.  Maymatt,  30. 
Turner   v.  Meymott,    1143,  1396 

1356. 
Turner  v.  Sheffield,  1378. 
Turner  v.  Steam  Coal  Co.,  260, 
Turner  v.  Stip,  447. 
Turner  v.  Whidden,"'448. 
Turner  v.  Wilcox,  376. 
Turner  v.  Wright,  990. 
Tumey  v.  Sturgess,  148, 333, 
Turnham  v.  Cooper,  598. 
Turnpike  Co.  v.  Burnett,  993. 
Tustin  V.  Faut,  440. 
Tuttle  V.  GUbert  Mfg.  Co. ,  856, 857. 
Tuttle  V.  Manfg.  Co..  869. 
Tuttle  V.  Reynolds,  124,  135. 
Tuttle  V.  Tompkins,  1064. 
Tutton  V.  Darke,  1316. 
Tweed  v.  Mills,  733. 
Twigg  V.  Potts,  1268. 
Twycross  v.  Fitohburg  E.  E.  Co., 

959,  966. 
Twyman  v.  Pickard,  667,  744, 1306. 
Tyler  v.  Heidorn,  14. 
Tyler  v.  McCurdle,  371. 
T^^ler  V.  Seed,  109,  117. 
Tyler  v.  Wilkinson.  538,  541,  553. 
Tyrrmgham's  Case,  417,  530,  533. 
TyrreU  v.  Clark,  1093. 
Uhde  V.  Walters,  639. 
Uhl  V.  Dighton,  1314. 
Umble  V.  Fisher,  603. 
Underhay  v.  Underhay,  616. 
Underwood  v.  Birchard,  758. 
Underwood  v.  Burrows,  129. 
Underwood  v.  Gamey,  515. 
Underwood  v.  Horwood,  605, 


Table  op  Cases. 


1499 


,  Union,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Murphy  &  Co.. 
'    357. 
Union  Bank  v.  Eidgely,  189. 
Union,  &c.,  Co.  v.  R.  M.  Natl.  Bk., 

276. 
U.  S.  T.  Appleton,  433,  433,  425, 

1123. 
U.  S.  V.  Athens  Armory,  245,  346. 
United  States  y.  Bostwick,  54,  787, 

984. 
United  States  y.  Hatch,  460. 
United  States  y.  King,  633. 
U.  S.  y.  Parrott,  977,  979,  983. 
U.  S.,  &c.,  V.  Winsor,  917. 
Upham  V.  Varney,  313. 
Wshaw  y.  McBride,  488. 
Upton  y.  Archer,  457,  463. 
Upton  y.  Ferguson,  757,  760. 
Upton  y.  Townsend,  1095, 1101. 
Urban  y.  Grimes,  306. 
Uredall  y.  Halfpenny,  599. 
Usher  y.  Moss,  106. 
Utben  y.  Godfrey,  393. 
Utty  Dale's  Case,  162. 
I    Valentine  y.  Penny,  417. 
Valet  y.  Hemer,  773, 1099. 
VaJk  y.  Eldred,  533. 
Valiant  y.  Dodmede,  741,  749. 
VaUe  V.  Fargo,  960. 
Van  y.  Corpe,  184,  335,  906,  1087. 
VanAUen  v.  Rogers,  1390. 
VanAlstyue  y.  VanSlyck,  438. 
VanBrunt  y.  Pope,  35, 1073. 
VanBrunt  v.  VanBrunt,  458. 
VanCortland  y.  Tozer,  447. 
VanCortland  v.  UnderhiU,  938. 
Vandarhamral  y.  Storrs,  1330. 
Vandekar  v.  Reeves,  1171. 
Vandenhemrel  y.  Storrs,  19. 
Vanderbeck  y.  Hendry,  859. 
Vanderbergh  v.   VanBergen,  540. 
Vandergrift  y.  Abbott,  511. 
Vanderheuyel  y.     Storrs,  61,    62, 

1337. 
Vanderkarr  y. Vanderkarr,  694, 699. 
Vanderpool  y.  Smith,  814,    1101, 

1131. 
Vanderpoel  y.  VanAUen,  1335. 
Van  Deusen  y.  Young,  978,  1377. 
Van  Dorens  y.  Eyeritt,  933,   1371. 
Van  Dover  y.  Everett,  66. 
Van  Dyne  v.  Vreeland,  381. 
Van  Every  v.  Ogg,  1335. 
Van  Hoesen  v.  Coventry,  554. 
Vanhook  v.  Story,  1380. 
Van  Horn  y.  Fonda,  1303. 
Van  Home  v.  Crain,  940. 
Van  Keuren  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  1324, 

1389 
Van  Ness  v.  Packard,  469,'  1337. 
Van  Orman  v.  Phelps,  1303. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Ball,  1040. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Barringer,  454. 


Van  Rensselaer  y.  Bonesteel,  674. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Chadwick,  666, 

1019,  1034. 
Van  Rensselaer  y.  Dennison,  966. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Gallup,  733. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Hays,  674,  1030, 

1048. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.    Jewett,    1036, 

1039,  1192. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Jones,  723.     » 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Penniman,  939, 

1160. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.    Radcliff,    619, 

63.'5-. 
Van  Rensselaerv.  Slinglerland,454. 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Snyder,  1040. 
Vansant  v.  Roberts,  194. 
Van  Slyck  v.  Kimball,  773.     ' 
Van  Wagner  v.  Van  Nostrand,  409. 
Van  Wicklen  v.  Paulsen,  1044, 1048. 
Vance  v.  Funk,  436. 
Vance  v.  Schuyler,  447. 
Vane  y.  Barnard,  990,  991. 
Vane  v.  Marshall,  317. 
Vanier  v.  Fisher,  240. 
Varne  v.  Rouse,  1113, 1123. 
Vardeman  v.  Boss,  241. 
Varick  v.  Smith,  529,  533. 
Varley  v.  Leigh,  1353. 
Varm  y.  Rose,  864. 
Varneys  v.  Stevens,  968. 
Vamis  v.  Goodcheape,  666. 
Varnum  v.  Babcock,  371. 
Vamum  v.  Smith,  759,  1384. 
Vason  y.  Ball,  352. 
Vatel  v.  Hemer,  1106. 
Vatel  V.  Hernet,  1095,  1097. 
Vaughan  v.  Mattock,  692. 
Vaughanv.  Menlove,  986,  988. 
Vaughan  v.  Carr,  203,  306. 
Vaughan  v.  TafiE  Vale,  &c.,  987. 
Vaughn  v.  Blanchard,   1098,  1113 
Vaughn  v.  Haldeman,  1333. 
Vaughn  v.  Hancock,  886. 
Vaughn  v.  Lyim,  634. 
Vaughn  v.  Mattock,  659,  661. 
Vaughn  v.  Tracy,  446. 
Vaux's  Case,  613. 
Vazie  v.  Dwinel,  536. 
Veal  v.  Roberts,  478. 
Veale  v.  Prior,  390. 
Veazie  v.    Dwmel,  539,  530,  533, 

534. 
Vecht  V.  Brownell,  1319. 
Vedderv.  Vedder,  1281. 
Veeder  v.  Fonda,  358. 
Veghte  V.  Raritan  Canal  Co.,  467, 

468,  469. 
Vermont  v.  Society,  &c.,  454. 
Vt.  Cent'l.  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Richardson, 

560,  562. 
Venniny  v.  Bray,  1071. 
Ventrige  v.  Goodcheape,  666,  667. 


1500 


TabiiE  of  Cases. 


Verges  t.  Forshee,  917. 
Vernam  v.  Smith,  348. 
Vemey  v.  Vei'ney,  950. 
Vernon  v.  BetheU,  266. 
Vernon  v.  Smith,  181,  678,  944. 
Vernon  v.  Vernon,  1093. 
Vernon  v.  West,  603. 
tVerture  v.  Beasley,  1309. 
Viany  v.  Ferran,  942. 
Vi^kery  v.  Jackson,  798,  800. 
Victory  v.  Stroud,  5. 
Vindeau  v.  GrifBn,  439,  440. 
Villers  v.  Beaumont,  223. 
Vincent  v.  Beverley,  1137. 
Vincent  v.  Corbin,  111. 
Vincent  v.  Godson,  345,  346,  1307. 
Vincent  v.  Rather,  269. 
Vinden  v.  EUsworth,  1086. 
Vine  V.  Lanedon,  335. 
Vine  V.  Lovedon,  348. 
Viner  v.  Vaughn,  977,  979. 
Vmton  V.  Walsh,  176. 
Vinz  V.  Beatty,  9. 
Vivian  v,  Blomberg,  188. 
Vivian  v.  Champion,  894,898. 
Vizoneau  v.  Pegram,  220. 
Vochell  V.  Doncastell,  1138. 
Vogle  V.  Ripple,  457. 
Volk  V.  Eldred,  529,  530,  534. 
Von  HoUen  v.  Knowles,  500. 
Voorhees  v.  Burchard,  417,  426. 
Voorhees  v.  Demeyer,  356,  1118. 
Voorhees  v.  McGinnis,  407,  1222. 
Voorhees  v.  Trueman,  1246. 
Voorhies  v.  Voorhies,  206. 
Vose  V.  Bradstreet,  397,  399,  629. 
Vowles  V.  MiUer,  1003. 
Voyce  V.  Voyce,  IOCS. 
Vooman  v.  McKaig,  96. 
Vyoyan  v.  Arthur,  648,  700,  738, 

1030. 
Wabash,  &c.,  Canal  Co.  v.  Brett, 

800. 
Wad  V.  Smith,  780. 
Waddelove  v.   Bamett,  249,  484, 

1337. 
Wade  V.  Baker,  311,  213. 
Wade  V.  Benham,  433. 
Wade  V.  Culvert,  330. 
Wade  V.  HaUigan,  693. 
Wade  V.  Johnson,  1321. 
Wade  V.  Johnston,  1237. 
Wade  V.  Simon,  333. 
Wadham  v.  Marlow,  666,  667,  716, 

750. 
Wadham  v.  Post  Master  Gen'l,  589, 

593 
Wadleigh  v.  Janurm,  1221, 1236. 
AVadltngton  v.  HiU,  648,  653. 
Wadman  v.  Colcroft,  1000. 
Wadmore  v.  Selwin,  607. 
Wadsworth  v.  Smith,  533,  534. 
Wadsworth  v.  TiUotson,  539,  540. 


Waffle  V.  N.  Y.  Cent'l  E.  R.  Co., 

849. 
Wagar  v.  Stone,  246. 
Waggener  v.  Waggener.  440. 
Waggoner  v.  Jermaine,  863, 1281. 
Wagneif  v,  Cleveland,  cfcc.,  R.  R. 

Co..  1325. 
Wagner  v.  Duffy,  W5. 
Wagner  v.L.  I.  E.  B.  Co.,  537. 
Wagner  v.  White,  883,  1099. 
Wagstafl  v.  Smith,  319. 
Wailling  v.  ToU,  1337. 
Wain  V.  Warlters,  353. 
Wainscott  v.  Silvers,  813,  1300. 
Wakefield  v.  Brown,  674, 738, 1334. 
Wakefield  v.  Buccleaugh,  564,  566, 
Wakeley  v.  Davidson,  552. 
Wakeman  v.  Lindsay,  1323. 
Wakeman  v.  Walker,  308,  773. 
Walcap  V.  McKinhey,  255. 
Walcott  V.  Sullivan,  837. 
Walden  v.  Bodly,  489,  490,  492. 
Walden  v.  Finch,  862. 
Waldo  V.  EuBseU,  446. 
Waldron  v.  Chastney,  391. 
Waldron  v.  McCarty,  771. 
Walgamott  v.  Brunner,  1309. 
Walker  v.  Board  of  P.  W.,  533, 
Walker  v.  Constable,  86,  109. 
Walker  v.  Cronin.  1388. 
Walker  v.  EUis,  201. 
Walker  v.  Engler,  634,  713,  1053, 

1307. 
Walker  v.  Furbush,  1332. 
Walker  v.   Gilbert,  789,  819,  829, 

1131. 
Walker  v.  Giles,  53,  336. 
Walker  v.  Gode,  107,  111. 
Walker  v.  Groves,  335,  342. 
Walker  v.  Harper,  489,  1383. 
Walker  v.  Hatton,   182,  800,  903, 

1277. 
Walker  v.  JefiErys,  372,  946. 
Walker  v.  Keile,  437. 
Walker  v.  King,  353. 
Walker  v.  Moore,  779. 
Walker  v.  Pierce,  409,  576. 
Walker  v.  Prescott,  1333. 
Walker  v.  Reeves,  354,  740,  742. 
Walker  v.  Richards,  1174. 
Walker  v.  Richardson,  390,  1173. 
Walker  v.  Sharpe,  105. 
Walker  v.  Shepardson,  530,  535, 
Walker  v.  Shoemaker,  1096. 
Walker  v.  Smith,  275. 
Walker  v.  Tucker,  786. 
Walker  v.  Walker,  431. 
Walker  v.  Webber,  649,  681. 
Walker  v.  Whittemore,  965,  966. 
Walker's  Case,  435,  666, 1138, 1141. 
Walkin's  Case,  1137. 
WaU  V.  Goodenough,  1193. 
Wall  V.  Granger,  337. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1501 


WaU  V.  Hinds,  751, 1032,  1243. 
Wallaxje  v.  Brown,  374. 
Wallace  v.  Drew,  538. 
WaUace  v.  King,  1333,  1327. 
Wallace  V.  Latham,  205. 
WaUace  v.  Lent,  870, 1134,  1392. 
Wallace  v.  Lewis,  198. 
WaUaston  v.  HukewiU,  156. 
WaUen  v.  Forrest,  1386. 
WaUer  v.  Andrews,  186,  955, 1067. 
Waller  v.  Dean,  441. 
Waller  v.  Drakeford,  1271. 
Waller  v.  Morgan,  8. 
Waller  v.  Petty,  578. 
WalHs  V.  Carpenter,  1051,   1052, 

1059. 
WaUis  V.  Delmar,  29,  70. 
WaUis  V.  Harrison,  469. 
Wallis  V.  LitteU,  505. 
Wallis  V.  Rhea,  445,  446. 
WaUis  V.  WaUis,  653. 
WaUs  V.  Atchinson,  1130, 1168. 
Walls  V.  Mason,  497. 
WaUuston  v.  HakeweU,  180. 
Walmsley  v.  MUen,  253,  1219. 
Walsal  V.  Heath,  148,  223. 
Walsh  V.  Feely,  180. 
Walsh  V.  Fussel,  669,  679. 
Walsh  V.  Powers,  204,  205. 
Walsh  V.  Pemberton,  1033. 
Walsh  V.  Ringer,  623. 
Walsh  V.  Trevanion,  593,  64!9. 
Walsh  V.  Watson,  675. 
Walter  v.  Davids,  480. 
Walter  v.  Dewey,  1078. 
Walter  v.  EumbaU,  1314, 1334. 
Walters  v.  Hiitchins,  660. 
Walters  v.  Coal  Co.,  368,  373. 
Walters  v.  Pflel,  563. 
Walters  v.  Vanderveer,  634. 
Walton  V.  FUe,  1296. 
Walton  V.  Hele,  774. 
Walton  V.  Johnson,  810. 
Walton  V.  Watterhouse,  488j  807, 

1126. 
Walton  V.  Wilson,  373. 
Wambaugh  v.  Binner,  1053. 
Wamble  v.  George,  241. 
Wane  v.  Wane,  993. 
Wansborough  v.  Maton,  1320, 1337. 
Waples  V.  Hastings,  199,  214. 
Waples  V.  Waples,  976. 
Ward  V.  Buckingham,  938. 
Ward  V.  Bull,  1026,  1073,  1119. 
Ward  V.  Byrne,  919. 
Wardv.  Camp,  269. 
Wardv.  Const,  959. 
Ward  V.  Day,  75,  455,  1393. 
Ward  V.  Hartpole,  280,  281,  383. 
Ward  V.  Kelsey,  797,  830,  895. 
Ward  V.  Lumley,  484,  483,  1353. 
Ward  V.  Macaulay,  386. 
Ward  V.  Mcintosh,  496. 


Wai-d  V.  Mason,  1350. 
Ward  T.  MorriU,  218. 
Ward  V.  Shrew,  1308. 
Ward  T.  Ward,  443,  448. 
Ward  V.  WUlingale,  1215. 
WardeU  v,  Etter,  73. 
WardeU  v.  Usher,  1011, 1249. 
Wardlaw  v.  Gray,  219. 
Wardle  v.  BrocMehurst,  555. 
Wardroper  v.  Cutfleld,  1093. 
Wardsworth  v.  Manning,  358. 
Wardsworth  v.  Smith,  529. 
Ware,  In  Re,  1335. 
Ware  v.  Lithgow,  760. 
Warefleld  v.  Booth,  918. 
Waring  v.  King,  32,  45,  1147. 
Waring  v.  Mackreth,  1146. 
Waring  v.  Martin,  545. 
Waring  v.  Smith,  460. 
Warlow  V.  Lake  Superior  Iron  Co. , 

138 
Warman  v.  Faithful,  334,  335,  341. 
Warn  v.  Bickford,  776. 
Warner  v.  Brown,  13,  85,  90,  98. 
Warner  v.  Browne,  118,  147,  845, 

432. 
Warner  v.  Hale,  1331. 
Warner  v.  Hitchins.  809,  810,  813. 
Warner  v.  Mower,  191. 
Warner  y.  WiUington,  352,  353. 
Warren  v.  Arthur,  731. 
Warren  v.  Blake,  431. 
Warren  v.  Causett,  434. 
Warren  v.  Chambers,  530. 
Warren  v.  Comings,  1387. 
Warren  t.   Fearnside,  13,  46,  69 

603. 
Warren  v.  Ferdinand,  1338. 
Warren  v.  Forney,  1309. 
Warren  v.  Kufifman,  853,  1301. 
Warren  v.  Leland,  325,  1249. 
Warren  v.  Lynch,  435. 
Warren  v.  Matthews,  525. 
Warren  v.  Merryfield,  648. 
Warren  v.  Sweet,  448. 
Warren  v.  Wagner,  813,  1840. 
Warthington  v.  Gimson,  415. 
Warwick  V.  Noakes,  1062. 
Washbom  V.  Black,  1331,  1833. 
Washburn  v.  Cutler,  836. 
Washburn  v.  Gould,  648. 
Washburn  v.  Sproat,  1231,  1341. 
Washington  v.  Conrad,  490,  493, 

1385. 
Watchman  v.  Crook,  648. 
WaterfaU  v.  Penistone,  1360. 
Waterman  v.  Harkness,  960,  961. 
Waterman  v.  Hookness,  964. 
Waterman  v.  Soper,  1010. 
Waters  v.  Howard,  358,  360. 
Waters  v.  TazweU,  337. 
Waters  v.  WeigaU,  805,  1065. 
Waters  v.  Young,  105, 1073. 


1502 


Table  op  Cases. 


Watherell  v.  Howells,  977. 
"Watkins  v.  Baird,  233. 
Watkins  v.  Edward,  446,  447. 
"Watkins  v.  Goodall,  848,  859, 1381. 
Watkins  v.  Grayesend,  75. 
Watkins  v.  Holman,  16,  19. 
Watkins  v.  Overseers,  &c.,  405. 
Watkins  v.  Peck,  546,  547. 
Watkins  v.  Taliaferro,  1307. 
Watriss  v.  Nat'I  Bank,  1263. 
Watson  V.  Alexander,  490,  1384. 
Watson  V.  Anderson,  339. 
Watson  V.  Atkins,  968. 
Watson  V.  Boyleston,  651. 
Watson  V.  Brainerd,  30, 1339;  1338. 
Watson  V.  Hemsworth,  934. 
Watson  V.  Hill,  166. 
Watson  V.  Home,  967,  968.  >■ 

Watson  V.  Hooton,  838. 
Watson  V.  Hunkins,  733,  1044. 
Watson  V.  Hunsworth,  319,  330. 
Watson  V.  Lane,  497,  1268. 
Watson  V.  McLean,  484. 
Watson  V.  Main,  1316. 
Watson  V.  The  Master,  &c.,  935, 

951. 
Watson  V.  Waltham,  745. 
Watson  V.  Wand,  619,  1119. 
Watson  V.  Whitney,  1375. 
Watson  Coal,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Casteel, 

1020. 
Watt  V.  Groves,  281,  383,  383,  385. 
Watt  V.  Maydev^eU,  1164,  1167. 
Watters  v.  Travel.  1118. 
Watton  V.  HiU,  221. 
Watts  v.  Ainsworth,  352. 
Watts  V.  Coffin,  354,  260, 533, 1136. 
Watts  V.  Judd,  900. 
Watts  V.  Rogers,  358. 
Watts  V.  Sheppard,  1053, 1053, 1054. 
Watts  V.  Weknan,  971. 
Waugh  V.  Russell,  459. 
Waukford  v.  Waukford,  336,  337, 

338. 
Waukley  v.  BuckneU,  456. 
Wawn  V.  Horn,  111,  1004. 
Way  V.  HaUon,  731. 
Way  V.  Hodges,  873. 
Way  V.  Myers,  1084. 
Way  V.  Reed,  465,  1195. 
'  Weakley  v.  Buckley,  13. 
Weakley  v.  BuckneU,  340. 
Weale  v.  Lawer,  488. 
Weatherall  v.   Geering,  373,  716, 

719. 
Weatherly  v.  Ross,  1001. 
Weatherby  v.  Sleeper,  1340. 
Weatlierhead  v.  Curwood,  718. 
Weaver  v.  Belcher,  39. 
Weaver  v.  Eureka  Co.,  554. 
Weaver  v.  Jones,  18,  46,  198. 
Weaver  v.  Wood,  353. 
Webb  V.  Alexander,  758,  773. 


Webb  V.  Austin,  334,  486,  488. 
Webb  V.  Dixon,  153,  611, 1141. 
Webb  V.  Fairmaner,  605, 1035. 
Webb  V.  Jiggs,  1353. 
Webb  V.  Noah,  918. 
Webb  V.  Paternoster,  473,  476, 
Webb  V.  Plummer,  634,  889,  1365. 
Webb  V.  Portland  M'f'g  Co.,  538, 

539,  540. 
Webb  V.  RusseU,  181, 393, 735, 1190. 
Webb  V.  Webb,  503,  504. 
Webber  v.  Shearman,  33,  154. 
Weber  v.  Reinhard,  966. 
Webster  v.  Flemming,  540. 
Webster  v.  Gibnan,  134. 
Webster  v.  Harris,  369. 
Webster  v.  Holland,  16. 
Webster  v.  Woodford,  338. 
Weddall  v.  Capes,  1156, 1163, 1173. 
Weed  V.  Beebe,  301,  304. 
Weeks  v.  Hull,  605,  1035. 
Weeks  v.  Maillerdet,  593, 
Weeton  v.  Woodcock,  1361,  1263. 
Weidner  v.  Foster,  17,  357,  359. 
Weigall  V.  Waters,  785,  786,  816, 

1099. 
WeUl  V.  Lucerne  Mining  Co.,  400. 
Weise  v.  Smith,  539,  530,  535. 
Weisenbach  v.  Pohalski,  1397. 
Weiss  V.  John,  1316.      ' 
Welch  v.  Myers,  1334. 
Welchman  v.  Spinks,  371. 
Welcome  v.  Labanter,  1333. 
Weld  v.  Nichols,  671. 
Welles  V.  Bannister,  473. 
Welles  V.  Castle,  834,  1393. 
Wellesley  v.  Wellesley,  991. 
Wells  V.  Bannister,  1338. 
Wells  V.  Castles,  1339. 
WeUs  V.  Coons,  371. 
WeUs  V.  De  Leyer,  937,  938. 
Wells  V.  Homish,  1318. 
WeUs  V.  Jackson  M'f'g  Co.,  336. 
WeUs  V.  Mason,  1115, 1117,  1385. 
Wells  V.  Moody,  1331. 
Wells  V.  Sheerer,  385,  498. 
Welsh  V.  PhiUips,  346,  1187. 
Welsh  V.  Wilcox,  514. 
WendeU  v.  Boxtor,  863. 
Wentz  V.  Finoher,  1331,  1350. 
Wesley  v.  Thomas,  626. 
West,  Re,  1260. 
West  V.  Blakevray,  689. 
West  V.  Davis,  433. 
West  V.  Dobb,  710,  717,  739. 
West  V.  Hart,  807. 
West  V.  KeUy,  634. 
West  V.  LasoeUes,  1089. 
West  V.  Nibbs,  1310. 
West  V.  Page,  983. 
West  V.  Stewart,  593,  747. 
Westcott  V.  Thompson,  653. 
WesterdeU  v.  Dale,  744. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1503 


■Westermeir  v.  Street,  829. 
Western  v.  McDermott,  432. 
Western  Bank  v.  Kyle,  583,  718. 
Western  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Babcook,  366. 
Western  Trans.  Co.    v.  Lansine, 

941,  948. 
Western  Union  Tel.  C6.  v.  Fain, 

93. 
Westervelt  v.  Acklen,  330. 
Westfall  V.  Van  Arker,  538. 
Westlake  v.  DeGraw,  789, 847, 1393. 
Westmoreland  v.  Foster,  1070. 
Westmorland  v.  Smith,  100. 
Westmoreland  Coal  Co.  Appeal, 

138. 
Weston  V.  Alden,  540. 
Weston  V.  Collins.  371. 
Weston  V.  Incorp.  of  Tailors,  853, 

1303. 
Weston  V.  Metropolitan,  &c.,  453. 
Weston  T.  Weston,  1326. 
Westwood  V.  Cowen,  1333. 
WethereU  v.  Bird,  801,  906,  1013. 
WethereU  v.  Howellfl,  1011,  1245, 

1349. 
WethereU  v.  Langston,  731. 
Wethers  v.  Larabee,  46. 
Whalen  v.  Ahl,  543. 
Whalen  v.  Gloster,  1281. 
Whalen  v.  Gloucester,  1391, 
Whaley  v.  Jacobson,  9. 
Whaley  v.  Laing,  541, 
Whalin  v.  White,  495,  1386. 
Whalley  v.  Thompson,  437. 
Whanton  v.  Staughtenburgh,  1340. 
Wharton  v.  Fitzgerald,  1339,  1338. 
Wharton  v.  Taylor,  1313. 
Whayman  v.  Chaplin,  119, 164. 
Wheadon  v.  Sugg,  600. 
Wheatly  v.  Boyd,  669. 
Wheaton  v.  East,  198,  304. 
Wheelden  v.  Lowell,  474. 
Wheeldon  v.  Paul,  1037, 1038, 1310. 
Wheeler  v.  Baker,  1348. 
Wheeler  v.  Bates,  360. 
Wheeler  v.  Branscombe,  350,  358. 
Wheeler  v.  Earle,  583. 
Wheeler  v.  Gorham,  134. 
Wheeler  v.  HiU,  157. 
Wheeler  v.  KirkendoU,  1304. 
Wheeler  v.  Monteflore,  264,  449, 

478. 
Wheeler  v.  Nionis,  367. 
Wheeler  v.  Schad,  669. 
Wheeler  V.  Stevenson,  1101,1130. 
Wheelock  v.  Freeman,  457. 
Wheelock  v.  Thayer,  181,  669. 
Wheelock'v.  Warschauer,  497, 1285. 
Whichcote  v.  Lawrence,  375. 
Whipley  v.  Darvey,  1361. 
Whipple  V.  Cumberland,  540. 
Whistler  v.  Newman,  319. 
Whistler  v.  Paslow,  577,  578. 


Whitaker  v.  Hales,  351, 

Whitaker  v.  Hawley,  707, 1033. 

Whitbeck  v.  Cook,  771, 1131. 

Whitbeck  v.  Skinner,  837, 1338. 

Whitbread  v.  Brockhurst,  377. 

Whitchurch  v.  Beris,  375. 

Whitcot  V.  Cox,  709. 

White  V.  Albany  Railway,  794. 

White  V.  Barlow,  410. 

White  V.  Bayle,  75. 

White  V.  Brooks,  168,  170. 

White  V.  Cox,  231. 

White  V.  Crutcher,  605. 

White  V.  Curtis,  176. 

White  V.  Cuyler,  373. 

White  V.  Denman,  269. 

White  V.  Elwell,  473. 

White  V.  Flora,  203. 

White  V.  Foljambe,  488. 

White  V.  France,  1395. 

White  V.  Greenish,  1189, 

White  V.  Guy,  399. 

White  V.  Jones,  336. 

White  V.  Langdon,  485, 

White  V.  Leeson,  305. 

White  V.  Livingston,  19. 

White  V.  Maddon,  197. 

White  V.  Mealis,  1377. 

White  V.  Malyneaux,  835,  884. 

White  V.  Mealio,  839,  1113,  1131. 

White  V.  Montgomery,   788,  845, 

885,  1383. 
White  V.  Nicholson,  793,  887,  889, 

891. 
White  V.  Osborne,  500. 
White  V.  Rittemeyer,  253. 
White  V.  Sayer,  1363. 
White  V.  Seeson,  514. 
White  V.  Wager,  893. 
White  V.  Wakley,  796,  804, 1358. 
White  V.  Walker,  1085. 
White  V.  Warner,  703. 
White  V.  White,  951. 
White  V.  Whitney,  674. 
White  V.  WUtshire,  473. 
White  V.  Yaw,  371. 
Whiteacjre  v.  Symonds,  133. 
Whitehead  V.  Bennett,  1337,  1348, 
Whitehead  v.  Clifford,  1176,  1350. 
Whitehead  v.  Parks,  559. 
Whitehead  v.  Taylor,  1308. 
Whitehead  v.  Wells,  369,  376. 
Whitehouse  v.  Birmingham,  853. 
Whiteman  v.  King,  523. 
White's  Appeal,  1245. 
Whitestone  v.  Davis,  941. 
Whitfield  V.  Benit,  138. 
Whitfield  V.  Beneriett,  573. 
Whitfield  V.  Brandwood,  967. 
Whitfield  V.  Longfellow.  232,  283, 
Whitfield  V.  Pindar,  1093. 
Whitfield  V.  Weedon,  1005. 
Whiting  V.  Daniel,  458, 


1504 


TABLE  OP  Oases. 


WMting  V.  Ekimunds,  134. 
Whiting  V.  lake,  1318. 
"Whitley  v.  Gough,  1164. 
Whitley  v.  Eoberts,  1308, 
Whitlock,  In  Be,  970. 
Whitlook  V.  Duffield,  935,  941. 
Whitlock  V.  Horton,  165,  394. 
Whitlock  V.  Hutchinson,  530. 
Whitlock's  Case,  394, 395, 477, 1048. 
Whitman  v.  NicoU,  963. 
Whitman  v.  Sex,  317. 
Whitman  v.  Shiverick,  346. 
Whitmarsh  v.  Cutting,  1371. 
Whitmore  v.  Empson,  1360. 
Whitmore  v.  Shiverick,  346. 
Whitmore  v.  Walker,  186, 1066. 
Whitney  v.  Allaire,  351,  1110. 
Whitney  v.  Bramble,  449. 
Whitney  v.  Brastow,  1364. 
Whitney  v.  Cochran,  59. 
Whitney  v.  Dutch,  198,  199,  314. 
Whitney  v.  Gordon,  109. 
Whitney  v.  Meyer,  1138. 
Whitney  v.   Meyers,    1137,    1166, 

1170. 
Whitney  v.  Olney,  430,  435. 
Whitney  v.  Slayton,  917. 
Whitney  v.  Smett,  50. 
Whitney  v.  Spencer,  584. 
Whitney  v.  Sweet,  1397. 
Whitney  v.  Swett,  53. 
Whittaker  v.  Brown,  573. 
Whittaker  v.  Hales,  356. 
Whittaker  v.  Howe,  917. 
Whittaker  v.  Miller,  397. 
Wliittemore  v.  Bean,  446. 
Whittemore  v.  Gibbs,  731: 
Whittey  v.  AUaire,  759. 
Whittey  v.  Davis,  436,  437. 
Wliittingham's  Case,  303. 
Whittlngton,  Ex  parte,  937. 
Whittington  v.  Clarke,  436. 
Wliittle  V.  Webster,  788,  1339. 
Whittock  V.  Duffield,  938. 
Whittome  v.  Lamb,  614. 
Whitton  V.  Bye,  1017. 
Whitton  V.  Whitton,  170. 
Whitty  V.  Dillon,  1008. 
Whitway  v.  Pinsent,  666,  944. 
Whitworth  v.  Moden,  1337. 
;  Whoon  V.  Drizzle,  46. 
Wickenden  v.  Webster,  907. 
Wicker  v.  Lewis,  827,  838. 
Wicker  v.  Pope,  463. 
Wickersham  v.  Orr,  489. 
Wickham  v,  Hawker,  535,  579. 
Wickham  v.  Lee,  1361. 
Wiegall  V.  Waters,  795, 1136. 
Wiggin  V.  New  York,  1098. 
Wiggia  V.  Peters,  605. 
Wiggin  V.  Wiggia,  18,  64,  1338. 
Wiggin  V.  Woodruff,  1400. 
Wiggleston  v.  Steers,  330,  331. 


Wigglesworth  v.  Dallison,  634, 923, 

1365. 
Wigg's  Case,  165. 
Wilbraham  v.  livesay,  349. 
Wilbraham  v.  Snow,  1309. 
Wilcox  V.  Cahn,  695. 
Wilcox  V.  CoUoway,  446. 
Wilcox  V.  Davis,  1187. 
Wilcox  V.  Ten  Eyek,  683. 
Wilcox  V.  Wilcox,  173. 
Wilcox  V.  Wood,  105. 
Wilcoxen  v.  Bowles,  1080. 
Wildbor  v.  Rainforth,  1143,  1356. 
Wilde  V.  CantiUon,  35,  38,i49. 
WUde  V.  Minsterley,  560,  563. 
Wilde  V.  Waters,  1343,  1367. 
Wilder  v.  Brooks,  446. 
WUder  v.  Houghton,  358,  359. 
Wilder  v.  Maine  Centl.  R.  B.  Co., 

679. 
Wilder  v.  Wilder,  1005. 
Wiley  v.  Christ,  463. 
Wilgus  V.  Gettings,  1344. 
Wagus  V.  Whitehead,  594. 
Wilkes  V.  Caulk,  460. 
Wilkes  V.  Steele,  1338. 
WUkie  V.  Day,  633. 
WUkias  V.  French,  353,  355. 
Wilkins  v.  Fry,  347,  433. 
WUkins  V.  Wingate,  1384. 
Wilkins  v.  Wood,  634,  696,  922. 
Wilkinson  v.  Cawood,  1064. 
Wilkinson  v.   Clduson,  872,    875, 

1338. 
Wilkinson  v.  CoUey,  130, 1360. 
Wilkinson  v.  Gaston,  605. 
Wilkinson  v.  Goodier,  117. 
Wilkinson  v.  HaU,  93,  364,  1358. 
WiEdnson  v.  HuU,  649. 
Wilkinson  v.  Ibbett,  1334. 
Wilkinson  v.  Libbey,  963. 
Wilkinson  v.  Malin,  93. 
Wilkinson  v.  Pearson,  229. 
Wilkinson  v.  Pettit,  678,  944. 
Wilkinson  v.  Rogers,  673,  738,  910. 
Wilkinson  v.  Roper,  394.    ■ 
Wilkinson  v.  Scott,  489. 
Wilkinson  v.  Trammer,  502. 
Wilkinson  v.  Webster,  907. 
Wilkinson  v.  Wilkinson,  374,  719 

984 
Wilks  V.  Bach,  373. 
Wilks  V.  Caulk,  460. 
Wnks  V.  Smith,  684. 
Wnian  V.  WiUan,  933. 
Willard  v.  Benton,  1310. 
WiUard  v.  TaUman,  675. 
WUlard  v.  Taylor,  678. 
WiUard  v.  Tillman,  647,  835,  1044, 

1377. 
Wilham  v.  Whitfield,  1385. 
WiUiams  v.  Bartholomew,    1043, 

1316. 


Table  of  Cases. 


1505 


■Williams  v.  Beard,  253. 
■Williams  v.  Besanquet,  735,  738, 

lOOUa 

■Waiiams  v.  BurreU,  691,  764,  783. 
Williams  v.  Chandler,  486. 
■Williams  v.  Cheney,  715.      A 
"Williams  v.  Cooper,  135. 
WilliaiBS  v.  Cnsh,  491. 
Williams  v.  Davies,  715,  716,  1203. 
Williams  v.  Day,  995. 
Williams  v.  Derrar,  16,  46,  86,  97. 
Williams  v.  Earle,  710,  789. 
Williams  v.  Evans,  785,  745,  1260. 
WilUams  v.  Flight,  1057. 
WiUiams  v.  Fry,  584. 
WiUiams  r.  Gale,  588. 
WiDiams  v.  Glover,  655. 
Williams  v.  Greer,  438. 
Williams  v.  Groncott,  1006. 
WiUiams  v.^Handley,  438. 
Williams  v.   Haywood,   180,  730, 

1354. 
Williams  v.  HoUis,  1339. 
WiUiams  v.  Holmes,  1307,  1313. 
WiUiams  v.  Jones,  465,  988. 
WiUiams  v.  Lake,  353,  353. 
WUUams  v.  Mabee,  204. 
WiUiam.s  v.  Macnamara,  996. 
WiUiams  v.  Matthews,  293,  310. 
Williams  v.  Merritt,  276. 
Wilfiams  v.  Morris,  471. 
Williams  v.  Pasquali,  135,  154. 
Williams  v.  Pearson,  317. 
WiUiains  v.  Eawlins,  239. 
Williams  v.  Roberts,  1315. 
WiUiams  v.  Robinson,  615. 
WiUiams  V.  Safford,  616. 
WiUiams  v.  Sawyer,  1151,  1167. 
WUliams  v.  Steven,  1308. 
Williams  v.  Storms,  369. 
WUliams  v.  Talliafero,  1318. 
Wmiams  v.  Taylor,  889. 
WiUiams  v.  Wadsworth,  411. 
WiUiams  v.    WUliams,  807,    898, 

1349. 
WUliams  v.  Young,  436. 
WUiiamson  v.  Baker,  333, 
WaUamson  v.  Carle,  318. 
WUiiamson  v.  HaU,  969. 
WiUiamson  v.  Mason,  337. 
WilUamson  v.  Paxton,  99,  107. 
Williamson  v.  WUiiamson,  446. 
WilUman  v.  Holmes,  313. 
WUlingham  v.  Jayer,  381. 
WiUingham  v.  Joyce,  362,  953. 
WUUngton  v.  Brown,  491. 
WilUs  V,  Astor,  937. 
Willis  V.  Birchmore,  489. 
WiUis  V.  Castle,  1130. 
Willis  V.  Jeirmaine's  Case,  195. 
Willis  V.  Parkinson,  1007. 
WUlis  V.  Whitehead,  312. 
WiUison  V.  Watkins,  14,  491,  668, 


1312. 
Willoughby  v.  Backhouse,  1331. 
WUls  V.  Murray,  889. 
WUls  V.  Sheever,  9. 
WiUs  V.  Stradling,  375,  377,  378. 
Willson  V.  Watkins,  117. 
WUmarth  v.  Bridges,  137. 
Wilson  V.  Abbott,  116,  117,  133. 
Wilson  V.  Abel,  591,  930,  1143. 
WUson  V.  Astor,  935. 
Wilson  V.  Bagshaw,  437. 
WUson  V.  Bigger,  331. 
WUson  V.  Chalf  oot,  466,  468. 
WUson  V.  Chisholm,  384,  335,  338. 
Wilson  V.  City  of  New  Bedford, 

853 
WUson  v.  Daniell,  218. 
WUson  V.  Davenpoi-t,  1064,  1309. 
Wilson  V.  Dean,  396,  789, 1347. 
WUson  V.  Edmonds,  140. 
Wilson  V.  Finch,  507,  788,  1393. 
WUson  V.  Finch  Hatton,  791,  855, 

870. 
Wilson  V.  Gamble,  173. 
WUson  V.  HaU,  463. 
Wilson  V.  Hart,  276,  905, 1087. 
Wilson  V.  Hunter,  417. 
Wilson  V.  James,  498. 
Wilson  V.  Jones,  1038,  1041. 
Wilson  V.  Leonard,  817. 
WUson  V.  Nightingale,  1333, 1327. 
WUson  V.  Oldham,  239. 
WUson  V.  PhUUps,  158,  591,113. 
WUson  V.  Pig,  1197. 
WUson  V.  Raybould,  779,  1140; 
WUson  V.  SeweU,  398,  1166,  1179. 
Wilson  V.  Smith,  13,  1095. 
Wilson  V.  Tovsmsend,  1001. 
Wilson  V.  Waddel,  848. 
WUson  V.  Watkms.  133,  736,  744. 
WUson  V.  Whately,  1356. 
WUson  V.  Wilhs,  417. 
Wilson  V.  Wilson,  701. 
Wilson  V.  Woolfryes,  440,  487. 
WUton  V.  Saxon,  994. 
Wilts  V.  Navigation  Co.,  541. 
WUtshire  v.  CottreU,  1318. 
Wiltshire  v.  Sidford,  1004. 
Wimberly  v.  Jones,  304. 
Winch  V.  Winchester,  366. 
Winchester  v.  Wright,  1352, 
Windham's  Case,  175, 
Windsmere  v.  Hobert,  600. 
Windsor  v.  China,  604,  605. 
Windsor  v.  Gower,  391. 
Windsor's  Case,  738,  817; 
Winfleld  v.  Henning,  671. 
Wing  V.  Burgis,  399,  633. 
Wing  V.  Chase,  437. 
Wing  V,  Gray,  633. 
"Wing  V.  Harris,  1164. 
Wingate  v.  Fry,  361. 
Wingford  v.  allaston,  788. 


1506 


Table  op  Cases. 


Winn  V.  Cole,  450,  454. 
Winn  V.  White,  795,  891. 
Winnipiseogee  Co.  v.  Mathieson, 

579. 
Winnipiseogee  Co.  v.  Perley,  653, 

655. 
Winnipiseogee  Lake  Co.  v.  Young, 

546,  547. 
Winship  v.  Pitts,  974. 
WlqsIo-w  t.  Rand,  409. 
Winslow  V.  Tighe,  678,  944. 
Winsmore  v.  Greenbaik,  1288. 
Winsted,  &c. ,  Bk.  v.  Spenser,  443. 
Winstell  v.  Hehl,  1386. 
Winston  v.  Preston,  489,  1383. 
Winter  v.  Brockwell,  473,  558. 
Winter  v.  Loveday,  146,  804,  476, 
Winter  v.  Trimmer,  1051. 
Winterbottom  v.  Ingham,  47,  63, 

94. 
Winterboume  v.  Morgan,  1325. 
Wintermute  v.  Eedington,  338. 
Wiatemute  v.  Snyder,  365. 
Winter's  Case,  1022. 
Winters  v.  Cornish,  1033, 
Winton  v.  Cornish,  883,  1121. 
Winton  v,  Pinkney,  1023,  1167. 
Wisconsin  Bank  v.  Mortley  268. 
Wiscott's  Case,  321,  223. 
Wise  V.  Metcalf ,  787,  984, 
Wissler  v.  Hershey,  514. 
Wiswall  V.  HaU,  406. 
Withcot  T.  Nine,  758. 
Witherill  v.  Geering,  716, 
Withers  v.  Bircham,  175.  178,  681. 
Withers  v.   Larabee,  50,  97,  105, 

1175. 
Witihrell  v.  Pitzold,  85. 
Witkinson  v.  Kirby,  1391, 
Witner's  Appeal,  1235. 
Witt  V.  Mayor,  &c.,  32,  40,  107. 
Witt  V.  New  York,  91,  92,  1299, 
Witt  V.  Pierson,  1069, 
Witte  V.  Dawkins,  219. 
Witte  V.  Derby  Fishing  Co.,  194. 
Witte  V.  Witte,  88. 
Witthaus  V.  Spavin,  449. 
Wittman  v.  MUwaukee,  &c.,B.  R. 

Co.,  6. 
Witton  V.  Bye,  1033. 
Witton  V.  Dunn,  258,  259,  360.' 
Witty  V.  Mathews,  138,  695,  843, 

1131. 
Witty  V.  WiUiams,  1035, 1309. 
Woloott  T.  SulUvan,  839,  841. 
Wolcott  V.  Van  Sanford,  1337, 
Wolden  v.  Bodley,  1388. 
Wolf  V.  Johnson,  497,  1385. 
Wolf  V.  Kilpatrick,  1394. 
Wolf  V.  Merritt,  1031. 
Wolf  V.  Weiner,  1136. 
WoKe  V.  JYost,  467,  468. 
WoUan  V,  Harmstead,  675. 


Wollaston  v.  Hakewill,  681,  730 

1023. 
Wolveridge  v,  Stewart,  668,  74S 

1034. 
Womack  v,  McQuarry,  883,  1033 

fl34. 
Woocock  V.  Dew,  797,  799. 
Wood  V.  Avery,  810. 
Wood  V.  Boyle,  966. 
Wood  &  Chiver's  Case,  1209. 
Wood  V.  Clark,  333,  887, 1311. 
Wood  V.  Com.,  605. 
Wood  V.  Copper  Miner's  Co.,  669. 
Wood  V.  Day,  487.  490, 686,  807. 
Wood  T.  Felton,  358. 
Wood  V.  Fleet,  170,  171. 
Wood  V.  Poster,  391. 
Wood  V.  Gaynon,  993. 
Wood  V.  Gosling,  304. 
Wood  V.  Hartpole,  389. 
Wood  V.  Hewitt,  1330. 
Wood  V.  HUdebrand,  457. 
Wood  V.  Hubbell,  1130, 1131, 1347, 
Wood  V.  Hyatt,  39. 
Wood  V.  Lake,  895,  473, 476. 
Wood  V.  Leadbitter,  469,  557. 
Wood  V.  Mauley,  75,  557. 
Wood  V.  Mayor,  &o.,- 1068. 
Wood  V.  Midgeley,  853,  359. 
Wood  V.  Morton,  449.  , 

Wood  V.  Nunn,  1315, 1320. 
Wood  V.  Partridge,  761, 1098, 1170, 
Wood  V.  Pennell,  486. 
Wood  V.  Phillips,  173. 
Wood  V.  RowclifEe,  598. 
Wood  V.  Sparks,  240. 
Wood  V.  SutcliJQfe,  541. 
Wood  V.  Tate,  96,  99,  189, 193. 
Wood  V.  Turner,  493. 
Wood  V.  Walbridge,  1157. 
Wood  V.  Wand,  587,  541,  555,  560. 
Wood  V.  Wilcox,  18.' 
Wood  V.  Wood,  137. 
Woodard  v.  Cone,  1038. 
Woodard  v.  Seeley,  470. 
Woodbridge  v.  Richardson,  1083. 
Woodbury  v.  Fisher,  444. 
Woodbtu:y  v.  Luddy,  364. 
WoodbuJT  V.  Short,  538. 
Woodcock  V,  Nuth,  14. 
Woodcock  T.  Titterton,  1314, 
Woodcook  V.  Nuth,  1179. 
Woodcraft  v.  Thompson,  1337, 
Wooden  v.  Haviland,  615. 
Woodhouse  v.  Jenkins,  764,  778, 
Woodhouse's  Case,  478. 
WoodhuU  V.  Rosenthal,  179. 
Woodman  v.  Pease,  1331. 
Woodman  v.  York,  &c.,  R.  R,  Co., 

487. 
Woodrosse  v.  Greenwood,  775. 
Woodruff  V.  Adams,  1277, 1379, 
Woodruff  V.  Cox,  317, 


Table  of  Cases. 


1507 


Wood's  Case,  1087. 

■Woods  T.  Dennett,  919, 

Woods  V.  Durrant,  1333. 

Woods  V.  Hyde,  373. 

Woods  V.  Naumkeag,  860, 861, 874. 

Woods  V.  Pope,  900. 

Woodward  v.  Aston,   457,   1163, 
1165. 

Woodward  v.  Gates,  977,  980. 

Woodward  v.  Giles,  1057. 

Woodward  v.  Gyles,  994,  995. 

Woodward  v.  Lmdley,  1153. 

Woodware  v.  Payne,  1373. 

Woolam  V.  Heam,  853,  366,  396. 

Woolcock  V.  Dew,  453,  480,  1199. 

Wooley  V.  Gregory,  1174. 

Wooley  V.  KedSieu,  889. 

Woodman  v.  Pease,  1336. 
•  WooMch  V.  Forrest,  194. 

Woolsey  v.  Tompkins,  373. 

Woolston  Y.  StofiEord,  1331. 

Wooten  V.  Hele,  776,  778. 

Wootley  V.  Gregory,  1154. 

Worcester  v.  Eaton,  303. 

Worcester  v.  Green,  486. 

Worcester  v.  Rowlands,  806. 

Worcester  Bank  v.  Baton,  198. 

Worcester  School  Trustees  v.  Row- 
lands, 793,  804,  838,  899. 

Worley  v.  Fnimpton,  316. 

Womersley  v.  Daily,  888. 

Wormsley  v.  Church,  541. 

Worrall  v.  Munn,  436, 

Worthington  v,  Gimson,  437,  438, 
558. 

Worthington  v.  Hvler,  633,  633. 

Worthington  v.  MoCann,  666. 

Worthington  v.  Weston,  175. 

Worthiagton  v.  Wigley,  1063. 

Wotton  V.  Edwin,  1048, 1049. 

Wotton  V.  Hele,  768. 

Wragg  V.  Denham,  365. 

Wrastly  v.  Adam,  598. 

Wren  y..  Woodlaw,  626. 

Wrenford  v.  Gyles,  614. 

Wrey  V.  Lemon,  735. 

Wright  V.  Burbank,  269. 

Wright  V.  Burnett,  310. 

Wright  V.  Burroughs,  735, 1307. 

Wright  V.  Calhoun,  278. 

Wright  V.  Calls,  355,  357. 

Wright  V.  Cartwright,  614. 

Wright  V.  Cochran,  399,  633. 

Wright  V.  Dewes,  1313. 

Wright  V.  Dickson,  631. 

Wright  V.  Dixon,  501. 

Wright  V.  Graves,  1336. 

Wright  V.  Hazen,  486. 

Wright  V.  Howard,  538,  544 

Wright  V.  Johnson,  1085. 

Wright  TT.  Lattin,  587,  1131,  1136. 

Wright  w.  Newport  Pond  .Scliool, 
331. 


Wright  V.  Newton,  19, 
Wright  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  374, 
Wright  V.  Roberts,  978,  981, 
Wright  V.  St.  George,  353. 
Wright  V.  Smith,  293,  1149,  1359. 
Wright  V.  Trezevant,  335, 337,  341. 
Wright  V.  Tuttle,  643. 
Wright  V.  WiUiams,  543,  1319. 
Wright  V.  Wright,  209,  359,  460, 
Wriker  v.  Groves,  335. 
Writer  v.  Stevens,  37. 
Wrottsley  v.  Adams,   478,    116'/. 
Wyatt  V.  Byron,  180,  181. 
Wyattv.  Elam,446. 
Wyatt  V.  Harrison,  560,  568. 
Wyatt  V.  Stagg,  1157. 
Wyburb  v.  Tuck,  664. 
Wyman  v.  Ballard,  969. 
Wyman  v.  Farrar,  693. 
Wyman  v.  Hook,  1338. 
Wyman  v.  Perkins,  485, 
Wyndham  v.  Lacombe,  308. 
Wyndham  v.  Way,  598, 1010, 1350. 
Wynham  v.  Carew,  588,  1300. 
Wynkoop  v.  Burger,  576. 
Wynn  v.  Brooke,  182. 
Wynn  v.  Humphrey,  161. 
Wynne  v.  Bampton,  1025. 
Wynne  v.  Humphreys,  158. 
Wynne  v.  Ingleby,  1253. 
Wyoming,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Price,  496, 

1385. 
Wythe's  Case,  1364. 
Yale  V.  Church,  713. 
Yale  V.  Flanders,  438. 
Yard  v.  Carman,  527. 
Yard  v.  Ford,  546. 
Yarnold  v.  Moorehouse,  719. 
Yates  V.  Boen,  238. 
Yates  V.  Church,  158,  160. 
Yates  V.  Dunster,  880,  901. 
Yates  V.  Jack,  427,  1001. 
Yates  V.  Milwaukee,  535. 
Yates  V.  Tearle,  1336. 
Yates  V.  Searle,  1336. 
Yates  V.  Yates,  1093. 
Yea  V.  Bucknell,  11. 
Yeatman  v.  Cleniens,  940. 
Yellowly  v.  Gower,  388,  305, ' 

991. 
Yeo  V.  Leman,  967. 
Yervel  Poor  v.  Sutton,  331. 
Yocum  V.  Barnes,  643. 
Yong  v.  Radford,  234. 
Yormer  v.  Mann.  1318. 
York  V.  Jones,  723, 1045. 
Young  V.  Baxter,  1231. 
Young  V.  Bradford,  1188. 
Young  V.  Collett,  838. 
Young  V.  Duke,  351. 
Young  V.  Harris,  900. 
Young  V.  Harrison,  533. 
Young  V.  Hoknes,  343,  343. 


1508 


Table  of  Cases. 


Young  V.  McKee,  201,  204. , 
Young  V.  Mantz,  797. 
Young  V.  Peyser,  746. 
Young  V.  Radford,  1190. 
Young  V.  Raincock,  768,  781. 
Young  V.  Smith,  116,  154. 
Young  V.  Timmins,  919. 
Young  V.  Young,  52. 
Youngblood  v.  Lowry,  1311. 


Youngborough  v.  Mondey, '. 
Younger  v.  Welch,  373. 
Zachaiy  v.  Swanyer,  1054 
Zebach  v.  Smith,  240. 
Zilkia  V.  Carhart,  287. 
Zink  V.  Grant,  1348. 
Zouch  V.  Claye,  459,460. 
Zouch  V.  WaUaston,  .294. 
Zouch  -v..  WJllingale,'  122. 


INDEX. 


ACCEPTANCE : 

of  rent  from  tenant  by  sufferance,  effect  of 44 

of  rent  from  tenant  holding  over,  rule 49 

operates   as  waiver  of  forfeiture  for  breach  of  covenant 

when 711, 1210 

operates  as  waiver  of  notice  to  quit < 123 

ACCroENT : 

inevitable,  tenant  not  responsible  for ^ 786 

does  not  suspend  rent 1133 

or  discharge  from  covenant.. 1127 

ACCIDENTAL  FIRES : 

tenant  not  responsible  for 984  ' 

formerly  otherwise  at  common  law 984   ..//' 

statute  6  Anne,  chap.  31,  effect  of 984  J- 

statute  14  Geo.  3,  chap.  78 984^ 

liable  for  fires  negligently  set 984 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT : 

of  case,  when  necessary 445 

must  substantially  conform  to  statute 447 

ACTION : 

when  landlord  may  taring  ejectment  for  tareach  of  covenant 

to  repair -- 892 

how  forfeiture  may  be  waived 893 

damages  recoverable  for  breach  of  covenant  to  repair 894 

lessor  may  maintain  against  lessee  after  assignment  when.      666 

against  assignee 1277 

tenant  may  maintain  trespass  when 1277 

landlord  may  bring  ior  trespass  when 1277 

may  maintain  against  tenant  for  injury  to  estate  When.    1277-1279 

what  constitutes  injury  to  reversion 1278  n.  1 

liable  to  strangers  f  or'def  ects  in  premises,'when 1179  &t  seq. 

liable  for  injuries  from  nuisances  when. 1179-1295 

of  replevin - .--      1326 

trespass  for  Ulegal  distress 1325 

trover ......-». .--.. —    1825 

ca«e --"* .-..-.    1325 

II.  — 43 


1510  Index. 

ACnON :— Continued. 

use  and  occupation 1338-1351 

for  wrongful  distress 1325 

irregular  distress..- 1326 

debt,  for  rent- 1352-1361 

for  double  value 1358 

for  double  rent -- -1361 

,  for  forcible  entry  and  detainer 1374 

ejectment,  lies  when _ -_  1383 

for  mesne  profits - 1389 

debt. 1353 

in  equity  for  rent 

for  specific  performance. _     380 

see    Covenant — Debt— Use     and     Occupation — Ejectment — 
Mesne  Profits — Trespass. 

ADMINISTRATOR: 

may  give  notice  to  quit... 119 

rule  when  there  are  two  or  more 119 

ADVANCE : 

rent  may  be  made  payable  in 1025 

payment  of  in,  when  lease  does  not  provide  for,  effect  of...  1026 

rights  of  tenant  paying  in 1025-1028 

when  agreement  to  pay  in  may  be  implied 1025-1028 

may,  by  custom,  be  payable  in . 1026 

not  liable  to  execution  creditor  for 1038 

ADVERSE  POSSESSIONS : 

of  lands,  person  in,  not  tenant 5-7 

assent  of  owner,  does  not  change  relation ..        6 

defeats  lease  when 326 

must  be  shown  by  person  seeking  to  avail  themselves  of  it    326  n.  3 
a  lease  made  to  commence,  when  lessor  gets  possession,  good    326 

AFFIDAVIT : 

to  authorize  distress 1318 

AGENT: 

may  give  notice  to  quit 120 

rule  as  to 120 

leases  by -. —  267 

how  should  be  executed. 271 

cannot  delegate  authority - 273 

authority  must  be  strictly  pursued 375 

real  estate,  powers  of 374 

to  take  leases 376 

misrepresentations  of . 376 

exceeding  authority  rule.. 376 

authority  should  be  stated  in  lease 377 

taking  lease  in  his  own  name,  rule ...  i 277 

by,  for  imlawful  purpose. ..i... 378 


Iot>EX.  1511 

AGENT  -.—Continued. 

lease  to,  byprincipalj  rule  as  to 279 

slightest  fraud,  will  avoid 286 

consideration  maybe  mixed 281 

what  should  be  done  to  avert  suspicion 281 

effect  of  acquiescence  by  principal 283 

AGREEMENT : 

to  take  a  lease,  effect  of 18 

AGREEMENT  FOE  LEASE : 

entry  and  payment  of  rent  under,  effect 100 

when  operates  as  a  present  demise.. 326 

when  not 343 

must  be  complete 340 

provision  for  future  lease 331-340 

when  provision  for  future  lease  will  not  prevent  from  oper- 
ating as  present  demise 334 

intention  of  parties  gathered  from  agreement,  controls...  331-343' 

effect  of  words  "doth  let,"  "hereby  lets,"  &c.,  in 834  n. 

subject  to  condition,  rule _    333 

no  particular  form  required 336 

maybe  madeout  by  different  writings... 336 

may  be  good  in  equity,  though  not  at  law 340 

no  action  maintainable  are  voidable 340 

when  tenant  goes  in,  and  pays  rent,  rule 340  f 

is  in  complete,  when 340-345''T- 

certainty  required  in 341,  also  n.  3,  343 

on  a  contingency,  rule _ 343 

when  terms  are  not  fixed 343 

to  commence  in  futuro 343 

dependent  upon  some  act  to  be  done... 343 

when  another  instrument  is  to  be  made 343 

entry  under,  effect  of 345 

should  contain  all  covenants 346-347 

usual  covenants  impHed 347 

repair,  covenant  to,  against  fire  or  tempest 347 

statute  of  frauds,  effect  of,  on 1 350-355 

remedies  upon,  valid .-    355 

remedy  at  law 356 

specific  performance  of 357 

for  illegal  purposes 364 

want  of  authority  of  intended  lessor... 364 

must  be  free  from  surprise,  mistake,  fraud 365 

contract  will  not  be  varied 366 

party  wUl  not  be  compelled  to  take  less  than  he  contracted 

for 367 

where  anything  remains  to  be  fixed  or  decided  by  third  per- 
sons  369 


1512  Index. 

AGREEMENT  FOR  LEASE  ■.—Continued. 

when  conditional  on  lessor's  ability 367 

when  intended  lessor  has  no  sufficient  title , 369 

when  contract  is  uncertain 370 

common  covenants,  what  are - 370 

where  contract  is  uncertain ,.._ 370 

not  of  part  of  contract 371 

after  unnecessary  delay 373 

oral  agreement  partly  performed , 378 

what  constitutes  part  performance ,374 

parties  to  actions  for.. ,....,.,.,...„.  380 

AGREEMENT  TO  PURCHASE : 

of  tenant  at  wUl,  terminates  tenancy 69 

AGRICULTURAL  FIXTURES : 

what  are.,,,.. , 1218  e^  seg. 

AGRICULTURAL  LAND : 

general  letting  of,  presumed  to  be  for  year 93 

rule  when  let  to   raise  crop  that  does   not  mature  in  one 
year - 95 

ALTERATIONS  : 

in  lease,  what  Invalidate 456-465 

immaterial,  do  not 457  m.  1-458 

of  consent,  nde 457  n.  1 

unauthorized,  material,  destroys 457  m.  1 

materiality  of ,  the  test 457  n.  1 

estate  of  person  making,  destroyed  by 457n.  1 

rule  as  so 458 

made  by  stranger,  rule 458  m.  4 

what  is -.- 458-460  and  notes 

presumed  to  have  been  made  prior  to  execution  in  some 

states- 461 

effect  of -suspicious  circumstances 463 

filling  blanks,  hot,  when 463-481 

not  in  handwriting  of  either  party,  presmnption , .    463  n.  1 

AMBIGUITY: 

construed  in  favor  of  lessee 620-683 

latent,  may  be  explained  by  parol ..  628-641 

patent,  cannot  be  explained 635 

when  lease  is  void  for , ,..,  633 

ANNUAL  RENT 

See  Rent. 

ANCIENT  LIGHTS: 

See  Leght. 

APARTMENTS: 

rights  of  hirer  of , ,, 138,  130 


Index.  1S13 

APARTMENTS  -.—Continued. 

let  for  immoral  purposes ^...^..jj  i*ij_^.i.^j..i.T;i.  130 

-when  rent  can  be  recovered  for..^^  ^ 130 

duty  of  landlord  in  reference  to 13^ 

APPORTIONMENT : 

of  rent  cannot  be  made  when  lease  is  void  in  part .._      65 

assignee  of  part  of  premises,  only  liable  for  part  of  rent 723 

of  rent,  when  may  be  made ., 1089 

what  the  term  signifies ^ 1089 

takes  place  by  act  of  Law,  when ^..^ 1089 

by  act  of  parties,  when 1089 

by  eviction,  when _  1089 

imder  11  Geo.  3,  c.  19,  §  15... 1090 

extended  by  4  and  5  W.  &  M.  4,  c.  27...... 1093 

how  made ....i.. 1094 

APPURTENANCES : 

What  are 415 

What  pass  as 415-431 

word,  not  important  in  lease 415 

test  as  to  what  is  embraced  as 415  n.  1-420  and  notes 

illustration 415  n.  1-430  and  notes 

rule  in  Maitland  V.  MacKinnon 416  m.  1 

rule  in  Tyringham's  case 417 

what  ways  and  easements  pass  as - 433-487 

light,  when  right  to  passesas 433  m.  3 

drains. 439  n.  2 

pump 431 

test  for  determining  what  are 415  ft.  1-480  and  notes 

'"wiH"  and... 416 

land  cannot  be  to  biuldiag  except 416  n.  1-431 

house  and  garden  may  be .- 416  n.  1 

does  not  embrace  anything  outside  of  premises  leased _    417 

see  Barrett  v.  Bell 418 

See  Ogden  v.  Jennings 417  n.  1 

a  water  right,  is  of  laud,  when 419-430 

"house  with,"  what  passes. 431 

stable  will  not  pass  as,  when 431 

right  of  way  of  necessity 432-427 

easements  generally 431-429 

"light  and  air,"  rule  as  to... 422-435 

see  Doyle  v.  Lloyd ---  434  w.  1 

drain  or  pump-. 439 

ASSENT: 

necessary  to  create  tenancy ^-- 5-18 

illustrations 5-12 

mutual,  necessary i- ^-i- - ...u-...       6 


1514  Index. 

ARREAES : 

of  rent  at  death  of  lessor,  who  entitled  to 1061 

See  Rent. 
ASSIGN: 

tenant  may,  unless  expressly  prohibited  in  lease 709  n.  1 

covenants  not  to,  nature  and  effect  of 709-714 

how  broken 714 

hcense  to,  effect  of 709 

Uoense  to  assign  part,  effect  of 709  n.  3 

how  must  be  given 710 

when  covenants  provide  mode. 710 

covenant  not  to,  without  hcense,  unreasonably  withholding, 

effect  of 710 

rights  of  assignee,  when  lessee  has  covenanted  not  to  assign.    711 

covenant  may  be  waived 711 

what  amounts  to  waiver _ , 711 

underletting  not  breach  of,  except 714  w.  1 

involuntary  assignment  is  not ^.    715 

bequest  of  term  not  a  breach 717 

taking  lodgers,  is  not 715  w.  1 

parting  with  possession  of  part  of  premises  is  not 715  n.  1 

depositing  lease  as  collateral  security  is  not 717 

marriage  of  feme-sole  lessee  does  not  operate  as  breach  except    717 

involuntary  transfers  operate  as  breach  when --.  7l6  n,  2 

ASSIGNEE  : 

of  lease  liable  as  tenant 14 

of  either  party  may  give  notice  to  quit 119 

may  avail  himself  of  notice  given  by  assignor 119 

of  lease  hable  to  landlord  under 183 

cannot  enforce  forfeiture  incurred  before  assignment -  -    453 

liability  of,  upon  covenants  in  lease .--  666  n.  2 

only  liable  in  respect  of  privity  of  estate - 741 

liability  ceases  by  assignment  over 742  n 

may  sue  lessor  for  breach  of  covenant  when 735 

what  covenants  run  with  the  land 737-739 

mortgagee  not  hable  as,  except 734  n.  1-744 

not  hable  on  personal  covenants 734 

takes  subject  to  Uabihty  of  lessee 734 

not  liable  on  collateral  covenants 734 

liable  when  he  expressly  assumes  all  the  lessee's  covenants. .    734 

may  enforce  against  lessor  covenants  running  with  land 735 

as  covenant  to  renew _ 737 

for  further  assurance -. -    737 

to  insure --    737 

what  covenants  bind,  although  "  assigns  "  are  not  mentioned    737 

when  "assigns"  is  used 738 

rights  of 750 

by  way  of  mortgage,  liability  of .-.  750-751 


Index.  1516 

ASSIGNEE :— Continued. 

mortgagee  liable  as  assignee,  when 750-751 

how  may  avoid  liability. 750-751 

assigning  part  of  term  does  not  discharge  from  liability  as  to 

part  retained 750 

of  lease  containing  covenant  not  to  assign,  rights  of 718 

what  amounts  to  an  assignment ,.. 720 

nature  of _ 720 

distinction  between  and  underlease 727-747 

of  lessee,  when  hable  to  lessor 735 

of  reversion  can  enforce  forfeiture,  when 754 

of  what  covenants,  is  hable 733 

attornment  not  necessary 754 

only  hable  in  debt  at  common  law 733 

of  lessor,  becomes  landlord 723 

of  part,  rightsof 723 

entitled  to  apportionmient  of  rent,  when _ 723 

must  notify  tenant  of  transfer 723 

assignee  of  lessee  hable  only  to  extent  of  interest  assigned.-    733 

liabmty  of ...'.. 735 

liabihty  of  lessee 735-737 

on  what  covenants  hable.. 736 

when  habiUty  commences... 736-740 

need  not  have  taken  possession 740 

mortgagee  hable  as,  when 740 

liable  for  .rent,  &c.,  after  term  expires 741 

executors,  &c.,  hable  as  for  rent  and  breaches  after  death  of 

testator ' 755 

of  lease,  damages  against  for  breach  of  covenant  to  repair..    898 

rights  of,  when  lessee  assigns  without  lessor's  assent 901 

of  reversion,  may  owe  lessee  for  rent] 435  m. 

of  reversion,  cannot  enter  for  breach  before  purchase 453 

ASSIGNMENT : 

of  premises,  by  tenant  at  wUl,  terminates  tenancy 70  «.  3 

tenant  from  year  to  year  may  make 89 

what  is 145 

distinction  between,  andlease 145 

distinction  between,  and  lease 179-180 

under-lease  amounting  to,  treated  as  sub-lease  when 183 

distinction  between,  and  sub-lease 145-709 

nature  of _ 145-709-730 

what  amounts  to 145  m.  1-709-730 

what  is  subject  to... 731-733 

operative  words  in ; 731 

covenants  against,  not  favored 714 

what  amoimts  to  breach  of  covenant  against. 714 

rights  of  assignee  under,  when  lessee  has  covenanted 
not  to  assign 711  m.  3 


1616  Index. 

ASSIGNMENT :— Continued. 

usual  covenants  in.......^ 733 

under-lease  for  term  longer  than  tenant  possesses  operates  as  729 
conveyance  of  all  tenants  interest  operates   as,  although 

rent  is  reserved,  etc 737 

distinction  between,  and  imder-lease __  737 

by  deposit  of  lease,  effect  of _  735 

what  passes  by,  under  general  words  of 737 

over,  discharges  assignee . 741 

breaches  prior  to  assignment  over,  not  discharged  by 743-749 

not  discharged  from  express  covenants  entered  into  by  bim  743 
executor,  etc.,  of  assignee  may  assign  so  as  to  discharge  es- 
tate from  subsequent  breaches 743 

by  assignee  of  assignee 743 

covenants  against,  nature  and  effect  of- 709 

how  broken 715 

void  or  invalid,  does  not  operate  as  breach  of  covenant  against  717 

good  will  of  a  lease,  subject  to 715 

of  reversion 733 

rights  of  assignee  under 733 

Stat.  33  Hen.  8,  effect  of.... 733 

how  reversion  may  be  assigned 723 

mortgage  of  reversion 736 

effect  of ^ 736 

rights  of  mortgagee 736 

of  lease,  as  collateral  security,  effect  of 736-w.  3 

re-assignment,  effect  of . 749 

Uabihty  discharged'by,  without  notice  to  lessor  or  consent..  749 

attornment  not  necessary 754 

rights  of,  when  lessee  assigns  without  lessors  assent 710 

acceptance  of  rent  from  assignee  waives  forfeiture 711 

lease  is  "merely  voidable  at  landlord's  election,  although  it 
provides  that  it  shall  become  void  upon  assessment..  713-713- 

landlord  bound  by  his  election 711-713 

effect  of,  as  to  covenants  that  run  with  the  land 737  et  seq. 

what  covenants  run  with  the  land 737  etseq. 

what  do  not 739 

when  lia,bility  of  assignee  begins 740 

of  part  of  land,  effect  of 743 

by  way  of  mortgage -  744 

liability  of  mortgagee  under 744 

equitable  deposit  may  amount  to 745 

trustees  under  deed  of  assignment,  right  of  election 745 

what  passes  under  general  words  in  assignment  by  deed 746 

good  without  attornment -  754 

effect  of  stat.  4  Anne,  chap.  16 754 

effect  of  death  of  lessee 754 


Index.  151'? 

assignment  of  lease  : 

assignee  takes  subject  to  all  terms  of  the  lease ^ 14 

assent  of  landlord  to,  may  be  implied 14 

ATTESTATION : 

of  lease,  requisites  of 441 

who  may  attest 441 

parol  lease,  needs  none 441 

ATTORNEY : 

persons  acting  imder  power  of,  cannot  delegate  authority 373 

lease  from  client  to,  rule -...- , ^    283 

see  Dawson  v.  Massey 384 

ATTORNMENT  : 

by  tenant  of  mortgagor  to  mortgagee,  effect  of 7n. 

see  Adams  v.  Bigelow 7  n. 

to  lessee  under  concurrent  lease  not  necessary 483 

effect  of  not  attorning  to  him.. ^. 483 

AWAY  GOING  CROP  : 

customary  right  of  tenant  to 636 

BANKRUPTCY  : 

determines  tenancy  at  will  when  estate  vests  in  assignee 73 

assignee  in,  liable  as  tenant  when 30 

BLANKS: 

inlease,  filled  by  lessee,  effect  of 463-481 

but  see 463  n.  i 

implied  authority  to  fill 463  n.  3 

BUILDINGS : 

right  of  tenant  at  will  to  remove 67 

not  fixtures,  when -.  1338-1233 

covenant  to  pay  tenant  for 939 

BUILD: 

covenant  to,  not  implied 103-104 

void  lease    containing  covenants,   not   biuding  on  tenant 
entirely  under. 104 

CANCELLATION : 

of  lease  by  parties,  effect  of -- ---    463 

not  evidence  of  surrender —    463 

CESTUI  QUE  TRUST  : 

power  of,  to  lease i - 313 

should  joia  with  trustee. 313 

confirmation  of  imperfect  lease  by 315 

CALENDAR  MONTH : 

intended  in  contracts,  when > 143 

CHATTEL : 

lease  for  term  is 

lease  may  be  made  of.. 


1918  Index, 

clay  pits : 

tenant  for  life  may  work 138 

COLOEABLE  SALE : 

win  not  defeat  lease  untU  premises  are  sold _  47  n.  3 

COMMONS  : 

rights  of,  what  are - 519 

common  of  pasture,  what  is , 520 

how  may  be  claimed 530 

appurtenant   to  lands 530 

in  favor  of  what  cattle  it  exists. 520 

common  jpitr  cause  de  vicinage,  what  is,  and  how  may  exist  530 

inter-commoning • 533 

common  of  turbaxy 533 

of  fishery 535 

common  of  estovers 534 

when  exists 534 

kinds   of -  534 

house  bote _ 534 

hay  bote -. ---  534 

plough  bote. 634 

common  fishery . 535 

nature  of 535 

how  created _  635 

by  grant 535 

by  custom _ _ • 535 

by  prescription 537 

CONCUKRENT  LEASES : 

what  are 146 

efiectof 483-484 

attornment  not  necessary 483 

effect  of  tenant  not  attorning.. 483-484 

tenant  taking  concurrent  lease,  effect  of 484 

CONDITIONS : 

in  lease,  what  are 580-584 

may  be  annexed  to  estate  of  inheritance 581 

distinction  between,  and  covenant - .-  581 

tests  for  distinguishing 581 

mayform  part  of  imphed  tenancy 581 

estate  may  be  enlarged  by 581  n.  1 

"           "    bequaUfiedby _  581  n.  1 

"           "    be  defeated  by ._ 581  n.  1 

"provided"  imports  a — 581 

illustrations - .-  581 

runs  with  land  when - 583 

penalty  for  breach  of,  makes  covenant- — 581 

illustrations.. 583 


Index.  1519 

CONDITIONS  •.—Continued. 

runs  with  land,  when ,..-  582 

insensible,  rule  as  to 582 

covenant  will  not  be  construed  as,  unless -, -  -  582 

illustrations 582-583 

provision  for  re-entry  essential _ 582 

active,  effect  of _ _  583 

precedent,  rule 583 

alternative,  rule.-- ._  583 

subsequent,  rule ■ 583 

w^hen  party  excused  from  performing ._  583 

when  one  alternative  is  impossible,  rule. 584 

dependent  on  lessor's  covenant,  rule 584 

construction  of . 588 

or  covenants,  depends  on  construction 588 

by  what  instrument  may  be  made 588 

may  be  in  separate  instrument 588 

maybe  indorsed  on  deed 588-589 

doubt  whether  is,  how  resolved 589 

may  be,  and  covenant. 589 

between  whom  binding 593 

CONDITIONS  PRECEDENT : 

to  exercise  of  option  to  determine  lease 151 

construction  of 588 

by  what  instrument  may  be  made. 588 

by  what  words  created 589 

between  what  parties  binding 593 

and  provisions,  what  are 583 

may  be  annexed  to  the  estate 583 

distinction  between,  and  covenant 583 

the  word  "  provided  "  imports  a  covenant ^ 583 

Biltemative  conditions 583 

conditions  precedent. 584 

conditions  subsequent 584 

when  covenants  are... 585,  682  n.  1 

rules  for  determining 683 

order  of  time  for  performance  controls 682  n.  1 

intention  of  parties  controls 682-683  n. 

when  breach  may  be  paid  for  in  damages,  covenant   is 

independent... - 683 

rule  when  covenants  require  simultaneous  acts. . ., 683  n. 

what  are  mutual  covenants 680 

illustrations 680  et  seq. 

independent  covenants,  what  are. 681 

rule  as  to 583 

must  be  strictly  performed 584 

performance  becoming  impossible,  effect 584 

distinction  between,  and  subsequent 584 


1520  Index. 

CONDITIONS  PBECEDENT  -.—Continued. 

what  is - 584 

test  of  distinction  between  and  subsequent. 585 

order  of  time  for  performance,  controls 585 

illustrations 585-588 

liberally  construed 

what  will  be  regarded  as  performance  of*^^ 589 

CONDITIONS  SUBSEQUENT : 

not  favored  in  law___ 584  w.  4 

how  must  be  connected  with  grant 584  n.  1 

equity  wiU  relieve  against,  when. 584  w.  1 

performance,  impossible,  rule. 584  n.  1 

intention  of  parties,  controls 585 

provision  for  re-entry  essential.. .    582 

penalty  for  breach  of,  makes  covenant . ^    681 

illustrations _    585 

run  with  land 583 

insensible,  rule. 582 

order  of  time  for  performance,  controls 582 

by  what  words  created ^  589-592 

what  is  and  office  of 585. 

distinction  between  and  precedent 584 

CONSTRUCTION  OF  LEASES : 

rules  as  to 620-623 

intention  of  parties  to  be  regarded 620 

when  lease  may  operate  two  ways 620 

when  material  word  is  omitted 620 

when  wrong  word  is  used 621 

illustrations 621 

when  words  have  been  struck  out _._ 621 

illustrations 621 

inferences 621-622 

when  description  is  vague  and  uncertain. 623 

necessary  particulars,  rejected  when. 632-623 

rule  as  to 633 

covenant  will  be  raised  from  language  of  lease  when 623 

"  from,"  construed  how 616 

of  leases  for  life  or  lives , 616 

of  leases,  rules  for 596-620 

oral  evidence  admissible  to  and  in,  when 623  et  seq. 

when  inferences  will  be  drawn 631 

when  covenants  will  be  inferred  from  other  covenants 633 

when  description  is  so  uncertain  that  it  cannot  be  applied, 

lease  vwd.. 633 

when  possible  to  apply  it  to  subject  matter,  rule 633 

rule  when  wrong  words  are  used  in  description 633 

rule  when  lease  may  operate  either  of  two  ways 630 


Index.  1521 

CONSTRUCTION  OP  LEASES  -.—Contmued. 

rule  when  it  cannot  operate  in  one  way 630 

rule  when  material  word  is  omitted 620 

rule  when  material  words  have  been  stricken  out  -  - 630-621 

rule  when  description  includes  several  particulars 623 

descriptions  to  be  construed  liberally. 633 

when  covenant' will  be  inferred  from  general  tenor  of  lease. .    633 
evidence  not   admissible  to  effect  construction  of  express 

terms 623 

or  to  show  that  certain  premises  were  to  be  included  in  lease    624 

or  excluded  from  it 624 

that  more  or  less  rent  was  to  be  paid. 624 

that  rent  was  to  be  paid  at  different  time. 624-625 

lease  to  begin  at  different  time _ 635 

that  tenant  was  to  pay  taxes 635 

that  landlord  was  to  repair 625 

that  certain  privileges  were  given 635 

admissible  to  defeat  the  lease 635 

to  show  that  it  was  illegal 626 

that  essential  formaUties  were  not  observed 635-686 

to  what  premises  lease  applies,  when  there  is  ambiguity  aris- 
ing from  extrinsic  circumstances 636 

maybe  shown  what  is  intended  by  words  "  my  home  farm," 

"  Lanier  House,"  etc 637 

when  particular  terms  restrict  and  limit  the  grant 628  notes 

when  they  do  not 638  n.  3 

parol  evidence  admissible  to  aid  in  making  out  terms  of 

illegible  lease,  and  construing  it,  when  _ 629 

general  rule  of  construction _ 637  n. 

when  acts  of  the  parties  are  admissible  to  aid  in  construc- 
tion  _ _,.  639  n.  630  n. 

latent  ambiguity,  rules  as  to _ _ 630 

rule  when  lease  may  apply  to  either  of  two  estates 633  n.  1 

or  in  favor  of  two  or  more  persons _. 619 

in  case  of  renewal,  evidence  admissible  to  show  what  is 

embraced  in,  when 632  n.  1 

never  admissible  to  explain  patent  ambiguity. 635 

illustration '. 682 

may  be  shown  that  lease  was  made  for  benefit  of  a  tMrd 

person 635 

custom  may  be  proved,  when 636-641 

when  may  not. 637 

of  covenants,  rules  of 648-666 

rule  as  to  interest  of  covenantees 650 

how  covenantees  should  sue 650  n.  3 

when  covenants  are  clearly  joint,  rule 650 

rule  when  covenantee  may  join  in  suit , 650 

whole  covenant  must  be  taken  together 650 


1522  Index. 

CONTRUCTION  OP  LEASES  -.—Continued. 

words  to  be  construed  favorably  to  covenantee 651 

rule  when  covenant  may  enure  either  of  two  ways 650  n.  5 

when  grammatical  sense  will  prevail _  650  n.  3 

rule  in  Jewett  v.  Spencer _ 650  n.  2 

rule  when  covenant  involves  a  forfeiture 650-653 

rule  when  express  covenant  applies  to  several  persons. . 652 

intention  of  parties  to  be  carried  out 653 

when  punctuation  wUl  be  resorted  to 653 

when  grammatical  sense  will  be  rejected. 653 

when  words  and  sentences  will  be  transposed 653 

when  clauses  wiU  be  rejected 653 

when  several  covenants  will  be  construed  together 654  n.  1 

rule  when  covenants  are  independent >  654 

when  two  instruments  may  be  construed  together 654 

when  extraneous  circumstances  will  be  considered 654 

maxim  ex  antecedibus,  &c 655 

rule  when  lessee  reserves  an  option 655  et  seq. 

how  far  express,  will  qualify  implied  covenant 657  n. 

when  general  woi-ds  will  be  limited  in  sense 557  n. 

rule  of  construction  when  use  of  thing  is  granted 658 

of  particular  covenants,  how  far  description  of  the  thing 

controls 660 

covenant  will  be  reasonably  construed 660 

illustrations. _._ 660  et  seq. 

what  is  treated  as  breach  of  covenajit 661 

CONTEACT : 

relation  between  owner  and  trespasser,  may  be  changed  to 

tenancy,  by ; 7 

to  pay  rent,  not  always  necessary,  may  be  implied 7 

CONTEACT  TO  PURCHASE : 

persons  in  possession  under,  tenants  at  will 5n.  2 

CONVEYANCE : 

of  estate  by  landlord  determines  tenancy  at  wiU G7  m.  10,  68 

CO-PAECENEES  : 

how  estate  arises -  168 

qualities  of 108 

how  may  lease 168 

lease  by  one  does  not  bind  others 168 

effect  of  several  leases.. 168 

CORPOEATION  : 

may  lease 187 

leases  by 187 

may  be  by  deed  or  parol 188-189 

must  be  by  deed,  when 147 

by  agents  or  officers  of 188 


Index.  1523 

CORPORATION :— Continued. 

what  is  sufficient  execution  of. 188-194 

may  ratify  unauthorized  act. 189 

■what  amoxints  to  ratification 189 

lease  by,  need  not  be  xrnder  corporate  seal 189 

may  lease  same  as  individuals 189 

voidable  lease  made  by,  how  far  operative. 190 

may  recover  under  parol  lease _ 191 

is  liable  for  rent  under  parol  lease  to  it 191-193  n.  6 

may  bring  use  and  occupation 191 

lessee  of,  cannot  question  powers  of,  to  make  lease 193 

how  conveyances  should  be  made  by  and  to  it 193-194 

COUNTERPART : 

of  lease,  production  of  may  be  compelled,  when 435 

COVENANTS  : 

what  wiU  be  implied. 103 

usual  covenants 103  et  seq. 

what  are  applicable  to  tenancy  from  year  to  year.' 104 

to  pay  for  improvements,  applicable  to  tenancy  from  year  to 

year. __ 104 

to  improve  property 104 

to  leave  manure 104 

against  successive  crops 104 

advance  payment  of  rent 104 

that  tenant  may  sow  and  gather  crops 104 

to  paint,  not  apphcable __ '..  105 

to  repair,  not __ _ 104 

of  lessee,  not  binding  on  sub-tenant,  except.  _ 178-195 

tenant  presumed  to  know,  of  lease ., 184 

unusual  presumption  does  not  apply ___ 184 

that  mortgagor  may  take  rents,  effect  of _ .  _ 263 

usual,  what  are _ 347 

to  repair  against  fire  or  tempest 347 

to  pay  rent _ 347 

to  quit  at  end  of  term 347 

for  quiet  enjoyment , 848 

not  usual,  not  to  assign 348 

not  to  carry  on  certain  trades. 348 

not  personally  occupy 348 

that  term  shall  end  if  buildings  are  burned,  etc.  _  - 348 

common,  what  are _ 370 

condition  treated  as,  when _ 581 

common  equity  wUl  not  enforce  the  performance  of 370 

express,  what  are 642-646 

what  words  amount  to 643 

kinds  of.- 643 

for  payment  of  rent 646 

instances  and  construction  of-.,, ,.^ 646 


1524:  Index. 

COVENANTS :— Continued. 

what  excuses  form... 646-648 

construction  of 648-666 

once  performed,  covenant  is  discharged 661 

intention  of,  important _ 661 

what  constitutes  breach  of , __ _    661 

liability  of  party  and  assigns 666 

void  or  nugatory,  when. 668 

real  or  personal,  when ._    669 

what  run  with  the  land... 669-673-680 

rules  for  determining 669-673-680 

instances  of  personal 669-673 

instances  of  real _._ 673-680 

divisible,  what  are _. __. 680 

dependent,  when .__ __ 681-684 

independent,  when _ 681-684 

rules  relating  to 681-684 

how  discharged _. _•_ 689 

by  operation  of  statutes _ 689 

implied,  what  is  and  when  the  law  raises _  691  n.  1 

express,  does  not  exclude  implied,  except 694 

when  will  not  be  implied. 696-700 

imphedon  part  of  lessee. 696 

when  implied  from  words  in  other  covenants. 697 

to  insure __ _ 701 

when  no  loss  has  occurred 704 

when  loss  has  occurred 706 

not  to  assign _ 709 

or  rmderlet. .., ___ __    709 

how  broken _ ___ 714 

license  to,  effect  of _ 709-714 

how  must  be  given ___ 710 

when  covenant  provides  that  assignment  shall  be  made  only 

in  certain  way,  effect  of 710 

when  lessor  covenants  not  to  withhold  consent  unreasonably, 

rule  as  to 710 

effect  of  assignment  when  lessee  has  covenanted  not  to  assign 

may  be  waived 710 

what  amoimts  to  waiver 711-714 

is  not  broken  by  underletting  except 714 

involuntary  assignment  does  not  operate  as]  a  breach  of 715 

nor  does  a  bequest  of  the  term 716-717 

what  amounts  to  an  assignment 717-730-726-737 

nature  of  assignment 730 

what  will  not  run  with  land 739 

running  with  land  are  divisible 744 

for  quiet  enjoyment,  implied  in  all  cases 756-760 

what  amounts  to  breach  of _ 756-760 

entry  by  wrong-doer  does  not  constitute  breach 757-758 

entry  by  landlord  not,  except 758 


Index.  1525 

COVSlNANTS  -.—Continued. 

entry  and  assault  by  landlord,  not '''58 

entry  by  landlord  to  repair,  not -    758 

destruction  of  buildings,  and  refusal  of  landlord  to  rebuild, 

not : 758 

landlord  entering  under  valid  ordinance,  effect  of 759 

not  implied,  wben  lease  contains  express  covenant  for 760 

illustrations __ _. 760-763. 

cesser  of  implied  covenant  for _ _. 764 

form  of  usual  covenants  for _ _    765 

what  operates  as  breach  of 771-779 

distress  for  taxes,  not 765 

wrongful  acts  of  tenant  under  previous  lease,  not 765 

can  only  be  breach  when  act  is  done  under  and  not  against 

the  lessor 765-767 

to  repair. -. _ 784 

express,  to  repair _ _ _ 791 

to  repair  and  keep  in  repair,  effect  of 793 

what  constitutes  a  breach  of 793  n.  4 

construction  of  peculiar 794  ?i.  6 

general,  how  construed - 796 

buildings  erected  duringthe  term. 803 

covenant  to  pay  expenses  of,  not  covenant  to  repair 807 

not  implied  on  tenant's  part,  to  restore  buildings  destroyed 

by  fire ..--. 808 

under  what  covenants  tenant  is  excused  from  restoring  build- 
ings destroyed  by  inevitable  casualty. 809-815 

w^hen  landlord  is  to  do  some  precedent  act,  tenant  not  charge- 
able until  actisdone 717 

repairs  made  by  landlord  raises  no  presumption  that  he  con- 
tracted to  repair — -    819 

tenant  may  recoup  damages  from  landlord's  failure  to  per- 
form, against  rent - -    830 

negligence  of  tenant  does  not  excuse  landlprd  from  perform- 
ing  .-    838 

landlord  has  no  right  to  enter  to  repair,  except 828 

leave  may  be  implied  when. — :. 838 

to  rebuild,  duties  imposed  by 815 

to  repair  after  notice 816 

to  pay  for  buildings  erected  by  tenant  during  the  term  does- 

not  entitle  t<im  to  recover  for  repairs  made  thereon 816 

to  repair,  runs  with  the  land 816 

conditional  or  qualified  covenants  to  repair - 817 

landlord's  liability  on  express  covenant  to  repair : 819 

to  what  lessor's  covenant  extends. 825 

landlord's  rightto  enter  to  repair - 838 

what  tenant  do  to  charge  the  landlord  under  a  covenant  to 
repair - — 829 

II.— 44 


1526  Index. 

COVENANTS  -.—Continued. 

no  implied  covenant  to  repair.. 880 

no  implied  covenant  that  buildings  are  tenantable 830 

what  amounts  to  disrepair .._. ,  831 

no  implied  covenant  that  premises  are  or  shall  remain  ten- 
antable  _ 833 

no  imphed  covenant  that  premises  are  fit  for  purpose  for 

which  they  were  let.. 834 

to  repair,  only  extends  to  artificial  objects... ,  809  n.  3 

damages  for  breach  of,  to  repair,  when  action  brought  at  end 

of  term L ....  878 

.    to  what  buildings  covenant  extends . , 878 

damages  not  recoverable,  unless.. 879 

what  amount  of  repairs  must  be  made.... --..__ .-  879 

evidence  of  disrepair 879 

effect  of  condition  precedent __. 881 

action  against  lessor __. _ ,,  883 

effect  of  entire  destruction  of  estate .  883 

to  repair,  when  implied  from  other  covenants 889 

implied  liability  of  tenant  at  will ,  to  repair 891 

of  tenant  from  year  to  year. ., ..  891 

remedies  of  landlord  for  non-repair ...  892f 

when  may  enter  for  such  breaches 89^ 

when  may  bring  ejectment  for 893^ 

against  offensive  trades ..  905- 

what  are  regarded  as 90& 

distinction  between  "  trade  "  and  business 906" 

see  rule  illustrated  in 906-4 

also  note  1,  page 907 

covenant  not  to  use  buUding  except  as  private  residence,  how 

broken *...  90T 

instances  qf  particular  covenants,  and  how  construed 903-911 

rule  in  Schroeder  v.  King 911 

rule  in  Clark  V.  Clark 911 

how  forfeiture  may  be  waived 911 

against  particular  trade 903-911 

not  a  usual  covenant 903 

to  work  mines,  how  broken 913 

to  furnish  lessor  with  lime  at  all  seasons  of  burning  imports 

a  covenant  to  burn  it _ 913 

to  deal  with  particular  persons , 915 

in  restraint  of  trade,  how  far  valid .-,, 916 

how  the  distance  is  to  be  computed -.. 919 

tore-deliver  fixtures i. __ 919 

to  give  up  part  of  land. _ _  930 

as  to  cultivation  of  land _ 921 

executors  may  sue  for  breach  of,  in  life  of  testator 754-755 

heirs  may  sue  for  breaches  of  the  death  of  ancestor 754^-755 

to  renew  lease .' 930-954 


Index.  1527 

COVENANTS  -.—Continued. 

See  Rejnewai,  of  Lease. 

to  pay  taxes ^ , 954^968 

.to  pay  for  all  buildings  erected  on  premises,  effect  of -    939 

against  incumbrances _ 968 

what  constitutes  an  incumbrance. _ 970 

knowledge  of  existence  of  incumbrance  by  the  tenant  when 

he  took  the  lease  does  not  prevent  recovery  1 9,70 

an  obvious  easement  not  an  incvmibrance _ 970 

legal  highway  in  use  is  not - '•.    970 

nor  any  mere  equitable  claim  to   the  land ^ 970 

•  when  judgment  maybe 970 

rightof  way  is _ 970 

right  of  dower  is - 970 

right  to  use  party  wall 970 

highway  located  but  not  builtis 970 

when  tax  or  assessment  is -.- -. 971 

mortgage  is 971 

covenant  is  personal  and  does  not  run  with  the  land. 971 

when  it  passes  to  assignee 971 

express,  to  pay  rent,  effect  of 1028 

necessity  of 1028 

reservation  of ,  should  be  certain 1029 

when  lessor  has  election  as  to  time  when  rent  shall  be  paid.-  1029 
rule  when  rent  is  payable  quarterly  be,  but  time  for  first  pay- 
ments is  fixed  at  time  after  two  quarters  have  elapsed 1029 

runs  with  the  land - - 1030 

assignee  not  liable  for  rent  accruing  before  assignment 1030 

even  when  he  expressly  promises  to  pay  it. 1030 

lies  for  rent  on  lease  under  seal 1329 

CREDITOR,: 

taking  possession  of  debtors  lands,  is  tenant,  when 9 

levying  upon  tenant's  term,  becomes  tenant,  when 20 

CROPS : 

growing,  right  to  on  determination  of  life  estate 138-1364 

tenants  may  enter  to  harvest  after  the  term  has  ended,  when  1083 
when  tenant  for  years  not  entitled  to  that  mature  after  term 

is  ended -  -. -'-- 1 364 

lease  should  stipulate  as  to -.  1364 

custom  in  reference  to,  may  control 1364 

out-going  tenant,  right  to  an  away-going  crop 1364 

usage  as  to -- - 1364 

rule  when  lease  contains  no  provision  as  to  mode  of  quitting 

but  the  holding  ig  inconsistent  with  the  custom 1365  , 

right  to  take,  holds  aigainst  new  tenant  .as  well  as  landlord  1366 
agreement  between  out-going  and  incoming  tenant  does  bind 

the  landlord  J... -- 1366 


1528  Index. 

CROPS  -.—Continued. 

trover  lies  by  landlord  against  out-going  tenant  for  crops  cut 

after  tenancy  expires _ 1366 

incoming  tenant  cannot  bring  trover  for _ 1366 

emblements,  what  tenants  entitled  to _ 1369-174 

contracts  between  out-going  and  incoming  tenants  as  tOj 

enforceable _. , 1867 

must  be  in  writing.... 1367 

vendee,  not  performing,  not  entitled  to... 19  w. 

vendee,  not  entitled  to,  when 47  w.. 

right  of  tenant  at  wiU,  to ._ _. 65-67 

tenant  of  tenant  for  life  entitled  to,  after  death  of  tetter,  when,  139 

CUJUS  EST  SOLUM : 

restrictions  i3mposed  upon  maxim  in  leases,  when ,,  401  n.  2 

CULTIVATION : 

of  farm,  obligation  of  tenant  as  to 931 

effect  of  custom  asto 931-933 

covenants  as  to 933-930 

rule  as  to  expending  the  manure,  etc, ,  on  farm 9330 

instances  of  peculiar  covenants  as  to 933-930 

remedies  for  bueachof.-. 937 

eqiiity  will  not  enforce  contracts  relating  to. 937 

will  restrain  breach  of  implied  covenants  when. 937 

will  enjoin  from  earring  ofE  manure 938 

from  planting  or  sowing  deleterious  crops 937 

CUETILAGE : 

what  is..^..^ ^r-- --- 408m.  5 

CURTESY: 

lessee  of  tenant  toy,  is  tenant  by  sufferance  when ► 35 

See  Tenabtt  by  Cuetesy. 
husband  does  jiot  become  tenant  by,  in  lands  held  by  wife  for 
Ufe  . 173 

CUSTOM : 

admissible  to  explain  meaning  of  lease  when -  636-637 

not  admissible  when... ._ 637 

treated  as  part  of  contract  when 637 

iUustrations ._. ., 637-690 

impliedly  annexed  to  lease  when...,....,,, 636 

parol  evidence  to  establish ..,.,,.. 636 

whenis  excluded ., 637 

influences  construction  of  words  when 639 

regulates  rights  of  parties  on  termination  of  agricultural 

leases,  unless. ._ 1144 

instances  of -_.  U45-1149 


Index.  152& 

customary  eights : 

maybe  shown  when 637 

of  tenant  to  away-going  crop 636 

DAMAGES : 

measure  of,  in  action  for  use  and  occupation 1347 

for  breach  of  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment 779 

of  covenant  to  repair _ 894-903 

See  The  Parhculab  Covenants. 

Date  : 

not  material  except 447 

false,  true,  may  be  shown _ 448 

if  none,  time  when  it  was  to  take  effect  may  be  sjiown  by 

parol __. ____    448 

delivery  wiU  be  presumed  to  have  been  made  at  date  of 448 

lease  prima /acte  takes  effect  from 448-597 

inclusive  or  exclusive  of  day  of,  when 603-607 

illustrations ^ 597-607 

DEATH: 

of  landlord  or  tenant  determines  tenancy  at  will ^ 69 

exception. _ _ __.. 71 

DEBT: 

one  joint  tenant  cannot  bring  in  his  <5wn  name. 164 

for  rent,  when  maintainable ..._ 1352 

lies  when  lease  is  not,  as  weU  as  when  it  is  under  seal. 1353 

what  must  be  shown  to  support  siction ^^ . 1353 

who  may  maintain  action  of 1353 

DEED: 

whatis.^ '. ^. 148,433 

leases  required  to  be  by,  presumed  to  be  by 433 

upon  what  must  be  written  or  printed. 433 

lost,  may  be  proved  by  counterpart ^ 435 

cancelling  of,  effect  upon  term 434  n.  1 

loss  of ,  estate  does  not  fail-. 434 

must  be  under  seal 435 

should  contain  name  of  grantee _ _ 439 

leases  of,  what  are , 433 

what  is  a 433 

unsettled  instrument  not  a. 486  also  n.  3 

distinction  between  and  indenture 433 

leases  presumed  to  be  by,  until 433 

required  to  be  by,  in  some  states... 435 

DEED: 

executed  by  corporation,  how. 440 

by  agent  or  attorney t...    440 

See  Lease. 


1630  Index, 

delivery: 

of  lease,  what  is _  442-445 

presumed,  when.. 443 

of  lease,  what  amounts  to 448 

no  acceptance  of  lease,  until ___ 448 

of  lease,  presumed  to  have  been  made  at  date  of 448 

essential  to  validity  of  lease ___ _.    443 

what  amounts  to i 443-444 

none,  so  long  as  in  custody  or  control  of  lessor 443 

possession  of  by  lessee  does  not  necessarily  constitute  443  n.  7-443 

may  be  inferred... 443 

intention  of  parties  controls 443 

formal,  not  necessary 443  m.  4 

to  stranger  good,  when 444 

what  must  be  shown  to  validate 444 

grantee's  assent  must  be  shown 444 

what  establishes 444 

in  escrow,  what  is  and  effect  of _.    444 

DEMAND : 

must  be,  when,  before  ejectment  brought  against  tenant  at 

win 68 

need  not  be  made  to  determine  tenancy  at  will 71 

terminates  such  tenancy. 71 

what  amounts  to 71 

of  rent,  to  uphold  forfeiture  when  and  how  must  be  made 

1035-1041 
DEMISE: 

See  Lease. 
DEPOSIT : 

premises  let  for  purposes  of : 131 

duty  and  liability  of  landlord  in  reference  to 131 

DESCBIPTION : 

of  premises,  what  should  contain. 397 

certainty  required 397 

insufficient,  good,  when 337 

illustrations. 397 

danger  of  general 397-403 

when  is  uncertain 398 

maxim  id  certum  est,  etc.,  applied.. 398 

rule  when  first  words  are  certain,  but  erroneous,  follows 399 

iQustrations 399  n.  1 

inconsistency  in,  will  not  defeat  lease,  when 899  n.  1 

false,  wiU.  not  defeat,  when 399  n.  1 

illustrations. 399  n.  1' 

when  erroneous,  will  defeat  lease 400 

general,  as  "my  farm,"  effect  of 400  also ».  Iand4 

"  more  or  less,"  effect  of * 400 


Index.  1531 

DESCRIPTION  ■.—Continued. 

what  should  contain -    401 

what  passes  as  "land" 401 

rule  when  lease  defines  the  thing  leased,  as  "  a  house,"  '•  a 

mill,"  etc 401 

certain  overcomes  general -     400 

as  "hoiise  and  furniture,"  rule. 403 

of  second  floor  of  house 403 

•     of  lands  on^rivers 406 

as  "house,"  effect  of 406 

asmiU 406 

asfarm ._ 408 

as  messuage- 408 

as  "dweUing-house  " 409 

particular  i-estricts  general,  when. ' 400  n.  4 

of  yard,  does  not  pass  cellar,  when 407 

rulesasto 633 

vague  and  uncertain,  rule 633 

necessary  particulars  rejected  when 633-633 

DESERTION  : 

of  premises  by  tenant,  landlord  may  enter  when.. 1398 

DESTRUCTION : 

of  lease  by  parties,  effect  of 463  n.  3 

DETERMINATION : 

of   tenancy _•..  1141-1318 

by  efflux  of  time .-.  1141 

by  notice,  when 1141-1143 

by  surrender 1151-1187 

by  merger 1187 

by  forfeiture : - 1193  ' 

tenant's  disclaimer... 1198 

rights  of  lessor  on 1143 

rights  of  lessee  on 1143 

See  Tenancy. 

DEVISEE: 

of  either  party  may  give  notice  to  quit. 119 

DISCLAIMER : 

of  tenancy,  effect  of _-_ 18 

by  tenant  at  wiU,  terminates  tenancy ---. 69 

verbal,  effect  of - 133 

what  amounts  to 133-135 

when  question  for  jury 134r-135 

DISPUTING  TITLE : 

right  of  tenant  in  reference  to 483-500 

effect  of,  on  tenant's  rights 493  n.  1 

void,  fact  that  the  lease  is  does  not  change  the  rule 493  n.  1 

what  tenant  must  do  to  enable  him  to 493  ».  1 


1532  Index, 

disseizee : 

lease  by,  invalid,  when 335-329 

wlien  there  is  adverse  holding,  rule 836 

lease  to  take  effect  when  outstanding  lease  is  ended,  valid 336 

adverse  holding  must  be  established  by  party  setting  up.  336  n.  3 

DISSEIZOR: 

may  lease  when 334 

effect  of  subsequently  obtaining  title 334 

may  be  confirmed  by  disseizee 335 

effect  of  eviction  of  tenant  by  disseizee 825 

DISTRESS  : 

for  rent  will  not  he  unless  conditions  precedent  have  been 

performed. _. 138 

for  rent  due  under  lease  made  by  joint  tenants,  one  may 

make 164 

howmust  proceed 164 

right  of  is  incident  to  every  demise 179 

right  of,  neednot  be  reserved  in  lease 179 

for  rent,  when  it  Ues 1305-1310 

what  may  be  distrained 1310-1313 

where  must  be  made 1313-1318 

how  may  be  made 1318-1333 

sale  of ;. 1323 

when  Ulegal 1335 

remedy  for 1835 

when  irregular 1336 

remedy  for 1836 

relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  must  exist  to  entitle  person 

to  remedy  by 1306 

rent  must  be  due  but  need  not  be  payable  in  money 1306 

rent  must  be  fixed 1306  Ji.  6 

Ues  when  payable  in"share  of  products 1306 

hes  f  or  Uquidated  damages 1307 

for  forfeitures  for  breach  of  conditions  of  lease  under  seal..  1307 

for  double  rent 1307 

does  not  he  where  premises  are  held  under  a  mere  hcense 1307 

rent  must  be  in  arrear 1308 

when  rent  is  in  arrear 1308 

note  taken  for  rent  suspends,  but  does  not  defeat  the  remedy  1309 

unsatisfied  judgment  does  not  defeat 1309 

bond  given  for  rent  does  not  prevent _ 1309 

agreement  to  pay  interest  does  not  defeat  the  remedy  by 1309 

nor  does  the  fact  that  landlord  owes  the  tenant 1809 

chattle  mortgage  does  not  prevent 1309  m.  3. 

reservation  of  a  lien  does  not  defeat 1309  «..  3 

tender  made  before  distress  is  completed  defeats 1309 

but  not  after 1309 

to  whom  and  when  tender  maybe  made 1310 


Index.  1533 

DISTRESS  :— Continued. 

requisites  of  valid  tender 1310 

what  may  be  distrained 1310 

fixtures  cannot  be , 1310 

reason 1310 

property  of  a  stranger  in  tenant's  possession  subject  to,  when  1311 

test  for  determining 1311 

animals /erce  natures,  not 1313 

things  in  actual  use,  not _..  1313 

things  in  custody  of  the  law,  not 1312  ■ 

goods  in  tenant's  possession  by  way  of  his  trade,  not,  when  1313 

■where  must  be  made 1318 

cannot  be  taken  off  the  demised  premises 1313  n.  7 

exceptions 1313  • 

permissions  of  stat.  Geo.  3 1314 

what  landlord  must  show  to  establish  fraudulent  removal 1315 

cannot  be  made  before  sunrise  or  after  sunset 1815 

right  to,  may  be  suspended  by  agreement 1815 

for  rent  payable  on  demand,  the  distress  is  sufficient  demand  1817 

lies  against  tenants  representatives 1317 

how  made  and  by  whom... -.  1818 

affidavit  necessary 1318 

what  it  should  contain 1818 

all  rent  due  must  be  embraced  in  the  warrant 1819 

howacce.ssto  premises  may  be  gained 1319 

lawful  entry  once  made,  force  may  be  used  to  keep  possession  1320 

what  is  not  a  sufficient  entry 1320 

when  actual  entry  not  necessary 1320 

what  constitutes  a  seizure,„ 1830 

seizure  must  not  embrace  an  excessive  amount  of  propei-ty..  1320 

test  for  determining 1331  n.  2 

must  be  sufficient 1331 

when  second  seizure  must  be  made 1331 

goods  must  he  impounded 1321 

what  property  may  be  left  with  the  tenant 1823 

inventory  should  be  made 1822 

poundbreach,  when  tenant  guilty  of 1333 

abandonment  of  tenant,  may  retake  the  property 1333 

property  may  be  either  kept  or  sold 1822 

what  must  be  done  before  a  sale  is  made 1332 

how  and  where  may  be  sold — — 1823 

willlie  against  tenant  at  will  when 44 

DISTRAINING  FOR  RENT : 

waives  forfeiture 17  n.  5 

DOOR  BELL : 

right  of  hirer  of  apartments  to  use .-    139 


15M  Index 

DOORS : 

cutting  out  walls  for  new,  is  breach  of  covenant  to  keep  in 

repair  when 800 

enlargement  of,  not,  when 800 

DOUBLE  RENT: 

See  Rent. 
DOAVER  :• 

rights  of  husband  of  tenant  by 217 

lessee  of  tenant  by,  is  tenant  by  sufferance  when 35 

See  Tenant  by  Dowee. 

DRAINS  : 

pass  as  appurtenances 429 

DRAWERS : 

losing  or  carrying  away  is  breach  of  tenant's  covenant  to 

keep  in  repair,  when 801 

DURESS  : 

what  constitutes _ 331-231 

degree  of  that  wiU  avoid  lease  made  by  person  under 234 

DWELLING  HOUSE : 

lease  of ,  passes  what 408 

EASEMENT : 

one  tenant  in  conmion  cannot  create _.  171 

what  are.-- 513 

rightof  way 513 

what  pass  as  appurtenances 422-512 

as  to  light.. 423  n.  3 

all  continuous  or  apparent,  pass 429  m..  2 

common,  right  of ,  what  is 519-533 

of  pasture 519 

how  and  by  whom  may  be  claimed 519 

is  appurtenant  to  land 520. 

in  favor  of  what  cattle 520 

pur  cause  de  vicinage,  what  is 521 

right  of  inter-commoning 532 

of  turbary,  what  is 523 

oE  estovers,  what  is 533 

when  exists,  kinds  of. 534 

may  exist  by  grant,  custom  or  prescription 524 

ways  by  grant 513 

prescription 514 

necessity 514 

duty  of  those  using 515 

who  must  repair 516 

duties  of  those  using 515 

pubUc  may  acquire. 517 

who  liable  for  obstruction  of 517 

what  is  an  obstruction 518 


Index.  1535 

EASEMENT  ■.—Continued. 

exists  in  navigable  streams 529 

what  streams  are  regarded  as  navigable 529 

test  for  determining.: ._! 529 

rights  of  riparian  owners  in 529 

in  watercourses 536-556 

nature  of  rights  in  natural  streams 537 

right  of  mill  owners 542 

reasonableness  of  use,  question  for  jury 544 

limitations  upon  right  to  erect  dams 544 

precautions  to  be  adopted 546 

prescriptive  rights,  how  acquired ' 546 

extent  of '. 547 

rule  in  Gilford  v.  Lake  Co. 547 

Lawler  v.  Potter 548 

Corhsh  V.  Cooper 550 

Mentz  V.  Dorney. 551 

change  of  machinery 551 

ancient  mills 558 

effect  of  prior  use 558 

what  is  a  mill  site 554 

artificial  watercourses 555 

implied  right  to  drain 556 

license  to  make  or  use  drains 557 

underground  water 558 

surface  water 559 

right  of  lateral  support 560 

of  subjacent  support. 568 

;  extinguishment  or  suspension  of  drains,  &c.. 558 

EJECTMENT : 

will  not  lie  against  tenant  at  will,  without  demand,  when..      68 

lessee  may  maintain,  before 449  also  n.  1 

bringing  equivalent  toentry 455 

rent  ceases  from  time  of  bringing 455 

does  not  lie  against  vendee  in  possession  until  after  demand.      57 

mortgagee  cannot  maintaia  in  New  York 247  n, 

tenant  under  valid  lease  may  maintain.. 488  m.  2 

when  landlord  may  bring  for  breach  of  covenant  to  repair..    892 

when  it  Ues -.-  1388-1389 

who  may  bring 1388-1389 

what  must  be  shown  to  uphold 1388-1389 

-  See  Mesne  Profits— Injunction. 

EMBLEMENTS  : 

tenant  at  will  entitled  to  crops,  when 65  m.  5 

tenants'  right  to 1369 

what  tenants  can  claim .-  1370-1371 

term  of,must  be  tmcertain.,;. 1371 

when  tenant  for  years  entitled  to 1371  n.  7 


1536  Index. 

EMBLEMENTS  ■.—Continued. 

right  to,  largely  regulated  by  statute  in  this  oonntry 1373 

right  of  tenant's  grantee  to _  1373^ 

EMPLOY^  -. 

occupying  premises  of  employer,  tenant,  when 6 

occupying  premises  of  employer  is  tenant  at  will  when ,..      47 

EMPLOYER  AND  EMPLOYE  : 

See  EMPLO-rfi. 

ENCROACHMENTS  : 

by  tenant  enure  to  landlord 1357 

ENTRY: 

of  lessee,  lease  equivalent  to 449 

until,  has  only  inter  esse  termini, 449 

title  and  seizin  presumed  to  be  united 450 

not  necessary  to  complete  grant 449 

by  tenant,  not  necessary  to  entitle  to  bring  ejectment 453 

bringing  ejectment  equivalent  to 455 

essential  to  create  liability  under  void  lease 456 

lawful,  by  landlord  is  not  eviction -  1137 

landlord's  right  of ,  exists  when ir43 

how  may  enter 1143-1144 

forcibly,  when.... 1144,1395-1299 

under  proviso  in  lease -  1144 

cannot  for  breachof  covenant,  unless 1295 

at  end  of  term ..1295-1299 

when  entry  is  forcibly  made  tenant  may  maintain  trespass..  1295 

and  recover  back  possession 1295-1298 

when  premises  are  vacant 1297  w.  3 

EQUITY  ASSIGNMENT  : 

assignee  under,  not  liable  for  rent  unless 727 

EQUITY: 

will  enjoin  prohibited  use  of  premises 157 

relief  to  tenant  when  reversioner  accepts  rent  from,  after 

formerestate  is  ended 160-161 

will  relieve  against  fraudulent  lease,  when 234 

leases  made  by  executors  and  administrators  may  be  voidable 

in,  though  good  in  law 243 

wiU  set  aside  leases  procured  by  fraud,  when —    235 

will  intervene  in  case  of  lease  by  trustee,  when'. 317-323 

grounds  on  which,  will  intervene 317-322 

wiU  decree  performance  of  agreement  for  a  lease,  when..  322-357 
will  appoint  receiver  of  rents  on  application  of  mortgagee, 

when 252  w. 

wiU  intervene  against  effect  of  lease  by  trustees,  when. 318  and  notes 
in  what  cases  rent  is  recoverable  in  .. --  1354 


Index.  1'S37 

erasures,  alterations  and  interlineations  : 

in  lease,  effect  of 45&-46S 

ruleasto 460-465-481 

suspicious  circumstances 463ji.  1 

should  be  noted  in  lease , 400 

presxzmption  as  to < 463 

who  must  explain 460  w.  1 

immaterial  changes,  what  are,  and  effect  of 460  m.  1,  3 

what  person  possessing  lease  must  prove . 463 

blanks  filled  by  grantee,  effect  of 463  w.  4,  463  n.  1,  3 

See  Alterations. 

ESCROW : 

lease  deUvered  in 444 

whatis.. ^ 444-445 

delivery  contrary  to  terms  of... 444-445 

ESTATE: 

of  freehold  cannot  be  made  to  commence  in  futuro 477 

conveyed  by  lease , 596-620 

habendum,  office  of,  in  limiting 596-601 

commencement  of 601-603 

from  date  of  lease 603-607 

illustrations 603-607 

with  reference  to  entry 607 

duration  of 608 

what  certainty  is  requisite. 608 

certainty  with  reference  to  collateral  matters 610 

illustrations 610 

when  duration  is  optional , 611 

when  there  is  a  receiving  term 613 

when  depends  upon  a  contingency.... 613 

leases  for  life  or  lives 616 

ESTATES  FOR  YEARS : 

what  are 141 

a  year,  what? 143 

a  month  in  law,  lunar,  with  four  exceptions 143 

origin  of  estates  for  years 143 

only  chattels 143 

the  term,  what? 143 

the  lease,  gives    a  right  of  entry,  and  the  entry  gives  the 

term 143 

term  may  expire  before  the  time 144 

the  lease  gives  no  possession.. 144 

lease  for  years  a  contract  for  possession  in  consideration  of 

rent 145 

lease  or  under-lease 145 

concurrent  lease 146 

lease  in  reversion — 146 

the  distinction  on  livery  and  grant  simplified  .^ 146 


1538  Index. 

ESTATES  FOE  YEARS  :— Continued. 

leases  must  be  by  deed  and  assigment  in  writing 147 

leases  by  the  state,  corporations,  and  husband  and  wife,  must 

be  by  deed 147 

a  deed,  what? 148 

feoffment,  gift,  grant,  lease 148 

the  components  of  a  lease 148 

quaUties  of  tills  species  of  tenancies 149 

how  created 150 

may  be  determinable  at  option  of  either  party 151 

when  option  is  personal... 153 

leases  for  fixed  term,  and  then  from  year  to  year 153 

determination  of  term 153 

notice  to  quit - 154 

ESTOPPEL : 

tenant  holding  xmder  void  lease,  cannot  deny  landlord's  title      13 

tenant  at  will,  may  create  tenancy  by 65 

parol  license  may  operate  as 468 

leases  by 485 

operative  when 485 

both  parties  must  be  bound  by... 485 

rule  if  one  party  is  infant  or  feme  covert 485 

persons  not  bound  by,  cannot  have  benefit  of 486 

effect  of  fraud  or  mistake  on 486 

acquisition  of  title  by  lessor,  after  lease __ 486 

lease  by  heir  before  death  of  ancestor 486 

parties  and  privies  only  bound  by 486  n.  3 

government,  not  bound  by 486  n.  3 

granter  of  government  not  bound  by •..  486  n.  2 

both  parties  must  sign  lease _ 487 

if  any  interest  passes  underlease,  rule 487 

lease  by  deed  poU,  rule _ 487 

false  recital,  rule.. ^- 487 

annexed  to  estate , 487 

privies  inlaw  bound  by 488' 

effect  of ,  on  lessor 488 

lessor  subject  to 489  also  n.  1 

tenant  bound  by , 489-490 

reversion  in  fee  simple  by,  rule 489 

under-lease  operates  by,  when -__ _ 490 

effect  of  on  lessee 490 

tenant  cannot  deny  title  of  landlord ,-,--- 490-500 

assignee  of  lessee  bound  by 490  n.  6 

stranger,  bound  by,  when -, . 491  ji.  6 

mortgagor  and  mortgagee  bound  by , 491  n. 

rule  applies  whether  tenancy  arises  from  deed  or  by  parol  491  n. 
tenant  may  show  landlord'?  litl^  has  expired- » ,  491  n. 


Index.  1539 

ESTOPPEL :— Continued. 

feme  covert -aot  hoxmd  by. 218-485 

must  be  certain 485 

mutual ._ 486-487 

not  binding  on  infant __ --    485 

unless  both  parties  are  bound. .. 486 

not  favored. --...-. 485 

after  purchase  of  estate.. __ 486 

annexed  to  the  estate.. 487 

lessor  acquiring  title  subsequent  to  lease,  eflfect  of 487 

effect,  if  any  interest  passes  under  the  lease 487 

under-lease  made  by  one  who  had  no  legal  interest,  operate    488 

by .... .    488 

effect  of,  upon . . 488 

cannot  deny  his  title  or  right  to  lease 489 

tenant  in  possession,  cannot  deny  landlord's  title 489 

rule  extends  to  assignee  of  lessee,  under  tenant  and  all  others 

claiming  under  lease 490  n.  6 

applies  whether  lease  is  by  parol  or  deed  exceptions ......     491  n. 

ESTOVERS : 

common  of,  what  is  and  kinds  of. -     534 

EVICTION : 

what  constitutes. „.- 1095-1137  , 

trespass  by  landlord  or  stranger  not 1095 

mereinterruption  of  tenant's  possession  not,  except 1095  n.  1 

entry  by  landlord  to  repair,  not,  unless 1095  n.  1 

effect  of  tortious  entry  by  landlord. 1095  n.  1 

must  be  obstruction  pf  permanent  character  to  tenant's 

possession.- 1095  n.  1 

tenant  must  be  actually  expelled  from    estate  or  part  of 

premises  by  landlord  or  someone  acting  under  him  or 

by  title  paramount... - - --- 1096 

or  possession  of,  must  be  seriously  disturbed. 1096 

tearing  down  partition  wall  not  necessarily 1096 

tearing  down  roof  of  summer  house  not 1096  n. 

when  such  acts  mav  amount  to _ 1097  n. 

injury  to  tenant's  quiet  enjoyment,  not. 1098  n. 

assaulting  tenant,  not - --  1098  n. 

part  of  premises  taken  for  public  purposes  is 1098  notes 

eviction  from  whole  premises,  rent  suspended,  mifofo 1099  n.  1 

from  part,  tenant  may  quit,   if  he  remains  in  possession 

must  pay  for  use  of  that  part -.  1099 

by  wrong,  does  not  suspend  rent... 1099  n.  3 

by  casualties  of  war,  does  not ---' 1099  n.  2 

rule  in  Hill  V.  Hanke --- -  1099  n.  2 

in   Harrison  V.    Lord    North.. --- _.  1099  n.  3 

different  rufe  in  United  States  Court,  Harrison  i?.  Meyers..  1100  n. 


1540  Index. 

EVICTION  -.—Continued. 

so  in  Louisiana.  ,. ..... 1100  11, 

in  South  Carolina - 1100  n. 

but  see  case  Coogan  v.  Parker,  later  case  in  South  Caro- 
lina, holding  contrary  rule 1100  n. 

rule  in  Florida,  Robinson  V.  L'Engle - 1100  n, 

also  Gary  v.  Davine 1100  ?i. 

does  not  discharge  rent  already  accrued -  llOO 

damages  from  interruption,  may  be  recouped 1100 

interference   must    be  of   permanent  character  essentially 

iaterfering  with  tenant's  beneficial  enjoyment 1101 

instances  of lW2e(seq.  andnotes, 

Jackson  V.  Eddy. _ 1103  w. 

Cohen  V.  Dupont _,.._ -,  1102  n. 

■walls  erected  under  eaves  of  building,  may  be,  Shennaa  v. 

Wnkins 1103  n. 

advertising    for   sale    aftef   tenant  has  abandoned  is   not,, 

Bellamy  v.  Smith 1103  n, 

leasing  of  premises  by  landlord  is,  Bobbins  v,  Ihiquid 1103  n. 

lessee  expelled  by  wrongfid  entry  of  lessor,  not  liable  for 

rent  during  period  kept  out 1136 

from  part,  whole  rent  suspended 1186  n.  1 

reason  for  the  rule .. -_ 113T 

does  not  excuse  payment  of  rent  previously  due 1137 

nor  apjDly  when  landlord  lawfully  enters 1138 

entry  as  sheriff  under  vaUd  process -- 1138 

or  under  a  statute 1138 

or  valid  municipal  ordinance - 1138 

or  for  forfeiture , 1138 

or  under  special  provisions  of  the  lease 1138 

under  writ  of  possession 1138 

or  after  surrender  by  tenant 1138 

when  tenant  evicted  from  part,  liable  for  part  of  other  part 

under  quantum  valebat - __ _  1137  ?i. 

from  part  does  not  discharge  tenant  from  other  covenants 1139 

must  be  specially  plead  in  covenant -  1139 

by  stranger,  tenant  must  show  stranger's  right  to  evict 1139 

in  debt  for  use  and  occupation,  may  be  shown  under  the  gen- 
eral issue 1139 

effect  of ,  upon  surety  for  lessee--- 1083 

damages  recoverable  by  lessee  when  wrongfully  evicted  1139  n.  5 

constructive,  what  is _.  1103 

what  acts  constitute _. 1103 

to  absolve  himself  from  rent  by,  tenant  must  give  up  posses- 
sion  -  1104 

rule  in  DeArittv.  Eierson _ 1104 ?i.  3 

rule  in  Edgerton  v.  Page 1106  n.  1 

assignment  of  dower,,  is  when- 1103 


Index.  1541 

EVICTION :— Continued. 

giving  under-tenant  notice  to  quit,  is,  when 1103 

refusing  to  permit  under-tenant  to  occupy. 1103 

refusing  to  do  certain  acts  necessary  to  enable  tenant  to  pc» 

py  for  the  special  purpose  for  which  premises  were  let 1103 

refusing  to  permit  improper  persons  to  occupy  as  under-ten- 
ant is  not,  unless _ 1103 

when  tenant  has  right  to  abandon,  must  do  so  in  reasonable 

time  and  because  of  eviction. 1105-1107 

rule  ia  Edwards  v.  Cundy 110711.6 

nuisance  evicted  by  landlord,  operates  eviction  when..  1 107-1109 
acceptance  of   key  of,  and   letting  premises  amounts  to, 

when.. 1120m.  3 

entry  of  landlord  for  forfeiture,  ends  the  term 1127 

bringing  ejectment,  ends  the  term. ,  1137 

destruction  or  disrepair  of  premises,  does  not  operate  as 1127 

statutory  rights  of  tenant  in  New  York 1137 

decisions  under 1 137-1 180 

tenant  sustaining  special  damage  from,  may  recover 1114  m. 

when  interference  with  easement  is  not  an 1114 

rule  in  Peek  v.  HUers 1114  m.  8 

by  title  paramount 1114 

need  not  wait  for  judgment  or  decree 1117 

tenant  who  has  paid  rent  in  advance  being  evicted  may  re- 
cover back  part  of ., 1118 

interfering  with  easement,  as  right  to  light,  is 1113-1114 

rule  in  Doyle  v.  Lord 1113  m.  1 

erection  of  building  on  adjoining  lot  rendering  premises  un- 
fit for  occupancy. 1113  m.  1 

rule  in  Boyce  V.  Guggenheim 1113  m.  1 

EVIDENCE : 

of  payment  of  rent,  establishes  tenancy 456 

parol,  not  admissible  to  vary  lease 504 

exceptions. 504 

or  to  show  thattenant  was  to  repair 624 

or  that  lease  w^as  to  commence  at  another  term  than  that 

named  in  the  lease 635 

may  be  shown  that  lease  was  made  for  illegal  purposes 635 

or  that  certain  formahties  were  not  complied  with 625-636 

or  fraud 626 

or  any  matter  that  defeats  the  lease 636 

may  be  shown  in  certain  cases  to  what  provisions  the  lease 

was  to  apply 636 

illustrations ■. - 636-638 

when  not , , -    626 

to  explain  latent  ambiguity., 639-630 

what  is  a  latent  ambiguity 631 

not  to  explaiu  patent  ambiguity , 635 

II.— 45 


1542  Index. 

EVIDENCE :— Continued. 

to  prove  a  custom 635-643 

oral,  when  admissible  to  explain  a  lease _ .  623-643 

cannot  be  shown  that  other  premises  were  intended  to  be  in- 
cluded.  _ 624 

or  that  premises  are  included  which  should  not  have  been..    624 

or  that  tenant  was  to  pay  taxes. .-_ 625 

or  that  more  or  less  rent  wasagreed  on 624 

or  that  it  was  to  be  apportioned 634 

or  that  certain  privileges  were  given 625 

EXCEPTIONS : 

in  lease,  vrhat  are 571 

illustrations 571-573 

distinction  between,  and  reservations t 573 

construction  of 577 

See  Reservations. 
EXECUTION : 

entry  under  levy  of,  creates  tenancy  subject  to  terms  of  ten- 
ant's lease ._ 20 

may  be  levied  on  estate  for  life _ 134 

lease  by  creditor  under,  who  is  infant 344 

See  Levy, 
EXEOXJTION  OF  LEASE : 

See  Leases,  Seal,  Deltveey,  Signinq,  Attestation. 

EXECUTOR:    ** 

may  give  notice  to  quit_- 119 

rule  when  thereare  twoormore , 120 

leasehold  estates  of  decedent,  belong  to ..337  also  n.  1,  243 

may  lease  leasehold  estates 238-243 

lease  by  one  of  two  or  more,  good ^ 238 

one  may  lease  to  the  other , 238  n.  5 

statutory  however,  in  New  York ^. 238 

one,  may  execute  power,  when. ^, 338-239 

surviving  executor  may  execute  power,  when 239 

may  underlet 339 

female  executrix,  marrying,  rule.. 339 

statutory  provisions  relation  to  powers  of 339  n.  7,  240 

power  to  sell,  does  not  include  power  to  lease 240 

administrator,  with  wUl  annexed,  cannot  execute  power  con- 
ferred on  executor 241 

reason  for  the  rule 241 

in  some  states,  statute  extends  power,  same  as  given  to  exec- 
utor.......  241-243 

leases  by,  voidable  in  equity. ^.s. ..., 343 

mustrations _ , 343-344 

infant,  rule  as  to -.,,.,.,,...,..,    244 


Index.  1543 

executor  and  administrator : 

of  either  party  may  give  notice  to  quit 118 

of  assignee,  assignment  by  discharges  estate  from  liability 

when -  743 

may  sue  for  breach  of  covenant  in  hf e  of  testator 753 

estate  of  lessee  vests  in 'i'SS 

when  may  waive  lease  to  testator 753 

liable  for  rent  under 753 

liable  for  breaches  by  testator 753 

liable  as  assignee  for  rent  and  breaches  after  death  of  testator  753 

how  may  discharge  himself  from  personal  liability 753 

rights  of,  at  common  law,  to  lease -  237 

administrator  may  leave  when -  288 

lease  by  one  of  several,  effect  of - 238 

statute  in  New  York -  288 

surviving,  may  lease --  239 

/ewe  soZe,  effect  of  n:arriage. 239 

powers  of ,  regulated  by  statute -. 239 

leases  by,  voidable  in  equity,  though  good  in  law 243 

instances - 243 

when  executor  is  an  infant,  rule 244 

EXECUTRIX  : 

.  rights  of  husband  in  chattels  real  held  by  wife  as. 226-237 

EXPIRED  LEASE  : 

occupancy  under,  raises  presumption  of  tenancy. 13 

FARM  LANDS: 

general  letting  of,  presumed  to  be  for  year 93 

rule  when  let  to  raise  crop  that  does  not  mature  in  one  year  95 

what  passes  under  lease  of 408 

FEE  FARM  RENT  : 

what  is 1034 

FEME  COVERT : 

leases  by 317 

void  at  common  law 317 

reason - .°^" 

under  express  power -  217  n.  6 

conveyances  made  by,  after  engagement,  and  before  marriage  2 18 

rents  belong  to  husband - 218  also  n.  4 

estate  sold,  money  belongs  to  husband 218 

not  harmed  by  estoppel 219 

cannot   be  compelled   to  specifically  perform   contract  to 

lease  or  sell - 317 

statutory  changes  as  to  rightsof - 320 

lease  by,  void  except - 

not  bound  by  estoppel - 

specific  performance  of  contract  for  lease  cannot  be  enforced 


1544  Index. 

feme  sole: 

marriage  of  tenant  does  not  determine  tenancy  at  will 73 

does  not  determine  tenancy  when  she  is  landlord 73 

lease  by,  not  invalidated  by  marriage _  315 

right  of  husband  to  determine  lease  at  will 215 

rent  under,  payable  to  husband  except 316 

executrix,  marriage  of ,  effect 216 

lessee,  marriage  of,  obligation  of  husband 216 

FENCES : 

obligation  to  repair,  on  whom  rests -.. .._  1004 

action  for  defective _ 1005 

waste  and  destruction  of 1007 

rights  respecting 1007 

FEOFFMENT : 

what  is 148 

distinction  between,  and  lease 148 

FIRE: 

tenant  at  will  not  liable  for  negligent  destruction  of  build- 
ings by 54  n.  3 

see  Lathrop  V.  Thayer 54  m.  3 

tenant  not  liable  for  accidental 984 

destruction  of  premises  by,  does  not  release  tenant  from  rent  1033 

statute  in  New  York _ 833  n.  1 

covenant  may  provide  for  suspension  of  rent. 1033-1034 

when  tenant  must  rebuild. 1 1138  and  notes 

tenant  nofrUable  for  accidental , .    984 

FISHERY : 

what  passes  under  lease  of , 413 

common  of,  whatis ._ _ 535 

how  created 535 

extent  of  right.. 535 

FIXTURES : 

right  of  tenant  by  sufferance  to  remove 31 

whether  or  not,  how  determined 407 

meaning  of,  as  a  legal  term 1218 

tenants' fixtures,  what  are 131& 

tests  for  determining,  what  are 1333-1324 

instanses  of  articles  held  to  be 1318-1338 

landlord's  fixtures,  what  are ___ 1338 

what  are  not. 1338-1240 

between  what  persons  questions  as  to,  arise. 1340 

general  rule  as  to 1240 

as  to  aimexations  by  tenant 1241 

exceptions  to  rule. 1243 

trade  fixtures,  what  are _ 1243-1246 

decision  as  to  trade  fixtures 1346-1350 


Index.  1545 

FIXTURES  :— Continued. 

ornamental,  when  may  be  removed 1250-1254 

contracts  respecting,  must  be  observed 1254^1260 

decisions  under 1254-1260 

when  tenant  may  remove... 1260-1267 

how  must  be  effected. 1267 

remedies  respecting _._' 1267 

for  wrongful  removal  of 1267 

remedies  to  recover __ 1268-1291 

to  recover  damages  for  improper  sale  of ...  1271 

buildings  erected  by  tenant,  right  to  remove 1272 

FLOOR: 

tenant  not  bound  to  lay  new,  under  covenant  to  repair 800 

FORCIBLE  ENTRY  AND  DETAINER  : 

what  is , 1374r-1382 

various  statutes  on  which  common  law  right  depends 1374 

when  indictment  lies  for.. 1875 

what  entry,  etc.,  is  a  riot. 1379 

what  is  a  forcible  detainer 1380 

by  whom  forcible  entry  etc. ,  may  be  made 1381 

what  force  must  be  shown  to  establish. 1381 

punishment  of,  by  action 1376 

statute  of  8  Hen.  6 1376 

stat.  8  Hen.  6,  as  to  power  of  justices 1377 

restitution ,...  1378 

stat.  5  Rio.  2 1378 

FORFEITURE : 

waived  by  receipt  of  rent 17  n.  5 

waived  by  distress 17  n.  5 

tenant  holding  after,  becomes  tenant  by  sufferance,  when ...      35 

for  improper  or  prohibited  use  of  premises 157 

lessor  parting  with  reversion  after  breach,  cannot  enforce..    453 
assignee  cannot  enforce  forfeiture  incurred  before  assignment    454 

waived,  can  be  no  entry  for 454  n.  1 

assignee  of  reversioner  cannot  enter  for,  when — 453 

effect  of  waiver  of 455 

when  entry  may  be  made 455 

what  amounts  to  waiver - 455 

incurred  by  breach  of  covenant  as  to  character  of  occupancy 

waived,  how 910 

entry  by  landlord  to  enforce,  not  eviction 1138 

when  and  how  incurred 1192 

by  record,  how  incurred 1193 

by  acknowledging  title  in  stranger. 1194 

when  and  how  incurred -  -  -'-  1194 

by  statute _„.„,............-.-  =  .-.-=.-.-....  1194 

by  provisions  in  deed — - 1194 


1546  Index. 

FORFEITURE :— Continued. 

can  only  operate  during  term 1196 

rule  when  time  is  fixed  for  performance 1196 

effect  of  statute  of  limitations 1196 

what  ectate  person  entering  for,  must  have 1196 

^  constnictioij  of  provisoes  for  re-entry, 1196-1304 

option  of  tailing  advantage  of,  rests  in  lessor  only. 1196-1304 

tenant  cannot  avail  himself  of 1304 

fact  that  tenant  is  infant  does  not  defeat 2300 

nor  that  she  is  married  woman _ 1200 

can  be  no  entry  unless  so  provided  in  the  lease 1200 

proviso  for  re-entry  being  insensible,  courts  will  not  support  1200 

who  may  take  advantage  of 1304^1306 

Stat.  33  lien.  6,  c.  34 1206 

entry  for,  generally _ 1207 

demand  of  rent,  when  unnecessary. _ _.  1208 

waiver  of,  what  amounts  to _..  1210 

lessor  must,  in  order  to  make  acceptance  of  rent  after,  oper- 
ate waiver  of  forfeiture,  have  notice  that  forfeiture  ex- 
ists  1314-1318 

FORMALITIES : 

required  to  make  a  valid  lease : 431 

informal,  may  operate  as  agreement  for  lease,  when 431 

leases  by  deed,  what  are 483 

by  indenture,  what  are 433 

leases  by  deed  must  be  written  or  printed  on  parchment  or 

paper ,...  438 

mustbeunder  seal,  except 435 

what  is  a  seal 435 

signed  how 438 

by  whom _.  438 

by  corporation,  how 440 

by  third  persons  without  authority,  validated  how 440 

attested  how 441 

delivery 443 

record 445 

acknowledgment 445 

date 447 

entry  by  lessee  not  essential 449 

FRAUD: 

lease  made  by  person  under  influence  of 234 

must  have  been  an  intent  to  deceive. 335 

equity  will  relieve  against,  when 385 

what  constitutes 235 

sufficient  to  avoid  lease 483 

misrepresentation  by  tenant  as  to  contemplated  use  of  proper- 
ty, sufficient  when - 483 


Index.  1547 

FRAUD  ■.—Continued. 

on  part  of  landlord  in  concealing  facts  relating  to  premises, 

maintainable  when 1113 

statute  of ,  leases  within 380,350,  1153 

agreement  for  lease  affected  by _ 379 

what  leases  are  good  under 1153 

FRAUDULENT : 

removal  of  goods  to  avoid  distress,  effect  of... 1314 

representations  as  to  premises,  concealment  of  matters  affect- 
ing health,  etc ms,  1293  n.  3 

FREEHOLD  ESTATE : 

tenant  for  life  has. 137, 139  ».  6 

cannot  be  made  to  commence  in /tefMro 477 

FURNITURE : 

what  passes  underlease  of ^....^ 403 

FURNISHED  APARTMENTS : 

liabilities  of  hires  of 131 

duty  in  reference  to 133 

notice  to  quit ^ 133 

FURNISHED  HOUSES  : 

implied  obligation  of  landlord  as  to 884-887 

rule  in  Smith  v.  Marrable ^ 884 

rent  issues  out  of  land  alone ^^ 138 

Implied  obligations 128-130 

conditions  precedent  must  be  performed ^ 138 

liability  of  hires  of 131 

duty  in  reference  to ._.» 133 

notice  to  quit 133 

FURNISHED  LODGINGS  : 

rules  as  to  lease  of 138 

liability  of  hirers  of 131 

notice  to  quit 133 

GARDEN : 

passes  as  appurtenant  to  house,  when 410  n.  3,  411  n.  4 

GAS  BURNERS  : 

losing  or  carrying  away  is  breach  of  tenant's  covenant  to 
repair. — 801 

GENERAL  HIRING : 

presumption  as  to  duration  of  time. 93-100 

GENERAL  LETTING  : 

ripens  into  tenancy  from  year  to  year  when 85  w. 

GIFT: 

what  is 148 


1548  Index. 

GLASS: 

tenant  must  replace  broken,  when 803 

GEANT: 

distinction  between  and  livery 146 

what  is _ ._ 148 

GRANTOR : 

of  lands,  becomes  tenant  by  sufferance  when 27 

GUARDIAN  : 

kinds  of .^^ _ 209 

by  nature,  who  are,  powers  of S09 

by  nurture 210 

by  socage 210 

testamentary _ 212 

by  appointment _ 213 

powers  of  to  lease  lands  of  ward , 209-215 

GUARDIAN  AND  WARD  : 

See  GuAEDiAN. 

HABENDUM : 

what  is,  office  of. 596  also  m.  1-601 

cannot  cut  down  the  grant. 596 

void,  when. .^.^ 596 

may  qualify  estate  in  premises. ...u 597  w. 

repugnant,  effect  of. ».^ . 597 

when  void 596  n.  1-597 

when  may  be  dispensed  with * ..    597 

construction  of 597-599 

caimot  change  nature  of  estate,  or  interest  conveyed., 596 

illustrations 596-601 

when  may  be  rejected 597-598  n.  2 

rule  when,  and  premises  are  inconsistent 597 

rule  when  parcels  are  named  in  premises,  but  not  in  habendum    597 

has  two  parts .__ 599  m. 

wUl  control  w^hen  premises  admits  of  double  meaning 599  n. 

cannot  introduce  new  parcels. 599 

illustrations . . 600 

parcels  named  in  premises,  but  not  in 600 

lessee  named  in,  effect 600 

mere  formal  part  of  deed 600 

dangers  from  improper  use  of 600 

HALF-YEARLY  TENANCY : 

what  is 91,  126 

reservation  of  semi-annual  rents,  no  term  being  fixed,  con* 
stitute - 136 

HEDGE: 

liglits  of  adjotoiog  owners  in - 1003 


Index.  IfiiD 

HIGHWAY  : 

who  liable  for  injuries  resulting  from  defects  in 1289 

HOLDING  OVER: 

tenant  may  be  treated  as  holding  on  terms  of  lease  except 

31  n.  i,  33 

illustration  of  exception 33n.  i 

terms  may  be  changed  by  notice _ 34 

leaseholds,  except  as  to  changes. 34 

tenant  at  wiU  in  some  states 35  Ji.  3 

remaining  from  any  time  beyond  term  gives  landlord  option 

to  treat  as  tenant  for  another  year 35  w.  1 

tenant  has  no  election. • 37 

Schuyler  V.  Smith,  rule  in 37  m.  5 

tenant  becomes  tenant  by  sufferance  when 34 

landlord's  right  of  election. 31  et  seq.  and  notes 

becomes  tenant  from  year  to  year 85-111 

person,  presumed  to  hold  on  terms  of  former  lease 13  m. 

landlord  may  elect  to  treat  him  as  trespasser  or  tenant 13  n. 

efiEectof 31-43 

landlord   may  elect  to  treat  tenant  as  trespasser  or  tenant 

from  year  to  year 31-43 

acceptance  of  rent,  effect  of 49 

tenant,  how  far  bound  by  terms  of  former  lease 49  «.  3 

tenant,  relation  of  to  owner... 49-57 

subject  to  terms  of  former  lease 49 

what  amounts  to 106-109 

liable  to  landlord  for  damages,  when 31 

lessee  liable  for  acts  of  under-tenant  when 40  n.  5 

under-tenant  permitted  to  remain  by  landlord,  is  tenant  by 

sufferance 41 

tenant  cannot  by  notice  change  effect  of 36  w. 

rule  in  Conway  V.  Starkweather 86  w. 

rule  in  Jones  V.  Shears,  repudiated 34 

in  order  to  make  tenancy  by,  must  have  been  previous  hold- 

ingas  tenant 39 

actual  occupancy  necessary . 89-40 

accidental  detention  of  key 36 

by  co-tenant,  does  not  bind  theother . 40 

by  under-tenant,  does  not  bind  tenant 41 

and  paying  rent,  effect  of 106 

landlord  electing  to  treat  as  tenant,  makes  tenancy  from 

year  to  year. 88-114 

notice  to  quit  necessary  in  such  case,  to  terminate  tenancy..    114 

•what  notice  must  be  ^iven., - -.    115 

who  may  give  notice - 118 

to  whom  must  be  given - 118,131 

form  of  notice 117 

when  notice  is,  and  when  not.  necessary 114 


1550    ■  Index. 

HOLDING  OVER :— Continued. 

how  notice  should  be  served 121 

how  is  waived 123 

second,  to  quit,  effect  of- 122 

acceptance  of  rent  after  notice,  effect  of 122 

effect  of  tenant's  disclaimer _ 123 

See  Tenant  kkom  Year  to  Year. 

HOUSE : 

lease  of,  what  passes  as  incident  to 402-445 

lease  of  "  with  appurtenances,"  what  passes. 421 

when  land  passes  with  lease  of 421 

garden,  passes  as  incident  to,  when 411  n.  4 

lease  of  portion  of ,  what  rights  pass 410 

HUSBAND : 

does  not  become  tenant  hj  curtesy  in  lands  held  by  wife  for 
life , 139 

HUSBAND  AND  WIFE  : 

husband  may  lease  wife's  lands  without  her  consent . .  221 

lease  for  term  exceeding  his  own  life,  rule 231 

wife's  estate  subject  to  levy  on  husband's  debts 321  n.  1 

must  not  commit  waste _ -.  221 

wife  may  confirm  lease  made  by  husband  in  his  life 221  n.  4 

lease  made  by  both,  void  as  to  wife,  good  during  husband's 

life 233-333 

cannot  be  affirraed  by  her,  when _ 333 

rule  when  lease  is  made  by  parol.. 323 

contract  for  lease  of  wife's  land,  not  enforceable  after  his 

death 224 

leasehold  estates  of  wife,  vest  in  husband 224,  335 

rule  when  he  dies  without  disposing  of  them 324 

rule  when  sold  on  condition 224 

rent  belongs  to  husband's  executor,  when 225 

rule  when  lessor  conveys  estate  to  husband 225 

rule  when  lease  is  made  by  husband  to  wife  before  marriage  336 

contingent  estate  of  wife,  rule.. 326 

rights  of  husband  in  estate  held  by  wife  as  executrix 336,  337 

IDIOTS  : 

leases  made  by,  prima  facie  valid 328 

leases  made  by,  voidable _ 228 

ILLEGAL : 

premises  let  for  illegal  purposes,  effect  of 130,  1341 

agreement  for  lease  for,  purposes,  wiU.  not  be  enforced 364 

sub-tenant  using  for,  may  be  enjoined 157 

good  defence  to  action  for  rent,  whether  action  is  covenant, 

debt  or  for  use  and  occupation 1341 

what  tenant  must  show  to  defeat  recovery  of  rents...  1841-1347 


Index.  1651 

ILLEGAL  -.—Continued. 

illegal  use  of  premises  does  not  defeat  rent,  unless  the  lessor 
knew  that  premises  were  to  be  so  used  when  he  leased 

them 1343  «,.  1,  1344 

must  be  shown  that  lessor  furthered  such  illegal  use -  1346 

rule  in  Michaels  v.  Bacon 1344  m.  1 

mere  knowledge  of  tenant's  intention  to  use  illegally,  not 

enough. .__ _ 1343 

agreement  for  lease  for,  purposes,  will  not  be  enforced 365 

IMMORAL : 

premises  let  for,  purposes,  effect  of ...^.. 130 

sub-tenant  using  for,  may  be  enjoined 157 

IMPEACHMENT : 

of  waste,what  is 995 

without,  for  waste,  what  is 995 

IMPEACHMENT  OF  WASTE  : 

meaning  of  term,  without 988 

is  privilege  depending  on  privity  of  estate 989 

tenant  under  it  may  license  others  to  do  what  he  has  right 

to  do 989 

IMPLIED  : 

tenancy,  when 1  n.  2,  8-17 

may  be  from  conduct  of  parties 9 

instances  of 817,  and  notes 

may  be  from  payment  of  rent 8n.2 

from  entry  as  agent  of  owner 8 

occupancy  under  expired  lease 8  n.  4 

taking  key  for  purpose  of  occupancy 8  w.  1 

entry  under  agreement  for  leafie 9 

IMPLIED  COVENANTS : 

See  Covenants. 
IMPLIED  TENANCY  : 

from  what,  arises 12-15 

IMPOUNDING : 

of  distress 1321 

IMPROVED  RENT  : 

what  is 1025 

INCIDENT  : 

to  lease,  and  premises,  what  is 415-431  and  notes 

ways  appendant,  pass  as,  to  estate. --    513 

INCIDENTAL  BENEFITS : 

when  tenant  not  liable  to  pay  for 1080-1082 

INCORPOREAL  HEREDITAMENTS : 

lease  may  be  made  of 388 


1562  Index. 

incoming  tenant : 

privileges  of 1362 

INCUMBRANCES :  (See  COVENANTS.) 

covenant  against,  effect  of 968 

what   is - 968 

knowledge  of,  by  lessee  does  not  defeat  the  covenant 969 

easementis,  when 970 

highway  is,  when _ 970 

when  broken 970 

covenants  against 970 

what  constitutes.'. 970 

INDENTURE : 

what  is 432,483 

words  cannot  make  iostrument  an 433 

indentation  necessary 433 

peculiarity  of ._    433 

original,  is  part  executed  by  grantor 433 

counterpaTts  are  the  others 433 

counterparts  in,  legal  effect  as  originals _ 433 

cannot  be  impeached 433 

leases  are  presumed  to  be  by  deed-poll 433 

preferable  to  deed,  when 444  w.  3 

INDICTMENT  ■ 

when  it  lies  for  forcible  entry  and  detainer.. 1374 

what  force  must  be  shown 1375 

tenement  must  be  described . 1375 

INFANTS : 

leases  by 196-199 

not  void , - - 199 

question  of  advantage  or  disadvantage  to  him  not  material..     199 

may  ratify  on  attaining  majority 199-200 

feme  covert,  lease  by,  voidable 197  31.  7 

leases  to  infants.. 198 

voidable 198 

how  ratiBed 198 

lease  by,  in  corporate  capacity. 199 

as  trustee 199 

as  executor,  etc _  199-244 

"when  such  as  law  would  have  compelled  him  to  make 300 

other  instances...'. 200 

right  of  disaffirmance,  ho'w  exercised 200 

how  affirmed 203 

leases  made  by,  voidable  only _  196-199 

lessee  liable  under . 196 

may  dispute  lease,  when 197 

leases  to,  voidable  only. _ 199 

not  liable  for  rent  unless 199 


Index.  1553 

INFANTS :— Continued. 

may  disaffirm 199-300 

infancy  does  not  avoid  lease,  when 200 

disaffirmance,  what  is 201-203 

affirmance,  what  is 203-209 

executor,  lease  made  by,  rule... 244 

INJUNCTION : 

against  tenant  or  sub-tenant  to  restrain  proliibited  use -  993 

to  stay  commission  of  waste,  when  granted 993 

right  of  landlord  to  re-enter  does  not  defeat  remedy  by 995 

Instances  when,  has  been  granted- 995 

rule  when  lease  is  "without  impeachment  for  waste" 995 

affidaTit  for,  what  must  contain 996 

when  landlord  will  be  enjoined  on  application  of  tenant  from 

injuring  estate.-. 997 

to  prevent  a  nuisance. 997 

to  compel  observance  of  covenants 998 

to  restrain  action  of  ejectment,  when 998 

when  in  favor  of  tecant  against  stranger 1000 

mSUEABLE  INTEREST : 

of  tenant  for  life  in  buildings 138 

how  must  apply  proceeds 189 

INTEE-COMMONING  : 

right  of,  and  when  exists - 522 

ESFTEEESSE  TERMINI : 

lease  confers 449,452,476,  478 

dispenses  with  livery  of  seizin 449 

tenant  cannot  maintain  trespass  before  entry. 449,  n.  8 

may  ejectment. .-- - 449-476 

present  interest  conveyed  by. 452,  472 

death  of  lessor,  before  entry  by  tenant  does  not  defeat  term    452 
death  of  lesseedoes  not  defeat 452 

INTEREST  : 

tenant  for  life  bound  to  pay,  on  mortgage 140 

INTERLINEATIONS  : 

rule  as  to.... - 460-465-481 

suspicious  circumstances,  rule - 462,  n.  1 

INTOXICATION  : 

degree  of  that  invalidates  lease - 280 

INTRUDER : 

not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit --     H'^' 

IRREGULAR  : 

distress,  remedy    for 1326 


1554  Index, 

joint  tenants : 

one,  cannot  give  notice  to  qujt..- 120 

may  gain  or  sever  in  lease  of  lands 163 

distinction  between  lease  by,  and  tenants  in  common 163 

lease  made  of  whole  estate,  by  one,  efiect  of - 163 

are  seized,  per  7)12/  etper  tout 163 

qualities  of  lease  by 163 

tenancy  at  will  created  by,  does  not  terminate  by  death  of 

one _ - 164 

one,  may  determine  tenancy  at  will 164 

character  of  tenancy  created  by  lease  by 164 

reservation  of  rent  in  lease  by 164 

must  join  in  action  for  rent... .__ 165 

payment  of  rent  to  one,  effect  of 165 

one,  may  lease  his  shS,re  of  estate. 165 

effect  of  lease  for  life,  made  by  one 165,  166 

lease  by  one,  to  commence  Mi/MiwrO 165 

one,  cannot  lease  moro  than  his  share  of  estate 165 

one,  may  recover  rent  in  his  own  name  when 166 

one,  may  distrain  for  rent  when 166 

distinction  between  demise  and  devise  by  one. 166 

for  Ufe,  relations  of 166,  167 

tenancy,  severed  how 167 

conveyance  by  one,  effect  of  on  estate  of  other 167,  168 

change  of  rule  as  to  estates  of. 169 

JUEY: 

question  as  to  whether  has  been  disclaimer  by  tenant,  for 
when  134,  125 

KEY  : 

of  building,  taken  by  person,  evidence  of  tenancy  when 18  n.  4 

even  though  actual  occupancy  not  shown 18  m.  4 

to  premises,  accidental  detention  of,  beyond  term  does  not 

amount  to  holding  over 39 

to  doors,  pass  by  lease 406 

KINDS  OF TENANCY : 

See  Tenakts  by  Stipfeeance,  Tenancy  at  Will,  Tenancy  from  Year 

TO  Year,  Tenants  for  Years  , 
KNOCKER : 

right  of  hirer  of  apartments  to  use 138 

LAND: 

what  is : 1 401  n. 

leased    at   annual   rent  forever   as    long   as  rent  paid,  is 

lease  from  year  to  year. _ 09 

what  passes  as,  in  lease 403 

lease  of,  carries  all  buildings  on 406 

of  well,  passes  what... 406 


Index.  1555 

fixtures  pass  as '. 406 

■what  passes  with  lease  of  house. - - 431 

what  covenants  run  with.... 673-680 

LANDLORD ; 

how  may  determine  tenancy  at  will 67  n.,  10  et  seq. 

how  may  determine  tenancy  by  sufEerance - 67 

need  not  give  notice  except 67 

demand  not  necessary  except 67 

acts  of ,  that  determine  tenancy  at  will 67 

impUed  obligations  of,  in  the  letting  of  furnished  houses.  - . .     129 

dutyas  to  lodgers 139 

letting  apartments,  duty  in  reference  to 130 

must  use  reasonable  care  for  protection  of  tenant. 130 

letting  for  storage  or  deposit,  deposit  of 130 

may  enjoin  prohibited  or  illegal  use  of  premises    by  ten- 
ant or  subtenant __ 157 

has  no  remedy  on  covenants  in  lease  against  sub-tenants 

180,  181,  173 

cannot  deny  his  own  title  or  right  to  lease 490 

tenant  cannot  dispute  title  of 483,  500 

exceptions. 490  n.  6 

estoppel  extends  to  all  claiming  under  the  lessee 490  n.  6 

not  bound  to  repair  unless  he  has  covenanted  to  do  so 839 

exceptance  to  this  rule 841 

under  covenant  to  repair,  entitled  to  notice  to  do  so  before  he 

can  be  charged 839 

promise  by,  to  repair  during  the  term,  binding 808 

fact  that  he  makes  repairs  raises  no  presumption  that  he 

agreed  to  do  so 819 

instances  in  which  he  is  bound  to  repair 841 

when  duty  is  imposed  by  statute _ 843 

who  liable  when  nuisance  results  from  want  of  repair 843 

when  landlord  retains  possession  of  part  of  the  premises 843 

as  to  adjoining  premises  owned  by  him 843 

liability  when  several  tenants  occupy  distant  portions  of  the 

same  building .j. 843 

only  liable  when  guilty  of  negligence 843 

injuries  resulting  from  apparent  defects. 848 

rule  in  Carstairs  V.  Taylor _.. 849 

not  liable  for  injuries  resulting  from  misconduct  of  tenants..    851 

rule  in  Ross  v.  Fedden ^.- 849 

when  not  liable  for  injuries  resulting  from  non-repair  of  part 

of  premises  in  possession  of  different  tenants 853 

fraud  of,  in  misrepresenting  condition  of  premises  when 

liable  for 854 

liable  for  failure  to  disclose  defects,  when 854 

rule  in  Minor  v.  Sharon - - 854  n.  4 

rule  as  to  covenants  where  there  are  several  lessors 876 


1556  Ikdkx. 

LANDLORD :— Continued. 

rule  when  landlord  has  repaired „    876 

rights  of,  when  tenancy  is  ended 1 1143 

right  to  enter  forcibly. 1144 

not  justified  in  making  forcible  entry  when  tenant  is  in 

actual  possession,  unless ,..  I144 

cannot  maintain  trespass  against  tenant  without  re-entry...  1144 
when  under-tenant  holds  over,  lessee  liable  for  rent,  unless..  1144 

on  termination  of  agricultural  leases,  rights  of. 1144 

position  of,  after  lease  takes  effect,  as  to  estate 1376 

no  right  to  enter  upon 1276 

even  to  repair _ 1376 

tenant  possesses  all  landlord's  right  respecting 1877 

landlord  cannot  sue  for  injury  to  the  possession 1277 

may,  for  injuries  affecting  reversion 1376  n.  1 

cannot  sue  for  mere  trespass 1378  n.  1 

cannot  alter  or  change  buildings  without  tenant's  consent. ..  1379 

liability  of,  to  third  persons. _ 1279 

nuisance,  when  both  are  liable _ 1280 

when,  may  be  liable  for  nuisance  created  by  tenant 1280 

by  tenants  from  year  to  year. 1283 

right  of,  to  enter  for  condition  broken. 1295-1299 

XQUst  have  complied  with  all  legal  requirements 1395 

may  enterforcibly  when 1296 

may  enter  when  he  can  do  so  peacefully 1298 

right  when  premises  are  vacant 1398 

or  abandoned ,  1298 

better  remedy  is  to  resort  to  legal  methods 1398 

remedies  for  rent,  by  distress _ 1305 

when  distress  lies 1305-1310 

what  may  be  distrained 1310-1313 

where  distress  must  be  made 1313-1318 

how  may  be  made 1318-1823 

sale  of , 1338 

right  to  enter  forcibly  when  term  is  ended 1357 

rights  and  remedies  of,  generally 1376 

distress 1305  et  seq. 

debt 1853 

use  and  occupation 1338 

covenant 1338 

waste 973  et  seq 

ejectment 1387 

in  equity _ 1854 

summary  proceedings 1893 

by  injunction... 157,  993-998 

Uability  of,  to  third  persons 1179-1395 

LANDLORD  AND  TENANT  : 

when  relation  exists. , 5-13 


Immxl  1555 


LANDLOED  AND  TENANT  :—ConMnMcd.  :     : 

eZemeuts  requisite  .tajBoastitute - i— -- ,     5-13 

possessions  .merely,,,  does  not  estatilishJ^'...^, ......     5  al^o  n. 

relation  does,  not  eyigt,  hetween  owner  and  trespasser....'..^    6-8 

relation  may  exist,  where  person. oppiipies  grattuitoufely-..-^.      8 

whether, relation  exists,, questionf or  jury -*. -        8 

what  essential  to.  create  relation....  ....-.-...-...^.-, „        8 

relation  does  not  exist  between  vender  find  purchaser,  unless       9 
relation  does  not  exist  between  employer  and  employee,  imless       9 

person  raising  props  on  shares _.......i,.. 9  n.  4 

person  entering  under  void  leafse. - - --.-  9  n.  4 

gOXo.mnient.  OQcupying  lands,  creates  relation  of,  when..  ,  9,  10 

see  Chillis  V.  United  States ., 10 

sheriff,  ousting  tenant,  and  occupying,  does  not  create  rela- 

tipn.of-, ...... ............  ......._.....- 10 

see  Leonard  v.Kingsman.............. x:      10 

relation  may  be  implied. .--..-..... 13-15 

relation  may,  arise  from  operation  of  Jaw 20 

illustrations..--....,-..-. ..,.,.^..... , 30 

LANDLOBB'S  FIXTURES-:  - 

what-are.ii ..i. - .:i.i 1338 

illustrations.. •.-..•-......- 1338 

lATEiiAL  SttPPOiiTi 

right  of 560 

LEASE :  

contract  gLving  option  to  tenant,  whether  to  occupy' or  not, 

.  is - -V-.-.L... '7  n.  1 

occupancy  under  expired,  raises  inference  of  tenancy ,      13 

assignee  of ,  takes  subject  to  terms  of 14 

void,  governs  as  toocoupancy , —      13 

agreenaent.to  take,  .effect  of----, -     1^ 

for  an  uncertain  terin,  create  tenancy  at  will 45 

for  indefinite  term,  create  tenancy  at  will,  unless, SI,  53 

'    in  terms  .creating  tenancy.  a.t.  will,  cannot  support  tenancy' 

,  .from  year.  to.  year................... l...i....^'53, 54 

of  jjreraises.t.o  another  party,  terminates  tenancy  at  will.  .:•:.    69 

i       by.tenant.at  will,  terminates  tenancy .:.-.  tO  n.  3 

for  one  year, .  tenant  holding  over,  rule 88 

terms  of  contract,  as  to  tenant  holding  over _.  88  also  m.  3 

hOwmaybe  changed :. --'-      89 

for  definite  term,  at  option,  of  lessee,,  rule '96-97 

for  definite,  term  and  for  additional  term  on  condition,  rule      97 

payment  of  rent  under  void,  effect  of 100 

entry. and  payment  of  rent  imder  agreement  for,  effect  of..'  100 
for  definite  term,  no  .notice  required  to  terminate  tenancy 

^  under '-- — ^  ^^^ 

parol,  person  holding  under,  becomes  tenant  from  year  to 

II.— 46 


1558  Index. 

LEASE  •.—Continued. 

year  when 107 

person  holding  over,  bound  by  terms  of 113 

Toid,  evidence  of  terms  of  tenancy 113 

gives  right  of  entry. 143 

gives  no  possession 144 

what  is. 145 

distinction  between,  and  assignment 145 

concurrent,  what  is 146 

in  reversion,  what  are 146 

distinction  between  livery  and  grant ^ 146 

must  be  by  deed  and  assignment  in  writing,  when 147 

by  corporations 147 

by  the  state 147 

by  husband  and  wife 147 

feoffment,  what  is 148 

what  is • 148 

distinction  between,  and  feoffment,  gift,  grant,  etc 148 

componentsof 148,149 

must  be  a  lessor 148 

"  lessee 149 

"       "  thingdemised 149 

"        "bydeedwhen 149 

"       have    commencement   and   certain    determination, 

when... , 149,150 

must  be  acceptance  of  the  thing  demised 149 

' '     executed  with  needful  formalities 149 

for  years  may  commence  in  prasenti  or  infuiuro 151 

of  years,  how  may  be  determined 151 

rule  when  term  is  determinable  at  option  of  parties .'..  151 

for  fixed  term  and  then  f rom  year^to  year 151 

expires  by  efSux  of  time ,. 153 

who  may  be  lessors „ ,--,--  155-163 

by  tenant,  valid  when ^ i. ,.,.,,.^.,,.  157 

atwiQ... , , _....  158 

"       "       by  suflferance ,. 159 

"       "       by  curtesy , ,. 159 

"       "       by  dower 159 

"       "       perautrevie 161 

by  joint  tenants 163 

"  tenants  in  common .^.. 163-169 

"  co-parceners ..^-.-^ 168 

by  tenant  for  years ....,.,.. 178-176 

See  Tenant  foe  Yeaiss. 

corporations ^ ,, 187-196 

See  Corporations. 

infants 196-209 

See  Infants. 


iNDiEX.  1559 

LEASE :— Continued. 

guaxdiana 309-316 

See  GtJAEDiANS. 

femesole _ 216 

See  Feme  Sole. 

feme  covert 216-228 

See  Febie  Covert. 

lunatics 228 

See  LtJNATics. 

idiots 228 

See  Idiots. 

intoxicated  persons.. 230 

See  Intoxicated  Persons. 

persons  under  duress 230,231 

See  Duress. 

persons  influenced  by  fraud 234 

See  Fraud. 

executors  or  administrators 207-244 

See  Executors  or  Administrators. 

mortgagor 245-266 

See  Mortgagor. 

mortgagee _ 245-266 

See  Mortgagee. 

agents 267-378 

See  Agents. 

principal  to  agent 279 

See  Principal  and  Agent. 

client  to  attorney 279 

See  Attorney. 

ward  to  guardian 279 

See  Guardian. 

cestui  que  trust  to  trustee 278 

See  Trustee. 

mortgagor  to  mortgagee - 279 

See  Mortgagor. 

under  powers I   183-371 

See  Lease  under  Power. 

trustees 312-333 

See  Trustees. 

disseizor 1 334-325 

See  Disseizor. 

disseizee 335 

See  Disseizee. 

by  tenant  for  less  than  a  year 186 

agreementsfor - - 330-383 

sub-lease .' 178 

See  Sue-Lease. 

between  relatives 885 

by  mortgagor  to  mortgagee,  rule 886 


LEASE: — Continued. 

under  powers,  rules  as  to..... '. 287-313 

construction  of  powers..... i.. 288 

execution  of  power .- _  290 

what,  may  be  granted... 294 

in  whom  powers  may  vest -. 1...  298 

usual  covenants  under  powers 300,304 

•    proviso  for  re-entry... ....■S00,305 

counterpart 300 

in  possession  or  reversion ..  300 

what  is,  in  reversion 303 

on  what  land  they  attach :..... 303 

effect  of  existing- 303 

effect  of  execution  of  power ; '.  303 

lands  usually  let,  what  are 306 

can  lands  not  before  let,  be  leased .....:..  308 

under  powers,  good  in  part  only. 309 

execution  of  power  by  infant, /erne  cowerf,  etc. . 310 

by  trustees,  effect  of... . . 313 

hj cestui  qiie  trust,effect  of 313 

for.  what  term  trustee  may  make. 314 

confirmation  of  inipei-f ect,  by  cestuis  que  trust Jl .  315 

trustees  not  liable  for  loss  in  rents,  wlien 315 

lease  by  trustee  may  be  good  in  part 316 

under  power  requiring  best  rent . 317 

as  trustees  of  charities .........,.._.. .__  317 

equity  will  intervene,  when. 317-333 

when  a  present  demise 330 

-      agreement  must  be  complete ..^ 340 

when  not  a  present  demise i 343 

,  ,  entry  under  agreement  for  lease,  effect  of 345 

agreenient  should  contain. all  covenants  that  are  to  be  em- 

,         bodied  in  the  lease _ ..:,... ....  346 

statiite  of  frauds,  effect  of,  upon  agreements  for  leases. . . .  350^-355 

remedies  upon  valid  agreements .  355 

remedy  at  law 'l^S 356 

specific  performance  of  valid  agreements 35.7-383 

illegal  purposes ._ 364 

surprise,  mistake,  fraud 365 

party  will  not  be  compelled  to  accept  less  then  he  contracted 

for .......  367 

where  anything  remains  to  be  fixed  or  decided  by  third  per- 
sons  .- 369 

when  contract  conditional  on  lessor's  ability , 369 

where  intended  lessor  has  no  sufficient  title ,  369 

where  the  contract  is  uncertain ,  370 

common  covenants _ .  870 

not  of  part:  of  a  contract,  exceptions 371 


iNb'BX.  1861 

LEASE  ■.—Continued.                                               '  '  '  ' 

•-      after -uanecessary -dekty  by  plaintiflE:. — 373 

oral  agreements  partly  pei^ormed 373 

what  constitutes  part- performance 1... 374 

parties  plaintiff  in  actions  for,  defendants .,...-  380 

whatare 385 

of  what  may  bemade.--- '.. .-..  385 

on  contingency "... 1 L.  385 

may  commence  in  past,  or  future ■. ....  385 

maybeof  lands  or  chattels,  or  both. ....  ^85,  386 

illustrations , ; '._  385 

of  hereditaments  corporeal  or  incorporeal ....I,  387,  388 

advowsons ^ ..!....  388 

corodies... 1... _ 389 

estovers ...1.  389 

ferries... 889 

fisheries .... . J 389 

ministerial  offices : 389 

franchises....- 390 

toUs--: L 1 ......:1-  390 

eights  of  common . i.  390 

rights  of  way _ 391 

rights  of  herbage.— '.- - 391 

lessee's  rights  under  lease  of  chattels. ._ 391 

must  be  reversion  in  lessor. .. 398 

if  no  reversion  in  lessor,  is  assignment.:..:...'. ..  392 

essential  requisites  of . . 393 

operative  words,  what  are.-.. ..... 394 

license  amounts  to,  when.. :--^ .-  395 

instruments  held  to  be ...-: 395 

intention  of  parties  controls.. ■.---  395 

illustrations .  395,  396 

should  contaiu  all  incidents  agreed  on. 1...  396 

-force  will  be  given  to  legal  effect  of  words  used ..... ■!..  396 

■parol  evidence  not  admissible  to  explain 396 

the  premises,  what  are ..... 397 

what  should  contain .  —  r---- — '-^--. ^^^ 

should  be  certain .1..... : .: :...i.' ,'  397 

erroneous  description,  effect  of — . ...... — 397,  398 

erroneous  description  will  be  rejected  as  surplusage '.  399 

■description overcomes  statement  as  to  quantity,  when.......  400 

illustrations.. ... 400 

"more  or  less,''  effect  of,  in. .'.!.*.. .■.:.'..:.-...: 400 

r>f  land,  what  passes - 401,403 

of  particular thingby  name,  effect.. .... -■ -.1-  401, 

'  particular,  restricts  general,  when... 400  w.  4 

'  what  passes  Ets  incident  to  thing  leased.. --r-r-r  ^03 


1563  Index. 

J  EASE :— Continued. 

particular  description,  effect  of 400 

"my  farm,"  what  passes 400 

house  and  furniture 403 

of  upper  floor,  what  passes 403 

s)  ofonerooni 403 

of  building,  to  several  tenants.. 403 

building  or  floor  fronting  on  street,  what  passes 403 

building  on  public  street 404 

land  bordering  on  stream 406 

of  "  house,"  what  passes 406 

of  a"mm" 406,  416 

of  a  farm.__ ^ 408 

of  premises  and  appurtenances,  what  passes 410-431 

of  land  does  not  pass  anything  which  soil  contains 412-415 

" appurtenances,"  what  are... 415 

"  appurtenances,"  what  pass  as 415-431 

test  for  determining  what  are 415  w.  1-420 

formalities  requisite  to  valid  lease 438 

what  are  not,  within  statute  of  frauds 433 

by  deed,  what  are 432,500 

what  is  a  deed 433 

indenture,  distinction  between  and  deed : 433 

by  deed,  requisites  of 433 

presumed  to  be  by  deed 433 

how  may  be  proved 434 

seal -.435-438 

indorsement  on  sealed  instrument,  effect  of 438 

signing  of ,  what  sufficient 438-441 

attestation  of,  what  sufficient.... 441,  443 

delivery  of,  what  is 443 

delivery  in  escrow,  what  is. 443 

recording 445 

acknowledgment • 445 

date 447 

entry  of  lessee 449 

void  or  voidable . 452,  479 

acts  of  parties,  which  invalidate 456 

license,  distinction  between  and  lease 465 

I  in  reversion 476 

interesse  termini 476,  478 

not  executed  by  lessor,  rule 441 

alterations,  invalidate  when 456-465 

entry  by  lessee,  not  indispensable 449 

has  interesse  termini  until  entry 449 

until  entry  cannot  maintain  trespass 449ii.  1 

may  maintain  ejectment  before  entry 449  see  also  n.  8 

may  assign MS 


Index.  1563 

lEASE  •.—Continued. 

void,  as  to  premises  partly  in  possession  of  another 450 

may  be  void  in  part,  and  good  in  part 450 

may  be  void  at  election  of  lessor  or  lessee 453 

illustration .: 462 

rule  applies  to  lease  for  Ufe  or  years 453 

avoided  from  date  of  election  only -  453 

lessor  need  not  re-enter  to  avoid... - 453 

election  by  landlord,  does  not  prevent  suit  for  accrued  rent, 

etc 453 

rule  when  no  provision  for  re-entry  exists ."  453 

lessee  not  entering  under  void,  not  liable  on '. 456 

destruction  of ,  eflfect 459  n.  1 

cancellation  of 463 

dependant  on  happening  of  event,  rule 463 

may  be  invalidated  by  judgment  of  court 463 

invalidated  by  breach  of  condition,  when 463 

for  unlawful  purposes,  void,  when 464,  465 

by  agent  knowing  unlawful  purpose,  landlord  not  affected  by 

agent's  knowledge 464 

see  Stanley  v.  Chamberlain... 464  n.  4  > 

assignment   of    by    lessee,  does   not    discharge   lessee  or         ? 

surety. 465" 

inreversion,  what  are 476 

future,  and  in  reversion,  synonymous 477 

void,  on  breach  of  covenant,  rule... 479-480 

void,  on  breach  of  covenant,  lessee  has  no  election 479 

concurrent,  what  are.. 483 

by  estoppel,  rules  as  to... 485 

what  avoid 481 

concurrent,  what  are,  effect  of 483 

by  estoppel,  what  are 485 

after  purchase  of  estate 486 

effect  of  estoppel,  on  lessor 488 

effect  of  estoppel,  on  lessee 490 

construction  of 500 

parol  evidence  not  admissible  to  vary 504 

exceptions  to  this  rule 504 

by  deed,  construction  of 500-504 

parol  evidence  not  admissible  to  vary ,  504 

exceptions  to  thisrvde 504 

easements,  generally 513 

right  of  way 513 

by  grant ^ 513 

prescription,  necessity,  etc - 614 

duties  of  those  using 515 

,  ..who  must  repair...... -...-. -...-.- ...... --.,-r,-^-- -.„.,.-,, ^.,..  616 

public  may  acquire  right r. 617 


15M.  ISBEX.' 

LEASE  -.—Continued.  - ,     ■ . 

I  ^     who  liablt/or ,9bstruction  of..... .....1... 517 

I          right  of  coimiions__ :'. '.  519 

inter-commomng..." .i 533 

,    .,     common  of  turbary . '.... ... 533 

nature  and  description  of  common  of  estovers.! .  534 

common  of  fishery,  nature  of 535 

watercourse,  definition  of . 1  536 

mature  of  rights  in  natural  streams 537 

.          rights  between  mill-owners  On  the  same  stream. .' .... . .  543 

,,   ..questions  of  reasonableness  for.juty.... ..-.--..'..'-."-. .---_.  544 

-     ,     limitation  upon  right  to  dam  water. i .  .1  544 

precautions  to  be  adopted.. ...... .11 ".  546 

prescriptive  rights,  how  acquired.ll 111 546 

extent  of  right  acquired, — Gilford  vl  Xake  Co 547 

Lawlor  v.  Potter .  548 

Carlislev.  Cooper :. ^.  550 

,          Mertz  V.  Dorney ^ ^ , 551 

change  of  machinery.. .- ,.  551 

ancient  mills 553 

effect  of  prior  use ^ ^ ^---,r  553 

..what  is  mill  seat.. ... .  554 

artificial  watercourses .' ...I ..1 :...!  555 

implied  grant  or  reservation  of  drains^  etc. .......  1.. 556 

license  to  make  or  use  drains,  etc. ■. 557 

extinguishment  or  suspension  of  drains,  etc. 1 ...  558 

underground  water 558 

surface  water . .  559 

,     ,     lateral  support 1 11.1...... 560 

subjacent  support 561 

_what  sxs.  exceptions.  in,le.ase:.,. , r.  573 

1    --   jdistiuction  betjveen. and  reAerviations ^.^ . ^  573 

■  jconstructifln  of  exceptions  and.  reservations >  577 

>    -provisoes  and- conditions, -description  and  nature  of 580-584 

-    .conditions pjecadent or  subsequent — ... 5S3-593 

'    .construction of  conditions,, ...,,......; ..^..y  588 

.by.wlxat  instrument.they  may  be  made^ ^  588 

-by.wjiat.wfirda  .they  may  he- created, 581,  589 

between  what. parties,  binding 593 

.echedulesj-indorsements,  etc...^ 593 

schedule  of  fixtures, -furnitures,- etc -— ^  593 

■  -when^jart  of- the.  lease .4.  593 

-alterations  indorsed  Jhrfore  the.lease.  is  executed ^  594 

-operates  a& grant  only- from  time  Af-  execution ..l  607 

-for  one  year  .certain,  .and-so  on  from  year  to  year,. rule...  ^ui|.  609 

'         Jllustrations- ....! ^....^  609 

•-  '    -certainty  with  reference,  to  collateral  matters 616 

T.  :■    -for -life <ir -lives - ;,-..i.i..*..,^^ ...■,..,..  616 


Jbmwt.  1S65 

ISEIASE  •.—Continued.  ■■    ,: 

^    .reddendum^oface.Q£-.,„„ .......^.  617 

'.. .»    .renl-pa^yablain ^dyanoe -.  618 

';  .;    -certainty aa to. reat ...^ , 618 

t        -W^de.pf.reserYatlQii,,.. j. 619 

:    .netrent,.-Kl}atfe.............. ,,.„...„ 619 

i     .    .cgnstruQtionpf,  rulesasto..^..^ .-..^^ 630-641 

:.  ...    ^Umitetion  of,  grant.. ., 6^711.3 

of  tenant  for  life  is  tenant  by  sufferance,  when 25 

!  S      Jiahility.of r  upon  covenant  in  dease  after  assignment. ....  666  n.  3 

r.t     .after.assignn[ientr liability  of.... _,.:^.:. 2.^ ... ■..  733,749 

assignee  of,  stands  as  surety  for  lessee 750 

J       ,  discharged  =when  landlord  accepts  assignee  as  tenant 751 

shajild  require' assignee 'to  indemnify  him  against  liability..  750 

','        effect  of  death' otr......... --  —  .-, 753 

-.f^  "See'TENAOT. 

liESSOE-  -  "-' - - 

■  determining- tenancy 'at  will,  not  entitled  to  crops  sown  or 

-   ■growing.".-.-.-.- .-.-.-.-.-...'...•...•... '.  65 

whCTinay  be.".-.v.V.v.-.-.-.-.v.-:-.-.-. ........  ....'..■ 155-330 

tenant  as.-.".-.-.-.i-.*.v.v.-.".'  ."j^.-.v.-.-.-'.v.' ! ^ L... i55 

teuanttiirwiil.-.".-.  j..-....r--r-;^;r."i...J..li.; ^.....1...  158 

Bufferance---.,i'..L-....-.-.;-.-.V--''- ...... '.........!...  159 

do-wrer.-.-.-.-.-.-.v.-,-.';:... '......„.!...  159 

ciirtesy.-.-.v-v.l.'i.'.I.L. ..-...:.. 1 '....' .:'.  159 

^Ufe:::. ::::::::::::;:;: ......'.. .....,.:1  159 

'purawtrB'tM::::::::::: ....... .  .1  163 

joint'  tenants  .v."  .".v.. .v.'."... I...'! 163 

co-psA<xneTS-'.'.'.\'.'.'SS-S.''...lZ'..l. '--'-■ * ........ 168 

tenants  in" cb'in'inon.'.J.'-' ."..".". .V .■..■—."....  1.. -..'.......  1 ....  169 

tenants  Tor  years.".''.''.".'.'.''.'.'.''.''.''.'.''.'.'.'.'.'.".'.'. ."."  J 178 

less  than  jfeafsJ.'.",". .".'.' ."."J.T.".".".".".".".' J.'.'... . . . . . ...  185 

Ci^rxKxrations , 247 

in/ants ,u.. 195 

guardians... . .....  208 

feme  sole '. -...'._....„... 315 

feme  covert , .,.  316 

husband  and  wife ^.........,.., ,._  219 

lunatics... , -.,....,.„  338 

m^sllllll^llllll.l-'.Il'.. .......... -;....-...^.  238 

intoxicated  persons.. ,-.-  230 

duress,  person  .under .; -^--  — - 231 

fraud,  person  under  influence  ofl! ..  334 

executors -  ■  237 

administrators. «..;^...........i. .--.-. — J.1.'-T..J.  237 

-moBtgagors.,i.^*-*..i...i— ......v^ ■t.-j  --^..iliLi.  S47 


1566  Index. 

LESSOR :— Continued. 

mortgagee...- 261 

agents 267 

person  acting  under  power 287 

trustees 313 

disseizor _ 324 

disseizee 325 

parting  with  reversion  cannot  enforce  forfeiture 453 

estopped  from  denying  his  own  title  or  right  to  lease 488 

LEVY: 

estate  of  tenants  from  year  to  year,  subject  to 89 

interest  of  tenant  for  life,  subject  to 134 

LICENSE  : 

distinction  between  and  lease 465-476  and  notes 

illustrations 466  et  seq. 

right  to  take  one,  is,  when 467' m.  1 

not  exclusive,  when 467  w.1 

illustrations 467m.  1 

may,  as  by  parol  unless 467,  468 

coupled  with  interest  in  the  land,  rule 467 

not  assignable,  imless. 467  n.  3 

mere  personal  privilege 467  w.  3 

attemptto  assign,  effect 467 

death  of  Ucensees  revokes 467  m.  3 

revoked  by  destruction  of  structure,  when 467  n.  3 

death  of  one  of  two  licensee's  does  not  revoke 467  ra.  3 

parol  may  operate  by  estoppel 468 

equity  will  enforce,  when _    468 

defense  for  all  acts  done  under  it 468 

must  not  be  exceeded 468,  471 

illustrations 463-471 

what  it  covers 468-471 

exceeded,  rule. 470,471 

acquiescence,  effect  of 470-471 

presumption  from 471 

embraces  all  necessary  incidents 471 

illustrations 471-475 

may  be  implied  when ., 471  m.  2 

amounts  to  lease  when 476 

must  be  granted  by  whom 476 

must  be  pleaded  in  justification 476 

only  goes  in  mitigation,  when.. 476 

revocable  when 468  m.  4 

proof  of  lease  will  not  support  plea  of  license 476 

LIFE: 

leases  for 134 

different  kinds  of........ .......v.... ...:.. 134 


Index.  1567 

LIFE  \— Continued. 

how  made.. 134-137 

constructions  of 13-137 

to  commence  in. /Miwro 184 

intention  of  parties 185 

how  arrived  at ^ 135 

rule  when  life  on  which  estate  depends  is  not  given 134 

tenant  for __. __ 134 

lease  for,  construction  of 616-617 

See  Tenant  foe  Life. 

LIGHT : 

when  right  to, "passes  as  incident  of  property 433  n.  3 

Americati 'doctrine  as  to  ancient 433  n.  3 

rule  in  Doyle  v.  Lloyd 434  m.  1 

obstruction  of  right,  gives  right  of  action 435 

LIVERY  OF  SEIZIN : 

distinction  between,  and  grant 146 

LODGINGS  : 

rooms  let  for,  rights  of  tenants  of 139 

notice  to  quit 132 

LUNAR  MONTH  : 

intended,  when 143 

LUNATICS  : 

leases  made  by,  ^jHwMi/acte  valid 338 

leases  made  by,  voidable 238 

MANURE:  * 

tenarrf:  at  -will  raramrrri:  THrm^mp^  '^hffin 67 

MARRIAGE  : 

of  feme  sole  deos  not  terminate  tenancy  at  wUl 72  83 

MASTER  AND  SERVANT :  '  " 

occupancy  of  master's  premises  by  servant  creates  tenancy 

when.. . 75 

when  not 75-83 

tests  for  determining... . ^. 75-83 

officers  of  govenmient, etc.,  aretenants 88 

See   Servant. 

MEADOW  LAND : 

what  passes  under  lease  of 140 

MEMORANDUM : 

of  agreement  for  lease,  essentials  of 351-355 

need  not  be  contained  in  one  paper 351 

by  whom  should  be  signed - 353 

letters,  telegrams ,-  etc. ,  sufficient,  when ...^ 351-855 

must  discribe  premises -^ 351 

duration  of  term...... 353 


1568  limEls. 

MEMORANDUM -.—ConimMcd.  '"  ■  " 

rent  to  be  paid. ..."..."..■.'..-"."....".......".„..■ 353 

names  of  parties." / 353 

must  be  signed  by  party  to  be  charged 354 

one  partner  may  sign  for  firm .^ 354 

agent  may  sigh  for  corporation „  354 

MERGER: 

when  it  occurs ' 1187 

when  may  transpire ■• 1187 

when  cannot llSljf 

rule  in  equity  as  to .--. 1187 

what  amoimts  toa..... ,.. , 1188-1191 

Mesne  profits  : 

who  entitled  to.. 1389-1393 

when  action  for,  Ues 1389 

action  is  consequential  on  ejectment..^ . . 1889 

when  may  be  recovered  in  action  for  use  and  occupation 1390 

what  is  recoverable  as ,.  1390 

what  is  sufScient  evidence  to  uphold  action  for 1331 

when  plaintiff  must  prove  title 1.391 

action  is  local -. 1391 

ruleas  to  under-tenant  holding  over. J 1391 

what  may  be  shown  in  defense  of  action  for 1391 

MESSUAGE: 

what  passes  under  lease  of I 408 

MILL  OWNERS: 

See  Water  Coitrses. 

MINES :  •     -    -       '  ■     •■,'.■-.'■ 

tenant  for  life  may  work  open .., . ■. 138 

may  not  open  new  ones...;... ^.^ ■. 138 

pass  by  grant  of  land 401 

MINING  LAND: 

what  passes  under  lease  of ,j - :.    403 

MISREPRESENTATION:  . 

See  FR4.UP. 

by  agent  of  landlord 373 

lease  to 'L..^-. :.....-'.. 279 

MONTH  : 

whatis,  in  lease........ ....: ...j.    143 

MONTHLY  TENANCY  4 . 

whatis.^. ., ..1... 91,126 

notice  to  quit-... ..-.^._. 110,lt2,».  3 

-v    -resecgatipa pr.regt>op.tej;m hejpg fitted, panstitntes.:.^.^ — J.    126 


MOEE  OR  LESS:                                                           -    .   - 
,'       in  lease,  effect  of. ■.•...:..  ..l , ,_.-■. -• 400 

MORTGAGE  : 

tenantfrom  year  to  year,  may. - ...- -      89 

tenant  for  life,  not  boiind  to  pay. 140 

rule'whenlie  does . 140 

must  pay  interest  of 140 

rights  of-  person  holding  on  leased  estase 245-267 

of  first  and  second ;. . 352 

mortgagee  may  intercept  the  rents 249 

treated  as  assignment ,, ^ 250  rii 

on  reversion,  tenant  for  life  bound  to  pay  interest  on 139 

not  boundto  pay  principal 140 

tenant  for  life  purchasing  mortgagee  of  reversion,  rule  as  to. .    139 

MORTGAGEE:- 

rights  of ,  in  mortgaged  premises..-..  ... .  247-266  andnotes 

See  MOBTGAQOR  AND  MofeTOAGEK— MOETGAGOR. 

cannot  lease  until  condition  broken. ..^..^ 254 

right  to  intercept  rents --...^^ ^ i 247  n.  6-252 

how,  may  be  done. .-..>.-  .....:.^-.--.-.. 247  %. '6-252 

cannot    dispossess  tenant  under  lease  made  before  mort- 
gage.  - i ' :...  247  n.  6 

taking  lease  f  roto  mortgagor,  rule ... . : 253  n.  1 

rules  as  to,  in  different  states. 252  n.,  254 

in  New  York  cannot  maintam.  ejectment 

liabilities  of  in  possession .,  — — . 265 

effect  of  covenant  permitting  mortgagor  to  take  rents 263 

may  dispossess  f chant '  of  taortgagor,  when 255 

receiving  rent  affirms  tenancy 256  n.  3 

see  Whittiker  v.  Hale ...L   256  w.  3 

notice  to  tenant  by,  effect , _ . .^ _- . .  1 257 

cannot  maintain  trespass  or  ejectment  against  tenant, 

when ..---   257,258 

mere  notice  by,  no,  defence,  to.  action  for  rent,  brought  by 

mortgagor....- 258,  259 

vyhen  tenant  not  entitled,  to  crops .., l ...,    261 

effect  of  lease  by... 261 

MOBTGAOOR:  .  .   .,       , 

in  possession,  tenant  by  sufferance,  when --..-.     .25, 

lease  made  by,  before  mortgage,  effect  of 247  also  n.  3 

mortgagee  entitled  to  rents,  when 247-252 

lease  made  by,  after  mortgage,  effect  of 247  w,  6 

may  intercept  rent,  how.:'. ......^ ■247  k.  6-252 

when  tenant  has  paid  rent  in  advance 247  m.  6 

payment  of  rent  to,  estops  mortgagee j ....  249  w. 

arrears  of  rent  belongto  ..J ^ ^ , 249  n. 

See  Alchrone  .Y^ Gonnue ^--r, '■^-- --..,  349  n. 


1570  Index. 

MORTGAGOR :— Continued. 

rule  as  to  rent  under  leases  made  after  mortgage 350  n. 

mortgagee  cannot  maintain  ejectment,  when 251  n. 

mortgagee  entitled  to  rights  of  the  land 25 1  n. 

tenant  may  show  title  of,  was  defeasible. 251  n. 

relation  of,  to  the  estate.  - 347-366  and  notes 

tenant  of ,  has  no  other  title  than... 254 

may  be  dispossed  by  mortgagee,  when 354 

tenant  of,  not  entitled  to  crops,  when 261 

lease  by,  to  mortgagee,  rules  as  to 386 

MORTGAGOR  AND  MORTGAGEE  : 

relation  to  each  other, ,,.^ 345-247 

mortgagor's  right  to  lease 347-353 

right  acquired  by  tenant  under .. 347 

lease  by  before  mortgage 247  and  notes 

after  mortgage ,^ ,, 247  n.  6 

rights  of  mortgagee  as  to  rents , 247-253 

second  mortgagee ,., . 349 

should  join  inlease 361 

tenant  going  in  under  lease  subsequent  to  ntprtgage  when 

I  not  entitled  to  crops , , 361 

receiver  of  rents  wiU  be  appointed  when 353  n. 

relation  of  each,  to  estate..... 345-347 

lease  made  by  mortgagor,  rule  as  to ,...  2i47-361 

See  MORTQAQOB,  MORTaAQEK. 

NAVIGABLE  STREAMS : 

what  are ..,, ,,  530-536 

rights  of  riparian  owners  upoq... ,,,  530-536' 

NECESSITY  : 

ways  by,  what  are , ,.,-.    514 

rules  relative  to ,--,.-. 514 

NEGLIGENCE  : 

resulting  in  destruction  of  premises  by  fire,  tenant  at  will 
not  liable  for ._ 54  n.  3 

landlord  bound  to  repair,  guilty  of,  liable  for  damages  result- 
ing from - 841-876 

injury  to  or  tenant  liable  for  destruction  of  premises  by  his.  1300 

NET  RENT  : 

what  is , ,,-.    619 

NOTICE  : 

to  tenant  holding  over,  of  change  of  terms  in  old  lease, 
effect 89 

NOTICE  TO  QUIT ; 

tenant  by  sufferance  not  entitled  to...... 28,  89 

vendee  not  entitled  to,  when , 47  m. 


Index.  1571 

NOTICE  TO  QUIT  -.—Continued. 

tenant  at  wUlnot  entitled  to,  except 67,  73 

statute  makes  necessary,  in  some  states...... 69 

six  months,  necessary  to  terminate  tenancy  from  year  to 

year 89,90 

agreed  for  two  years,  effect  of 101 

unnecessary  when  term  expires  by  limitation 102 

where  there  is  no  express  agreement 109 

length  of,  may  be  regulated  by  custom 109 

may  be  regulated  by  agreement- 110 

half  years,  when 109 

as  to  monthly  and  other  tenancies 110 

must  expire  at  end  of  current  year Ill 

statutory  provisions  as  to Ill 

none  required,  when Ill 

not  evidence  of  time  when  tenancy  commenced 112 

commencement  of  term  must  be  shown Ill 

effect  of  admission  of  tenant  as  to 112 

when  tenant  enters  on  different  parts  of  premises  at  different 

times,  rule. 113 

■when  tenant  enters  between  two  quarter  days 113 

■when  required 113-117 

when  not  required 113-117 

form  of - 117 

what  must  contain 117  ' 

by  whom  must  be  given 118 

on  whom  must  be  served 118,181 

reasonable  notice,  sufficient,  when 119 

given  by  executor 119 

given  by  heir , 119 

given  by  administrator 119 

given  by  agent 120 

given  by  receiver , 120 

given  hj  cestui  quetrust 120 

given  by  one  of  two  or  more  executors,  sufficient 120 

given  by  one  or  more  tenants  in  common  not  good,  unless..  119 

given  by  mere  collector  of  rents,  not  sufficient 120 

when  given  by  agent,  rule 120 

how  may  be  served ' 121 

waiver  of 122 

second 121 

acceptance  of  rent  after , 122 

giving  of  second,  effect  of 122 

cannot  be  withdrawn -  123 

See  Furnished  Houses,  Furnished  Lodgings,  Rooms. 

tenant  for  term,  not  entitled  to 154 

KUISANCE : 

created  by  one  tenant  in  common,  others  not  liable  for. 


1572:  Ii^EX.! 

NUISANCE  -.—Continued.  -  -  --  —       ",.:  '-l 

^  except ... 177 

erected  by  landlord  operates  as  eviction  ■when 1107rlll3 

see  nile  in  Alg^r  V.  Kennedy. : 1109  re.  1 

'        see  Dyett  v,  Pendleton , , 1109  w. 

lettingpart  of  premises  for  purposes  of  prostitution  not  ..1110  n.  1 

rule  in  GUhooley  V.  Washington lllOn. 

rule  in  PeWitt  v,  Pearson , 1111  n. 

created  by  stranger  is  not...^ 1111 

existing  when  premises  were  let,  who  liable  for ;  1380 

when  landlord  maybe,  for  nuisances  erected  by  tenant 1280 

when  landlord  and  tenant  may  both  be  gained  in  action  for..  1280 

:    when  assignee  of  landlord  is  liable  for, 1381 

test  of  landlord's  liability  for.,..,.. ...,1281 

;    liability  for  injuries  resulting  from  defective  coal  holes,  grat- 
ings, etc - .1289 

rule  of  liability  in  such  cases  in  England ^..  189Qra.  1 

same  rule  in  several  states  ., ...^. ..-..^ ,1290 

generally  in  this  country,  landlord  liable  for ■. ..1290 

j-ule  where  landlord  has  covenanted  to  repair ...  1391 

when  landlord  retains  control  over  part  of  premises ^..i:-1293 

landlord  not  liable  to  tenant  for  nuisance  or  defects  existing 

when  lease  was  made ■...  1293 

exception  when  landlord  guilty  of  fraud  in  concealing 1393 

rule  in  "Wilson  y.  Finch  Hatton, - ^ 1293 

see - 933  n.  4 

NURSERY : 

lands  let  for,  inference  as  to  durations  of  term ..      95 

OCCUPANCY : 

iiot  necessarily  evidence  of  tenancy 5-13 

whenit  is _ _  5-13 

as  trespasser  or  tenant....... T 

under  expired  lease ^^- _ 10 

and  payment  of  rent 

under  void  lease 13 

xmder  agreement  for  lease _ IS 

assent  to,  implied 14 

presumptions  arising  from 15-31  and  nofes 

OCCUPATION: 

of  house  pending  execution  of  lease,  creates  tenancy 10,  H 

promise  to  pay  rent,  implied  froin,  when 18-21 

permission  to  occupy,  creates  tenancy  when 18  m.  4 

OCCUPATION  OF  LANDS : 

not  sufficient  evidence  of  tenancy. 5-13 

by  consent  of  owner,  does  not  establish  liability  to  pay  rent       9 

OCCUPY : 

covenant  -to,  in  a  particular:  way,  effect  .of. 903-911 


Index.  1573 

OFFICES : 

ministerial,  formerly  could  be  leased  at  common  law 390  n,  1 

OFFICERS  : 

occupying  premises  of  government,  tenants - -      82 

OLD  RENT : 

what  is 1035 

OPTIONAL : 

lease  for  years  may  be  made 151 

condition  precedent  to  exercise  of 151 

ORAL  AGREEMENTS : 

for  lease,  when  binding 373 

ORNAMENTAL  FIXTURES : 

tenant  may  remove.. _ 1319 

what  are- 1319 

pier-glasses 1319 

chimney-pieces 1219 

wainscots.... 1319 

hangings 1319 

OUT-GOING  TENANT  : 

rights  of _ 1362 

PAINT: 

when  tenant  bound  to,  under  covenant  to  repair ___ 800 

when  not 802 

PAROL  EVIDENCE  : 

not  admissible  to  vary  lease,  when 504 

exceptions  to  rule  in  reference  to 504-511 

not  admissible  to  add  to  or  vary  leases 633-641 

exceptions  to  this  rule 623-641  and  noies 

not  to  be  shown  that  other  lands  included 634 

not  to  show  or  excluded. 624 

to  change  rent 624 

to  apportion  rent 624 

that  landlord  represented  premises  to  be  fit  for  use ..  634  ?i. 

that  lease  not  intended  to  abrogate  another  instrument 624  n. 

to  add  to  obligations  of  lessor 624  n. 

to  show  parties  intended  different  line 634  n. 

to  add  exceptions  to  lease 624  m. 

that  rent  was  to  be  paid  at  different  time. 625 

that  rent  was  to  be  paid  in  different  way 635 

'         that  lease  was  to  commence  at  later  date 635 

as  to  taxes - - 635 

as  to  rights  and  privileges , 635 

as  to  ^repairs ,---, 635  w. 

illegality  may  be  shown - 625 

.  I     ,  feud ----- 625  n.  5 

'   "■ '11.-47      ■  


15Y4:  IinjEX. 

PAROL  EVIDENCE  •.—Continued. 

as  to  legal  formalities 635 

to  explain  latest  ambiguity 626,630 

proof  of  custom  or  usage  admissible  when 636 

to  explain  meaning  of  words 636 

general  rule  as  to  words  of  lease.- _ 626 

exceptions 626-641 

to  restrict  or  extend  operation  of  lease  when 626  n,  3 

to  apply  lease  to  premises 626  w.  3 

illustrations 626 

to  show  misdescription,  when 627 

to  show  what  is  embraced  in  description 626  also  n.  3 

when  description  cannot  be  aided  by 629  also  n. 

when  words  are  Ulegible... 639 

when  language  is  equivocal 639  to. 

surrounding  circumstances  may  be  shown  when 630 

latent  ambiguity  raised  by  extrinsic  evidence 631-634 

illustration 631 

not,  to  explain  patent  ambiguity 685 

to  show  lease  made  for  benefit  of  party  other  than  lessor 635 

to  show  when  term  commenced,  when 635 

that  lease  was  executed  on  different  day. 635 

as  to  surrender. 635 

when  lessee  entered 635 

that  landlord  knew  purpose  of  lessee  when. _    635 

that  lessee  knew  conditions  of  lease 635 

customary  rights 637 

that  tenant  knew  of  existence  of  another  tenant's  rights.  636  n.  1 
to  show  meaning  of  parties  when 636 

PAROL  LEASE  : 

cannot  be  made  by  corporation  aggregate 148 

by  thestate ....  147 

by  husband  and  wife 148 

person  holding  under,  becomes  tenant  from  year  to  year,when  107 
person  entering  under,  for  term  of  years,  becomes  tenant 

by  sufferance  when 32,  433 

entry  under,  and  agreement  to  quit  on  sale  of  premises,  ef- 
fect of  sale  _ - 33 

evidence  not  admissible  to  show  intention  of  parties  in  lease 

for  life -_.. 135 

estate  for  life  cannot  be  created  by . - 134 

agreement  for  lease,  when  wUl  be  enforced  in  equity 878-380 

when  are  valid___ ..-.-^ 316 

PART  PERFORMANCE  : 

of  parol  agreements  for  lease,  what  constitutes ^.    874 

when  equity  will  enforce  performance 373 

PARTICULAR  TRADES  : 

covenants  against -...,  903-911 


Index.  1675 

PAfiTICtTLAR  TRADES  ■.—Continued. 

lessor  in  absence  of  fraud  on  part  of,  cannot  prevent  use  of 
premises,  by  tenant,  difEerent  from  that  contemplated 905 

PARTITION : 

of  estate  of  tenants  in  common,  unless  applicable  to 171-172 

PARTY  WALLS : 

presumption  as  to  ownership  of,  when  origin  is  not  known..  1003 
who  bound  to  repair _ 1004 

PARAMOUNT  TITLE  : 

See  Title  Paramount. 

PASTURE : 

common  of,  when  exists,  nature  and  extent  of 519 

PAVEMENT ; 

tenant  must  keep  in  repair  when 801 

PAYMENT  OF  RENT : 

effect  of... 21-33 

See  Rent. 

PENALTY  OR  LIQUIDATED  DAMAGES  : 

distinction  between 1050-1060 

rights  of  landlord  under  provisions  for 1050 

POND  : 

■  covenant  to  keep  in  repair  how  kept. , 800 

POSSESSION  : 

merely,  not  sufficient  evidence  of  tenancy 5 

tenancy  implied  from,  when _  5  n.  2 

person  in,  under  contract  of  purchase,  tenant  at  will 5  n.  2 

as  agent  of  owner,  raiseE|(inf erence  of  tenancy 12 

underexpired  lease,  inference 12 

POWERS : 

lease  under 287 

construction  of  power 288 

execution  of  the  power 290 

what  kind  of  leases  may  be  granted 294 

in  whom  powers  may  vest. 298 

usual  covenants,  proviso  for  re-entry,  counterpart 300,  305 

leases  in  possession  or  reversion _ 300 

on  what  land  they  attach _  302 

what  is  a  lease  in  reversion _ 302 

effect  of  existing  leases 303 

what  are  usual  covenants  within  such  powers 300,304 

ways,  etc 304 

power  to  grant  leases  with  a  proviso  for  re-entry 300,  305 

what  lands  are  considered  as  having  been  lands  usually  let. .    306 
whether  lands  not  before  in  lease  may  be  demised 308 


15Y6  Index. 

POWERS  -.—Continued. 

whether  such  leases  are  good  for  part  only 809 

execution  of   powers  delegated  to  infants,  lunatics,  /erne 

covmi,  etc - _..  309 

statutory  powers 810 

to  trustee,  requiring  best  rent,  rule - 317 

statutory 310 

POWER  OP  ATTORNEY : 

See  Powers. 
person  acting  under ,.  287-313 

PREMISES : 

in  deed,  office  of--- 598  also  w.  2 

habendum  may  enlarge  estate -.  598  n.  2 

habendum  will  control,  when.: 599  n. 

lessee  named  in,  rule 600 

PRESCRIPTION  : 

'  rights  of  way  by 513 

rights  acquired  by,  how 546 

PRESCRIPTIVE  RIGHTS  : 

how   acquired. ^ 546 

PRESUMPTION : 

of  tenancy,  from  possession,  when  raised 6m. 3 

relation  of  parties  must  be  such  as  to  create,  of  contract,  to 

establish  tenancy.. .7 

of  tenancy,  from  occupancy,  rules  as  to ..--  15-31 

person  holding  over,  presumed  to  do  so  on  terms  of  old  lease, 

except.. _ 88  w.  2-89 

lessee  in  under  lease,  presumed  to  know  provisions  of  lease, 

except -. 184 

that  aU  leases  are  by  deed 484 

that  an  instrument  was  sealed,  when 430  w.  2 

that  corporate  seal  was  put  on  instrument  with  authority 437 

what  are 580-584'^ 

See  Conditions. 

PRINCIPAL  AND  AGENT  : 

See  Agent. 

PROHIBITED  : 

use  of  premises  may  be  enjoined 157 

forfeiture  for,  rights  of  landlord  to  elect 157 

PUMP: 

use  of ,  passes  as  appurtenant,  when 431 

PURCHASER : 

one  who  enters  as,  not  tenant 14  n.  8 

liable  as  for  occupancy  after  contract  is  ofE. 14  m.  8-57 


Index.  1577 

quarterly  tenancy: 

what  is 91,126 

length  of  notice  to  quit 110, 112  w.  3 

effect  of  entering  upon  new  quarter 110 

reservation  of  rent  by,  no  time  being  fixed,  constitutes 126 

QUARRIES:" 

tenant  for  life  may  work,  when 138 

may  not  open  new  ones ...     138 

QUIET  ENJOYMENT : 

covenant  for  implied 756-760 

what  amounts  to  breach  of. 756-760 

character  of  entry  that  must  be  shown. 758 

when  entry  by  landlord  does  not  create  breach ^ 758 

lessor  of  such  covenants 760 

not  implied,  when  lease  contains  express  covenants  for 760 

illustration 760-763 

form  of  usual  covenants  for 765 

what  operate  as  breach  of. 765,771 

must  be  entry,  under,  not  against  landlord 765 

unqualified  amounts  fqr. 765 

decisions  under  peculiar  covenants  for 767-771 

what  is  a  breach  of 771-779 

illustrations _ ...  771-779 

see  note  l.page _ 778 

special  covenants  for 775 

damages  recoverable  for  breach  of 779 

covenant  for,  does  not  bind  landlord  to  restore  buildings  de- 
stroyed by  fire  or  other  casualty 812 

QUIT  RENT : 

what  is 1025 

BACK  RENT  ; 

what  is.. 1025 

.Raising  crops  on  shares  : 

creates  tenancy,  unless 9  w.4 

REAL  estate  : 

agents,  powers  of 274 

RECEIVER  : 

may  give  notice  to  quit  when 120 

when  not — 120 

of  rents,  on  application  of  mortgage 252  w. 

RECORD : 

of  lease,  necessityfor 445 

of  lease,  necessary  when 445 

effect  of  notice  of  lease  upon  third  persons 447 

good  without,  between  parties 447 


1578  Index, 

recording  : 

required,  when 445 

effectof- - -- 445 

actual  notice  of  lease,  effect  of 445 

within  what  time 446  ra. 

party  not  on  inquiry,  rule _ 446  n.  1 

unrecorded,  good  between  parties 447 

RECOUPMENT  : 

uncertain  damages  may  be  set  up  by  way  of,  when. 1067 

what  the  term  signifies _ .  1067 

how  it  differs  from  set-off 1067 

what  damages  may  be  recouped 1068-1069 

what  may  be  set  up  by  way  of 1133  n.  3 

what  may  not  be 1133  m.  3 

REDDENDUM : 

what  is 616 

office  of 617 

RE-ENTRY  : 

for  forfeiture,  waived  by  receipt  of  rent 17  n.  5 

cannot  be,  when  landlord  has  parted  with  reversion 453 

none,  after  forfeiture  waived 454 

RELATIVES  : 

leases  between,  rule  as  to 395 

see  MulhaUum  v.  Marum 386 

REMEDIES  : 

upon  vahd  agreement  for  lease 355 

at  law 356 

in  equity 1 357 

for  waste 973,991 

by  injuction ___ 993 

by  distress 1305 

debt 1353 

use  and  occupation _  1338 

covenant 1353 

ejectment 1383 

summary  proceedings 1393 

RENEWAL  : 

person  holding  over,  pending  treaty  for,  is  tenant  at  wUl 47 

of  lease,  covenant  to,  runs  with  land 930 

equity  will  compel  performance 930 

covenant  to  renew  perpetually,  binding 931 

conditions  precedent  must  be  performed  by  tenant 930  n.  3 

in  case  of  trust  estates,  perpetual  renewals  wUl  not  be  en- 
forced except .- 935 

unqualifted  covenant  to  renew,  effect  of. 935 

covenant  to  renew  by  lease  with  same  covenants  does  not 


Index.  1579 

RENEWAL  ■.—Continued. 

require  covenant  to  renew  to  be  inserted  in - 935 

rule  when  covenant  required  not  to  be  fixed  by  arbitrators- .  937 
covenant  to  renew  upon  such  terms  as  may  be  agreed  on  by 

the  parties,  effect  of -.  93&-939,  d40 

covenant  must  be  definite  as  to  duration  of  time 940 

covenant  imports  giving  of  new  lease _ 941 

rent  must  be  fixed,  or  means  for  reducing  to  certainty,  pro- 
vided  941 

rule  when  lessor  refuses  to  agree  on  arbitration  as  provided 

in  covenant _ 941 

what  amounts  to  breach  of  covenant  to  renew 943 

tenant's  remedies  for 942 

right  to  renewal  is  assignable  _ 943 

rule  when  tenant  has  option  to  take  renewal 944 

when  tenant  bound  to  perform  condition  precedent. 945 

substantial  compliance  sufficient  in  equity 945 

strict  compliance  essential  at  law 945 

illustrations- _ 945 

rule  when  tenant  is  required  to  give  written  notice  of  his 

election 947 

rule  when  tenant  has  lost  his  legal  right 947 

rule  when  tenant  has  option  to  take  renewal  and  no  provision 

for  notice  exists. 947 

rule  when  length  of  renewed  term  is  optional. .. 947 

effect  of  remaining  in  possession  render  optional  covenants. .  948 

rule  when  lessor  covenants  to  renew  on  request  of  tenant 948 

when  there  are  two  or  more  lessees  renewal  to  one  enures  to 

both 949 

rule  where  lessees  are  partners 950 

rule  when  mortgagor  takes  renewal. ._.  950 

rule  when  mortgagee  takes  renewal 950 

rule  when  trustee  takes  renewal i. 950 

rule  when  renewal  embraces  other  premises 951 

custom  to  renew,  effect  of 951 

wUful  violation  of  covenant  by  tenants,  excuses  from  renew- 
ing...  953 

violation  of  agreed  covenants,  effect  of 943 

effect  of  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  of  tenant  on  covenant  for 

renewal 953 

surrender  and  conveyance  to  lessor  of  an  under-lease  does 

not  discharge  covenant 953 

surrender  of  under-lease  not  condition  precedent  to  renewal. .  953 

;          rule  changed  by  Stat.  4  Geo.  3,  c.  28 953 

RENT: 

contract  to  pay,  not  essential  to  create  tenancy 2,  4w.  3 

is  badge  of  tenancy _.-__ ,  2 

payment  of,  prima  fade  evidence  of  tenancy 17 


1580  Index. 

RENT :— Continued. 

when  not,  instances 17-19 

payment  of,  under  mistake,  not  evidence  of  tenancy 18 

Strahan  v.  Smith 18  w.  3 

Neave  v.  Moss 18  m.  4 

Higginbotham  v.  Barton _ 18  w.  5 

payment  by  tenant  holding  over,  effect  of-. 106 

reservation  of  weekly,  monthly,  etc.,  no  term  being  fixed, 

measures,  duration  of 126 

furnished  liouses,  etc.,  issues  out  of  land  alone. 128 

conditions  precedent  must  be  performed  before  recovery  can 

be  had  for,  by  distress 128 

cannot  be  recovered  for  apartment  let  for  immoral  purposes.    131 

payment  of,  to  one  joint  tenant  binds  all 165 

distress  for,  by  one  joint  tenant 165 

payment  of ,  to  one  tenant  in  common 172 

tenants  in  common  may  join  or  renew  in  action  of  debt  for    174 

except 175-176 

death  of  one  tenant  in  common,  others  cannot  sue  for  whole 

rent 175 

tenant  of  mortgagor  before  mortgage  not  liable  to  mortgagee 

for .__ 247 

mortgagor  not  Uable  f  or 245-260 

receiver  of,  from  tenant  of  mortgagor  will  be  appointed 

when 352  w. 

cannot  be  distrained  for  when  lease  is  void  in  part 450 

use  and  occupation  lies  for _    452 

actual  payment  of,  not  necessary  to  create  tenancy  from  year 

to  year,  under  void  lease _ 456 

recognition  by  tenant  of  liability  to  pay,  sufficient 456 

payment  of,  does  not  create,  but  evidences  tenancy 456 

reddendum,  office  of 617 

reservation  of  in  lease _. 617 

net  rent,  what  is 619 

certainty  as  to  amount  of ,  essential _ 618 

to  whom  should  be  reserved..  619 

mode  of  reservation 619 

net  rent,  what  is... 619 

covenant  to  pay,  runs  with  the  land 673 

payment  under  license  to  occupy  for  certain  purposes,  treat- 
ed as .._ -_ 736 

mortgagee  of  lessee  not  hable  for  rent  unless. 736 

tenant  not  excused  from  paying,  because  buildings  have  been 

destroyed 809  n.  3 

fact  that   landlord  had   buildings  insured  and   refuses  to 

rebuild  does  not  change  the  rule 810-813 

covenants  to  repair  and  pay  rent  are  independent 803,  886  n. 

when  destruction  of  estate  releases  tenant  from  rent 836  n.  1 

issues  out  of  the  land,  and  tenant  liable  for,  so  long  as  land 


Index.  1581 

RENT:— Confmwed. 

remains 838 

statute  excusing  tenant  from,  iii  New  York 840 

in  Louisiana  tenant  may  relieve  himself  from,  by  surrender- 
ing the  lease 841 

what  is,  as  a  legal  term 1016 

out  of  what,  it  issues. _  1017 

twofold  nature  of  - _ 1017 

need  not  be  payable  in  money _  1019 

may  be  payable  in  grain,  fowls,  services  or  any  species  of 

property 1019 

reservation  of  part  of  profits  of  estate,  not  strictly  rent _  1019 

must  be  certain,  or  capable  of  being  made  so 1019 

must  issue  annually,  although  need  not  be  payable  yearly...  1019 

is  sufllcient  if  may  be  reduced  to  annual 1020 

must  issue  of  lands,  and  of  the  estate  demised 1021 

part  of  the  herbage  of  lands,  cannot  be  reserved  as 1021 

royalty  upon  stone,  ores,  etc.,  is  rent 1021 

may  be  reserved  out  of  remainders  and  reversions 1021 

not  out  of  personal  chattels 1022 

when  land  and  chattels  are  leased  together,  whole  rent  issues 

out  of  the  land 1022 

where  two  parcels  of  land  are  leased  for  an  entire  rent,  in 
one  of  which  lessor  has  no  title,  rent  issues  out  of  one  to 

which  he  has  title. ^ _ 1022  71.  6 

if  distinct  sums  are  reserved  for  each,  rent  issues  from  each 

1032  n.  6 

sum  reserved  for  mere  license  to  use  premises,  not  rent 1022 

sums  reserved  on  assignment  of  a  lease,  not  rent 1023 

payment  sin  addition  to  rent  reserved,  not  strictly  rent 1023 

only  distinction  relates  to  remedy  for  recovery  of 1024 

kinds  of,-. 1024 

rent  service,  what  is _  1034 

rent-charge,  what  is 1024 

rent-seek,  what  is 1024 

fee  farm  rent,  what  is _ 1024 

rents  of  assize,  what  are __ __ 1025 

quit-rent,  what  is 1025 

old-rent,  what  is 1025 

improved  rent,  what  is _ _..  1025 

rack-rent,  what  is 1025 

nnay  be  made  payable  in  advance 1025 

rights  of  tenant  so  paying 1025 

payment  of,  in  advance,  when  lease  does  not  provide  for, 

effect  of. 1025 

tenant  has  whole  of  last  day  in  which  to  pay .'. 1031 

rule  when  lease  commences  on  certain  date,  as  Jan.  10th,  rent 
payable  quarterly 1031 


1582  Index. 

RENT  -.—Continued. 

rule  in  New  York  where  lease  is  for  less  than  year,  payable 

quarterly., 1031  n.  3 

rule  when  rent  is  apportioned  to  several  parcels j  1031 

apportionment  of  rent 1031 

tenant  liable  for  although  he  has  lost  use  of  premises  by  the 

casualties  of  war 1033 

or  by  fire  or  other  casualty 1033 

lessee  cannot,  where  he  has  covenanted  to  pay  rent,  release 

himself  from  habUity  by  assigning  lease. 1033 

lessee  in  such  case  acquires  double  security  by  the  assignment  1034 

assignee  of  lessor  acquires  all  the  lessor's  rights 1034 

when  in  arrear 1034 

w^here  rent  is  payable  when  noplace  is  named 1034 

rule  when  payable  in  specific  articles 1036 

when  and  where  landlord  must  demand  the  rent  to  enforce 

forfeiture  for  non-payment 1036 

precise  sum  must  be  demanded 1036 

interest  may  be  included 1036 

must  be  demanded  on  precise  day  when  due 1036 

demand  before  or  after  day  it  becomes  due,  is  bad 1036 

must  be  made  such  a  time  before  sunset  as  to  allow  sufficient 

light  to  count  the  money 1037 

landlord  must  remain  until  after  sunset 1037 

what  landlord  must  show  to  establish  demand 1038 

demand  may  be  waived  by  clause  in  lease. 1039 

waiver  will  not  be  implied- 1039 

object  of  demand _..  1040 

forfeitures  obvious  to  courts _ 1040-1041 

payment  of ,  as  evidence  of  tenancy 1041 

effect  of --- 1041 

assignable  quaUties  of 1043 

reservation  of ,  or  sums  in  gross 1047 

reservation  of,  may  be  made  to  third  person 1047 

rights  of  such  person _ 1047 

how,  should  be  reserved 1048 

incident  of  reversion,  and  when  payable  to  third  person 

ceases  when  lessor's  estate  ceases 1048 

effect  of  omitting  words  "  to  his  heirs,  executors,  etc." 1048 

penalty  or  liquidated  damages. 1049 

when  performance  of  covenant  is   secured  by  a  penalty, 

effect  of,  and  what  landlord  must  do  to  fix  rights  to 1050 

when  damages  are  Uquidated 1051 

rules  for  determining , 1051 

payment  of,  what  are _ 1053 

to  whom  must  be  made... 1057 

rent  in  arrear  at  death  of  lessor 1061 

payment  to  wrong  person  by  mistake 1061 


Index.  1583 

RENT  •.—Continued. 

deduction  from,  allowed  by  mistake,  effect  of 1061 

where  payable. 1061 

how  may  be  paid i - -  1063 

tenant  may  safely  follow  lessor's  directions  as  to 1062 

sent  by  maU  by  lessor's  orders 1062 

payment  by  bill  or  note,  what  is -..  1063 

what  are  payments  oi,  pro  tanto - -.  1064 

-what  may  be  set  off  against 1064  n.  1 

payment  or  tender  of,  may  be  made  to  agent  when 1070 

payment  of,  before  due,  effect  of 1071 

tenant  holding  over,  liability  for -  1072 

payment  of,  suspended  while  title  is  in  dispute,  in  certain 

cases,  rule  as  to _. 1074 

instances  where  tenant  holding  over  cannot  be  held  subject 

to  terms  of  former  lease 1074 

alternative  provisions  as  to,  in  lease,  effect  of -  1074 

when  landlord  has  once  elected,  rule  as  to - ---  1074 

payable  in  specific  articles,  rule  as  to. 1075 

rule  when  no  time  for  payment  is  fixed 1077 

when  payable  in  perishable  property,  crops,  etc. 1077 

under  covenant  to  pay  tenant  must  oust  the  landlord 1078  n.  5 

rule  in  Haldane  v.  Johnson 1078  n.  5 

tenant  not  boimd  to  pay  for  incidental  benefits  resulting 

under  lease.. - 1080 

except. ..- 1080 

effect  of  eviction  upon  liability  of  tenant  to  pay 1080-1140 

when  maybe  apportioned 1089-1095 

taking  key  and  letting  premises  excuses  tenant  from  pay- 
ment of,  after  abahdoiiment,  when _ 1130  n.  2 

acts  of  landlord  that  absolve  tenant  from  rent 1133 

tenant  must  quit  possession  or  pay 1132 

when  acts  of  Isindlord  are  conditions  precedent  to  payment 

of  rent, -  1133  m.  3 

double  rent  recoverable  when 1148 

what  must  be  shown  to  warrant  recovery 1148 

provisions  of  stat.  4,  Geo.  3,  relative  to 1149 

must  have  been  legal  notice  to  quit . 1149 

holding  over  must  be  continuous 1149 

who  may  recover. 1149 

destruction  or  disrepair  of  premises,  no  defence  to  action 

for .1127-1136 

instances  of 1187-1136 

when  premises  let  for  illegal  purposes,  not  recoverable 1341 

what  is  unlawful  use 1341-1347 

what  must  be  shown  to  defeat  rent 1841-1347 

See  Eviction. 
trespassers,  not  liable  for 6 


1584  Index. 

EENT  -.—Continued. 

payment  of ,  proof  of  tenancy 6w.  1 

contract  to  pay,  not  necessary. _        7 

payment  of,  usual  badge  of  tenancy 8 

may  be  paid  in  services . 8  n.  3. 

payment  of,  raises  presmnption  of  tenancy 12 

acceptance  of,  usual,  but  not  conclusive  evidence  of  ten- 
ancy.  14 

promise  to  pay,  implied  from  occupancy,  when 18 

payment  of,  proof  of  tenancy,  when _. 21-S3 

tenant  by  sufferance,  not  liable  for 31-i3 

tenant  at  wiQ  liable  for,  when 44 

effect  of  payment  of,  by  tenant  at  will  under  void  lease 46  m.  3 

reservation  of ,  not  necessary  to  create  tenancy  at  will 45 

see  Jones  v.  Shay 45  n.  6 

see  Humphries  v.  Humphries 45  m.  6 

seeWhoon  v.  Drizzle 46  n. 

acceptance  of,  from  tenant  holding  over,  effect 49 

reservation  of  annual,  essential  to  create  tenancy  from  year 

to  year  by  holding  over 51,53 

need  not  be  payable  in  money 53 

payable  quarterly 53 

cannot  be  apportioned 55 

annual,  necessary  to  create  tenancy  from  year  to  year..  91,  97,  98 

annual,  without  any  lease  or  agreement,  effect 98 

payment  of,  imder  void  lease,  effect  of 100, 105 

acceptance  of,  after  notice  to  quit,  effect  of. 123 

payable  in  advance,  rule 618 

certainty  as  to  amount  of 618 

madeof  reservation . 619 

net,  what  is 619 

EENTAL  VALUE : 

of  premises,  how  ascertained 331 

BENTS  OF  ASSIZE  : 

what  are 1025 

RENT-CHARGE : 

what  is 1034 

RENT-SECK : 

what  is 1034 

RENT-SERVICE : 

what  is .,.- 1024 

REPAIR  : 

tenant  for  life  bound  to 140 

of  private  ways,  who  liable  for 516 

parol  evidence  not  admissible  to  show  that  tenant  agreed  to  625 

covenants  to,  runs  withtheland 674 


Index.  1585 

REPAIR  -.—Continued. 

■who  liable  to. 748 

express  covenants  to 791 

to  repair  and  keep  In  repair,  effect  of 793 

what  constitutes  a  breach  of _ 798  w.  4 

tenant  may  repair  and  recover  the  expense  of  the  landlord  or 

sue  for  damages 793 

what  tenant  must  do  to  bind  landlord  to  pay  for 835-828 

must  be  actual  non-repair 793  n.  4 

tenant  covenanting  to  make,  not  liable  for  natural  wear  and 

decay.. _ _._ 801,  806 

not  liable  to  lay  new  floors  or  put  on  new  roof 800 

when  bound  to  paint _ _ 800 

cutting  new  door  breach  of,  when 80O 

enlargement  of  windows,  doors,  etc. ,  is  not,  when 800 

pulling  down  wall  of  yard,  is  breach  of,  when 801 

must  repair  partition  wall  when __    801 

when  bound  to  keep  premises  in  same  condition  as  when  he 

took  them... 801 

carrying  away  gas  burners  is  breach  of,  when 801 

keys,  losing  or  carrying  away  is 801 

Boof  any  fixture 801 

as  shelves,  drawers,  wall  brackets,  stalls  in  bam,  etc 801 

neglecting  to  replace  gate  taken  away  by  stranger. 801 

must  replace  broken  or  worn-out  machinery,  when 801 

broken  glass _ 801 

leaving  up  payment 801 

effect  of  covenant  to  keep  farm  in  good  substantial  repair. . .  803 
effect  of  covenant  to  leave  the  premises  in  substantial  repair    803 

effect  of  covenant  to  repair  as  often  as  necessary 803 

when  tenant  not  bound  to  repaint  buildings _. 803 

buildings  about  to  be  pulled  down,  tenant  not  absolved  from 

covenant,  becauseof. 803 

landlord  liable  to  tenant  for  repairs  made  by  him  when 803 

when  tenant  not  bound  to  repair  damages  resulting  from  the 

elements 806 

when  not  bound  to  keep  or  leave  in  better  repair  than,  when 

he  took  the  premises _ 806-807 

under  what  covenant  tenant  not  hable  for  breach  until  term 

is  ended . 806  Ji.  3 

effect  of  covenant  to  put  and  keejD  in  repair 807 

effect  of  covenant  to  maintain 807 

effect  of  covenant  "to  repair"  and   "surrender  in  repair,'' 

damages  by  elements  excepted 807 

effect  of  general  covenant  to  make  improvements 807 

effect  of  covenant  "  to  leave  in  repair" 808 

tenant  bound  to  rebuild  premises  destroyed  by  fire,  when...    808 

construction  of  peculiar  covenants- _ 794  n.  6,  796 

covenant  to  keep  old  buildings  inrepair 797 


1586  Index. 

REPAIR :— Continued. 

tenant  covenanting  to,  must  repair  buildings  erected  during 

the  term _ __ 803 

lessor  covenanting  to,  is  entitled  to  rent  though  he  fails  to  re- 
pair  _ _    804 

covenant  to  yield  up  in,  what  amounts  to  breach  of 804 

bound  to  rebuild,  when  buildings  are  destroyed  by  Are 808 

instances  of  covenants  under  which  tenant  has  been  held 

bound  to  rebuild 809  n.  3 

not  excused  from  performing  because  the    injury  resulted 

fromact  of  God 809  «..  3 

damages  for  breach  of  covenant  to. ;  -  -  _ 878 

to  what,  covenant  extends _ 878 

damages  not  recoverable,  unless 878 

what  amount  of ,  must  be  made 878 

evidence  of  disrepair 879 

effect  of  condition  precedent 881 

effect  of  entire  destruction  of  estate. _ 883 

action  against  lessor 883 

neglect  of  landlord  to,  who  has  so  covenanted,  does  not  excuse 

tenant  from  rent 1133 

may  recoup  damages  resulting  from  breach  of  such  covenant, 

inaction  for  rent '. 1132  m. 

failure  of  landlord  to,  no  ground  for  reUef  in  equity 1134 

REMOVAL  ^ 

of  fixtures,  right  of  tenant  holding  over 1360 

under  new  lease,  unless  lease  provides  for,  caimot,  although 

former  lease  gave  such  right 1363 

rule  in  Watriss  v.  First  Nat'l  Bank  of  Cambridge 1363  n.  1 

RESERVATIONS  : 

in  lease,  what  are 575 

distinction  between  and  exceptions  will  be  treated  as  excep- 
tions, when , -, 573 

cannot  be  made  to  stranger 573 

part  of  thing  demised,  cannot  be.., 573 

such,  are  exceptions 574 

illustrations , 574 

see  Bush  V.  Coles 574 

rights  implied  under , 574 

construction  of , 595,  577 

assignable  when _ 576 

rightof  way - , 574,  575 

REVERSION : 

tenant  at  will  cannot  sue  for  injury  to ,---. 65 

essential  to  lease , 149 

must  remain,  or  no  lease , ,.,,.,. 178-187 

sub,  what  is.- , , 178-187 


Index..  1587 

REVERSION  •.-^Continued. 

what  is  lease  in _ 302 

possession  or  reversion _ 303 

in  lessor 393 

REVERSIONER : 

accepting  rent  from  tenant  of  tenant  for  life,  after  death  of, 

effect -  160 

RIGHTS : 

of  tenant 1299 

liabilities  of 1299-1357 

RIGHTS  OF  WAY : 

how  acquired 613 

by  grant ....1 513 

"  prescription ' 513 

"  necessity. 513 

duties  of  parties  using... 515 

who  must  repair 516 

public  may  acquire 517 

obstruction  of 517 

RIOT: 

what  forcible  entry,  etc.,  is 137S 

RIPARIAN  OWNERS : 

right  of ,  on  navigable  streams 530-536 

ROOF '. 

tenant  not  bound  to  put  on  new,  covenant  to  repair 800 

ROOMS : 

let  for  lodgings,  rule  as  to. 130 

"       immoral  purposes 130 

"       storage  or  deposit ISl 

liabilities  of  hirers  of 131 

notice  to  quit. 132 

SALE: 

colorable,  will  not  defeat  tenancy  under  lease  "until  premises 
aresold". 47  w.  2 

SALE  OF  LEASE : 

asto --■-.-- - -  184 

SCROLL : 

isuflScient  as  seal  in  some  states 431' 

SEAL: 

corporation  may  contract  without 189 

to  lease,  required  when — 433 

what  is.... - 433-438 

in  some  states,  scroll  is  sufficient 436 


1588  Index, 

SEAL : — Continued. 

instrument  without,  is  not  a  deed 436 

mere  words,  cannot  dispense  with 435  n.  SJ,  437 

loss  of,  does  not  destroy  instrument 436  n.  2 

presumed  to  have  been  put  upon  instrument,  when 436  n.  2 

provisions  as  to,  in  different  states 436  to.  3,  437 

printed 437 

corporate,  presumption  from 437 

SERVANT : 

occupying  master's  premises  not  tenant 75-83 

relation  crpated  thereby 75-83 

tests  by  which  to  determine  character  of  relation 75-83 

illustration _ ."..w. 75-83 

SET-OFF : 

against  rent,  what  maybe - 1064  w.  1 

taxes  paid  by  tenant  may  be,  when 1064 

rates 1064 

payments  made  to  prevent  being  ousted  of  possession 1065 

compulsory  payments,  what  are,  and  when  may  be 1065 

instances  of_-- 1065 

money  must  actually  have  been  paid  by  tenant ---.  1066 

must  have  been  paid  under  threat  of  expulsion 1066 

uncertain  damages  cannot  be  set  off 1067 

SHELVES : 

taking  down,  or  carrying  away,  is  a  violation  of  tenant's  cov- 
enant to  repair J 801 

SKYLIGHT : 

right  of  hirers  of  apartments  to  use 193 

SHERIFF  : 

ousting  tenant,  and  occupying  premises,  not  liable  as 10 

see  Leonard  V.  Kingsman 10 

entry  by  landlord  as,,  not  eviction —  1138 

SIGNING : 

of  lease,  may  be  by  whom -  438-441 

by  third  person,  when 438,439 

should  be  read  to  grantor. 439 

by  grantor's  "mark" -    439 

by  agent , - -    439 

by   attorney .--_ 439 

by  different  name  from  that  in  body  of  deed,  rule 440 

by  corporation.. 440 

SIGNS  : 

tenant  has  exclusive  right  to  use  of  front  wall,  for.. 403 

see  Lowell  v.  Stratton... 403  w,  2, 


Index.  1589 

six  months : 

notice  to  quit,  necesBaiy  to  terminate  tenancy  from  year  to 
year 90 

SPECIFIC  ARTICLES : 

rule  payable  in,  rules  as  to 1075-1080 

when  landlord  may  sue  for  money 1075 

amount  of  recovery  limited  to  value  of  property. 1075 

tenant  cannot  pay  in  money,  at  his  option 1075 

parties  may  agree  as  to  sum  of  money  to  be  paid  in  lieu  of 

property 1076 

rule  when  no  time  for  payment  is  fixed.. 1076 

rule  when  payable  in  perishable  articles 1077 

in  share  of  crops 1077 

where  payable ; 1077 

where  tender  may  be  made 1078 

tenant  not  liable  for  destruction  of,  from  natural  decay 1078 

rule  when  payable  at  such  place  as  lessor  shall  fix. 1078 

must  be  delivered  in  usual  manner 1079-1080 

SPECIFIC  PERFORMANCE  : 

of  agreement  for  lease  wiU  be  decreed  when 357 

of  agreements  for  leases,  will  be  ordered  when. 857-383 

remedy  at  law  cannot  be  sought  at  same  time. 357 

will  not  be  enforced  after  suit  at  law,  unless. 357 

agreement  must  be  complete 359 

agreement  must  be  mutual,  etc 360 

when  will  not  be  enforced 361-364 

w^hen  purpose  is  illegal 364 

not,  when  agreement  was  made  under  a  mistaJie 365 

not  surprise 365 

not  fraud —  365 

party  will  not  be  required  to  accept  less  than  he  contracted 

*       for 367 

rule  when  contract  is  conditional  on  lessor's  ability  to  per- 
form    369 

whenlessor  has  not  sufficient  title 369 

w^hen  contract  is  uncertain 370 

common  covenants -- 370 

part  of  contract  will  not  be  enforced,  unless ;  371 

unnecessary  delay,  effect  of. 372 

oral  agreements  partly  performed .-  373 

what  constitutes  part  performance. 374 

parties  plaintiff  to  action  for 380 

parties  dependent  to  actions  for 380 

SQUATTER : 

tenant,  when 17, 18 

II.— 48 


1590  Index. 

STALLS: 

in  barn,  taking  down,  is  breach  of  tenant's  covenants  to 
keep  in  repair ^ 800 

STAIES: 

rights  of  hirer  of  apartments  to  use. i2& 

tenant  of  upper  floor  entitled  to  exclusive  use  of 403  also  n.  2 

tenant  of  one  room  not  entitled  to  exclusive  use  of 403 

STATE : 

lease  by,  must  be  by  deed^..^.;.-.-......^^.j.. ^..    147 

STATITTE : 

confirming  power  to  lease,  must  be  strictly  pursued 311 

entry  by  landlord  under,  does  not  create  eviction  of 1138 

STATUTE  OP  FBAUDS : 

effect  of,  upon  leases 350 

upon  agreement  for  lease ^ ^....... ^ 350 

agreement  and  memoranda  need  not  be  contem^poraneous. ..  351 

need  not  be  contained  in  one  paper... ^ ^^ 351 

letters  sufficient  as  memorandum. 351 

telegrams v-... ^ 351 

any  written  document  signed ^ ^ 353 

must  contain  all  elements  of  lease,  without  aid  of  extrinsic 

evidence ^ ^ 353 

must  describe  preroises  ^ .i..^ ^ i.  853 

duration  of  term 353 

amount  of  rent - i ^.^ i 353 

names  of  both  parties ^ 353 

must  be  signed  by  party  to  be  charged  thereby,  or  his  agent  353 

partner  may  sign  for  firm ^ i i ^.^i...  354 

STOCiK : 

tenant  for  life  entitled  to  increase  of 139 

STOEAGE  : 

premises  let  for - ^ 131 

duty  and  liability  of  landlord ^ ..l^...i. 131 

STORE  HOUSES : 

See  Stoeaqe. 

SUBJACENT  SUPPORT : 

rightof 560 

SUB-LEASE  : 

what  is -..-. 178 

essentialsof , 178  m.  2, 179 

sub-tenant  not  Uable  to  original  landlord 179-181 

distinction  between,  and  assignment 179-180 

See  Underlease. 


Index.  1591 

sub-letting : 

tenant  may,  except 157 

effect  of  in  Louisiana 157 

SUB-TENANT : 

only  liable  for  rent  to  his  lessor 157 

using  premises  for  illegal  purpose 157 

equity  win  enjoin.. 157 

estate  of  determines  with  estate  of  lessee 157 

of  tenant  at  wiU,  rights  of 158 

of  tenant  by  sufferance 159 

not  liable  to  landlord  for  rent  or  on  covenants  in  lease 
except 179-181 

SUFFERANCE— TENANT  BY : 

g^uilty  of  commissive  waste,  terminates  estate 993 

See  Tknamt  by  Suffeeanck, 

SUMMARY  PROCEEDINGS : 

in  New  Yorit,  when  they  lie 1392-1396 

who  is  entitled  to  relief.. 1396 

how  application  maybe  made. 1397 

petition  by  neighborhood  of  a  bawdy  house. 1397 

to  whom  application  should  be  made 1898 

what  should  be  stated  in  petition _  1399 

how  served 1400 

amendments  to  petition,  &o _ 1404 

answer,  issues,  &c. ,  when  and  how  should  be  made 1404 

jury  trial,  how  obtained : 1406 

change  of  venue 1407 

I  adjournment 1407 

final  order  in 1407 

how  possession  is  obtained 1408 

how  warrant  may  be  stayed.. 1408 

w^hen  lessee  may  redeem 1410 

appeal,  effect  of 1410 

power  of  appellate  court 1410 

remedy  of  tenant  when  wrongfully  dispossessed. , 1418 

injunction  order  in,  when  allowed. 1413 

SUNDAY : 

persons  entering  under  lease  made  on,  liable  as  tenant 9  n.  4 

SURETY: 

for  lessees  may  terminate  tenancy  from  year  to  year  by 

notice 90 

not  discharged  by  assignment  of  lease ,  465 

for  lessee,  discharged  by  tenant's  eviction 1088 

other  matters  discharging. 1083 

payment  by  tenant,  discharges  pro  tanto 1083 


1592  Index. 

SUEETY  •.—Continued. 

for  tenant  from  year  to  year  may  put  an  end  to  liability,  how  1084 

cannot  set-off  debt  due  tenant- __ 1084 

cannot  recoup  damages  accruing  of  tenant  unless. 1084 

destruction  of  buildings,  no  defence  by 1084  n..  3 

not  discharged  by  tenant  giving  note  for  rent  unless 1084  n, 

discharged  when  lease  is  altered  by  agreement  between  land- 
lord and  tenant  unless 1085 

when  surety,  and  when  guarantor 1085 

only  for  rent  during  the  term  named  in  lease 1086 

liable  when  additional  term  is  made  optional  with  tenant  by 

the  terms  of  the  lease 1086 

landlord  not  bound  to  demand  rent  of  lessee 1086 

or  notify  surety  that  lessee  has  abandoned  premises 1086 

two  or  more,  although  lease  is  joint  each  may  set  up  distinct 

defence ,. 1086 

judgment  may  be  reversed  as  to  one  and  aflBrmed  as  to  other  1086 

release  of  one  under  seal  releases  both 1086 

contribution  by __ 1086 

SURFACE  "WATER : 

right  and  liabilities  respecting 559 

SURRENDER : 

cancellation  of  lease,  not  evidence  of 463 

tenant  taking  concurrent  lease,  operate  a  surrender  of  pre- 
vious term  -_ '. 483 

tenant  still  bound  in  equity  to  perform  covenants  in  first 

lease  when 484 

illustrations. 483 

tenant  must,  before  he  can  dispute  landlord's  title ...  488-500 

when  re-letting  by  landlord  does  not  operate  as  acceptance 

of 1083  w.  3 

what  is,  and  by  whom  may  be  made. 1151 

to  whom  should  be  made 1151 

how  maybe  luade 1153 

must  be  by  deed  or  vrriting  when. 1153  and  notes 

statutory  provision  in  different  states ^  1158  n.  6 

merely  cancelliug  lease  does  not  operate  as 1154 

on  conditions,  effect 1155 

when  surrender  may  be  made 1155 

what  writing  is  sufficient 1156 

instances 1156 

written  notice  by  tenant  to  landlord  to  re-let,  may  be  when 

1157-1158 

byacceptance  of  new  lease , 1158 

when  operates  as 1158 

instances ^.  1158 

reducing  rent  does  not  operate  as,  imless ,  1158 


Index.  1593 

SURRENDER  ■.—Continued. 

unsealed  agreement  to  relinquish  upon  failure  to  perform  cer- 
tain conditions  may  amount  to 1158 

parol  agreement  for  a  new  lease  for  longer  term  than  might 

be  valid  by  parol,  does  not  amount  to 1158 

rule  inCoe  V.  Hobby _.. 1159  m.  4 

reason  why  acceptance  of  new  lease  operate  as  surrender  of 

first 1160 

whatisa  sufllcient  new  lease... 1163. 

illustrations _ 1163 

collateral  grant  does  not  operate  as 1165 

.    provision  for  in  lease,  must  be  strictly  pursued ...  1 1165 

what  acts  of  tenant,  etc.,  do  not  amount  to 1165 

effect  of  new,  invalid  lease.... 1166 

acceptance  voidable  lease 1166 

new  lease  of  part  only,  effect  of 1167 

by  estoppel,  when  occurs 1168 

by  act  and  operation  of  law 1168 

by  consent  of  landlord  and  acceptance  of  possession 1 1 68 

acceptance  of  key,  etc.,  may  operate  as 1177 

instances  where  acts  of  landlord  have  been  held  operative  to 

effect 1168-1178 

acceptance  of  new  tenant ...1178 

by  lessee,  does  not  defeat  estate  of  under-tenant 1181 

effect  of  upon  under-leases 1183 

when  presiuned 1184;-1185 

TAXES: 

tenant  for  life  to  pay 139,968 

covenant  to  pay,  runs  with  the  land 674 

paid  by  tenant  when  not  required  to  do  so  by  covenant,  may 

be  deducted  from  rent 954 

or  may  by  recovered  by  action,  in  certain  cases 954 

rule  in  England 954 

different  rules  in  this  country 956 

covenant  to  pay  does  not  include  assessments 957 

maningof  word  "tax" 957 

what  is  embraced  under  covenant  to  pay 958 

distinction  between  covenant  to  pay  all  taxes  "  assessed  " 

and  all  "levied"  during  the  term 958 

effect  of  covenant  to  pay  all  taxes,  etc.,  assessed,  when  due 

and  payable. 960 

covenant  to  pay  all  taxes  and  assessments 960 

what  is  embraced  under — 963 

rule  in  Massachusetts 965 

destruction  of  premises  does  not  discharge  the  tenant  from 

the  covenant 966 

to  what  such  covenants  extend 966 

duty  as  to  assessments,  etc 967 


1594  Index. 

TENANCY ; 

may  be  implied,  when 5  m.  S 

may  be  implied,  when 12-15 

from  what,  may  be  inferred 13-15 

cannot  be  implied  when.. 14,15 

presumed  from  occupancy,  when... _  15-21 

when  not 15-31 

may  be  implied  when  entry  is  wrongful,  when 17,  18 

generally  arises  from  contract . 17 

admission  of... 17 

may  arise  from  operation  of  law 20 

illustrations 20 

implied  from  payment  of  rent,  when. 21-33 

when  not _ 21-83 

determination  of ,  by  efflux  of  time 1141 

lessor's  rights  when  ended 1143 

when  length  of  term  is  optional,  who  may  exercise  option. . .  1141 
when  determinable  at  certain  time,  if  parties  see  fit,  both 

must  assent  to _ 1142 

when  determinable  by  either  party,  their  assigns,  etc 1143 

when  notice  in  writing  IS  required _  1143 

whole  estate  must  be  determined _. 1143 

when  right  to  terminate  is  conditional 1143 

TENANCY  AT  WILL  : 

may  exist,  without  payment  of  rent 8 

illustrations. 8 

what  is - 4:3-45 

may  be  terminated  by  either  party 44 

arises,  when 44  ?i. 

exists  by  statute,  in  many  states 44  ?i. 

how  created 45-57 

lease  for  uncertain  term,  creates ._ 45 

reservation  of  rent,  not  necessary 45 

see  Jones  V.  Shay 45  w. 

see  Humphries  v.  Humphries n.  6 

see  Whoonv.  Drizzle 46  n.. 

general  features  of 46  n.  1.  48 

may  arise  from  express  contract,  or  by  implication 48 

determined  by  conveyance  of  part  of  premises 53 

see  Emmes  V.  Feeley 56 

how  determined 67-73 

determined  at  will  of  eitherparty _ ...      67 

demand  necessary,  when 68 

by  implication 68,  69 

by  conveyance  by  landlord 69 

by  lease  to  other  party 69 

by  death  of  either  party 69 

by  tenant's  disclaimer , 69 


Index.  1595 

TENANCY  AT  WILL  :-Cmtmued. 

"  by  agreement  to  purchase 69 

"  by  committing  waste 69 

"  by  tenant  leasing  or  assigning  premises 70  re.  3 

"  by  acts  of  landlord  inconsistent  with  tenancy..  70-73 

as,  entering  and  cutting  trees ..^... 71 

carrying  away  soil  or  stone 71 

mere  entry  by  landlord  not  sufficient,  unless 71  re. 

what  notice  necessary  to  terminate 73 

TENANCY  BY  SUFFEEANCE : 

arises  from  wrongful  entry  pending  treaty  for  lease 13 

definition  of  term ._ 24 

what  is. 34-28 

TENANCY  FOE  LESS  THAN  A  YEAR  : 

what  constitutes 1  136, 127 

rules  as  to 126, 127  re.  1 

notice  required  to  terminate. 126, 137  re.  1,  133, 133 

see  Huflell  V.  Armistead 137  re.  1 

, ''Tenancy  for  life  : 

i  how  created ..^ 134 

qualities  of 134 

rights  of 184,  137 

liabUities  of • 139 

cannot  be  created  byparol 134 

must  be  perfected  by  livery  of  seizin 134 

equalto  seven  years'  purchase 134 

cannot  be  enlarged  except 134 

liable  to  levy 134 

instances  of  use  of  words,  creating 134, 135-137 

cannot  commence  infwturo 184 

rule  when  no  life  is  named  on  which  estate  depends 136 

See  Tenant  foe  Life. 

TENANT :  ^ 

definition  of  term. 1,30 

what  creates  relation 1,  17 

mere  possession  o^  lands  does  not  make  person  a.. 1 

trespasser  not  a ' ^- 1 

assent  of  owner,  does  not  make  person  a,  except 1 

acceptance  of  assent  necessary : 3 

person  who  enters  under  consent  of  owner,  is,  though  he  is 

to  pay  no  rent .-- 4re.  2 

person  may  become,  by  <)p,eration  of  law 16 

who  enters  under  permission  of  owner,  rent  free  cannot  be 

removed  by  force. 4  re.  3 

fact  that  owner  is  municipal  corporation,  or  department  of, 

does  not  changerule .. -,  4  m.  3 


1596  Index. 

TENANT  -.—Continued. 

taking  key  to  building,  with  intent  to  occupy  makes  person 

a,  though  no  occupancy  in  fact 8n.  1 

occupancy  makes  person  a,  when 1-17  and  notes. 

person  may  become  tenant  by  operation  of  law 16 

instances 16 

what  acts  of,  amount  to  admission  of  tenancy. 13 

person  who  enters  by  apparent  permission  of  owner  may 

claim  rights  as  tenant 16  n.l 

person  who  entered  tortiously  cannot  be  made,  unless  ho  sub- 
sequently consents  to  occupy  imder  owner  . .'. 16 

entry  under  agreement  for  lease,  effect  of i  16  m.  2 

assignee  in  bankruptcy 16 

assignee  of  lease _ 16 

by  provision  of  statute 16 

holding  over,  becomes  tenant  by  sufferance 80-24 

consent  of  agent  having  no  authority  to  let,  does  not  change 

therule 23 

by  sufferance,  when 20-24 

holding  over,  liability  of 23andnoto. 

at  will,  when  as 43-73 

servant  not 75-84 

for  a  term,  not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit 154 

lease  by 155 

valid,  when « 157 

how  far  binding  on  himself 1 157 

at  will,  lease  by  ..^ 158 

for  years,  lease  by. 178 

mortgagor  not,  until 245-261 

of  mortgagor,  before  mortgage,  rights  of 247 

after  mortgage 247  n. 

how  rent  may  be  intercepted  by  mortgagee 249 

by  estoppel,  what  constitutes 483-500 

who  cannot  be 486 

cannot  deny  landlord's  title 488-500 

exception ^.. 491  n. 

assignee  of,  and  under-tenant  subject  to  the  same  rule 490  n.  6 

not    bound  to  restore    buildings  destroyed    by    fire,  etc., 

unless  he  has  covenanted  to  do  so... 812 

instances  in  which  tenant  is  excused 813  n. 

no  implied  covenant  on  part  of,  to  repair -    887 

proof  of  custom 888 

to  what  tenancies  apphcable 888 

obhgationof,  as  to  cultivation  of  land 921 

as  to  expenditure  of  produce  on  land 923 

express  covenants  as  to  cultivation  of _ . .    923 

holding  over,  when  not  subject  to  terms  of  former  lease 1074 

rule  as  to,  as  to  amount  of  rent 1073 

holding  over  while  title  is  in  dispute... 1073 


Index.  1597 

TENANT  •.—Continued. 

when  not  liable  to  pay  for  incidental  benefits  under  lease  1080-1083 

implied  benefits 1083 

may  enter  to  harvest  crops  after  term  has  expired,  when 1083 

holding  over,  becomes,  from  year  to  year  when 1147 

rights  of ,  on  commencement  of  lease 1399 

succeeds  to  all  landlord's  rights,  except  such  as  have  been 

reserved _ 1399 

may  maintain  ejectment  against 1399 

or  action  for  damages 1299 

or  may  abandon  lease 1299 

bound  to  use  premises  in  husband-like  manner 1300 

may  sue  landlord  or  stranger  for  injury  to  his  estate... 1300 

entitled  to  compensation  when  part  of  estate  taken  for  pub- 
lic nurposes 1300 

hable  to  landlord  for  improper  use  of  premises,  producing 

damage 1301 

prima  facie  liable  to  stranger  for  injuries  resulting  to,  from 

defects  in  premises 1301 

when  premises  are  occupied  by  other  tenant 1301 

cannot  deny  landlord's  title ,..  1303 

cannot  encumber  estate  with  easement 1303 

right  as  to  manure 1303 

can  only  attorn  to  landlord 1303 

effect  of  attornment'... 1304 

when  payment  of  rent  to  person  does  not  amount  to  attorn- 
ment  w.. 1304 

'    duty  of ,  when  term  is  ended 1356 

penalty  for  failure .., 1356 

encroachments  by,  enure  to  landlord 1357 

rights  of  outgoing 1363 

rights  of  mcoming 1363 

right  to  crops,  under  lease 1364-1368 

emblements,  right  to 1369 

for  years,  not  entitled  to  emblements 1371 

cannot  dispute  landlord's  title 1384  n, 

rights   of. 1399-1305 

liabilities  of 1376-1399 

whois - - 5 

definition  of  term 5 

sheriff,  ousting  tenant,  and  occupying  premises,  not  liable      10 

holding  under  void  lease,  bound  by  terms 13 

estopped  from  denying  landlord's  title 13 

holding  over  presumed  to  hold  subject  to  terms  of  former 

lease '^3''■• 

presumption  maybe  overcome 13  m. 

holding  over,  relation  of,  to  owner. .  _ 48,  49  also  n.  3 

of  upper  floor,  entitled  to  exclusive  use  of  stau-s  when 403 

entitled  to  use  of  outer  wall  for  signs,  etc 403 


1598  IlSTDEX. 

TENAJSTT  ■.—Continued. 

,  of  lands  bounded  on  public  sireet 403-415 

remedy  against  landlord  when  premises  in  possession  of  an- 
other.  450 

not  liable  on  lease  for  rent,  is,  for  use  and  occupation 451, 453 

cannot  deny  landlord's  title 490-500  and  moies 

assignee  of,  bound  by  rule 490  n.  6 

stranger  bound  by,  when 491  n. 

mortgagor  boimdby 491m. 

rule  applies  whether  tenancy  by  deed  or  parol 491  n. 

exceptions  to  rule 491  n.,  498,  499 

See  Landlord  and  Tenant— Tenant  at  Will— Tenant  by  Sufferance 
—Tenants  in  Common — Tenants  for  Life — Tenant  for  Years — 
— Tenant  for  Less  than  a  Year — Tenant  by  Dowek— Tenant  by 
Curtesy— Tenant  from  Year  to  Year. 

TENANT  PER  AUTRE  VIE  : 

lease  by,  effectof 163 

how  determined 163 

TENANT  IN  COMMON  :     * 

one,  cannot  be,  in  notice  to  quit 130 

difEerence  between  estate  of,  and  joint  tenants 169 

identity  of  estate  not  necessary. 169 

one,  may  lease  his  share 170 

one,  cannot  lease  the  whole  estate 170 

cannot  lease  distinct  part  of  estate,  unless.. 170,  171 

interest  in  mines,  quarries 171 

one,  cannot  create  easement 171 

rule,  when  one  has  leased  whole  estate .    171 

rent  must  be  paid  to  tenant  leasing 173 

rule  as  to  rent,  when  all  join  in  lease 173 

when  they  may  join  inaction  for  rent 173 

"vrhen  they  must  sever 174 

rule,  when  one,  dies 174 

rule,  when  rent  is  paid  to  agent 174, 175 

rule  as  to  actions  to  try  title  to  estate 175 

how  one  must  declare  for  his  share  of  rent 174 

when  must  join  in  action  and  demise 175-177 

when  must  join,  or  bring  separate  actions,  generally 175-177 

TENANT  BY  CURTESY  : 

lessee  of,  becomes  tenant  by  sufiEerance,  when 31 

lease  by,  rights  under : 159 

TENANT  BY  DOWER : 

lessee  of,  tenant  by  sufferance,  when 31 

lease  by,  rights  under. ,    159 

TENANT  FOB  LIFE  : 

lessee  of,  is  tenant  by  sufferance,  when.. 35 

has  demisable  estate 173 


Index.  1599 

TENANT  FOR  LIFE :— Continued. 

may  lease 137 

may  work  out  open  mines 138 

"             "           quarries ■. 138 

clay  pits 138 

cannot  open  new  mines 138 

rights  as  to  wood  and  timber. 138 

may  sue  for  injury  to  estate 138 

has  insurable  interest  in  buildings __ 138 

must  apply  insurance  money  to  repairs  or  reconstruction  of 

buildings. 139 

improvements  made  by 139 

increase  of  stock 139 

right  of  his  tenants  to  crops  sown  before  life  tenant's  death  139 

may  cut  wood  for  his  own  fires... 138 

may  cut  timber  to  repair  buildings 138 

cannot  cut  woodtoseU.. 138 

cannot  cut  timber  to  sell 138 

cannot  sell  timber  on  estate  to  get  money  to  pay  for  repairs  138 

how  estate  of,  iscreated 134 

qualities  of 134 

rights  of 134,137,139 

Uabilities  of 139 

estate,  cannot  be  created  by  parol 134 

must  be  perfected  by  livery  of  seizin 134 

cannot  commence  infuturo 134 

equal  to  seven  years,  purchase ^ 134 

estate  cannot  be  enlarged 134 

liable  to  levy 134 

instances  of  words  creating  tenancy 134-1 37 

was  free  hold  estate 139  m.  6 

must  pay  taxes..! _ 139 

piurchase  of  premises  at  tax  sa,le,  by  him,  does  not  effect 

estate  of  reversioner 139 

rule  when  tenant  buys  in  estate  on  execution 139 

incumbrances  renewed  by  him,  issues  for  joint  benefit  of  ten- 
ant and  reversioner 140 

bound  to  pay  interest  on  mortgages 140 

not  bound  to  pay  mortgage 140 

rule  when  he  pays  mortgage  debt 140 

boimd  to  repair 140 

must  not  commit  waste. 140 

rights  of,  as  to  use  of  estate 140 

TENANT  BY  SUFFERANCE : 

person  holding  over,  after  estate  is  ended,  is 24 

mortgagor,  is,  when 35 

vendee  is,  when :. - 25 

lessee  of  tenant  for  life,  is  when ^ 25 


1600  Index. 

TENANT  BY  SUFFERANCE  -.—Continued. 

lessee  of  tenantin  dower 25 

lessee  of  tenant  by  curtesy 25 

an  under-tenant,  is,  when 26 

has  no  demisable  estate. 28 

cannot  maintain  trespass  against  landlord .._  28 

not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit 38 

origin  of  this  species  of  tenancy 28 

effect  of  owner's  assent  to  occupancy. 28 

receipt  of  rent  from,  by  owner,  effect 44 

may  be  dispossessed  by  force,  without  notice 29-31 

not  liable  as  trespasser  until  landlord  has  actually  entered 30 

tenancy  may  be  determined  by  entry  of  landlord 30 

not  liable  for  rent 31 

mayremove  fixtures,  when. 31 

liable  for  damages,  when 31 

person  holding  over,  is,  when 31,49 

not  liable  for  use  and  occupation 44 

See  "Tenancy  by' Sufferance." 

parol  lease,  entry  under,  person  becomes,  when. 22 

■vendor  of  premises,  becomes,  when 33 

lease  by,  rights  conferred  by 23 

person  cannot  be,  against  the  government. 30  n.  3 

distinction  between,  and  tenancy  at  will 33 

joint  occupancy  by  owner  and  tenant 23 

cestui  que  trust,  person  going  in  under,  when 33 

who  is 50-24 

tenant  holding  over 31 

mortgagor,  after  expiratien  of  decree 21 

tenant  holding  after  forfeiture,  may  be 21 

lessee  of  tenant  for  life  after  death  of  tenant 21 

dower,  lessee  of  tenant  by,  when 21 

curtesy,  lessee  of  tenant  by,  when... 31 

under-tenant,  when.  _ .* 21 

tenant  at  wUl,  when 31 

not  liable  as  trespasser 30  m.  8 

origin  of 24 

nature  of 24 

no  assent  of  occupancy  presumed 24 

assent  of  owner  changes  into  tenancy  at  wUl 24 

illustrations 24  and  notes 

how  may  be  determined 26 

has  no  demisable  estate.... 24 

cannot  maintain  trespass  against  landlord 25 

notentitled  to  notice  to  quit 25 

statutory  provision  for  notice  exists  in  same  states 25 

landlord  may  dispossess  by  force 25 

but  cannot  maintain  trespass  against  until  after  entry 35 


Index,  1601 

TENANT  BY  SUFFERANCE  ■.—Continued. 

how  tenancy  may  be  terminated 36 

ejectment  lies  against,  without  previous  notice  to  quit  or 

demand 

removed  by  force  may  maintain  trespass  for  assault,  or  in- 
jury to  goods,  but  not  to  lands... 26-37 

must  enter  under  the  owner  or  is  trespasser 36 

rent  not  recoverable  from ,  except  under  statutes 27 

landlord  may  elect  to  treat  him  as  tenant  or  trespasser,  when      27 

right  to  remove  fixtures... 27 

servant  occupying  master's  premises  is  not 75 

who  is . 43-73 

how  relation  is  created 45-57 

illustrations 45-57  aadnotes 

right  of,  to  crops,  &c 64 

how  tenancy  may  be  ended 67 

no  notice  to  quit  necessary 73 

exiseption  in  some  states 74 

vendee  of  lands  under  contract  to  purchase,  tenant  at  will, 

when 57 

has  no  demisable  estate  except 64 

rights  in  estate 65 

lease  by,  rights  6onferred  under 157 

guilty  of  commissive  waste,  terminates  estate 991 

may  be  maintained,  by  waiver  of  tort,  when 7 

landlord     cannot  maintain    action    for,  w^hien  entry   was 

wrongful,  unless.. 7 

contract  to  payment ,  not  always  necessary 7-8 

but  see _ 11,  m.  3 

action  for,  not  upheld  by  mere  proof  of  occupancy 16 

tenant  at  will  liable  for,  when 17 

tenant  by  sufferance  not  liable  for '. 44 

will  not  lie,  when ^45 

see  Tew  v.  Jones , 45m.    4 

TENANT  AT  WILL : 

person  in  possession  under  contract  to  purchase  is 5  m.  2 

person  in  possession  pending  treaty  for  lease,  is,  when 11 

but  see  Rodgers  v.  Pullman 11  n.  3 

also  Knight  V.  Quigley 11-13 

who  is... - 43-46 

liable  for  rent,  when 44 

distress  may  issue  for  rent 44 

liable  for  use  and  occupation  when 44 

tenancy  may  be  determined  by  either  party 44 

when  fixed  rent  is  agreed  upon,  may  be  distress  for 44 

'     person  occupying  rent  free,  may  be 45,  also  n.  6 

person  occupying  by  consent  of  owner 46,  also  n.  1 

squatter  is,  when 46 


1602  Index. 

TENANT  AT  WILL  •—Contin'ued. 

occupying  under  void  lease _ 46 

payment  of  rent  does  not  change. 46  w.  1 

effect  of  payment  of  rent  by,  under  void  lease 46  n.  3 

vendee  under  contract  to  purchase,  is,  when 46  n. 

one  who  enters  under  agreement  for  lease,  is 47 

occupancy  under  lease  until  premises  are  sold 47 

colorable  sale  will  not  defeat  tenancy  of- 47  w.  3 

servant  of  owner 47 

untU  contingency  happens 47,48 

see  Ashley  V.  Warren , 48m.  2 

holding  over,  pending  renewal  of  lease 48 

not  liable  for  negligent  burning  of  buildings , 54'W.  1 

seeLathrop  v.  Thayer 54  n.  2 

liable  to  third  persons,  for  negligence 54,  55 

estate  of,  determined  by  conveyance  of  part  of  premises  by 

owner _.... 56 

seeEmmesv.  Feeley -- 56 

vendee  is,  when ^, 57-64 

See  Vendee. 

right  of,  to  crops , 64-67 

may  create  tenancy  by  estoppel. 65 

may  maintain  trespass  for  injury  to  his  possession 65 

cannot  sue  for  injury  to  reversion. 65 

may  terminate  tenancy  at  any  time 65 

loses  right  to  growing  crop  if  he  terminates  tenancy   before 

it  matures .^ 65 

right  to  crops,  when  landlord  terminates  estate 65-67 

cannot  take  away  manure  when 67 

rights  as  to  buildings  erected  by  him , 67 

TENANT  FOR  YEARS  : 

how  term  is  created 141 

origin  of  this  species  of  tenancy , 143 

leases  for,  gives  mere  chattel  interest , 143,  149 

what  is  term  of 143 

how  conferred 143 

entry  gives  the  term .., 143 

term  may  expire  before  the  time 144 

lease  gives  right  of  entry 145 

"     gives  no  possession 143 

"     mere  contract  for  jjossession 155 

relation  may  be  created  by  assignment  or  lease 144 

what  is  an  assignment _ 143 

what  is  a  lease 141 

qualines  of  estate  of 149 

interest  of,  mere  chattel .,„  149 

term  may  be  for  any  number  of  years, ,,  150 

how  estate  of,  is  created , ,---,  155 


InBEx/  1603 

TENANT  FOR  YEARS  '-Cmtinued. 

term  may  be  made  to  commence  at  any  time,  past,  present 

or  future 151 

how  maybe  ended 159 

expires  by  efflux  of  time 180 

notice  to  quit  not  required... ,  153 

rightto  lease 178 

tenant  of,  sub-tenant... 175 

essentials  of  sub-lease . .  .  178,  also  n.  2,  271 

TENANCY  FROM  YEAR  TO  YEAR  : 

See  Tenant  feom  Year  to  Year. 

TENANT  FROM  YEAR  TO  YEAR : 

distinction  between,  and  tenant  at  will. 84r-89 

how  relation  is  created 89 

tenant  for  a  term,  holding  over,  becomes,  when 27-43 

holds  under  terms  of  former  lease 88 

term  commences  with  each  year 27-43,88 

may  be  created  by  express  agreement 89 

or  by  implication. 27-43 

when  may  be  for  two  years 90-91,  96 

TENANT  FOR  LESS  THAN  A  YEAR  : 

may  create  sub-tenancy  unless 186 

lease  by,  for  term  exceeding  his  own,  effect  of 186 

TENANT'S  FIXTURES : 

what  are 1119 

TERM: 

unless  fixed  by  lease,  must  be  flxed  by  implication 104  m.  7 

illustration. 95 

what  constitutes _ 143 

may  expire  before  time  flxed  in  lease 144 

what  it  embraces 143 

lease  for,  confers  only  chattel  interest i 149 

determination  of . 153 

expires  by  efflux  of  time. 153 

tenant  for,  not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit ., 154 

lease  for,  longer  than  lessor  has,  valid  for  what  he  has......     186 

for  what,  trustees  may  lease. 314 

of  lease ,  may  commence  in  past  or  future 381 

commencement  of 603 

certainty  required  as  to..... 601  w.  2 

may  be  made  to  commence  at  future  day 601 

may  be  made  to  commence  from  day  past 601 

may,  upon  contingency --..  601,  603 

iUustrations 601,603 

commencing  at  date  of  lease,  rule:.... 603  n.  4 

intention  of  parties  controls  as  to 603 


1604  Index. 

TEEM  •—Continued.  ^ 

whether  lease  to  commence  "  from,  etc.,"  mclndes  day  or 

not,  rule 604 

how  will  be  construed :...  604, 605 

illustration , 604 

impossible  or  uncertain  date,  rule 605,  606,  608  n.  5 

illustrations 606 

commencement  of,  with  reference  to  entry 670 

duration  of,  for  years,  j 608 

how  ascertained - 608 

lease  for  one  year  certain  and  no  on  from  year  to  year 609 

certainty  with  reference  to  collateral  matters 610 

when  duration  of,  is  optional.. ._ _ 611 

when  there  is  a  recurring  number  of  yearsi 613 

where,  depends  on  contingency 613 

illustrations 613-616 

forlifeor  lives 616 

TIMBER  : 

tenant  for  life  may  cut,  when 138 

passes  by  grant  of  land 401 

TIME: 

lease  for  time,  expires  byeflflux  of 153-154 

instances 153-154 

TILLABLE  LAND : 

what  passes  imder  lease  of ..- 403 

TITLE  : 

tenant  cannot  dispute  landlord's 483-500 

except - 491  n.  492  »i.  3 

landlord  cannot  deny  his  own  title  or  right  to  lease 488 

effect  of  denial  of ,  by  tenant 488 

TITLE  PARAMOUNT  : 

eviction  by 1114 

what  is. 1114-ill9 

effect  of -.  1114-1119 

may  quit  whole,  though  eviction  extends  only  to  part  of  prem- 
ises   - - 1114 

if  he  remains  in  possession  of  part,  rent  may  be  apportioned.  1114 

TO  RENT : 

putting  up,  does  not  defeat  rent  for  unexpired  term 133 

TORT: 

use  and  occupation  may  be  maintained  by  waiver  of,  when..        7 

TRADE  FIXTURES  : 

what  are 1119 

rule  for  determining  whether  or  not  movable 1130 


Index.  1605 

trespasser  : 

cannot  be  charged  as  tenant : 1 

may  become  tenant  by  express  contract 3 

mere  waiver  of  trespass  by  owner,  does  not  make  the  tres- 
passer a  tenant 3-16 

person'entering  upon  condition,  with  assent  of  owners  is  not, 

until _ ^ _ 6ii.  1 

not  liable  for  rent 1 

relation  may  be  changed  by  contract 7 

upon  lands,  not  tenant 6,  7 

cannot  be  held  liable  for  use  of  lands,  unless 1 

cannot  be  converted  into  tenant  by  any  act  of  owner 20 

TREES : 

blown  down,  tenant  not  bound  to  replace. _ 809  n.  3 

TREES  AND  TIMBER : 

what  is  timber... 1009 

implied  rights  as  to  trees. 1010 

windfalls 1011 

express  contracts  as  to  trees 1011 

for  what  purpose  may  be  cut  without  making  tenant  charge- 

•  able  for  waste 1013 

what  acts  amount  to  waste 1014 

TRUSTEES :  ,     - 

under  general  assignment  for  benefit  of  creditors,  may  dis- 
claim lease  when 745 

as  lessor,  powers  of 313 

ot  cestui  que  trust ..--  313 

for  what  term,  may  lease 314 

not  liable  for  loss,  when 315 

cannot  be  compelled  specifically  to  perform  contract  of 

grantor,  when 315 

cannot  subject  property  to  his  debts 316 

leases  by,  may  be  good  in  part 316 

leases  by,  under  power  requiring  best  rent,  liability  and  duty 

of - - 317 

leases  by  trustees  of  charities --.^..  317 

equity  wiU  intervene   when _ 317-333 

how  rental  value  of  premises  leased  by,  should  be  ascer- 
tained  , - •-- 

TURBARY! 

common  of,  what  is 533 

UNDER-LEASE : 

contract  to  sell  a  lease,  not  satisfied  by 184 

reason - - 184 

lessee  imder,  presumed  to  know  provisions  of  the  original 

lease,  except -    184 

II.— 49. 


1606  Index. 

UNDER-LEASE :— Continued. 

liability  of  tenant  under,  to  his  lessor ...^ 185 

amounting  to  assignment,  treated  as  sub-lease,  when. 157 

who  may  make ._ 157  et  seq. 

tenant  may  make,  unless  restrained  by  covenants  in  lease  709  n.  1 

assignment  of  only  part  of  term,  operates  as  imder-lease 731 

what  is 737  }i.  7,729  m.  1 

distinction  between,  and  assignment. 737,  747 

lease  for  longer  term  than  tenant  possesses,  operates  as  an 

assignment 727 

saleof 748 

UNDEEr-TENANT : 

becomes  tenant  by  sufferance,  when 36 

notice  to  quit  given  by  or  to,  not  binding  on  lessee 130 

estate  determines  with  estate  of  lessee 158 

liability  to  his  lessor. _    185 

may  pay  rent  to  original  landlord,  when 185 

presumed  to  know  terms  of  the  lease 903 

lessee  cannot  enter  for  breach  of  covenant  by,  against  pro- 
hibited trade  unless  he  shows  that  under-tenant  knew  that 

such  use  was  prohibited 904 

not  liable  to  lessor  for  rent , 1031 

lessee  liable  for,  even  in  use  and  occupation 1031 

not  liable  to  landlord  under  covenants  in  lease "...  1087 

may  be  ousted  by  landlord  for  forfeiture  incurred  by 1087 

lessor  may  restrain  him  from  committing  breach  of  covenants 

in  lease , 1087 

bound  to  know  contents  of  original  lease 1087 

when  covenants  in  under-lease  are  same  ^s  in  original  lease, 

liabihty  of 1088 

rule  when  under-tenant  expends  mopey  in  performing  lessee's 

covenants  to  prevent  forfeiture 1088 

rule  when  one  of  several  under-tenants  under  separate  leases, 
expends  money  in  performing  lessee's  covenants  to  pre- 
vent forfeiture , ,, 1088 

UPPER  FLOOR : 

lease  of ,  what  passes  as  incident  to.. 403 

of  one  room  on 403 

USAGE : 

proof  of,  admissible  to  explain  meaning  of  words  in  lease, 

when ,. 626 

not  admissible  when 637 

treated  as  part  of  contract,  when _ 637 

illustrations 637-690 


Index.  1607 

use  and  occupation : 

does  not  lie  against  vendor  in  possession,  except 58-64 

rent  mider  lease  void  in  fact,  may  be  recovered  in 453 

•when  it  lies  for  rent 1338 

■  does  not  lie  when  lease  is  under  seal 1339 

relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  must  exist 1339 

occupancy  under  and  with  owner's  assent  must  be  shown. ..  1330 
may  be  maintained  where  defendant  entered  under  agree- 
ment for  lease 1331 

against  tenant  holding  over 1833 

actual  occupancy  must  be  shown 1333 

entry  under  contract  to  purchase,  not  enough 1330  n. 

does  not  lie  against  the  trespasser 1330  m. 

nor  when  rent  is  payable  in  specific  articles : 1330  w. 

lies  where  entry  is  under  void  lease'... 1330  71- 

when  promise  to  pay  will  beimpUed 1330 

when  not 1331 

defences  to  action  for 

premises  let  for  unlawful  purposes 1335 

what  is,  and  what  not  unlawful  use 1341-1347 

what  must  be  shown  to  defeat  recovery 1341-1347 

measure  of  recovery  in  actions  for 1347 

does  not  lie  after  ejectment  brought 1390 

mesne  profits  may  be  recovered  in,  when 1390 

USUAL  COVENANTS : 

See  Covenants. 

VENDEE : 

is  tenant  by  sufEerance,  when 36 

person  who  enters  as,  not  tenant. 57-64 

when  liable  for  rent 58,  59 

tenant  at  will 57-64  and  notes 

relation  must  be  determined  by  demand  before  ejectment-..      57 

when  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  exists .  57-94 

when  tenant  becomes,  effect - 63 

not  liable  for  rent,  unless... 58,  59 

liable  for  use  and  occupation,  when 58-63 

VENDOR : 

of  lands,  becomes  tenant  by  sufferance,  when 2-7 

VENDOR  AND  PURCHASER  : 

person  entering  under  contract  to  purchase,  not  liable  for 

rent - - ^ 

vendee  may  become  Uable  for  rent,  how 9 

VENDOR  AND  VENDEE  : 

occupancy  by  vendee  does  not  create  tenancy 19  w. 

liable  for  use  of  premises,  when 19  "• 

vendee  not  entitled  to  crops l^n, 

vendee  in  possession  not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit 47  n. 


1608  Index. 

VENDOR  AND  VENDEE  -.—Continued. 

not  entitled  to  crops,  when 47  »i. 

relations  of _ _ 57-64 

respective  ri|;hts  of ,...  57-64 

See  Vendee. 

VIS  MAJOR  : 

landlord  not  liable  for  damages  resulting  from 849  n. 

VOID  LEASE : 

occupancy  under,  evidence  of  tenancy 9  m.  4 

entry  under,  effect  of lOO  n.  1 

expires  by  efflux  of  time 103  n.  1 

terms  of,  imposed  on  tenant  entering  under,  except 103 

payment  of  rent  under,  effect  of 104 

leases  by  infants  are  not .'. 195 

lease  by  infants  not  void  but  voidable 195 

must  be  personal  act  of  infant 198 

lease  may  be,  m  part  and  good  m  part - 450 

lease,  tenant  entering  under,  becomes  tenant  from  year  to 

year,  vyhen.  _ 458 

unless  tenant  enters  under,  no  liability 456 

VOIDABLE : 

lease,  distinction  between,  and  void 160 

lease,  at  election  of  one  party,  how  avoided 453 

how  confirmed - 453,  479 

person  entering  under,  liable  as  tenant 9  ra.  4- 

see  Vinz  v.  Beatty.. 9m,  4,  11. 

regulates  terms  of  occupancy 13, 13  also  n,  5 

person  entering  under,  estopped  from  denying    landlord's 

title 13 

tenant  holding  under,  how  far  bound  by  terms  of. 49  n.  2 

see  Pistor  V.  Gator 49  n.  3. 

diversity  of  doctrine  as  to. - 50  w. 

payment  of  rent  under,  effect  of 100, 105 

WAIVER : 

of  trespass  does  not  make  a  person  a  tenant * 

owner  cannot  elect  to  treat  person  as  trespasser  or  tenant...       3 

of  notice  to  quit 132, 133 

of  effect  of ,  by  landlord 133 

of  forfeiture,  what  amounts  to 455 

of  demand  for  rent,  how  may  be  made 1089 

will  not  be  implied 1039 

WALL  BRACKETS  : 

taking  down,  is  breach  of  tenant's  covenant  to  keep  in  repair, 
when _ -- --- 801 


Index.  1609 

WASTE  : 

by  tenant  at  will,  destroys  estate 69 

agreement  to  purchase  by  tenant  at  will  terminates  tenancy .  69 

assignment  of  estate  by  tenant  at  will,  effect  of - -  70 

tenure  for  life,  liable  for , 140 

remedies  for _._ 991 

wholiable  for _.. 991 

commissive,  what  is L:.'.. 973,  1014 

permissive,  what  is S80 

tenants  from  year  to  year  or  at  will  not  liable  for. 991  n.  3 

accidental  iires _ .._ 984 

fires  extending  from  railways  adjoining  pi;Dperty 987 

fires  occasioned  by  negligence  of  servants 988 

injuries  from  gunpowder  and  other  exp'osives 988 

without  impeachment  for,  meaning  of  term 989  . 

when  trees,  etc.,  may  be  cut  without  waste 1014 

WAYS  : 

what  pass  as  appurtenances <  437  n.l 

what  are _- 513 

by  grant 513 

by  prescription... 514 

necessity 514 

duty  of  those  using 515 

who  must  repair _ 516 

public  may  acquire. , 517 

who  liable  for  obstruction  of _ 517 

WAY-GOING  CROPS  : 

vendee  not  entitled  to,  when 47  m. 

WATER  CLOSET : 

rightof  hirer  of  apartments  to  use. 139 

WATER  COURSES  : 

what  are.. .-.- - 536 

nature  or  landowner's  right  in 537 

rights  between  miU  owners - 543 

reasonableness  of  use - 544 

limitation  upon  right  to  dam 544 

precautions  to  be  adopted - 546 

prescriptions  to  be  adopted 546 

prescriptive  rights  to,  how  acquired ^ , 546 

extent  of  right  of  acquired- 547 

i-ule  in  Gilford  V.  Lake  Co ---- -  547 

"           Lawlorv.  Potter --.- 548 

Carlisle  V.  Potter 1 550 

"           Mentz  V.  Domey. ■  551 

"  change  of  machinery - 551 

ancient  mills 553 

.  effect  of  prior  use ' 553 


1610  Index. 

WATER  COURSES  ■—Continued. 

what  is  a  mill  seat __  554 

artificial  water  courses 555 

license  to  make  or  use  a  drain _ 557 

implied  grant  or  reservation  of  right  to  drain 556 

extinguishment  or  suspension  of  drains 558 

underground  water _..,  553 

surface  water 559 

WATERS : 

pass  by  grant  of  land _ 401 

WEEKLY  TENANCY : 

what  is 91,  ]86 

right  of  notice  to  quit 110,  113,  ■•i.  3 

reservation  of  rent  by,  no  term  being  fixed,  constitute 186 

WRIT  OF  POSSESSION : 

en^ry  by  landord  under,  does  not  amoimt  to  eviction.. 1138 

WOOD: 

tenant  for  life,  may  cut,  when 188 

passes  bygrantof  land 401 

WORKMANLIKE  MANNER ; 

Covenant  to  cultivate  farm  in,  meaning  of 501 

YARD: 

quitting  down  wall  of,  is  breach  of  covenant  to  keep  in  repair, 
when 801 

YEAR: 

what  is,  in  lease 143 

YEAR  TO  YEAR : 

tenant  holding  over,  becomes,  when 31-43,  48-57 

must  be  reservation  of  annual  rent 50-57 

see  Richardson  V.  Landridge 51 

"    Rich  V.Bolton _ 51 

statutory  provisions  as  to  in  some  states 53 

leases  indefinite  as  to  term,  rule 53-57 

distinction  between  tenancy  from,  and  at  will 84^89 

how  created 89 

landlord  may  elect 85  n. 

tenants  intention  of  no  account... 85  n. 

general  lettings,  ripen  into  tenancy  for,  when 85  n. 

tenancy  from,  confers  but  one  estate 86-88 

term  commences  with  each  year 86 

substantially  tenant  at  wiU,  except.. 86 

may  continue,  until  regular  notice  to  quit 86,  87 

terminated  how... 86,87 

death  of  landlord  does  not  terminate,  except 87  also  n,  3 


Index.  1611 

YEAR  TO  YEAR :— Continued. 

each  year  is  mere  prolongation  of  term 87  also  n.  5 

is  spi-inging  interest,  each  year 87  w.  5 

rule  when  tenant  held  over  under  lease  for  one  year 88 

rule  as  to  pleading 88 

tenant  for,  has  demisable  estate. 89 

may  mortgage 89 

may  assign 89 

subject  to  levy _ 89 

change  of  terms  of  old  lease,  by  notice 89, 108 

tenancy  for,  created  how 89-100 

may  as  created  by  parol. 89 

sis  months  notice  necessary  to  terminate 89 

right  to  terminate  by  notice,  inseparable  incident  of  ten- 
ancy from 90 

either  party  may  terminate  by  notice 90 

estate  continues,  until  regular  notice  is  given 90 

Biurety  for  lessee,  may  terminate  tenancy,  by  notice 90 

teliancy  not  terminated  by  tenant  abandoning  possession, 

tmless 91 

if  annual  rent  is  reserved,  rule,  although  notice  is  fixed  for 

short  time 91 

half  yearly  tenancy,  when. j ._      91 

quarterly  tenancy,  when 91 

corporation  may  become  tenant,  from 96  n,  4 

tenancy  from,  does  not  arise  from  permission  to  occupy  in- 
definitely      97 

rule,  when  monthly  or  weekly  rent  is  reserved 97 

lease  for,  does  not  create  tenancy  from,  when 97,  98 

rent  need  not  be  payable  in  money 98 

annual  rent  and  indefinite  term,  creates  tenancy  from 98 

entry  under  void  lease,  created  tenancy  for,  when... 100 

"  agreement  for  lease,  effect  of 100 

stipulation  for  two  years'  notice  inconsistent  with  tenancy 

for. 101 

when  tenancy  is  determinable ^. 109 

notice  to  quit,  when  there  is  no  express  agreement 109 

covenants  implied  in  tenancy  from 103 

•what  amounts  to  holding  over 106-109 

notice  to  terminate  must  expire  at  end  of  current  year Ill 

statutory  provisions  as  to.. Ill 

when  tenant  denies  tenancy,  no  notice  required. Ill 

tenant  from,  bound  by  terms  of  lease,  as  to  notice  to  quit..    113 
when  tenant  enters  on  different  parts  of  premises  at  different 
times,  rules  as  to  notice  to  qioit , 114 

YEAES: 

tenant  fornot  entitled  to  emblements 1371 

See  Tenants  foe  Yeabs. 


