Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


/■  / 


\ 


■'*" 


TEEATISE 


iNDLORD  AND  TENANT 


WITH  COPIOUS  HOTBB  AND  EErEEENCES. 


*".'; 


II  ii 


Entered  acoordlxig  to  Act  of  Congress  in  the  year  eighteen  hundred  and  clglity-oiia 

By' BANES  &  BROTHERS, 
In  the  office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington.   ^ 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress  In  the  year  eighteen  htmdraA  and  eighty-etgfat 

Bt  banes  &  BROTHERS, 

In  the  office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington. 

. .— . —  ■ .  I    ■■■      ■    ■    ...  1. 1  ■      I.        ■  ■         I  «it«i     ..  ■  ■ 


i 


•'   *jir\    «T>- 


tfo  sointfA 


•REFACE 

TO  NEW  EDITION. 


The  lapse  of  nearly  ten  years  since  the  original  work 
vae  published,  has  made  a  new  edition  necessary. 
The  growth  of  the  law  upon  this  topic  has  been  such 


ioqu  loHfii 


tXaoY  v/rtT/I 


-.^T 


J   -« 


VL 


By  Infaktb. 


Table  of  Contents, 


CHAPTER  xm. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


BT   GUABDIAIIB. 


CHAPTER  ZV, 
By  Feme-Solb— Femb-Covebt 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
By  Lunatics— Idiots— Intoxicated  Pebsons,  Era 


CHAPTER  XVH, 
By  Executors  or  Administrators 


CHAPTER  XVm. 

By  MORTQ^iaOB  and  HOETGAaEE 


215 


228 


287 


MS 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


By  Agents. 


CEAFTBBZX 
Of  Leassss  3BXWSSN  PA&TIVVU6A  Xndxvipuai<s. 


CBLAPTBBXZJ. 


LflASES  UNXUSft  PPWXBS. 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


ByTrusxebs, 


CHAPTEB  TTXTTT. 
By  Dissbizob  and  Disseizee .^fi;iJi.<j3.j^::>:^ 

CHAPTER  xxrr.  P 

Aotkembnt  k>b  Lbahb .jabl-»oaLTy/:AT§t$ 

CHAPTER  XXV. 
Leases ..;:??Ml.iLT5 --'iB* 

CHAPTER  XXVL 
IBasements ^:::i?^:\{::.-}:Uj-  *-*'iit 

CHAPIBR  XX^. 
BxcEPnows— Hesbrtations  and  CoNiijfSiiify. . !?,"'i,^: , : ^: Jl'l!::-' • ''^  tfW 


I 


Tbob  Estatb. 


CHAPlSIK 'l^t^^^. 


OONSTRUCfRON  OF  LbASBS.. 


'•r  .  .r-y  :■ 


€dO 


rfl. 


viii.  Table.  OP  Contents. 

CHAPTER  XUV.  'i 

Detebmination  op  Tenancy 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

SUBRENDEB i Ill 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 
Merger 1187 

CHAPTER  XLVn. 
Forfeiture 1193 

CHAPTER  XLVHL 
Fixtures 1218 

CHAPTER  XUX. 
Rights,  Remedies  and  Liabilities  of  the  Parties 1270 

CHAPTER  L. 
Use  and  Occupation 1328 

CHAPTER  LL 
Debt  for  Rent ^ 

CHAPTER  LH. 
Out-going  Tenants 

CHAPTER  LHI.  ^^■ 

Emblements -^cf^'V''^ 

CHAPTER  LIV.                         i"^       ^^^ 
Forcible  Entry  and  Detainer 1V--      Ji^KT 

CHAPTER  LV.  ^      u. 

Ejectment ^:::::::yvki 

CHAPTER  LVI. 
Mesne  Profits J}'™/.ll?*  '^'it»'' 

fi-a:;  '  '  .   C    /    r^-:  :*  i. 

**» 


i.An    ur   LANDLOED  AND  TENANT. 


CHAPTER  I. 


ons, 
isia 

tSQl£ 

ader 
land, 

held 
itnct 


iper- 
nt  so 


Landlord  and  Tenant. 


U 


a  claim  of  title  in  himself,  or  under  the  title  of  anothel 
or  even  in  recognition  of  the  owner's  title,  but  withouj 
his  assent,  he  is  a  mere  trespasser,  and  cannot  be  com^ 
pelled  to  yield  rent  for  his  occupancy,  nor  is  he  estopp^ 
from  attacking  the  owner's  title.  In  such  a  case,  all  the 
elements  requisite  to  create  the  relation  of  landlord  on 
the  one  hand,  or  of  tenant  on  the  other,  are  lacking,  to 
wit,  assent  upon  the  one  hand,  and  subordination  to  title 
upon  the  other.  If  the  owner  gives  his  assent  to  the 
cx^cupancy  of  one  who  has  entered  upon  his  lands  ad- 
versely, a  tenancy  is  not  thereby  created.  In  order  to 
have  that  effect,  the  person  in  possession  must  accept 
such  permission,  and  consent  to  hold  under  him,  and  in 
subordination  to  his  title,^     Where  a  person  goes  into 


mado  while  such  contract  is  in  force 
are  made  under  the  agreement  of 
purchase,  and  not  as  tenant.  In 
such  case  the  principles  of  law 
applicable  to  landlord  and  tenant 
in  relation  to  improvements  made 
do  not  apply;  but  in  the  absence 
of  any  other  agreement  they  be- 
come part  of  the  freehold,  as  in 
the  case  of  mortgagor  and  mort- 
gagee. Lapham  v.  Norton,  71  Me. 
83.  In  Meadville  v.  Boush,  93 
Penn.  St.  837,  an  ordinance  of  the 
city  of  M.  dedicated  and  set  a^mrt 
certain  grounds  and  spaces  as  a 
city  market,  and  dh-ected  that  the 
revenues  to  be  derived  therefrom 
should  lie  disposed  of  annually  to 
the- highest  bidder,  who  should  be 
invested  with  the  office  of  superin- 
tendent, and  entitled  to  all  fees 
derived  from  the  rent  of  stalls  and 
stands,  as  well  as  to  the  fees  col- 
lected from  the  vendors  of  produce, 
and  for  the  use  of  the  public  scales. 
Plaintiff's  bid  was  accepted,  and 
he  became  superintendent  in  1875. 
At  that  time  there  was  a  cellar  un- 
der the  market-house.  There  was 
no  evidence  that  it  had  ever  l)een 
used  for  the  storage  of  meat  or 
vegetables.  In  the  fall  of  1874  it 
was  fitted  up  and  useu  as  a  place 
to  confine  **  tramps."  There  was 
a  privy- vault  in  this  room,  which 
became  offensive  the  succeeding 
summer,  and  the  use  of  the  cellar 
as  a  '* tramp-room"  was  discontin- 
ued. The  plaintiff  alleged  that  it  , 
affected  the  entire  cellar  so  as  jft 


make  it  unfit  for  use  by  the  market 
people  for  the  storage  of  meats  and 
vegetables,  whereby  ho  was  pre- 
vented from  renting  some  of  the 
stalls,  and  was  deprived  of  the  use 
of  the  cellar  for  1875,  and  Yhq 
brought  an  action  to  recover  dam- 
ages therefor.  It  was  held  tliat 
there  was  no  contract  of  Mtllijfy 
and  that  ho  could  not  recover.    ' 

*  Jackson  v.  Tyler,  3  John.  (TT. 
Y.)  444.    Where  the  owner  d< 
not  consent  to  the  occupancy  tl 
is  no  tenancy,  Ackerman 
man,  80  Wis.  454,  see 
a  person  who  entered 
sent  of  the  owner  upon 
that  has  not  been  compj 
is  not  a  trespasser  until 
possession  has  been  dei 
son  V.  Baker,  4  Dev, 
In  Wittman  v.  MU\m 
R.  Co.  51  Wis.  89,  a:1 
I)any   built   a 
plaintiff's  land,  pi 
portion  of  the 
thus  occupied,  ai 
tinned  the 
sent,  xmtil  i 
saidf 
ant's 


sale 
cu 


^itottiliiiufng'th 

^  aay  oolioe'^iiii 
im  to  hold  advers«l3F 
rfttr  held 

Er^utnption    w60 
eld  as  plakitiff^s 

fotmer  tenancy  not  being 
definite  period,, thi&  tMX 


;*. 


vt 


tedly 

ler  to 
st  be 
erred 
lence 
e  the 
mcy, 

louid 


vow- 
ion." 
(1  oc- 
1  en- 
nises 

who 
ner*s 
uless 
!,  the 
aasa 
treat 
rela- 

pre- 

lor  to 
Ll  Hd. 
tnuu- 
ccntm- 

!i  time 
all  the 


itwith- 
■tog  it 


4  Lakdlord  and  Tenant. 

ci-eate  the  relation,'  although  this  is  the  usual  incident  of' 
tenancy."  It  is  competent  for  a  person  to  permit  another 
to  occupy  his  premises  gratis  if  he  chooses  to  do  so,  and 
if  the  person  enters  into  possession  under  such  permis- 
eion,  the  fact  that  no  rent  was  to  be  paid,  or  that  no  term 
was  agreed  upon,  does  not  divest  them  of  the  relation  of 
landlord  and  tenant.  Thus,  if  a  man,  with  his  family, 
moves  into  the  house  of  another,  hy  his  invitation,  and 
i-emains  there  and  takes  care  of  him  until  his  death,  he  is 
a  tenant  at  will,  even  though  no  rent  whatever  is  or 
was  to  he  paid."  In  order  to  create  the  relation  of  land- 
lord and  tenant,  no  particular  words  are  necessary  ;  but 
the  intention  of  one  party  to  dispossess  himself  of  the 
premises,  and  of  the  other  to  enter  and  occupy 
them,  as  the  former  himself  had  a  right  to  do, 
must  in  some  way  appear,'  and  in  all  cases  where 
the  facts  are  disputed,  the  question  as  to  whether 
a  tenancy    exists    is  for    the   jury.'       In  a  Vermont 


^ 
'"  \ 


'  McKIsaack  v.  Bullingtoa,  37 
MiES.  63.5. 

*  Herrell  v.  Sizplainl,  81  111. 
4m;  MfKiBSack  v.  BuUington.  37 
Mies.  5ii5.  A  person  who  Mx^a 
in  a  house  rent  free  by  the  suf- 
ferance of  the  owner,  is  a  ten- 
ant at  will.  Rex  v.  Collett.  R.  Sc 
R  C.  C.  498;  Rex  v.  JobHng,  3 
Ru88,  C.  &  M.  28.  Thus  in  Rex  v. 
Flllongley.  1  T.  R.  4.W,  it  was  lield 
that  Die  wonis  "I  give  you  a  close 
to  enjoy  as  long  as  I  please,  and 
to  take  again  when  I  jjlease,  and 
you  shall  pay  nothing  for  it,"  con- 
stituted a  tenancy  at  will.  See 
also.  Nichols  v.  McKaey,  10  B.  &  C. 
731;  Jones  v.  Jonea,  10  id,  718, 
and  any  compensation  paid  oreer- 
vice  rendered  for  the  une  of  prem- 
ises, however  slicht,  is  treated  as 
rent,  and  establisJie.H  a  tenancy. 

Thus  a  person  who  occupies  a 
house  on  condition  that  lie  shall 
sweep  a  church,  Ednej  v.  Benhani, 
9  Jur.  062,  or  ring  the  church  bell, 
is  a  tenant  paving  rent.  Edney  t. 
Billett.  fi  Jur.  602. 

» Herrell  v.  Sizeland,  81  111.  4o7. 
In  Health  Deimrtnient  v.  Police 
Department.  41  N.  Y.  Superior  Ct. 
328,  it  was  held,  that  ono  whojicr- 
viitt  another  to   enter  u^Kin  his 


K remises,  and  occupy  them  rent 
■ee,  such   possession    lieiiig   only  . 

for  a  temporary   purpoxe,   cannot  f 

regain  [wssession  by  force,  and  in  / 

tlus  case,  it  was  held  that  the  po-  ^  . 
Uce  department  of  a  city  liave  no  ^atj 
greater  rights  than  an  indi^'idual.  >',^v 
•  Moshier  v.  Keding,  12  Me.  mm'"  ' 
WaUer  v.  Morgan,  IB  B.  Mon.  iWiy"  ' 
136.  See  Kuokle  \.  Phila.  RiHo  '■- 
Co.  10  Phila.  (P*-""!.)  52;  Cliatard 
V.  O'Donavan,  8U  led.  20 ;  41  A 
Reix  783. 


father  of 
nds  of  the 
ancy  with 
or  the  use 
same  rule 


haser,  but 
persop  in 
relinquish 
luant,  and 
sioa  after 
tween  an 
s  a  whole, 
a  definite 
.3  created, 
)f  the  em- 
upon  the 
ment.' 
a  debtor's 
that  pur- 1 


he  debt  is 
I'eated  be- 
lt without 
in  on  the 
trol  of  the 


T.  Rogere,  46 
vho  goes  into 
sea  under  a 
)e  upon  Sun- 

ot  out  of  tbe 

^reement  be- 
resiiect  to  the 
eattj.eiWis. 

f8  Ala.  142. 


r 


6 


Landlord  and  Tenant. 


[§ 


purposes  for  which  such  lands  are  occupied,  promise  to 
pay  for  such  occupancy,  the  relation  of  landlord  and  ten- 
ant is  thereby  created  between  the  government  and  the 
owner.  Thus  in  a  case  before  the  Court  of  Claims* 
the  United  States  occupied  land  for  a  fort,  never  as- 
serting title  thereto,  and  the  owner  not  objecting  to  the 
occupancy.  The  oflScers  in  possession  promised  to  pay 
the  rent  demanded  and  the  Secretary  of  War  sent  the 
vouchers  to  the  treasury  for  payment.  It  was  held  that 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  existed  prima  facie 
between  the  government  and  the  owner,  and  that  the 
former  was  liable  to  the  latter  for  the  use  of  the  land. 

A  Sheriff  or  other  officer,  who,  under  legal  process 
against  a  tenant,  enters  into  possession,  ousting  the  ten- 
ant, is  not,  in  the  absence  of  an  agreement  to  pay  for 
the  use  of  the  premises,  a  tenant,  and  the  landlord  can- 
not look  to  him  for  the  rent.    Thus,  in  a  Massachusetts 
case. '    An  officer  kept  a  keeper  in  charge  of  the  goods  of 
a  lessee  of  a  building,  for  two  months,  when  he  dis- 
charged  him,    leaving   the   key  in  the    building  and 
the  outer  door  unlocked.      As  the  officer  was  leaving, 
the    lessor,  in  the  presence  of  the    keeper  and  owner 
of  the  goods,   said   to  the    officer,    *'What    shall  I  do 
about   rent  ? "    to    which   the   officer   replied    **  don't 
know,"  whereupon  the  lessor  said,   "I  notify  you  now, 
and  the    other   party   too,    that  I  shall  claim    rent." 
The  lessor  then  locked  the  door  and  retained  the 
although  he   did  not  use  the  building  for  two  ji 
when  the  goods  were  removed  on  his  demand, 
action  for  use  and  occupation  against  the  officei^ 
held  that  the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  di^ 
ist  between  the  landlord  and  the  officer,  and 
covery  could  be  had  in  the  action  against  tb 
an  English  case*  it  was  held  that  the  occj 
house  pending  the  execution  of  a  lease, 
relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  and 

» Chins  V.  United  States,  19  a. 
of  Claims  79. 

*  Leonard  v.  Kingsman,  136 
Mass.  123. 


[AP.  I.] 


When  Rela.tion  Exists. 


such  a  case  can  maintain  qtiantum  valehat  for  the  rent 
although  no  distress  therefor  can  be  made.    In  another 
case'  the  tenant  had  been  in  possession  under  a  previous 
lease,  and  continued  in  possession  pending  a  treaty  for  a 
further  lease  for  seven  years,  but  which  came  to  nothing. 
But  before  the  treaty  for  the  new  lease  was  at  an  end, 
the  plaintiff  brought  ejectment.     The  Court  held  that 
the  defendant  was  a  tenant  at  will,  and  could  be  put  out 
at  any  time  without  notice,  the  agreement  being  void 
under  the  statute  of  frauds.    But  it  being  proved  that 
an  agreement  for  a  lease  had  been  entered  into,  and  that 
the  lease  had  been  actually  prepared  and    the  31st  of 
July  fixed  upon  as  the  time  when  it  should  be  executed, 
Lord  Kenyon  held  that  ejectment  brought  before  that 
date  would  not  lie,  as  the  defendant  was  in  by  the  lessor 
of  the  plaintiff's  permission,  and  consequently  was  not 
a  trespasser.'    An  occupation  for  eighteen  years,  under 
a  void  agreement  for  a  lease  for  twenty-one  years,  con- 
stitutes a  tenancy,  although  no  lease  had  ever  been  ten- 
dered by  the  lessor  or  demanded  by  the  lessee.    But 
where  one  gets  into  possession  wrongfully,  and  without 
the  privity  of  the  landlord,  a  tenancy  is  not  created,  al- 
though they  afterwards  enter  into  a  treaty  for  a  lease, 
but  differ  as  to  the  terms.*     Thus,  in  an  English  case 


^'tlollingsworth   v.    Stennett,    3 
Esp.  717. 
nTea  V.  Bucknell,  1  Camp.  478. 
^Knight    V.  Quigley,  2    Camp. 
In  Rogers  v.  JPullen,  2  Bing. 
749,  the  defendant  in  pos- 
iinder  a  lease  for  fourteen 
ed  the  lease  by  way 
^e    to    plaintiff     and 
initted  a  lorfeitnre,  for 
ment  waa  brought  by 
It  was  afterward  agreed 
nt  should  be  signed  in 
^  suit,  and  a  new  lease 
intiff ,  who  was  to 
ase  to  the  def  end- 
^j^    lease  was 
irered  the 
saying  : 
jjnoney 
\.  when 
ive 
jld 


that  this  did  not  constitute  the  de- 
fendant a  tenant  from  year  to 
year,  because  there  was  a  condi- 
tion precedent  which  he  did  not 
perform,  and  when  the  first  quar- 
ter's rent  became  due,  he  not  hav- 
ing paid  it  was  ejected.  Under 
such  circumstances  the  occupier  is 
a  mere  tenant  at  sufferance  at 
most,  until  he  performs,  and  fail- 
ing to  do  so  may  be  turned  out 
without  previous  demand.  Price  v. 
Price,  9  Bing.  356.  See  also  Jack- 
son V.  Ashbumer,  5  T.  R.  163 
Fisk  V.  Moores,  11  Rob.  (La.)  279 
Howard  v.  Carpenter,  22  Md.  10 
Kerrains  v.  People,  60  N.  Y.  221 
McEldery  v.  Flanagan,  1  H.  &  G. 
(Md.)  808. 

In  an  action  for  the  use  and  oc- 
cupation of  a  ferry  and  ferry-land- 
ing, the  plaintiff  proved  that  the 
defendant,  who  was  then  in  occu- 


"3i^ 


8 


Landlord  and  Tenant. 


[§' 


the  plaintiff  had  a  lease  of  a  house  and  wished  to  under- 
let it.  While  it  remained  empty,  the  defendant  got  into 
it,  intending  to  take  a  lease  of  it  from  the  plaintiff,  and 
some  negotiations  to  that  end  were  afterwards  had,  but 
the  parties  disagreed  about  some  of  the  details,  and  no 
agreement  was  ever  arrived  at.  Ejectment  was  brought 
to  recover  the  possession,  and  Lord  Ellenborough  held 
that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  tenancy,  and  that  if 
the  defendant  could  be  said  to  be  a  tenant  of  any  sort,  he 
was  a  mere  tenant  at  sufferance,  and  entitled  to  no 
notice  to  quit.  But  if  a  person  gets  into  a  house  or 
premises  without  the  privity  of  the  owner,  although  ne- 
gotiations are  afterwai'ds  opened  for  a  lease,  he  is  not  a 
tenant  if  the  negotiations  come  to  nothing. 

Sec.  2.  The  relation  may  be  implied.— In  the  absence  of 
an  expi'ess  contract,  the  relation  may  be  implied  from 
the  conduct  of  the  parties  in  reference  to  each  other, 
and  in  reference  to  the  premises,*  as,  that  the  person 
sought  to  be  charged  as  tenant,  or  who,  himself,  seeks  to 
establish  that  relation,  paid  rent  therefor  to  the  owner 
or  his  agent,'  or  entered  into  possession  as  agent  of  the 
owner,*  or  under  lease  that  has  expired,*  or  that  he  en- 


pation  of  the  premises  under  a 
former  aCTeement,  had  a  conver- 
sation with  the  plaintiflTs  agent,  in 
which  the  latter  wished  the  de- 
fendant to  agree  to  pay  a  specific 
rent,  to  which  the  defendant  made 
no  other  objection  than  to  the 
amount  of  rent  required,  and  of- 
fered a  smaller  sum,  which  was 
not  agreed  to,  and  that  the  defend- 
ant continued  to  use  and  occupy 
the  premises.  Held,  that  the  evi- 
dence was  insufficient  to  establish 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant, 
or  to  support  the  action.  Ballen- 
tine  V.  M^DoweU,  3  111.  28. 

*  Jackson  v.  Mo  wry,  30  Ga.  143 ; 
Cliambers  v.  Ross,  25  N.  J.  L.  293 ; 
Phelps  V.  a)nant,  30  Vt.  277 ;  Lit- 
tleton V.  Wynn,  31  Ga,  588 ;  Red- 
lield  V.  Utica,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.  25 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  54 ;  Pinero  v.  Judson, 
6  Bing.  206;  Gustin  v.  Burn  ham, 
34  Mich.  50 ;  Dunn  v.  Trustees,  39 
ni.  578 ;  Hammerton  v.  Stead,  3  B. 
&  C.  478 ;  Larned  v.  Hudson,  60 


N.  Y.  102;    Anderson  v.  Midland 
R.  R.,  30  L.  J.  Q.  B.  94.    Taking 
the  key  of  a  house  for  the  purpose 
of  occupancy  has  been  held  suffi- 
cient to  raise  an  implied  tenancy,  ( 
although  tJie  person  did  not  in  f actj 
occupy.    Little  v.  Martin,  3  Wej 
(N.  Y.)219. 

»  Porter  v.  Bieler,  17  Bar! 
Y.)149;  Smith's  Landlord 
ant,  24,  29;  Thompson  v. 
12  Ad.  &  El.  476 ;  Riggs 
T.  R.  471 ;  Braithwaite  v.  H( 
10  M.  &  W.  494 ;  Mannii 
joy,  Ry.  &  Moo.  355; 
V.  Gifford,  1  Ad.  &  ELj 
same  rule  applies  to  a'' 
Pennington  v.  L 
998 ;  HQl  v.  Sou 
Co.,  11  Jur.  ^^ 
ler  V.  WilMlDS. 
V.  Gelt 

'FaMPr  :r.. 
Mon^ 

*JKI^J!?9'P9l&.  ^  Bxng.'Mt; 
oTj^HttraHrfi^MHSettah  v.  Dcd- 


i 


lP.  l] 


Relation  May  Be  Implied. 


9 


tered  under  an  agreement  for  a  lease,*  or  under  an  invalid 
lease  or  agi-eement  for  a  lease/  or  f  r(5m  any  acts  of  the  par- 
ties, or  facts  or  circumstances  that  show  an  intention  to  cre- 
ate the  relation,  or  that  in  law  do  create  it.  In  the  case  of 
a  lease,  void  as  to  its  duration,  it  is  nevertheless  held 
that  it  must  regulate  the  terms  on  which  the  tenancy 
subsists  171  all  other  respects^  as  to  the  rent,  the  time  of 
the  year  when  the  tenant  is  to  quit,  the  nature  of  the 
occupancy,  &c.  It  was  also  so  held  in  a  case  where  a 
fann  was  leased  for  seven  years,  by  parol,  and  was  con- 
sequently void  under  the  statute  of  frauds,  but  under 
which  the  tenant  entered  into  possession.*  Even  where 
a  person  enters  into  possession  under  a  void  lease,  or 
tinder  an  agreement  for  a  lease  which  is  not  executed, 
he  is  a  tenant,  and  estopped  from  denying  the  title  of  tho 
person  under  whom  he  entered,  without  first  surrender- 
ing his  possession/  as  he  cannot  controvert  the  title  of 
him  who  let  him  into  possession.*  It  is  enough,  if  there 
is  permission  upon  the  part  of  the  owner,  and  an  entry 


ahar,  1  H.  Bl.  5;  Boraston  v. 
Green,  16  East,  71;  Schelling  v. 
Holmes,  23  Cal.  227 ;  Baker  v.  Root, 
4  McLean  (U.  8.),  573;  Ames  v. 
Sclmesler,  14  Ala.  60.  In  the  case 
of  a  tenant  continuing  in  possession 
after  his  term  expires,  m  the  ab- 
sence of  any  new  agreement,  the 
law  presumes  tliat  he  holds  under 
and  subject  to  the  terms  of  the 
previous  lease.  Quineth  v.  Car- 
?nter,  35  Mo.  502 ;  Laguerenne  v. 
>ugherty,  85  Penn.  St.  45 ;  De- 
'oung  V.  Buclianan,  10  Gill  &  J. 
1.)  149,  but  this  presumption 
be  overcome  bv  proof  to  the 
Frantz  v."  Wood,  2  HiU 
367;  Bremer  v.  Knapp,  1 
'  J.)  332.  But  the  fact  of 
cannot  be  denied  if  the 
iks  to  enforce  such  a  rela- 
in  the  case  of  a  person 
^r  after  his  term  has  ex- 
landlord  may  elect 
hoQ  him  as  a  tenant, 
',  and  his  election 
person  holding 
V.  Flinn,  2  Penn. 

.4  Cow. 
4  M. 


« Warner  v.  Brown,  8  East,  165 
3  Riggs  v.  BeU,  5  T.  R.  471 ;  Little 
V.  Martin,  3  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  219. 

*  Richardson  v.  Harvey,  37  Ga. 
224;  Thyer  v.  Society  of  United 
Brethren,  20  Penn.  St.  60;  Patter- 
son V.  Hansel,  4  Bush  (Ky.),  654 ; 
McConnell  v.  Bowdry ,  4  T.  *B.  Mon. 
(Ky.),  392;  Heath  v.  Williams,  25 
Me.  209 ;  Bryne  v.  Beeson,  1  Doug. 
(Mich.)  179;  King  v.  Murray,  6 
Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  62. 

*  Lane  v.  Edmonston,  1  Ired.  (N. 
C.)  L.  152;  Wilson  v.  Smith,  5 
Yerg.  genu.)  379 ;  Sharpe  v.  Kel- 
ley,  5  Den.  (N.  Y.)  431.  See  also 
holding  that  a  person  in  possession 
under  a  void  lease  is  to  be  treated 
as  a  tenant,  and  not  as  a  trespass- 
er, Boult  V.  Symonds,  10  East,  13 ; 
Brune  v.  Rawlings,  10  id.  261 ; 
Martin  v.  Watts,  7  T.  R.  83 ;  Lud- 
ford  V.  Barber,  1  id.  86 ;  Gallaway 
V.  Herbert,  4  T.  R  680;  W'arren  v. 
Feamside,  1  Wils.  176.  In  Bealo 
V.  Sanders,  3  Bing.  (N.  C.)  850,  it 
was  held  tliat  a  tenant  who,  as  as- 
signee under  a  void  lease,  liiid  been 
in  possession  several  years,  was 
bound  to  repaii*  to  the  end  of  th*:) 
term  accordmg  to  the  covenants 
in  the  lease. 


10 


Landlord  and  Tenant 


or  occupancy  in  pursuance  of  stick  permission  on  the\ 
part  of  the  tenant,'  and  the  owner's  assent  may  be  im- 
plied.' Thus,  where  a  lessee  for  a  term  assigns  the  lease, 
the  assignee,  without  any  express  contract  to  that  effect, 
by  accepting  the  assignment,  takes  it,  subject  to  all  its 
conditions,  including  the  payment  of  rent  as  it  thereafter 
becomes  due,'  or  the  payment  of  assessments,*  or  the 
making  of  repairs,  or  any  other  covenant  or  con- 
dition therein  that  runs  with  the  land,*  including 
the  manner  of  occupancy.*  And  the  assent  of  the  land- 
lord to  the  substitution  of  tenants,  may  be  implied  al- 
though such  presumption  does  not  necessarily  arise  from 
a  mere  acceptance  of  rent  by  him  from  the  assignee.' 
An  acceptance  of  rent  is  the  ordinary  acknowledgment 
of  tenancy,  but  is  not  conclusive. ' 
A  tenancy  cannot  be  implied  when  such  an  inference 


»  Rainey  v.  Copps,  22  Ala.  288 ; 
McKissack  v.  Bumngton,  87  Miss. 
685. 

*  JackBon  r.  Tyler,  2  John.  (N. 
Y.)  444  >  W^illison  v.  Watkins,  8 
Pet.  (13.  S.)  50i  McKee  v.  Angel- 
rodt,  16  Mo.  283 ;  McKeon  v.  WMt- 
ney,  3  Den.  (N.  Y.)  452. 

*  Graves  v.  Porter,  11  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  592;  Overman  v.  Sanborn,  27 
Vt.  54 ;  Blake  v.  Sanderson,  1  Gray 
(Mass.),  832;  Main  v.  Davis,  82 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  461,  and  it  is  held 
that  an  action  of  covenant  for 
arrears  of  ground  rent  accruing 
before  the  assignment  was  made 
will  lie  against  an  assignee  of  a 
lease,  Hannen  v.  Ewalt,  18  Penn, 
St.  9. 

*  Kearney  v.  Port,  1  Sandf .  (N. 
Y.  Superior  Ct.)  105. 

*  Myers  v.  Burns,  83  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  401 ;  Tyler  v.  Heidorn,  46  id. 
489.  In  Arden  v.  Sullivan,  14  Q. 
B.  832,  the  tenant  entered  into 
the  possession  of  a  house  under  an 
agi-eement  made  with  A  and  B  for 
a  lease  for  three  years,  and  paid 
them  rent,  and  so  "became  tenants 
from  year  to  year  to  them  on  such 
terms  of  the  agreement  as  were 
applicable  to,  and  not  inconsistent 
with  a  yearly  tenancy ;  and  after- 
wards A  assigned  all  his  interest  in 
the  premises  to  B,  and  the  tenant 
contmued  in  occupation,  and  paid 
rent  to  B  alone,  and  it  was  held  to 


be  reasonable  to  presume,  in  the 
absence  of  proof  to  the  contiary, 
that  in  consideration  that  B  had 
permitted  him  to  continue  the  oc- 
cupancy, he  had  agreed  to  hold  of 
B,  upon  the  same  terms  that  he 
held  of  A  and  B,  and  that  B  could 
maintain  an  action  against  him  in 
his  own  name  for  a  breach  of  the 
agreement  in  not  repairing,  or 
keeping  the  premises  in  repair. 

•  Where  a  lease  contained  a  re- 
cital as  follows:  "Said  premises 
are  now  occupied  and  to  be  occu- 

gied  as  a   lumber  yard,"  it  was 
eld  to  be  a  covenant  that  run  with, 
the  lands  and  the  erection  of  buil 
ings  by  an  assignee  of  the  leas 
was  held  to   constitute  a 
thereof,  De  Forest  v.  Bryne,  1 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  48. 

■»  North  V.  Nichols,  87  Con 
Bumham  v.  Hubbard,  36 
Bacon  v.  Brown,  9  id.  83^ 
receipt  of  rent  from  the 
and  an  allowance  made  for 
made  by  him,  has  been  helfli 
cient  to  warrant  the  .fttfj  in 
ing  that  the  assigmee  WuT  b 
cepted  as  tenant 
Nuth,  8  Bing.   170,  so 
landlord  gives  thUB  a 
that  the  i*ent  must 
Brown,  i^  StoraaL  1 

8Bu 
542; 


.» 


i 


\ 


V 


^ 


\  I.]     Presumptions  From  Occupancy, 


11 


is  negatived  by  the  contract  or  conduct  of  the  parties. 
Lus,  an  agreement  was  made  between  A  and  a  hotel 
company,  "  for  the  keeping  of  the  hotel  for  the  term  of 
seven  continuous  years."  A,  as  the  landlord  was  to  pro- 
vide for  the  hot^l ;  to  contract  no  debts  on  account  of 
the  concern  without  the  consent  of  the  directors  ;  to  re- 
side with  his  family  in  the  hotel,  but  free  of  all  charge 
for  board  or  rent ;  to  keep  constantly  in  his  employment 
a  book-keeper,  who  should  keep  the  accounts,  and  be 
liable  to  be  discharged  by  A  if  the  directors  disapproved 
of  him ;  and  the  books  were  to  be  opened  for  the  exam- 
ination of  any  of  the  directors.  These  particulars  of  the 
agreement  were  followed  by  provisions  for  the  compen- 
sation of  A,  varying  according  to  the  profits,  but  at  least 
securing  him,  in  any  event,  a  certain  compensation  of 
$4,000  per  annum.  Another  provision  in  the  agreement 
was,  that  A's  interest  was  personal  merely,  not  trans- 
ferable to  any  one,  nor  liable  for  his  debts ;  and,  if  A 
should  die.  that  compensation  should  be  made  to  his  rep- 
resentatives. It  was  held  that  this  agreement  was  not 
a  lease,  and  that  therefore  the  contract  could  have  no 
effect  at  law,  as  against  the  rights  of  the  owners  to  pos- 
session ;  that  A,  being  in  possession,  as  agent  of  the 
owners,  to  manage  for  them,  had  no  legal  interest  in 
the  possession  which  could  be  set  up  against  an  execu- 
tion for  the  debt  of  the  company.*  When  premises  are 
let  to  a  certain  person  named  therein  by  a  Ifease  under 
feal,  although  the  lessor  knew  that  they  were  to  be 
id  by  a  firm  or  by  a  corporation,  and  that  was  the  ob- 
of  the  lease,  and  they  are  eo  occupied,  yet  the  lessor 
lot  recover  the  rent  of  the  firm  or  corporation,  but 
look  only  to  the  lessee  named  in  the  lease  there- 


to. 3.  Presumptions  arising  from  oooup^inoy.— The  mere 


Page,  1  Speers  (S.  C), 
ere  the  person  merely 
i^Tate  a  crop  on  shares, 
ila.  417 ;  Brown 
;e  auo  Raw- 
j,  where 
)tion 


arises,  in  such  cases  as  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  occupation.  A  person 
employed  to  grade  lots  is  not  a  ten- 
ant. Fost  V.  Phelan,  3  How.  Pr. 
(N.Y.),  N.  S.  188. 

« Haley  v.  Boston  Belting  Co.  140 
Mass.  73. 


12 


Landlord  and  Tenant. 


w 


occupation  of  premises  does  not  of  itself  necessaril; 
imply  that  the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  ex- 
ists/ and  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  re-' 
lation  does  exist  in  the  absence  of  any  contract,  must 
bo  gathered  from  the  character  of  the  occupancy,  and 
the  intention  of  the  parties  as  evinced  by  their  conduct 
towards  each  other,  and  if,  upon  the  whole  facts,  it  is 
evident  that  no  tenancy  in  fact  existed,  the  mere  fact  of 
occupancy  will  not  uphold  a  presumption  of  tenancy,* 
and  a  party  who  should  seek  to  recover  for  *'use  and  oc- 
cupation "  by  proving  occupancy  alone,  would  find  that 
his  case  was  not  made  out.  He  must  also  show  that  the 
defendant  occupied  the  premises  as  his  tenant  or  by  his 
permission  or  sufferance  during  the  period  for  which  it 
is  sought  to  recover  the  rent.*  Thus,  where  a  landlord 
sued  the  defendant  as  the  assignee  of  a  lease  with  a 
count  for  use  and  occupation,  and  upon  the  trial  pro- 
duced the  lease  and  proved  that  the  defendant  had  occu- 
pied the  premises,  and  had  treated  him  as  landlord,  and 
paid  rent  to  him,  but  that  the  lease  had  never  been  as- 
signed to  the  defendant,  it  was  held  that  he  could  not 


>  Edmonson  v.  Kibe,  43  Mo.  176 ; 
Jordan  v.  Mead,  19  La,  An.  101. 
The  mere  use  of  the  premises  of 
another,  by  a  person  without  per- 
mission ex][:)ress  or  implied,  how- 
ever benencial  it  may  be  to  the 
I)erson  oc'-cui)ying,  does  not  create 
a  tenancy,  or  render  liim  liable  to 
an  action  for  rent  or  for  use  and 
occuj)ation.  Richmond,  &c. ,  Road 
Co.  V.  Rogers,  7  Bush  (Ky.),  532. 
The  owner  must  seek  his  remedy 
for  the  tort.  Stewart  v.  Finch,  31 
N.  J.  L.  17.  Thus  in  Hall  v. 
Jacobs,  7  Bush  (Ky.),  595,  the  de- 
fendant used  the  unimproved  banks 
of  a  river  to  moor  his  rafts  with- 
out tlie  assent  of  the  owner,  and  it 
was  held  that  the  relation  of  land- 
lord and  tenant  did  not  exist.  See 
also,  Williams  v.  Deriar,  31  Mo.  13 ; 
Can)enter  v.  United  States,  17 
Wall.  (U.  S.)489 ;  Lucas  v.  Brooks, 
18  id.  436  ;  Webster  v.  Holland,  58 
Me.  168 ;  Harris  v.  Frink,  2  Lans. 
(N.  Y.)  35. 

'  Knight  V.  Quijjley,  2  Camp. 
505,   and  the  question  is  for  the 


jury.  Chamberlain  v.  Donahue,  44 
Vt.  57 ;  Riggs  v.  Bell.  7  T.  R.  471. 
Rent  cannot  be  collected  of  a  per- 
son, who,  by  the  invitation  of  the 
landlord  occupied  his  premises, 
notliing  being  said  about  rent, 
Strickland  v.  Hudson,  55  Miss.  235. 
3  Watson  v.  Eacliin,  2  Jones  (N, 
C.)  L.  207  ;  Watkins  v.  Holman, 
Pet.  (U.  S.)  25.  The  relation 
landlord  and  tenant  in  no  sense 
ists  between  the  vendor  and 
dee  of  lands,  even  though  th 
is  never  completed.  Blight  \ 
ester,  7  Wheat  (U.  S.)  548. 
contract  the  vendee  enters 
holds  for  himself  and  under  tit 
himself,  which  he  may  sustai 
the  purcliase  of  any  other 
which  may  protect  him  i 
quiet  enjovment,  Societv 
let,  4  Pet.'(U.  S.)  506;  ' 
V.  Huntin<<ton,  5  id.  4i 
v.  W^atkins  3  id. 
Moakes,  5  C. 
Lewis,  6  C. 


^^ 


[AP.  I.]     Presumptions  From  Occupancy. 


13 


jcover  of  the  defendant  either  for  rent  or  for  the  use 
md  occupation  of  the  premises '  because  there  had  been 
^no  new  demise  to  the  defendant,  and  the  defendant  not 
being  legally  an  assignee,  the  plaintiff's  only  remedy 
was  against  the  lessee.  Where,  however,  possession  is 
taken  by  one,  with  the  permission  or  assent  of  the  own- 
er, from  such  possession  the  relation  of  landlord  and 
tenant  is  implied,  as  well  as  a  promise  to  pay  rent. 
Thus,  it  has  been  held  that,  w^here  a  person  agrees  to  be- 
come a  tenant  of  premises,  a  subsequent  occupancy  by 
him  will  enable  the  owner  to  recover  the  rent  therefor, 
or  for  their  use  and  occupation,  although  no  Iqase  is 
made,  and  any  assertion  of  the  right  of  possession  by 
such  person  will  be  sufficient,  as  the  putting  up  a  notice 
of  '*to  let,  inquire  within  or  at — ,"  the  defendant's 
place  of  business,  has  been  held  sufficient.^  So,  evidence 
that  a  person  entei-ed  into  the  occupancy  of  premises 
under  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  although  the  agreement 
is  invalid,  will  give  to  his  occupancy  the  character  of  a 
tenancy.*  So,  where  the  person  in  possession  has  ad- 
mitted a  tenancy,*  as  by  submitting  to  a  distress'  or  by 
any  act  that  may  be  treated  as  an  acknowledgment  of  a 
tenancy,  as  the  payment  of  rent,*  or  even  an  admission 
that  rent  is  due.  Generally,  a  tenancy  is  created  by  ex- 
press contract,  but  it  may  arise  even  where  the  entry 
was  originally  wrongful  and  no  contract  whatever  ex- 
isted ;  as,  where  a  person  enters  upon  the  land  of  an- 
other as  a  squatter,  expressly  disclaiming  title  in  him- 
df,  it  is  held  that  he  holds  as  tenant  at  will  of  the  true 
ner,^  and  the  same  rule  prevails  where  a  person  goes 


[yde  T.  Moakes,  5  C.  &  P.  578 
Sullivan  v.  Jones,  3  C.  &  P.  57W. 
llliott  V.  Rogers,  4  Esp.  59. 
Sullivan  v.  Jones,  ante  ;  Pan-, 
[V.  Jones,  3  Camp.  372. 
*anton  v.   Jones,    ante,    and 
a  forfeiture,  if  the  lessor  re- 
f  rom  the  tenant  by  any 
ig  the  lessee's  posses- 
his  right  of  re-entry 
jnt  of  the  rent  on  the 
le.    Mere  receipt 
lessee    does 
it  is  a 


duty  due  him,  but  if  he  distrains 
for  the  rent,  or  accepts  rent  for  a 
period  subsequent  to  the  forfeiture, 
it  operates  as  an  affirmance  of  tlie 
tenant's  right  of  possession,  Green's 
Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  8. 

«  Porter  v.  Bieler,  17  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  149.  The  confession  of  a  judg- 
ment for  the  rent  in  favor  of  the 
landlord  is  evidence  that  the  rela- 
tion of  landlord  and  tenant  exists, 
Weidner  v.  Foster,  2  Penn.  23; 
Dolby  v.  lies,  11  Ad.  &  El.  335. 

'  Stamper  v.  Griffin,  20  Ga,  212 ; 


% 


u 


Landlord  and  Tenant. 


[§ 


into  possession  under  an  agreement  to  take  a  lease  bul 
afterwards  refuses  to  do  so,*  or  under  a  contract  to  pur  J 
chase,  which  he  fails  to  perform.'  A  mere  agreement 
to  take  a  lease,  unless  accompanied  by  an  occupancy  un- 
der it,  does  not  create  a  tenancy,  as  there  can  Jbe  no  con- 
structive tenancy  except  where  there  is  an  actual  de- 
mise ; '  but  it  is  sufficient  if  an  entry  and  occupation  en- 
sues under  the  person  sought  to  be  charged  as  tenant, 
by  him  in  person,  or  by  his  agent,  or  by  an  under  ten- 
ant. *  In  some  of  the  States  it  is  held  that  a  contract  to 
pay  rent  will  be  implied  from  the  mere  occupancy  of 
premises,  unless  the  character  of  the  occupancy  is  such 
as  to  negative  the  existence  of  a  tenancy,*  and*  where 
the  tenant  disclaims  the  tenancy,*  or  where  his  original 
entry  was  tortious, '  or  under  a  contract  that  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  idea  of  a  tenancy,  it  is  held  that  no  such 
implication  can  arise.'    A  tenancy  can  only  exist  by  vir- 


Smith  V.  Houston,  16  Ala.  Ill ; 
Weaver  v.  Jones,  24  Ala.  420  ;  Gay 
V.  Mitchell,  35  Ga.  159. 

^  Dunn  V.  Trustees,  &c.,  89  Ul. 
578. 

« Patterson  v.  Stoddard,  47  Me. 
855  ;  Jones  v.  Jones,  2  Rich.  (S.  C.) 
542 ;  Love  v.  Edmondston,  1  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  L.  152 ;  Manchester  v. 
Doddridge,  8  Ind,  860;  Proprie- 
tors, &c.,  V.  McFarland,  12  Mass. 
825. 

«  Wood  V.  Wilcox,  2  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
87  ;  Beach  v.  Gray,  2  id.  84  ;  Tobie 
V.  Smith,  28  Me.  106;  Lowe  v. 
Ross,  5  Exchq.  558 ;  Nation  v. 
Tozer,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  172  ;  Edge  v. 
Strafford,  1  C.  &  J.  891. 

■»  Wood  V.  Wilcox,  2  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
87,  as,  if  A  agrees  to  let  lands  to 
B,  who  permits  C  to  occupy  them, 
B  thereby  becomes  tenant  to  A  and 
liable  for  the  rent  of  the  premises, 
Bull  V.  Sibbs,  8  T.  R.  327 ;  Con- 
nolly V.  Baxter,  2  Stark  525,  and 
this  relation  continues  so  long  as 
C  continues  his  occupancy  of  the 
premises,  unless  A,  by  some  acts  of 
nis,  accepts  liim  as  his  tenant, 
Harding  v.  Crethom,  1  Esp.  57,  of 
releases  B  from  his  tenancy,  which, 
according  to  Lord  Kknyon  in  the 
hust  case,  may  l)e  done  by  accept- 
ing the  key  of  tlie  house  or  build- 
ing.   Soo  also  holding  that  v/here 


the  landlord  takes  the  key  and 
deals  witli  it  as  if  it  had  l)econie 
his  own,  the  jury  are  warranted  in 
finding  that  he  intended  to  resume 
possession  and  to  discharge  the 
tenant  from  his  obligations  as 
lessee,  Santos  v.  Hollinshead,  4 
Pliila.  (Penn.)  57;  Hegeman  v. 
McArthur,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
147,  but  the  mere  acceptance  of  the 
key  does  not  necessarily  liave  that 
effect,  Bloomer  v.  Merrill,  1  Daly 
(N  .Y.  C.  P.)  485;  Prentiss  v. 
Warne,  10  Mo.  60  ;  Townsend  v. 
Albens,  8  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
560.  See  Henderson  v.  Squire,  L.; 
R.  4  Q.  B.  170 ;  Levy  v.  Lewis, 
C.  B.  N.  S.  766  ;  Ibbs  v.  Richai 
son,  9  Ad.  &  El.  849,  holding  tl 
doctrine  stated  in  the  text. 

'^Oaks    V.     Oaks,    16    lU.    1( 
Chambers  v.  Ross,  25  N.  J.  L. 

fi  Phelps  V.  Conant,  30  Vt. 
Jackson  v.    Mowry,  SO  Ga.   1- 
littleton  V.  Wynn,  81  id.  588. 

'  Wiggin  V.    Wiggin,    6  N. 
298 ;  Hen  wood  v.  Cheesman, 
&  R.  (Penn.)  500  ;  Curtis  v. 
21   Me.   525;    Folsom  v.    Cj 
Minn.  420 ;    Watson  v. 
33  Vt.  88  ;  Cmcinnati 
Ohio  St.   222;  By 
Ark.  G02. 

» Little  V. 
801 ;  Si 


*.j 


CHAP.  I.]     Presumptions  From  Oocupancy. 


15 


tue  of  a  contract,  express  or  implied,  consequently,  in 
order  to  charge  a  person  as  tenant,  in  the  absence  of  an 
express  demise,  not  only  occupation  must  be  shown,  but 
also  an  occupation  under  such  circumstances  that  a  con- 
tract can  fairly  be  implied  therefrom,*  which  can  never 


Y.)  46;  Jones  v.  Tipton,  2  Dana 
1y.).  295;  Wright  v.  Newton,  5 
Where  a  person  enters 
upon  premises  under  a  contract  to 
])urchase,  whether  it  is  carried  out 
or  not,  he  caniiot,  in  the  absence 
of  an  express  contract,  be  held 
chargeable  as  a  tenant.  He  enters 
and  holds  as  owner,  and  his  occu- 
pancy cannot  be  presumed  to  be 
that  of  a  tenant,  so  that  an  action 
for  use  and  occupation  will  lie 
ai^inst  him.  Smith  v.  Stewart,  6 
John.  (N.  Y.)  46 ;  Watkins  v.  Hol- 
man,  16  Pet.  (U.  S.)  25 ;  Bull  v. 
Ellis,  1  Stew.  &  P.  (Ala.)  294 ;  Little 
v.  Pearson,  7  Pick.  (Mass.)  801 ; 
Curtis  V.  Treat,  21  Me.  525 ;  White 
V.  Livingston,  10  Cush.  (Mass.)  259 ; 
Stone  V.  Sprague,  20  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
509 ;  Howard  v.  Shaw,  8  M.  &  W. 
118.  But,  if  the  contrct  is  not 
carried  oat,  through  the  refusal  of 
the  tenant  to  accept  a  conveyance, 
or  to  perform  on  his  part,  he  is 
liable  lor  the  use  of  the  premises, 
from  the  time  that  the  contract 
goes  off,  but  not  for  his  occupancy 
so  long  as  the  contract  for  a  pur- 
chase was  in  force,  Hull  v.Vauglin, 
6  Price,  422 ;  Tancred  v.  Christy, 
12  M.  &  W.  324 ;  Howard  v.  Shaw, 
ante ;  Gould  v.  Thompson,  4  Met. 
(Mass.)  224,  although  in  Clough  v. 
Hosford,  6  N.  H.  231,  it  was  held 
tJiat,  if  a  contract  of  purchase  goes 
through  the  fault  of  the  vendee, 
'ho  entered  under  such  contract, 
le  condition  of  the  permission  to 
iter  is  broken,  and  all  benefits 
>m  the  agreement  forfeited,  and 
it  the  vendor  may  maintain  tres- 
for  the  entry,  or  assumpsit  at 
election.  See  also  Atton  v. 
[ckering,  9  N.  H.  494,  in  which 
doctrine  of  the  previous  case 
stained  by  a  dictum  of  the 
But  the  doctrine  of  this 
is  hardly  sustainable  either 
principal  or  authority.  In 
cases,  the  right  to 
dt  for  use  and 
jriod  ftnlise- 
the  con- 


Vi.. 


tract  by  the  vendee,  is  denied,  and 
it  is  held  that  tresj^ass  is  the  proper 
remedy,  Bancroft  v.  Wardwell,  13 
John.  (N.  Y.)  389 ;  Smith  v.  Stew- 
art, 6  id.  46 ;  Bremer  v.  Conover, 
18  N.  J.  L.  215;  Bell  v.  Ellis,  1 
Stew.  &  P.  (Ala.)  295,  and  where 
the  contract  is  broken  up  by  the 
vendor,  it  seems  clear  that  no  action 
for  use  and  occupation  can  be 
maintained  against  the  vendee  in 
possession,  for  an  occupancy  subse- 
quent to  the  termination  of  the 
contract.  Hough  v.  Binge,  11  Vt. 
190 ;  Jones  v.  Tipton,  2  Dana  (Ky.) 
295,  nor  so  long  as  the  contract  re- 
mains in  force,  Vandenhennel  v. 
Storrs,  3  Conn.  203,  nor  if  it  is  con- 
sumated,  can  the  vendor  recover 
for  the  use  of  the  premises  prior  to 
the  conveyance,  although  the  con- 
tract was  not  completed  within  the 
time  agreed  upon,  Dennet  v.  Pen- 
obscot Fair  Ground  CJo.,  57  Me.  425 ; 
Carpenter  v.  United  States,  17 
Wail.  (U.  S.)  480.  In  Harris  v. 
Frink,  7  Lans.  (N.  Y.)  35,  it  was 
held  that  a  jiarty  who  enters  into 
the  possession  of  a  real  property 
under  a  contract  to  purchase  and 
remains  in  its  occupancy  until  the 
agreement  is  performed,  does  not 
occupy  as  a  tenant,  and  has  no 
legal  title  to  crops  planted  by  him, 
if  forcibly  expelled  from  possession 
by  the  party  with  whom  he  con- 
tracted, before  harvesting  them. 
For  man^  purpose?,  howevcjr,  there 
is  a  species  of  quasi  tenancy,  Kiek 
V.  Taylor,  8  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  262; 
Stansburv  v.  Taggart,  3  McLean 
(U.  S.),  457. 

^  La  Farge  v.  Park,  1  Edm.  Sel. 
Cas.  (N.  Y.)  223 ;  Gunn  v.  ScoviU, 
4  Day  (Conn.),  228  ;  Estep  v.  Estep, 
23  Ind.  114;  Pierca  v.  Fierce,  25 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  243 ;  Rassell  v.  Fab- 
yan,  31  N.  H.  218 :  Osgood  v.  Dew- 
ev,  13  John.  (N.  Y.)  240,  and  it  is 
for  the  jury  to  say  from  all  the 
facts  and  circumstances,  wliether 
a  te.iancy  exists,  Clvamberlain  v. 
Donahue,  44  Vt.  57.  To  create  the 
relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  an 


/*.-... 


18 


Landlord  and  Tenant. 


[§*. 


nor  even  of  a  tenancy  at  all,  if  the  payment  is  referable 
to  any  other  consideration,'  or  if  paid  under  such  cir- 
cumstances as  clearly  to  rebut  the  idea  of  a  tenancy." 
In  order  to  constitute  a  tenancy  from  a  payment  of  rent 
it  must  be  paid  in  the  capacity  of  a  tenant^  and  if  it  is 
paid  in  any  other  capacity,  it  does  not  have  that  effect.* 
So,  too,  where  rent  has  been  paid  by  one  in  the  capacity 
of  a  tenant,  and  the  term-  is  unexpired,  in  an  action  to 
recover  for  subsequent  rent,  the  tenant  may  show  that 
he  paid  it  under  a  mistake,  and  that  the  title  of  his  les- 
sor to  the  premises  has  expired.*  Thus,  in  an  English 
case,*  the  lessor  being  seized  in  fee  of  certain  land  mort- 
gaged it,  but  remained  in  possession  and  afterwards 
leased  a  part  of  it  to  Barton,  who  entered  under  the 
lease,  after  which  the  lessor  executed  a  second  mort- 
gage, and  Barton  after  that  paid  rent  to  the  second 
mortgagee.     The  second  mortgagee  afterwards  leased 


»  Right  V.  Beard,  13  East.  260 ; 
PhJUips  V.  Mosely,  1  C.  &  P.  262. 

*  In  Strahan  v.  Smith,  4  Bing. 
91,  one  T  holding  pictures  of  P,  as 
security  for  an  alleged  debt,  hired 
rooms  of  the  plaintiff  in  which  to 
deposit  them.  P  having  died,  the 
defendants  (his  administrators) con- 
tested T*s  claim  bv  a  suit  in  chan- 
cery. Pending  the  suit,  in  order 
to  prevent  the  pictures  from  being 
distrained,  they  petitioned  the 
Court  to  satisfy  the  plaintiffs  rent, 
out  of  certain  funds  paid  into 
Court  in  the  course  of  the  cause. 
T*8  claim  having  been  disallowed 
by  the  Court,  the  pictures  were 
ordered  to  be  deUvered  to  the  de- 
fendants, who,  in  order  to  obtain 
tlieni,  paid  rent  to  the  time  of  de- 
livery. Tlie  Court  held  that  the 
payment  of  rent  under  these  cir- 
cumstances did  not  constitute  the 
defendants  tenants  to  the  plain- 
tiif. 

»  Best,  C.  J.,  in  Strahan  v. 
Smith,  4  Bing.  94,  in  commenting 
upon  the  facts  of  this  case,  given 
in  the  preceding  note,  and  their 
effect,  said  :  "In  order  to  consti- 
tute the  relation  of  landlord  an(| 
tenant  between  them  (the  defend- 
ants and  the  plaintiff),  there  must 
have  been  a  contract  express  or 
implied.  Express  contract,  there  is 


none ;  but  it  has  been  urg^ed  that 
such  a  contract  may  be  implied 
from  the  payment  of  rent  by  the 
defendants.  There  certainly  are 
cases  in  which  such  an  implication 
would  arise  from  the  payment  of 
rent,  but  every  such  imphcation  is 
liable  to  be  rebutted,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  this  rent 
was  paid,  do  rebut  any  such  im- 
plication. The  mere  payment  of 
rent  will  not,  ot  itself,  constitute  a 
tenancy.  In  order  to  have  that 
effect,  it  must  be  paid  by  the  party 
in  the  capacity  of  tenant." 

*  In  Neeve  v.  Moss,  1  Bing.  860,  a 
tenant  for  life,  with  power  to  lease 
for  twenty-one  years,  leased  for 
fifty-three  and  died.  After  his 
death,  and  more  than  twenty-one 
years  after  the  makijig  of  the 
lease,  the  lessee  underlet :  after  *^ 
which  the  remainderman  gave  both 
the  lessee  and  the  under-lessee  no- 
tice to  quit,  and  then  gave  the 
under-lessee  a  new  lease,  and  re- 
ceived rent  from  him.  The  lessee 
distrained  on  the  under-lessee,  and 
it  was  held  that  he  might  plead 
non-tenuit,  because  he  was  entitled 
to  show  that  the  lessor's  title  had  . 
expired. 

•Higi 
Ad.  & 


V 


CHAP.  i.j  Payment  of  Eekt.  19 

the  balaDce  of  the  land  to  the  other  defendant,  Warbur- 
ton,    who  also  went  into  possession  under  his  lease. 
Subsequently,  the  first  mortgagee  gave  the  defendants 
notice  to  pay  the  rent  to  him,  which  they  did.    The  sec- 
ond mortgagee  then  brought  ejectment  against  them, 
and  the  court  held  that  the  defendants  might  show  the 
existence  of  the  first  mortgage;    notice  from  the  first 
mortgagee  to  them,  and  payment  of  rent  to  him  pursu- 
ant to  such  notice :  for,  although  Barton  could  not  dis- 
pute his  lessor's  title  at  the  time  of  the  demise,  he  might 
erivative  title 
:luded  hy  hav- 
of  the  facts. 
0  whether  the 
■,  depends  en- 
ti  it  was  paid, 
lancy  is  liable 

rbm,  11  Ad.  &  EL 


..^ 


2a 


ElSDB  OF  TONANCY. 


[§5. 


^1 


CHAPTER  II. 

KINDS  OF  TENANCY. 

TENANT  BY  SUFFERANCE. 

Sec.      6.    Definition  of  term. 

Sec.      6.    Tenancy  by  sufferance — what  is. 

Sec.      7.    Origin  of  this  species  of  tenancy— effect  of  owner's  assent 

— how  established. 
Sec.      8.    Has  no  demisable  estate — cannot  maintain  trespass  against 

landlord — ^not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit. 
Sec.      9.    How  the  tenancy  may  be  determined. 
Sec.    10.    Rent  not  recoverable. 

Sec.    11.    Right  of  tenant  at  sufferance  to  remove  fixtures. 
Sec.    12.    Tenant  liable  for  damages,  when. 
Sec.    18.    Landlord's  right  of  election,  as  to  tenant  holding  over. 

Sec.  5.  Definition  of  term.— The  word  tenant  is  derived 
from  the  Latin  word  tenere,  which  signifies  to  hold,  and 
as  a  legal  term,  is  applied  to  a  person  who  holds  or  pos- 
sesses lands  or  tenements  by  any  species  of  title,  either 
in  fee  ;  for  life ;  for  years  ;  from  year  to  year ;  at  will ; 
by  sufferance,  or  under  any  kind  of  claim  or  title  which 
confers  an  interest  in  the  property,  long  or  short.*  But 
the  species  of  tenancy  with  which  we  shall  deal  in  this 
work  is  that  by  sufferance,  at  will,  from  year  to  year, 
for  years,  and  for  life. 

Sec.  6.  Tenancy  by  sufferance— what  is.- A  tenant  by  suf- 
ferance is  one  who  comes  into  the  possession  of  real  es- 
tate lawfully  for  a  specified  term  or  purpose,  but  who, 
after  his  estate  is  ended,  holds  over  without  authority,* 


»  3  Tomlin's  Law  Die.  573. 

'  Co.  Litt.  57  b,  Moore  v.  Law- 
der,  2  Camp,  308 ;  Simpkins  v.  Ash- 
urst,  4  TVryw,  781 ;  Keay  v.  Good- 
win, 16  Mass.  1 ;  Kin^sley  v.  Ames, 
2  Met.  (Mass.)  29 ;  Bayley  v.  Brad- 


ley, 5  C.  B.  396 ;  HoUis  v.  Pool,  8 
Met.  (Mass.)  350 ;  Knight  v.  Quig- 
ley,  1  Stark's,  505 ;  Rising  v.  Stan- 
nard,  17  Mass.  282;  JmkmA  ▼«- 
McLeod,  12  John.  (N.Y.)W;  jack- 
son  V.  Pai'khutft,  5  id.  iWL    ^*  An 


CHAP,  n.] 


Tenancy  by  Sufferance. 


21 


as  a  tenant  for  a  year  or  a  tenant  for  any  other  specified 
term  or  purpose/ who  holds  over  after  his  term  expires, 
is  a  tenant  by  sufferance.*  So,  a  mortgagor  who  re- 
mains in  possession  after  a  decree  of  foreclosure  has  ex- 
pired, or  after  a  sale  of  the  mortgaged  premises  under 
the  mortgage,*  or  a  person  who  enters  under  a  contract 
to  purchase  a  leasehold  interest  to  be  paid  for  by  install- ' 
ments,  with  a  stipulation  for  a  forfeiture  in  case  of  non* 
performance,  after  condition  broken,*  or  a  lessee  of  a 
tenant  for  life  who  holds  over  after  the  lessor's  death,* 
or  a  lessee  of  a  tenant  in  dower,*  or  by  curtesy  after  the 


A 


estate  by  sufferance/'  says  Black- 
stone,  in  vol.  2,  c.  150,  of  his  com- 
mentaries, ''is  where  one  comes 
into  possession  of  land  by  lawful 
title,  out  keeps  it  afterwards  with- 
<mt  any  title  at  aU,  As,  if  a  man 
tiJ^es  a  lease  for  a  year,  and,  after 
the  year  is  expired,  continues  to 
hold  the  premises  without  any 
fresh  lease  from  the  owner  of  the 
estate.  Or  if  a  man  maketh  a 
lease  at  will,  and  dies,  the  estate 
at  will  is  thereby  determined ;  but 
if  the  tenant  cometh  into  posses- 
sion, he  is  tenant  by  sufferance, 
Co.  litt  67  b.  But  no  man  can 
be  tenant  at  sufferance  against  the 
king,  to  whom  no  laches  or  neg- 
lect in  not  entering  and  ousting 
the  tenant  is  ever  imputed  by  law ; 
but  his  tenant,  so  holding  over,  is 
treated  as  an  absolute  intruder  Co. 
litt.  57  b.  But  in  the  case  of  a 
subject,  this  estate  may  be  de- 
stroyed whenever  the  true  owner 
shall  make  an  actual  entry  on  the 
lands,  and  oust  the  tenant ;  for  be- 
fore entry,  he  cannot  maintain  an 
action  of  trespass  against  the  ten- 
ant by  sufferance  as  he  might 
against  a  stranger,  Co.  Litt.  57  o. ; 
4  John.  (N.  Y.)  150 ;  4  Kent's  Com. 
117,  and  the  reason  is,  because  the 
tenant  once  bein^  in  by  lawful  ti- 
tle, the  law  (which  presumes  no 
wrong  in  any  man)  will  suppose 
him  to  continue  upon  a  title  eoual- 
ly  lawful ;  unless  the  owner  oi  the 
land  by  some  public  and  avowed 
act.  such  as  entry  is,  will  declare 
ce  to  be  tortious,  or, 
e,  wrongfuL" 
of  his  term,  a 


tenant  becomes  tenant  by  suff  err 
ance,  1  Dyer,  62  apL;  Flower  v. 
Darby,  17  B.  159;  Tilt  v.  Stratton, 
4  Bing.  446,  and  so  remains  until 
by  payment  of  rent,  or  other  wo 
Imowledgment  of  tenancy,  he  is« 
by  construction  of  law,  converted 
into  a  tenant  at  will,  or  from  year 
to  year,  Clark  v.  Smaridge,  0  Jur. 
781 ;  Flower  v.  Darby,  ante ;  Man- 
ning V.  Loveioy,  1  Ry.  &  Moo.  856 ; 
Culvert  V.  Frowd,  4  Bing.  557; 
Keay  v.  Goodwin,  16  li&s.  1 ; 
Hyatt  V.  Wood,  4  John.  (N.  Y.) 
150 ;  Wilde  v.  Cantillon,  1  John. 
Cas.  (N.  T.)  128;  Hauzhurst  v. 
Lebru,  88  Cal.  568. 

*  Overdeed  v.  Lewis,  1  W.  &  S, 
(Penn.)90;  Hyatt  v.  Wood,  4  John.- 
(N.  Y.)  150 ;  Keay  v.  Goodwin,  16 
Mass.  1 ;  Wilde  v.  Cantillon,  1 
John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.)  128 ;  Hauxhurst 
V.  Lebru,  8d  CaL  668. 

'  Stedman  v.  Gassett,  18  Vt.  846; 
Kingsley  t.  Ames,  2  Met.  (Mass.) 
29. 

'  Moore  v.  Lawder,  1  Stark,  505. 
Thus,  in  Cole  v.  Gill,  14  Iowa,  527, 
the  defendant  entered  into  posses- 
sion of  premises  under  a  bond  for 
a  deed,  and  held  over  after  the 
premises  had  been  sold  upon  an 
execution  to  satisfy  the  balance 
due  on  the  purchase  contract,  it 
was  held  tiiat  he  became  a  mere 
tenant  at  sufferance,  after  such 
sale. 

*  Torrey  ▼.  Torrey,  14  N.  Y.  480 ; 
Livingston  v.  Tanner^  14  id.  64; 
Preston  v.  Love,  Noy,  120;  Jor- 
dan V.  Ward,  1  H.  Bl.  99. 

*  Miller  v.  Mayncwaring,  Cra 
Car.  897. 


22 


Kinds  of  Tenancy. 


[§6. 


death  of  the  person  in  whom  such  estate  is  vested/  or  an 
under-tenant  who  continues  in  possession  after  the 
determination  of  the  original  lease, '  or  a  tenant  at  will 
who  keeps  possession,  after  the  will  has  been  determined 
by  the  death  of  the  lessor  or  otherwise,"  although  in  the 
case  of  a  tenant  remaining  in  after  the  determination  of 
an  estate  at  will,  but  slight  evidence  will  be  required  to 
convert  it  into  a  tenancy  at  will  again,*  and  any  undue 
laches  on  the  part  of  the  landlord  in  entering  into  pos- 
session will  have  that  effect.*  The  distinction  between 
a  tenancy  at  will  and  by  sufferance  is  marked.  A  ten- 
ant at  will  is  always  in  by  right ;  but  a  tenant  by  suffer- 
ance holds  over  by  wrong,  after  the  expiration  of  a  law- 
ful title.*  If  there  is  a  joint  occupation  of  land  by  the 
owner  and  another  by  agreement,  the  latter  cannot  be  a 
tenant  at  sufferance.*  But  if  a  person  goes  into  posses- 
sion under  an  agreement  for  a  lease  by  the  cestui  que 
trust,  but  pays  no  rent,  and  cestui  que  trust  dies  without 
executing  a  lease,  he  is  only  a  tenant  by  sufferance  as 
against  the  trustee.*  So,  where  a  person  goes  into  pos- 
session under  a  parol  lease  for  years,  but  agrees  to  quit 
if  the  demised  premises  shall  be  sold  within  the  time, 
upon  the  sale  thereof  he  becomes  a  mere  tenant  at  suf- 


■*?i 


'  Piatt  on  Leases,  97. 

'  Simpkins  v.  Ashurst,  4  Trv, 
781. 

•Knight  T.  Quigley,  3  Camp. 
505  Co.  Litt.  57  b.  A  valid  lease 
for  years,  by  the  owner  of  prem- 
ises then  occupied  by  a  tenant  at 
will,  terminates  the  tenancy,  and 
makes  him  a  tenant  at  sufferance 
of  the  lessee,  Dillon  v.  Brown,  11 
Gray  (Mass.)  179,  and  if  a  part  of 
the  estate  is  leased  or  sold  he  be- 
comes a  tenant  at  sufferance  as  to 
that,  but  remains  tenant  at  will  as 
to  the  remainder,  Dillon  v.  Brown, 
ante. 

*  In  Bennett  v.  Turner,  7  M.  & 
M.  226,  Parke,  B.,  said  :  "Slight 
evidence  would  probably  satisfy  a 
jury  that  a  relation  so  inconven- 
ient as  that  of  a  tenancy  by  suffer- 
ance, in  which  the  tenant  is  not 
entitled  to  the  fruits  of  his  own  in- 
dustry (as  he  has  no  right  to  the 
emblements,    Vin.    Abr.    Emble- 


ments, 79),  would  not  be  long  con- 
tinued." If  the  lessor  receives 
rent  from  the  tenant,  the  tenancy 
by  sufferance  is  at  once  changed 
into  a  tenancy  at  will,  or  from 
year  to  year,  according  to  the  cir- 
cumstances. Hollingsworth  v. 
Stennett,  2  Esp.  716;  Rowan  v. 
Little,  11  Wend.  N.Y.  619. 

*  Bennett  v.  Turner,  ant«. 

«  Co.  Litt.  57 .  b ;  Cole  on  Eject- 
ment, 546;  Woodfalls*  Landlord 
and  Tenant,  190. 

'  Johnson  v.  Carter,  16  Mass. 
444. 

» Howard  v.  Carpenter,  22  Md. 
10.  So  long,  however,  as  the  agree- 
ment for  the  lease  is  operative,  he 
is  a  tenant  at  will.  Thus,  where  a 
tenant  held  over  after  the  expira- 
tion of  his  lease,  under  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease  of  the  same^jwid 
additional  premises,  Jm  '^KiaS'^fiBE 
to  be  a  tenant  ali'lvK    SmmoB 


V.  Scudder,  1: 


CHAP.  n. 


Tenancy  by  Sufferance. 


23 


v> 


1 


•  ■- 


ferance.*  A  person  who  holds  over  after  the  termination 
of  his  estate,  under  an  agreement  with,  or  by  the  per- 
mission of  one  who  had  no  authority  in  the  premises,  is 
a  tenant  at  sufferance.  Thus,  where  a  tenant  for  years, 
on  the  expiration  of  his  lease,  applied  to  the  attorney 
who  drew  the  lease  for  a  renewal  of  it,  and  the  attorney 
told  him  that  he  had  no  authority  to  renew  it,  but  that  ' 
he  (the  tenant)  might  keep  possession  until  he  heard 
from  the  landlord,  it  was  held  that  the  tenant  was  a 
mere  tenant  at  sufferance.'  A  grantor  of  land,  no  time 
being  fixed  in  which  possession  shall  be  given,  instanter^ 
upon  deUvery  of  the  deeds,  or,  if  a  time  is  agreed  upon 
after  the  expiration  of  the  time  becomes  a  tenant  at 
sufferance ;  and  if,  before  the  time  for  delivering  up  pos- 
session, he  permits  another  to  enter,  they  both  become 
tenants  at  sufferance."  A  tenant  who  goes  into  posses- 
sion under  a  written  lease,  at  a  rent  payable  quarterly, 
and  holds  over  after  the  expiration  of  his  term,  is,  in  the 
absence  of  any  agreement  to  the  contrary,  a  tenant  at 
sufferance,  and  he  does  not  become  a  tenant  at  will  by  i 
virtue  of  stipulations  in  the  lease  that  he  will  "during 
the  said  term,  and  for  such  further  term  as  the  said  lessee 
or  any  other  person  claiming  under  him  shall  hold  the 
premises^  pay  unto  the  said  lessor  the  said  quarterly  rent 
upon  the  day  hereinbefore  appointed  for  the  payment 
thereof  ^^  and  that  he  will  *'at  the  expiration  of  said 
term,  peaceably  yield  up  unto  the  said  lessors,  or  those 
having  their  estate  therein,  all  and  singular  the  prem- 
ises." Such  a  lease  does  not  operate  to  give  the  lessee 
any  right  to  occupy  the  premises  beyond  the  term  fixed 
therein.* 


»  Dallas  V.  Pool,  3  Met.  (Mass.) 
350.  In  Writer  v.  Stevens,  9  Allen 
(Mass.))  52G,* two  persons  entered 
into  an  agreement  to  buy  land  and 
build  a  house  thereon.  A  convey- 
ance was  made  to  one  only,  who 
boarded  in  the  house  with  the  oth- 
er, who  paid  no  rent,  but  occupied 
under  a  written  agreement,  the 
^hom  the  legal  title  was 
jpnveyed  the  land ; 
other  became 


a  mere  tenant  at  sufferance  after 
the  conveyance. 

*  Jackson  v.  Parkhurst,  5  John. 
(N.  Y.)  128. 

«  Hyatt  V.  Wood,  4  John.  (N.  Y.) 
150 ;  Wood  V.  Hyatt,  4  id.  313.  In 
any  event  a  grantor,  under  such 
circumstances,  is  no  more  than  a 
tenant  at  will.  Jackson  v.  Aid- 
rich,  13  John.  (N.  Y.)  100. 

*  Edwards  v.  Hale,  9  Allen 
(Mass.),  462. 


24 


Kinds  op  Tenanct. 


[§7. 


Sec.  7.  Origin  of  this  species  of  tena]i07--eff^t  of  owner's 
assent— how  established.— This  species  of  tenancy  is  be- 
lieved to  have  been  originally  a  mere  device  to  prevent 
a  tenant,  who  went  into  possession  lawfully,  from  setting 
up  title  in  himself  by  adverse  possession,  and  thus  de- 
feating the  title  of  his  landlord.*  The  tenancy  is  of  suc- 
a  nature  as  necessarily  implies  an  absence  of  any  £^ee- 
ment  between  the  owner  and  the  tenant,  and  if  express 
assent  is  given  by  the  owner  to  such  possession,  the  ten- 
ancy is  thereby,  instantevy  converted  into  a  tenancy  at 
will,'  or  from  year  to  year,  according  to  the  circum- 
stances.* If  a  tenant  holding  the  premises  for  a  specific 
term,  hold  over,  after  the  term  is  ended,  in  the  absence 
of  any  evidence -to  the  contrary,  the  presumption  is,  that 
his  possession  is  wrongful,*  but  this  presumption  may  be 
overcome  by  any  evidence  that  shows  that  the  landlord 
or  owner  of  the  premises  assented  thereto,*  as,  that  the 
landlord  received  rent  from  him,*  or  after  a  notice  to 
quit,  permitted  him  to  remain  upon  the  premises  with- 
out suit  or  objection  for  a  considerable  period.^ 

Sec.  8.  Has  no   demisable  estate— cannot  maintain  tres* 
pass  against  landlord—not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit.— A  ten- 


>  Smithes  Landlord  and  Tenant, 
81 ;  Fawcett*B  Landlord  and  Ten- 
ant, 49. 

« Rowan  v.  Little,  11  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  619 ;  Smith's  L.  T.  81. 

'  Rowan  v.  Little,  ante. 

*  Brown  v.  Keller,  82  HI.  151. 
This  presumption  attaches,  and  it 
is  incumbent  on,  the  tenant  to 
show  that  the  landlord  has  in  some 
way  assented  to  his  holding  over, 
so  as  to  convert  his  tenancy  from 
that  at  sufferance,  to  a  tenancjr 
from  year  to  year.  Prima  facie 
he  is  a  tenant  at  sufferance,  Wilde 
V.  Cantillon,  1  John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.) 
123 ;  Jackson  v.  McLeod,  12  John. 
(N.  Y)  182.  Thus,  a  tenant,  under 
a  written  lease,  at  a  rent  payable 
quarterly,  who  holds  over  after 
the  expiration  of  his  term,  is,  in 
the  absence  of  any  agreement  to 
the  contrarv,  a  tenant  at  suffer- 
ance, and  this  is  so  even  though 
the  lease  contfuns  language  from 
which  it  may  be  inferred  that  a 


further  term  is  contemplated. 
The  burden  is  upon  the  tenant  to 
show  that  the  Itmdlord  has  given 
his  assent  to  his  remaining,  in 
some  definite  manner,  and  the 
mere  fact  that  he  has  made  no  ob- 
jection thereto  does  not  change  the 
character  of  his  occupancy,  Ed- 
wards V.  Hale,  9  Allen  (Mass.),  462. 

*  Newell  V.  Sanford,  13  Iowa, 
191. 

« Hollingsworth  v.  Stennett,  2 
Esp.  716. 

'  In  Newell  v.  Sanford,  13  Iowa, 
191,  the  defendant,  by  the  permis- 
sion of  the  owner,  enterea  upon 
premises  and  erected  a  house  there- 
on. Shortly  after  the  house  was 
completed,  the  owner  served  him 
with  a  notice  to  quit.  He  did  not 
leave  the  premises,  however,  but 
remained  there  for  several  years 
without  molestation  from  the  own- 
er. In  an  action  brought  jfBr*t|^ 
owner  to  recover  xaM^HtlS^  ^itfl 
of  the  house  for- the  itariod  wMt 


CHAP,  n.]  Landlord  May  Dispossess  by  Force. 


25 


.  *• 


ant  by  sufferance  has  no  demisable  interest  in  the 
premises,  at  least  except  against  himself/  and  a  tenant 
under  him  takes  no  better  title  than  he  himself  had." 
He  stands  upon  a  mere  naked  possession,  and  being  a 
wrong-doer,  if  the  landlord  so  elects  to  treat  him,  he 
cannot  maintain  trespass  against  the  owner  for  an  entry 
upon  the  premises,  because  the  owner  has  the  right  to 
enter  and  put  an  end  to  the  tenant's  possession  by  force, 
instanter*  and  this  applies  to  all  persons  holding  under 
him.*  Except  where  provision  is  made  therefor  by  stat- 
ute, he  is  not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit ;  *  although  at 
common  law  where  the  holding  over  had  been  long  con- 
tinued a  demand  of  possession  was  required,  *  or  an  act- 
ual entry  by  the  landlord  or  some  person  authorized  by 
him,  before  the  landlord  could  maintain  trespass  or 
ejectment  against  the  tenant.'  In  many  of  the  States 
provision  is  now  made  by  statute  for  the  giving  of  no- 
tice, providing  how  and  what  notice  shall  be  given,  and 
the  practitioner  will  find  it  advisable  to  consult  the  stat- 
utes of  his  own  State  upon  this  question. 

Sec.  9.  Landlord  may  dispossess  by  force—cannot  main- 
tain trespass  against,  until  after  actual  entry.— The  tenant's 
possession,  at  common  law,  is  treated  as  wrongful,  and 
he  has  no  interest  as  against  the  landlord,  or  even  as 
against  a  stranger,  except  that  conferred  by  possession, 
and  the  landlord  under  certain  circumstances  can  enter 


quent  to  such  notice,  the  court 
held  that  the  notice  did  not  change 
the  relation  or  liability  of  the  ten- 
Lnt  from  what  it  was  before,  and 
that  he  was  not  liable  for  rent. 

•  Weaver  v.  Belcher,  3  East.  450 ; 
Shopland  v.  Ryder,  Cro.  Jac.  55 ; 

)le  on  Ejectment,  456. 

*  Shopl^d  V.   Ryder,  Cro.  Jac. 
> ;  Lord  Ellenborough  in  Thun- 

fder  V.  Belcher,  3  East.  451 ;  Hyatt 

[v  Wood,  4  John.  (N.  Y.)  150. 

»  Curtis  V.  Calvin,  1  Allen  (Mass.) 

^15  ;  Moore  v.  Mason,  1  id.  407  ;  9 

id.  530  ;  6  id.  77  ;  7  Met.  (Mass.) 

147  ;  5  Cush.  (Mass.)  218. 

itt  V.  Wood,  4  John.  (N.  Y.) 
Hyatt,  4  id.  313. 

1  Pick.  (Mass.) 
Srt.Bing.  856; 


Livingston  v.  Tanner,  14  N.  Y.  64 ; 
Torrev  v.  Torrey,  14  id.  480 ;  Keich 
V.  Hall,  Doug.  22 ;  Dorrell  v.  John- 
son, 17  Pick.  (Mass.)  263;  Haux- 
hurst  v.  Lebru,  38  Cal.  563 ;  Allen 
V.  Jaquish,  21  Wend.  (N.  Y.)628; 
Clapp  V.  Plaine,  18  Me.  624 ;  Stock- 
well  V.  Mark,  17  id.  455 ;  Hollis  v. 
Pool,  3  Met.  (Mass.)  350;  Doe  v. 
Adams,  12  N.  J.  L.  99 ;  Kingsley  v.  . 
Ames,  2  id.  29 ;  Wallis  v.  Delmar, 
29  L.  J.  Exchq.  276 ;  Doe  v.  Turner, 
7  M.  &  W.  235 ;  Doe  v.  Maisey,  8 
B.  &  C.  767 ;  Doe  v.  Lawder,  1 
Starkie,  308. 

•  Price  V.  Price,  ante ;  Crisp  v. 
Barber,  2  T.  R..  749;  Harrison  v. 
Murrell,  8  C.  &  P.  134. 

'  Co.  Litt.  57  b. 


2G 


Kinds  of  Tenancy. 


[§10. 


and  put  him  out  by  force,  provided  he  uses  no  more 
force  than  is  necessary,  and  gather  the  crops,  without 
liabihty  to  the  tenant,*  but  his  original  entiy  having 
been  lawful,  the  landlord  cannot  maintain  trespass 
against  him  until  he  has  determined  the  estate  by  an 
actual  entry  thereon,  or  some  other  equally  decisive  act." 
But  as  a  tenant  by  sufferance  must  come  into  the  pos- 
session by  the  act  of  the  owner,  if  he  comes  in  by  any 
other  method,  as  by  act  of  law,  he  is  a  trespasser  or 
abator  as  soon  as  the  estate  or  interest  acquired  by  oper- 
ation of  law  is  determined,  and,  as  against  the  State,  no 
such  tenancy  can  exist,  as  the  State  cannot  be  held 
guilty  of  laches.' 

Sec.  10.  How  the  tenancy  may  be  determined.— A  tenan- 
cy by  sufferance  may  be  determined  at  any  time  by  the 
entry  of  the  landlord  without  any  previous  demand  or 
notice  to  quit,*  and  he  may  forcibly  eject  the  tenant, 
using  no  more  force  than  is  necessary ;  *  but  it  is  held 
that  where  a  tenant  is  put  out  by  force,  without  a  pre- 
vious demand,  while  he  cannot  maintain  ejectment,  he 
may  maintain  trespass*  for  the  assault  and  battery  or 


1  Hilary  v.  Gray,  6  C.  &  P.  284 ; 
Ivesv.  Ives,  13  John.  (N.  Y.)235; 
Jones  V.  Muldrow,  1  Rice  (S.  C), 
64 ;  13  Vt.  273 ;  Jackson  v.  Farmer, 
9  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  201 ;  2  W.  &  S. 
(Penn.)  225 ;  Butcher  v.  Butcher,  7 
B.  &  C.  899 ;  Taunton  v.  Coster,  7 
T.  R.  431  ;  31  Me.  293 ;  Sampson  v. 
Henry,  11  Pick.  (Mass.)  579;  New- 
ton V.  Harland,  1  M.  &  G.  644; 
Turner  v.  Maymatt,  1  Bing.  158; 
Taylor  v.  Cole,  3  T.  R.  292 ;  Argent 
V.  Durant,  8  id.  403;  Harvey  v. 
Bridges,  14  M.  &  W.  437 ;  Norton 
V.  Harland,  1  M.  &  G.  644 ;  Pollen 
V.  Brewer,  7  C.  B.  (N.  S.)  371 ; 
Davison  v.  Wilson,  11  Q.  B.  890; 
Burling  v.  Reed,  11  id.  901,  but  the 
landlord,  while  not  liable  to  the 
tenant,  unless  guilty  of  excessive 
force,  subjects  himself  to  an  in- 
dictment for  a  forcible  en trv,  Archi- 
bald PI.  &  Ev.  in  C>.  Cas.  i5th  Ed. 
736.  The  plaintiff  having  the  right 
to  the  possession  of  a  nouse  oc- 
cupied by  the  defendant,  and  hav- 
ing given  him  notice  to  quit,  after- 
waros,  while  the  defendant  was 


temporarily  absent,  for  the  day 
only,  from  the  house,  which  he  had 
fastened  upon  leaving,  entered  the 
premises  by  forcing  open  the  door, 
and  placed  the  defendant's  furni- 
ture in  the  street,  and  fastened  up 
the  house  and  left  it.  The  defend- 
ant, on  returning,  forced  open  the 
door,  and  re-entered  and  occupied 
the  premises.  Held,  that  the  plain- 
tiflTs  entry  was  the  exercise  of  a  1 
legal  right  in  a  legal  manner,  and 
tliat  he  could  maintain  tres()ass  qtL 
d.  against  the  defendant  for  his 
subsequent  entry.  Mussey  v.  Scott, 
32  Vt.  82.  t 

'  Jackson  v.  McLeod,  12  John. 
(N.  Y.)  182. 

»  Co.  Litt.  57  b.  ;  2  Bl.  Com.  150. 

*  Bennett  v.  Turner,  7  M.  &  W. 
235. 

*  Fifty  Associates  v.  Rowland, 5 
Cush.  (Slass.)  218 ;  Currier  v.  Gale, 
9  Allen  (Maiw.),  530 ;  Crisp  v.  Bar- 
ber, 2  T.  R.  749 ;  Harrison  v.  Miuf- 
rell,  8  C.  &  P.  134.  •  r» 

«  Harrison  v«  JigHfll,  8  C.  &  F. 
134 ;  Crisp  v.: Barber,  !JT.  R.  T4$."i 


;■  J 


if  CHAP,  n.l 


Eent  Not  Eecoverable. 


21 


injury  to  his  goods,  but  not  for  trespass  to  the  land,  or 
the  disturbance  of  his  possession.*  The  landlord  may 
maintain  ejectment  against  the  tenant  without  any  pre- 
vious demand  or  notice  to  quit.' 

Sec.  11.  Bent  not  recoverable —At  common  law,  rent  is 
not  recoverable  of  a  tenant  by  sufferance,  and  if  the 
landlord  elects  to  treat  him  as  a  wrong-doer,  he  must  be 
content  to  waive  all  contract  liabilities  that  might  exist 
if  he  elected  to  treat  him  as  a  tenant  at  will. ' 

Bight  of  tenant  at  sufEbranoe  to  remove  fixtures.— A  tenant 
for  a  term,  who  holds  over  on  sufferance,  after  his  term 
has  expired,  may  remove  such  fixtures  as  he  might  have 
removed  during  the  term  ;  but  if  he  is  put  out  of  pos- 
session, or  if  he  quits  in  pursuance  of  a  notice  and  de- 
mand of  possession,  his  right  to  them  is  gone.* 

Sec.  12.  Tenant  liable  for  damages,  when.— Where  a  ten- 
ant holds  over  af tet  his  term  has  expired  and  interferes 
with  the  re-letting  of  the  premises,  he  is  liable  to  the 
landlord  for  the  damages  resulting  to  him  therefrom  ;  * 
but  if  the  premises  are  leased  to  another  party,  and  the 
tenant  in  possession  refuses  to  let  him  in,  the  lessee's 
remedy  is  not  against  the  landlord,  but  against  the  ten- 
ant holding  over." 

Sec.  13.  Landlord's  right  of  election,  as  to  tenant  holding 
over.— When  a  tenant  under  a  demise  for  a  term  holds 
over  after  the  termination  of  the  time  for  which  the 
premises  were  let  to  him,  without  any  new  demise,  the 
mdlord  may  elect  to  treat  him  as  a  trespasser  or  as  a 
jnant  holding  under  the  terms  of  the  original  lease,  ^ 


'  Col6  on  Ejectment,  456,    and 
le  landlord  would  only  be  liable 
nr  excessive  force,  or  an  unneces- 
sary injury  to  his  goods,  Overton 
'  r.  Lewis,  1  W.  &  S.  (Penn.)  90. 
«  Bennett  v.  Turner,  7  M.  &  W. 
W ;  Heming  v.  Brett,  H.  &  W.  3 ; 
on  Ejectment,  457. 
^opd  V.  Flood,  1  Allen  (Mass.), 
[ass.)  42. 

rood,  5  C.  B. 


N.  S.  516;  Woodfairs  Landlord 
and  Tenant,  534  ;  Gibson  v.  Ham- 
mersmith R.  R.  Ck).,  32  L.  J.  Ch. 
837. 

» Stoddard  v.  Waters,  30  Ark. 
156. 

« Gardner  v.  Ketelas,  3  Hill,  (N. 
Y.),  530. 

'  Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  2  Penn.  St. 
144 ;  Jackson  v.  Salmon,  4  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  327;    Conway    v.  Stark- 


28  Kinds  of  Tenancy.  [§  13. 

unless  it  appears  that  by  agreement  or  by  notice,  the^'- 
terms  of  the  original  agreement  or  lease  were  changed 
and  notice  given  by  the  landlord  to  the  tenant,  before 
the  term  expires,  that,  if  he  remains  upon  the  premises 
it  must  be  upon  certain  different  terms,  specifically  stat- 
ing them.  If  he  remains,  whether  he  signifies  his  as- 
sent thereto  or  not,  he  will  be  treated  as  subject  to  the 
original  lease  as  amended  by  such  notice,  A  tenant  for 
a  term,  as  for  two,  three  or  five  years,  with  the  privi- 
lege of  another  similar  term  or  some  other  specified  term, 
by  holding  over,  becomes  bound  for  a  second  terra  of 
equal  duration  with  the  first,  or  for  the  period  reserved 
to  him  in  the  lease.  *  In  a  Michigan  case  *  the  premises 
were  leased  for  one  year,  with  the  privilege  of  having 
the  same  three  years  at  the  same  rent  and  at  the  option 
of  the  lessee.  The  tenant  held  over  one  year  and  five 
months  without  giving  notice  that  he  would  remain 


weather,  1  Den.  (N.  Y.)  11 ;  PhU- 
lips  V.  Monges,  4  Whart.  (Penn.) 
256.  When  a  tenant  holds  over, 
whether  he  is  a  tenant  for  a  term 
of  years,  or  from  year  to  year,  he 
impliedly  holds,  according  to  the 
terms,  and  subject  to  all  the  condi- 
tions of  the  original  lease  which 
are  applicable  to  his  new  situa- 
tion, and  the  law  will  imply  those 
terms  which  are  found  in  the  con- 
tract which  has  expired.  De Young 
V.  Buchanan,  10  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  149 ; 
Doe  V.  Bell,  5  T.  R.  471 ;  Witt  v. 
Mayor,  &c.  5  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  248  ;  Bradley  v.  C!ovel,  4  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  349 ;  Osgood  v.  Demey,  13 
John.  (N.  Y.)  240  ;  Quinette  v.  Car- 
penter, 35  Mo.  502 ;  Deller  v.  Rob- 
erts, 13  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  Co.;  Lon- 
guemore  v.  Daugherty,  35  Penn. 
St.  45  ;  Right  v.  Darby,  1  T.  R.  162; 
Moore  t.  Basely,  3  Ohio,  294 ;  Ba- 
con V.  Brown,  9  Conn.  384 ;  Bruner 
V.  Knapp,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  332; 
Harkins  v.  Pope,  10  Ala.  493; 
Hunt  V.  Wolfe,  2  Daly  (N.  Y.  C. 
P.),  298  :  and  he  is  subject  to  a  dis- 
tress, whether  the  lease  is  by  parol 
or  by  deed.  Webber  v.  Shearman, 
3  Hill  (N.  Y.),  347;  Frantz  v. 
W'otxi,  2  Hill  (S.  C.)  367.  It  makes 
no  difference  upon  what  pretence 
the  tenant  holds  over,  the  rule  is 
the  same  in  all  cases.  Thus,  where 


the  defendant  held  premises  under 
a  lease  for  years,  which  expired  at 
midsummer,  1821,  but  he  then  re- 
fused to  give  up  possession,  claim- 
ing to  be  entitled  to  a  notice  to 
qmt,  and  he  continued  to  occupy 
until  Christmas,  and  paid  two 
quarters'  rent,  it  was  held  that 
such  occupancy  conclusively  show 
a  new  tenancy  from  year  to  year, 
and  that  he  was  liable  for  rent  due 
at  Lady's-Day,  1822,  although  he 
quit  at  Christmas,  1821.  Bishop  v. 
Howard,  2  B.  &  C.  100 ;  Waring 
V.  King,  8  M.  &  W.,  571.  By 
holding  over  he  i3  a  wrong-doer, 
and  ejectment  lies  against  him  by 
the  landlord  without  any  demand .. 
for  possession  or  notice  to  quit,  but 
if  the  landlord  has  in  any  wise  as-* 
sented  thereto,  he  becomes  a  ten-» 
ant  from  year  to  year.  Den  v. 
Adams,  12  N.  J.  L.  99 ;  Hemphill 
V.  Flynn,  2  Penn.  St.  144,  and 
thereafter  is  entitled  to  notice  to 
quit.  Jackson  v.  Salmon,  4  Wend; 
(N.  Y.)  327 ;  Evertsen  v.  Sawver,  2 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  507 ;  Sherwood  v. 
Phillips,  13  id.  479 ;  Abeel  v.  Rad* 
cliffe,  15  John.  (N.  Y.)  505. 

*  Montgomerv  v.  Hamilton  Coun- 
ty ,76  Ind.  362  ;  Am.  40  Rep.  250; 
bald  V.  First  Nat'l  Bank,  42 

^  Delashman  v.  Betty, 
292.  •     •     ."     v^' 


CHAP,  n.]     Landlord's  Right  of  Election. 


29 


longer.  The  court  held  that  he  was  liable  for  the  whole, 
term  of  three  years.  The  court  said  **upon  principle,  it 
would  c>ertainly  seem  that  the  actual  continuance  of 
such  occupation,  was  the  best  and  most  conclusive  evi- 
dence of  his  intention  to  continue.  And  as  it  was  his 
option  to  have  the  term  expire  at  one  year,  or  three 
years,  and  he  had  covenanted  to  deliver  up  possession  at 
the  end  of  the  term,  but  one  inference  could  legally  and 
properly  be  drawn  from  such  continuance  after  the  year, 
to  wit,  that  he  intended  to  continue  rightfully  according 
to  the  terms  of  his  lease,  rather  than  wrongfully,  in  de- 
fiance of  its  provisions."  Thus,  in  a  Missouri  case, 
where  a  notice  was  given  by  a  landlord  more  than  three 
months  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  term,  informing 
the  tenant  that  if  he  desired  to  retain  the  premises  he 
could  have  them  at  a  specified  rate,  provided  he  signi- 
fied his  assent  by  a  certain  designated  day,  but  that  if 
he  did  not  accede  to  the  terms  offered,  but  continued  to 
hold,  a  certain  additional  rent  would  be  exacted,  and 
the  tenant  made  no  answer  to  the  notice,  but  held  over, 
and  at  the  first  rent  day  thereafter  refused  to  pay  the 
increased  rent,  but  tendered  the  amount  due  according 
to  the  prior  lease,  it  was  held  that  by  continuing  in  pos- 
session after  notice  and  remaining  silent,  the  landlord 
had  a  right  to  construe  his  silence  into  an  assent  or  ac- 
quiescence and  hold  him  for  the  increased  rent.'    The 


>  Hunt  V.  Bailey,  89  Mo.  267.    In 
Roberts  v.    Hayward,  8  C.  &  P. 
^432,    a  party    occupied    premises 
ider   an    agreement    for   three 
,^ear8  at  £45  a  year,  which  expired 
tt  midsummer,  18!^.     He  did  not 
go  out,  nor  did  the  laodlord 
kke  any  steps  to  compel  him,  but 
Michaelmas  following  gave  him 
>tice  to  quit  at  Lady's-Day,  1827, 
pay  rent  at  £50  a  year.     He  re- 
'  led  in  possession  but  refused 
pay  more  than  £45  rent.     The 
)urt  held  that,  under  the  circum- 
Lces  he  must  be  taken  to  have 
[uiesced  in   the  new  proposal, 
was  bound    to  pay  the  £50 
Best,  C.  J.,  said,    **  The 
Lder  the  agreement  ex- 
"*  1826.     Im- 


mediately after  that  time,  the 
plaintiff  was  a  trespasser ;  but  the 
landlord  was  not  obliged  to  treat 
him  as  such,  but  might  make  pro- 
posals to  him,  to  renew  the  rela- 
tion of  landlord  and  tenant  be- 
tween them.  This  he  did,  and  the 
plaintiff  did  not  say,  'I  will  go  out 
oirectly.  His  silence  is  tantaSiount 
to  saving,'  *I  will  continue 
in  on  the  terms  of  your  proposal.* 
I  am  of  the  opinion  that  under 
the  circumstances,  the  distress 
was  regular.  I  think  the  land- 
lord had  a  right  to  make  any 
terms  he  pleased,  for  the  time  sub- 
sequent to  Lady's-Day,  1827,  and 
if-  the  plaintiff  would  not  accept 
them,  to  turn  him  out  of  posses- 
sion."    In  Digby  v.  Atkinson,  4 


i 


30 


Ejnds  of  Tenancy. 


[§13. 


old  lease  controls,  except  in  so  far  as  it  has  been  changed  i^ 
by  parol,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  by  deed  or  under  seal,  *' 
does  not  affect  the  question,  because  the  lease  is  not  the 
contract  under  which  he  holds  over,  but  only  evidence 
to  uphold  the  implied  contract  resulting  from  such  hold- 
ing over,  except  so  far  as  it  has  been  changed  by  notice 
or  agreement,  and  assumpsit  and  not  covenant,  is  the 
proper  remedy  for  a  recovery  of  the  rent  or  a  breach  of 
any  of  the  conditions  of  the  old  lease.*  An  alteration 
in  the  rent  to  be  paid  will  not  overcome  the  presump- 
tion that  the  premises  in  other  respects  were  to  be  held, 
subject  to  the  terms  of  the  former  demise  ;'  but  this  pre- 
sumption may  be  overcome  by  proof  of  an  intention 
to  alter  the  terms,  or  of  a  new  demise."  If  the  rent, 
under  the  lease,  was  payable  weekly,  monthly,  or  quar- 
terly, it  will  be  so  payable  under  the  new  implied  demise,* 
and  in  all  respects  the  covenants  and  terms  of  the  old 
demise  will  apply  to  that  which  is  implied,*  except  where 
the  covenants  are  collateral  to  its  operation,  or  are  such 
as  can  only  be  performed  during  the  term.*  When  the 
title  to  premises  occupied  by  a  tenant  is  in  dispute,  and 
there  is  no  recognized  landlord,  a  tenant  holding  over  is 
liable  to  the  person  in  whom  the  title  is,  for  their  use  and 
occupation,  but  the  rate  fixed  in  the  former  lease,  under 


Camp.  276,  the  doctrine  that  the 
tenant  holds  subject  to  the  terms 
of  the  old  lease,  except  as  amended 
by  parol  was  forcibly  illustrated. 
In  that  case  premises  were  leased 
to  the  defendant  for  a  term,  the 
lease  containing  a  condition  that 
the  tenant  should  keep  the  prem- 
ises in  repair.  After  his  term  had 
expired,  ne  verbally  agreed  to  hold 
over  at  an  increased  rent,  notliing 
more  beingsaid  by  the  parties  as 
to  the  terms  of  holding.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  court  held 
that  he  must  be  presumed  to  hold 
under  the  covenants  of  the  former 
lease,  as  far  as  they  were  applic- 
able to  his  new  situation,  and  that 
a  change  as  to  the  rent  did  not 
amount  to  a  new  demise,  and 
the  premises  having  been  burned 
by  accident,  he  was  held  liable  to 
rebuild  them. 


*  See  Digby  v.  Atkinson  in  the 
last  note.  Monck  v.  Geekie,  9  Ad. 
&  El.  841. 

« Monck  V.  Geekie,  5  Q.  B.  841, 
Doe  V.  Ruffian,  5  Esp.  4 ;  Digby  v. 
Atkinson,  4  Camp.  275. 

»Thetford  v.  Tyler,  8  Q.  B.  95.     , 

*  Conway  v.  Starkweather,  \ 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  118 ;  Dorrill  v.  Steph} 
ens,  4  McCord  (S.  C),  59. 

»Frantz  v.  Ward,  2  Hill  (S.  C.\ 
367 ;  Humphreys  v.  Frank,  18  CV 
B.  853 ;  Harkins  v.  Poi^e,  10  Ala. 
493 ;  De  Yoimg  v.  Buchanan,  lOl 
G.  &  J.  (Md.)  149;  Breener  v,, 
Knapp,  1  Pick.  (Majss.)  832 ;  Phil-, 
lips  V.  Monges,  4  Whart.  (Penn.) 
226;  Bacon  v.  Brown,  9  Coniv 
384. 

«biller  V.  Roberts,  13  S.  R,' 
(Penn.)  60. 


"i  CHAP,  n.]     Landlord's  Right  op  Election. 


31 


!••' 


such  circumstances,  is  not  conclusive  upon  either,*  when 
■*v  the  lease  itself  contains  a  provision  for  renewal,  but  pro- 
vides for  the  appraisement  of  the  premises  at  the  end  of 
the  term,  and  for  the  payment  of  a  specified  percentage 
upon  the  valuation  so  fixed,  as  rent,  under  the  renewed 
tenant  from  year  to  year  under  the  terms  of  the  old 
lease  and  the  new  rates  only  take  effect  from  the 
time  when  the  renewal  lease  was  tendered,^  But  when 
the  circumstances  are  such  that  no  inference  can  be 
drawn  as  to  the  terms  upon  which  the  tenant  did 
hold  over,  the  question  must  be  left  to  the  jury."  By 
the  common  law,  if  a  tenant  who  has  occupied  and 
paid  rent  annually,  holds  over  into  a  new  year,  it  is 
evidence  of  a  new  demise  for  a  year,*  or  rather  from  year 
to  year,  according  to  the  circumstances/  or  a  tenant  at 


» VanBrunt  v.  Pope,  6  Abb.  Pr. 
N.  S.  (N.  Y.)  217. 

«  Ryder  v.  Jenny,  2  Robt.  (N.  Y. 
Superior  Ct.)  65. 

*  In  Mayor,  &c.  v.  Tyler,  10  Jur. 
68,  A  was  tenant  to  the  plaintiff,  of 

E remises  which  the  plaintiff  gave 
ina  notice  to  quit  on  the  11th  day 
of  October,  1843.  After  the  notice 
was  given,  the  defendant  agreed 
to  take  a  lease  from  that  day.  Be- 
fore that  day,  the  defendant  was, 
with  the  consent  of  the  plaintiff, 
substituted  as  tenant  in  tne  place 
of  A  for  the  balance  of  A's  term. 
The  plaintiff  and  defendant  could 
not  agree  as  to  the  terms  of  the 
lease  to  be  granted  to  the  defend- 
ant ;  but  the  defendant  continued 
to  occupy  premises  for  half  a  year 
after  October  11th.  It  was  held 
that,  under  these  circumstances, 
there  was  uo  presumption  that  he 
occupied  subject  to  the  terms  of 
the  determined  lease,  but  that  it 
was  a  question  for  the  jury, 
whether  he  occupied  under  the 
old  lease  or  under  a  new  taking. 

*  Bacon  v.  Brown,  9  Conn.  3134 ; 
Hoof  V.  L^d,  1  Cr.  (U.  S.  C.  C.) 
167  ;  Harkiifs  v.  Pope,  10  Ala.  493, 
but  in  Alabama  it  is  held  that  a 
rearly  tenant  under  a  void  lease, 
)y  holding  over,  becomes  a  mere 
;nant  at  will,  and  that  his  tenancy 
ly  at  any  time  be  put  an  end  to, 
[uitting  the  premises,  or  by  a 
le  possession  on  the 


part  of  the  landlord.  Crommelin  v. 
Thiess,  31  Ala.  412.  In  Iowa,  in  a 
case  where  a  tenant  at  wiU  of  a  lot 
of  land  built  a  house  thereon,  and 
was  then  served  b^  his  landlord 
with  a  notice  to  quit,  after  which 
however,  he  remained  in  posses- 
sion for  several  years,  by  the  suf- 
ferance and  permission  of  the  land- 
lord, it  was  neld  tliat  the  charac- 
ter of  his  tenancy  was  not  changed 
by  the  notice,  and  that  he  was  not 
thereby  placed  under  any  different 
liability  than  he  was  under  before, 
and  consequently  was  not  liable 
for  the  rent  of  the  house  built  by 
him.  Newell  v.  Sanford,  13  Iowa, 
191 .  In  Maine,  by  statute,  a  tenant 
holding  over  by  consent,  after  the 
expiration  of  his  term,  is  a  tenant 
at  will  merely,  and  is  only  liable 
for  rent  so  long  as  he  occupies 
(Kendall  v.  Moore,  30  Me.  827), 
and  it  is  held  that  this  tenancy 
may  be  determined  by  him  by  his 
doing  any  act  inconsistent  with 
the  lease  under  which  he  held 
originally,  as  by  receiving  a  deed 
from  a  stranger,  and  causmg  it  to 
be  recorded.  Bannock  v.  Whip- 
ple, 12  Me.  346. 

*  Den  V.  Adams,  12  N.  J.  L.  99 ; 
Jackson  v.  Salmon,  4  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  327  ;  Bradley  v.  Covel,  4  Cow. 
(^.  Y.)  349  ;  Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  2 
Fenn.  St.  144.  In  New  York  city- 
it  is  held  that  a  tenant  who  holds 
over  and  remains  in  possession  of 


i 


32 


Kinds  op  Tenancy. 


[§13. 


will,  if  the  circumstances  are  such  as  to  rebut  a  renewal 
of  the  former  tenancy.  Thus,  if  a  tenant  whose  lease 
has  expired,  is  permitted  to  continue  in  possession 
pending  a  treaty  for  further  lease,  he  is  not  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  but  so  strictly  a  tenant  at  will,  that 


•i 


premisee  leased  to  him  at  a  certain 
rent  with  the  assent  of  the  owner, 
after  the  expiration  of  the  term, 
without  any  new  agreement  as  to 
rent,  becsomes  a  tenant  from  year 
to  year,  and  liable  for  the  rent  at 
the  same  rate  up  to  the  1st  of  May 
next  after  the  holding  imder  sucn 
tenancy  commenced.  Witt  v. 
Mayor,  &c.,  5  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Su- 
perior Ct.)  248  ;  Schuyler  v.  Smith 
et  al.,  51  N.  Y.  808,  17  Am.  Rep. 
609.  To  the  same  eflfect  see  Di^bv 
V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  275,  in  wmcn 
it  was  held  that  a  tenant  holding 
over,  impliedly  holds  subject  to 
all  the  conditions  in  the  former 
leases  applicable  to  his  new  situa- 
tion, and  that  the  fact  that  the 
lease  is  in  writing  and  under  seal, 
does  not  make  any  difference,  and 
that  a  parol  change  in  the  terms  of 
the  lease  made  to  apply  to  the  new 
situation  may  be  snown,  and  that 
the  lease  will  control  except  as  to 
such  changes.  The  lease  is  not  the 
contract,  but  is  evidence  of  the 
terms  of  the  implied  contract,  and 
assumpsit  may  be  brought  to  re- 
cover the  rent,  although  the  lease 
is  imder  seal  and  it  is  also  the 
proper  remedy  for  a  breach  of  any 
of  the  conditions  of  the  old  lease, 
and  in  this  lease  was  held  to  be  a 
proper  remedy  for  a  breach  of  the 
conditions  as  to  repairs.  Covenant 
would  not  lie,  because  the  case  is 
not  in  force,  as  a  lease,  but  only 
affords  the  evidence,  from  which 
the  terms  of  the  new  holding  are 
to  be  implied.  The  liability  of  a 
party  holding  over  after  the  expi- 
ration of  a  tenancy  by  agreement, 
says  Mr.  Smith,  in  a  note  to  Riggs 
&  Bell,  ante,  2  Smith's  L.  C.  73  a, 
is  rather  a  matter  of  evidence  than 
of  law  ;  and  although  Lord  Ken- 
yon,  in  Riggs  V.  Bell,  5  T.  R.  47, 
and  Lord  Ellenborough,  in  Digby 
V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  278,  seem  to 
lay  down  the  rule  as  one  of  law, 
yet  in  all  the  more -recent  cases 
upon  the  subject,  the  existence  of 
any  tenancy  in  the  party  holding 


over,  (beyond  a  tenancy  of  suffer- 
ance, which  exists  bv  law  in  every 
case  where  a  person  nolds  over  by 
wrong  after  the  determination  of 
a  rightful  estate,  but  which  im- 
ports no  privity  between  the  land- 
lord ana  tenant,  Co.  Litt.  57  b, 
270  b,  271  a,)  as  well  as  the  terms 
upon  which  such  tenancy  exists, 
have  been  considered  as  questions 
for  the  jury :  the  construction  of 
any  written  agreement,  and  the 
applicability  of  its  terms  to  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year,  being  for 
the  decision  of  the  court.  See  the 
remarks  of  Lord  Denman,  C.  J., 
and  Littledale,  J.,  in  Johnson  v. 
The  Churchwardens  of  St.  Peter, 
Hereford,  4  Ad.  &  El.  525  ;  see  also 
Jones  y.  Shears,  4  Ad.  &  El.  832 ; 
Algar  y.  Watson,  Cttr.  &  Marsh, 
494 ;  and  The  Mayor  of  Thetford  v. 
Tyler,  8  Q.  B.  95,  in  which  case  Mr. 
Justice  Wightman  savs,  "  When  a 
party  is  allowed  to  hold  over  after 
the  expiration  of  a  tenancy  by 
agreement,  the  torms  on  which  he 
continues  to  occupy  are  matter  of 
evidence  rather  than  of  law."  The 
law,  it  is  apprehended,  does  not 
infer  any  particular  contract  from 
the  mere  fact  of  entry  under  an 
agreement  for  a  future  lease,  or 
a  holding  over  after  the  expira- 
tion of  a  past  agreement,  per  Lord 
Abinger,  C.  B.,  Waring  v.  King,  8 
M:  &  W.  575.  See  also  Jenner  v. 
Clegg,  1  M.  &  R.  217 ;  Jones  v. 
Shears,  4  Ad.  &  El.  882 ;  Chapman 
y.  Towner,  6  M.  &  W.  104,  per- 
Parke,  B.;  Risely  v.  Ryle,  11  M.  & 
W.  16 ;  and  The  Mayor  of  Thetford 
v.  Tyler  8  Q.  B.  95.  But  where 
the  party  so  occupying  pays  rent 
according  to  the  terms  of  the 
agreement,  either  pas^  or  future, 
and  thereby  becomes  tenant  from 
year  to  year,  the  inference  is  ir- 
resistible, in  the  absence  of  any- 
thing to  show  a  different  under- 
standing, that  the  parties  intend 
the  occupation  to  continue  upo^ 
such  of  the  t^rms  of  the  agreem4M 
as  are  applicable  tp  iacli  a  lust- 


m 


CHAP,  n.]     Landlord's  Eight  of  Election. 


33 


he  may  be  turned  out  of  possession  without  notice.* 
But,  if  a  tenancy  has  commenced,  that  is,  if  there  has 
been  a  holding  over  without  the  intervention  of  negotia- 
tions for  a  new  lease,  for  hotvever  short  a  period,  the  ten- 
ant cannot  absolve  himself  from  liabihty  for  the  rent  for 
the  unexpired  term  that  has  set  in,  in  consequence  of  his 
holding  over,  by  abandoning  the  possession,  if  the  land- 
lord elects  to  hold  him  as  tenant,"  even  though  he  gave 
the  landlord  notice,  before  his  term  expired,  of  his  inten- 
tion not  to  keep  the  premises.*  The  same  principle  applies 
where  the  letting  is  by  the  day,  week,  month  or  quarter  ; 
if  the  tenant  holds  over,  he  is  a  tenant  for  an- 
other week,  month  or  quarter  according  to  the 
terms  of  the  agreement  under  which  he  entered/ 
The  tenant  has  no  election  in  the  matter.  It 
is  not  for  him  to  say  whether  he  will  occupy  the  relation 
of  a  wrong-doer  or  of  a  tenant,  but  the  right  of  election 
belongs  exclusively  to  the  landlord,  and  his  election 
binds  the  tenant,  whatever  the  tenant's  intention  may 
have  been,  and  although  the  landlord  knew  what  his 
intentions  were  before  the  time  expired.  *  Thus,  in  the  case 
cited  from  51  N.  Y.,  the  defendant  entered  into  the  occu- 


ancy;  and  this*  is  probably  all 
that  was  intended  by  Lord  Ken- 
yon  in  the  principal  case  and  by 
Lord  Ellenborough  in  Digby  v. 
Atkinson. 

*  Hollingsworth  v.  Stennett,  3 
Esp.  717. 

« In  Witt  V.  Mayor,  &c.,  of  N.Y., 
5  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.J  248, 
the  defendants  who  entered  into 
possession  under  a  written  lease, 
remained  in  possession  from  year 
to  year  after  the  expiration  of 
that  lease  in  May,  1861,  until 
May  1st,  1868,  with  the  assent 
of  the  owners,  and  with  the 
like  assent,  continued  to  occupy 
the  premises  for  at  least  a  week 
after  the  last-mentioned  date,  with- 
out giving  any  notice  to  the  lessor 
that  they  would  not  continue  to 
occupy  the  premises  during  the 
whole  of  the  year,   commencing 

ay  Ist,  1868.    Tlie  court  held  that 

were  liable  for  the  rent  up  to 

J^64,  although  they  did 


not  occupy  them.  A  tenancy'  at 
sufferance  may  exist  where  the 
original  entry  was  lawful,  Kenney 
V.  Sweeney,  14  R,  I.  481.  A  person 
who  enters  under  a  contract  with 
an  agent  which  is  never  ratified, 
is  a  tenant  at  sufferance,  and  after 
demand  is  made  upon  him  for 
possession  and  a  refusal  to  give  it, 
he  becomes  liable  for  rent.  Smith 
V.  Singleton,  71  Ga.  68. 

•Conway  V.  Starkweather,  1  Den. 
113;  Schuyler  v.  Smith,  51  N.  Y. 
809  ;   17  Am.  Rep.  609. 

*  Gray  v.  Bompas,  11  C.  R  (N.  S.) 
520. 

*  Conway  v.  Stai^kweather,  1 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  113;  Schuyler  v. 
Smith,  51  N.  Y.  309  ;  17  Am.  Rep. 
609 ;  Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  2  Penn. 
St.  147  ;  Bacon  v.  Brown,  9  Conn. 
834 ;  Harkins  v.  Pope,  10  Ala.  493 ; 
Hoop  V.  Ladd,  1  Cr.  (U.  S.  C.  C.) 
167 ;  Osgood  v.  Dewey,  13  John. 
(N.  Y.)  240 ;  Logan  v.  Herron,  8  S. 
&  R.  (Penn.)  459. 

3 


34 


Kinds  of  Tenancy. 


[§13: 


pancy  of  a  wharf  belonging  to  the  plaintiff  under  a  lease 
for  a  year,  to  commence  May  1st,  1863.  In  March,  1864, 
before  the  lease  had  expired,  the  plaintiff  gave  the  de- 
fendants notice  that  if  they  desired  to  take  the  premises 
for  another  year,  he  would  increase  the  rent  one 
hundred  dollars.  Upon  receiving  such  notice,  and  before 
their  term  expired,  they  gave  the  plaintiff  notice  that  they 
should  not  take  or  keep  the  premises  for  another  year 
after  the  1st  of  May,  1864,  and  then  hired  another  wharf, 
of  which  the  plaintiff  was  aware.  The  wharf  rented  by 
them,  not  being  ready  for  occupancy  on  the  1st  of  May, 
1864,  they  continued  to  land  their'boats  at  the  plaintiff's 
wharf  up  to  May  21st,  1864,  when  they  ceased  to  occupy 
it  at  all.  The  rent  was,  by  the  terms  of  the  old  lease,  pay- 
able quarterly,  and  the  rent  for  two  quarters,  ending  Nov. 
1st,  1864,  not  having  been  paid,  the  plaintiff  brought  an 
action  therefor,  to  recover  the  rent  at  the  rates  fixed  in 
the  old  lease.  The  defendants  had  offered  to  pay  the 
plaintiff  for  the  use  of  his  wharf  for  the  twenty-one  days 
that  they  held  over,  and  insisted  that,  in  view  of  their  no- 
tice to  him,  and  the  circumstances,  they  could  not  be  held 
chargeable  for  rent,  except  during  the  period  of  actual  oc- 
cupancy. The  Commission  of  Appeals,  however,  held  that 
they  were  chargeable  as  tenants  for  the  whole  year,  and 
that  they  could  not  by  any  notice  or  otherwise,  change 
their  relation  to  the  landlord.*    In  an  English  case'  an  ap- 


»  The  opinion  of  Earl,  C,  is 
given  entire,  so  far  as  it  relates  to 
this  question.  He  said  :  **  The  an- 
swer admits  the  relation  of  landlord 
and  tenant  between  the  parties,  as 
to  the  wharf,  and  that  the  defend- 
ants had  held  the  wharf  as  tenants 
for  several  years  prior  to  the  1st 
day  of  May,  1864,and  paid  rent  foi 
the  same  ;  that  the  tenancv  expired 
May  1, 1864,  and  that  they  held  over 
the  term  until  May  21st.  It  does 
not  appear  precisely  what  the 
rights  of  the  def  endsmts  were  imder 
their  lease,  nor  upon  what  water 
the  wharf  was  located.  From  the 
fact,  however,  that  it  was  used  for 
a  steamboat  landing,  we  may  infer 


that  it  was  upon  the  Hudson  river. 
The  defendants  admit  that  they 
hired  the  wharf  and  were  tenante 
of  it  under  the  plaintiff , and  if  they 
did  not  have  the  exclusive  right  to 
use  it  as  a  steamboat  landing,  they 
at  least  had  the  exclusive  right  to 
collect  wharfage  from  all  who  did 
use  it.  Commissioners  of  Pilots  v. 
Clark,  83  N.  Y.  251.  I  am  there- 
fore, of  the  opinion  that  the  defend- 
ants* liabilities  are  the  same  as  if 
they  hired  a  house  instead  of  a 
wharf.  The  plaintiff  claims  that 
because  the  defendants  held  over 
and  continued  in  the  occupancy  of 
the  premises  for  three  weeks  eiter 
the  expiration  of  the  lease,  he  had 


^  Jones  V.  Shears,  4  Ad.  &  ^ 
483.  ^ 


C3HAP.  n.]     Laot>lord's  Eight  of  Election. 


35 


parently  different  doctrine  was  held,  and  the  court  seemed 
to  be  of  the  opinon  that  the  intention  of  the  tenant  was 
to  be  considered,  as  well  as  the  intention  of  the  landlord, 


the  rizht  to  hold  them  as  tenants 
for  the  whole  year.  TTiis  they 
deny,  because  they  gave  him  notice 
before  the  expiration  of  the  term, 
that  they  did  not  intend  to  occupy 
the  premises  for  another  year, 
and  made  arrangements,  with  his 
knowledge,  to  occupy  another 
wharf.  I  am  of  opinion  that  the 
plaintifTs  claim  is  well  founded. 

The  law  is  too  well  settled  to  be 
disputed,  that  where  a  tenant  holds 
over  after  the  expiration  of  his 
term,  the  law  vnll  miply  an  agree- 
ment to  hold  for  a  year  upon  the 
terms  of  the  prior  lease.  Woodf . 
Landlord  &  Tenant,  218 ;  Right  v. 
Darbv,  1  T.  R.  162;  Bradley  v. 
Covel,  4  Ck)w.  849;  Evertson  v. 
Sawyer,  2  Wend.  607.  But  the  de- 
f  encfants  claim  that  this  implication 
of  law  may  be  rebutted,  and  that 
the  tenants  may  show  by  proof 
that  they  did  not  intend  to  hold 
upon  the  same  terms  as  the  prior 
lease;  and  they  claim  that  the 
notice  which  they  gave  in  this  case 
was  sufficient  to  overcome  this  im- 
plication. The  argument  on  the 
part  of  the  appellants  is,  that  the 
relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  for 
any  given  time,  can  be  created  by 
agreement  only,  and,  in  order  to 
make  the  agreement  there  must  be 
mutualily.  The  minds  of  the  par- 
ties must  meet,  and  both  assent  to 
the  agreement,  and  that  the  notice 
in  this  case  shows  that  the  defend- 
ants did  not  assent  to  the  tenancy 
claimed.  This  argument,  as  ap- 
plied to  most  contracts,  would  be 
sound.  The  general  rule  undoubt- 
edlv  is,  that  it  takes  two  parties  to 
make  an  agreement,  and  that  their 
minds  must  meet.  But  this  rule  is 
not  of  universal  application.  The 
law  sometimes  steps  in  and  makes 
agreements  for  parties  which  they 
did  not  mutually  intend.  A  wrong* 
doer  converts  my  personal  prop- 
erty, intending  never  no  pay  me  for 
it.  I  may  sue  him  in  trover,  or  I 
may  sue  him  as  upon  a  sale,  upon 
an  implied  promise  to  pay. 
Another  may  receive  my  money, 

itending  not  to  pay  me.  Yet  I 
sue  him  for  money  had  and 


received,  upon  an  implied  promise 
to  pay.  In  neither  of  these  cases 
would  the  wrong-doer  have  the 
option  to  determine  whether  I 
should  sue  him  in  tort  or  upon 
contract.  In  this  case  the  defend- 
ants held  over  wrongfully.  It  can- 
not be  disputed  that  they  were  tres- 
passers; and  their  notice  did  not 
deprive  their  act  of  holding  over 
of  its  tortious  character.  The  law 
should  not  give  them  the  option  to 
determine  whether  they  should  be 
treated  as  trespassers  or  as  tenants. 
This  option  should  be  accorded  to 
the  innocent  owner  of  the  property. 
The  law  regards  the  possession  of 
real  estate  as  a  great  advantage  in 
any  dispute  in  reference  to  it.  And, 
hence,  a  tenant  who  has  obtained 
possession  of  real  estate  cannot 
dispute  the  title  of  his  landlord; 
and,  having  obtained  possession 
from  his  landlord,  he  should  not  be 
permitted  to  hold  over,  deny  his 
tenancy  and  convert  himself,  at 
his  option,  into  a  wrong-doer.  If 
he  may  give  notice  that  he  does  not 
intend  to  hold  over  as  tenant,  and 
yfet  hold  for  three  or  six  months, 
without  being  a  tenant  at  any  time, 
leaving  his  landlord  to  an  imper*- 
feet  and  uncertain  remedy  by  ac- 
tion of  trespass  or  ejectment,  he 
may  greatly  embarrass  his  landlord 
and  defeat  a  letting  for  the  balance 
of  the  year.  The  safe  and  just 
rule  I  believe  to  be  the  one  estab- 
lished by  authority,  that  a  tenant 
holds  over  the  term  at  his  peril ; 
and  the  owner  of  the  premises 
may  treat  him  as  a  trespasser 
or  as  a  tenant  for  another 
year  upon  the  terms  of  the  prior 
lease,  so  far  as  appUcable.  If  the 
argument  of  appellants*  counsel,  as 
to  mutuality  and  consent  of  both 
parties,  is  sound,  then  a  tenant 
may  hold  over  an  entire  year,  and 
give  notice  at  its  commencement 
that  he  will  not  pay  as  much  rent 
as  stipulated  in  tne  prior  lease,  or 
that  he  will  not  perform  some  other 
covenant  contamed  in  the  same, 
and  then  claim,  at  the  end  of  the 
year,  that  he  is  not  liable  to  pay 
the  rent,  or  bound  by  the  covenant, 


36 


KmDS  OF  Tenancy. 


[§13. 


and  that  it  was  for  the  jury  to  say  whether  the  tenant, 
by  holding  over,  intended  to  continue  his  tenancy.  But 
the  doctrine  of  this  case  is  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  Enghsh  courts,  both  before  and  since  it  was  made, 
and  is  ignored  by  English  text  writers,  and  was  expressly 
repudiated  by  Earle,  C.  ,  in  the  New  York  case  previously 
referred  to.  Indeed,  at  the  Assizes  the  question  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  raised,  but  the  case  turned  upon  the 


because  he  did  not  assent,  and,  thus 
that  the  mind  of  the  parties  did 
not  meet.  In  such  case,  no  matter 
what  objection  the  tenant  made,  so 
long  as  the  landlord  did  not  consent 
to  new  terms,  he  would  be  boimd 
by  the  terms  of  the  prior  lease. 

The  conclusion  which  I  have 
reached  upon  this  branch  of  the  case 
is  sustained  by  authority. 

In  Conway  v.  Starkweather,  1 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  113,  it  was  held  that 
where  a  tenant,  before  the  expira- 
tion of  his  term,  communicated  to 
the  landlord  his  determination  not 
to  keep  the  prenises  another  year, 
but,  nevertheless,  remained  in  pos- 
session a  f oilnight  after  the  expira- 
tion of  the  term,  such  continuance 
in  possession,  notwithstanding 
what  had  taken  place,  enabled  the 
landlord  to  treat  him  as  a  tenant 
for  another  year,  upon  the  same 
terms  as  the  prior  lease.  It  was 
held  that  the  landlord  had  the  elec- 
tion to  treat  him  either  as  a  tres- 
passer or  as  a  tenant.  Tlie  tenant 
there  claimed,  as  the  defendants  do 
here,  that  the  holding  over  only 
furnished  presumptive  evidence  of 
the  continuance  of  the  tenancy, 
which  was  suflBciently  rebutted  by 
proof  that  the  tenant  had  given 
notice  that  he  had  hied  other 
premises,  and  refused  to  hire 
the  premises  in  question.  But  it 
was  held  that  the  act  of  the  tenant, 
in  holding  over,  gave  the  landlord 
the  legal  right  to  treat  him  as  a 
tenant  for  another  year ;  and  that 
it  was  not  in  his  power  to  throw  off 
that  character,  nowever  onerou  it 
might  be.  It  is  conceded  on  the  part 
of  the  appellants  that  this  case  is  an 
authority  in  point  for  the  plaintiff 
herein.  But  we  are  asked  to  over- 
i-ule  it.  This  we  should  not  do. 
The  case  seems  to  have  been  well 
considered.  It  lias  stood  unques- 
tioned for  more  than  twenty-five 


years.  It  has  been  cited  without 
disapproval  in  the  following  ca^es  : 
Hunter  v.  Osterhoudt,  11  Barb,  83 ; 
Witt  V.  Mayor  of  New  York,  5 
Robt.  248  ;  S.  C,  6  id.  441  ;  Giles  v. 
Comstock,  4  N.  Y.  270 :  Park  v. 
Castle,  19  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  29; 
Greaton  v.  Smith,  1  Daly,  374.  In 
the  case  of  Witt  v.  The  Mayor  of 
New  York,  the  tenants  gave  notice 
that  they  had  hired  other  premises, 
and  that  they  would  not  hold  the 
premises  which  they  had  occupied, 
and  yet,  because  they  held  over 
from  the  1st  to  the  12th  of  May, 
during  which  time  they  were  en- 
gaged in  removal,  they  were  held 
liable  for  another  year.  This  case 
was  twice  before  tne  court,  was  ar- 
gued by  able  coimsel,  and  fully 
considered. 

In  Park  v;  Castle,  Mr  Justice 
Balcom  says :  "  When  a  tenant,  for 
a  year,  or  for  one  or  more  jears, 
holds  over  after  the  expiration  of 
his  term,  without  any  express 
a^eement,  but  with  the  assent  of 
his  landlord,  the  law  implies  that 
he  holds  the  premises  upon  the 
former  terms  for  another  year." 

Willard,  in  his  work  on  Real 
Estate  (p.  97),  cites  the  case  of  Con- 
way V.  Starkweather,  with  approv- 
al, and  as  authority  for  the  doctrine 
therein  enunciated.  And  the 
learned  editor  of  the  eleventh  ed. 
of  Kent's  Com.  Vol.  4,  p.  117, 
citing  this  case  in  a  note,  says :  "  If 
the  landlord  elects,  as  he  may,  to 
treat  the  tenant  as  holding  under 
the  terms  of  the  original  lease,  the 
tenant  cannot  deny  the  tenancy,^* 

In  Bacon  v.  Brown,  9  Conn.  834, 
Hosmer,  C.  J.,  says:  "After  the 
expiration  of  a  lease  for  a  year,  if 
the  tenant  holds  over,  the  law  con- 
siders him  responsible  to  his  land- 
lord as  on  a  hiring  for  another 
vear,  upon  the  same  terms  as 
before. 


CHAP,  n.]     Landlord's  Eight  op  Election. 


?7 


question  whether  the  defendants,  who  went  into  the 
the  possession  of  certain  mines  under  a  lease  for 
twenty-one  years,  under  which  they  were  to  pay  a 
sleeping  rent  of  £100  per  annum  and  a  royalty  upon  the 
coal  mined,  having  held  over  into  a  third  year,  were 
chargeable  with  the  rent  for  that  year.  The  lease  con- 
tained a  condition  that  the  tenants  would  work  the  mine 
**  so  long  as  it  was  workable, '^  and  Coleridge,  J.,  at  the 
Assizes,  held  that  the  mine  could  not  be  regarded  as 
"workable  "  when  it  was  run  only  at  a  **  dead  loss,"  and 
that  when  that  condition  existed,  they  had  a  right  to 
quit.  It  seems  that  there  was  also  a  provision  in  the 
lease  that  the  defendants  might  at  any  time  put  an  end 
to  the  lease,  by  giving  six  months'  notice,  which  was 
given,  but  they  held  over  two  months  after  the  second 
year  expired,  for  the  purpose  of  working  out  certain  por- 
tions of  the  coal  which  they  claimed  it  was  usual  for  a 
tenant  to  take  away  on  abandoning  such  mines.  It  also 
appeared  that  two  of  the  tenants  withdrew  at  the  expi- 
ration of  the  second  year,  and  consequently  that  the 
holding  over  was  by  the  remaining  two  tenants.  The 
verdict  being  for  the  defendants,  was  upheld  by  the 
court,  which,  upon  the  facts,  was  clearly  right,  if  for  no 
other  reason,  because  there  was  no  holding  over  by  two  of 
the  defendants^  and  consequently  no  continuance  of  the 
tenancy  as  to  thenij^  but  the  ground  upon  which  the 
judges  at  King's  Bench  predicated  their  judgment,  that  it 
•was  a  question  for  the  jury  to  determine  whether  the 
defendants  held  over  unth  an  intention  of  becoming  ten- 
ants for  a  longer  period,  is  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  all 
the  cases,  and  inconsistent  with  the  principles  upon 
which  they  rest."  In  all  the  cases  the  doctrine  is  held 
that  as  to  the  tenant  who  holds  over  he  is  a  wrong-doer, 
and  only  becomes  a  tenant  upon  the  terms  of  the  old 
tenancy,  because  the  landlord  elects  to  treat  him  as  such. 
'^  By  the  mere  act  of  holding  over,  he  does  not  become  a 
^"3    tenant  from  year  to  year."    Something  more  must  occur 

'  *  »  Jones  V.  Shears,  7  C.  &  P.  846.  166 ;  Christy  v.  Tancred,  9  M.  & 
»  Jones  V.  Shears,  4  Ad.  &  EL  382.  W.  438,  affd.  12  M.  &  W.  816; 
»  Davis  V.  Crofts,  15  M.  &  W.      Waring  v.  King,  8  M.  &  W.  571 ; 


38 


Kinds  op  Tenancy. 


[§13. 


in  order  to  show  the  existence  of  a  tenancy  by  a  renova- 
tion of  the  old  contract,  and  this  is  done  by  the  landlord 
making  his  election  whether  to  treat  him  as  a  tenant,  or 
as  a  trespasser,'  and  the  landlord's  election  is  conclusive, 
both  against  himself  and  the  tenant,  and  after  he  has 
once  disaffirmed  the  tenancy  while  the  holding  over  con- 
tinues, he  cannot  afterwards  set  it  up  for  the  purpose  of 
enforcing  a  claim  for,  rent,  nor  if  he  has  affirmed  the 
tenancy,  can  he  afterwards  treat  the  tenant  as  a  tenant 
at  sufferance  merely/    So,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  ten- 
ant uses  the  premises  as  a  tenant,  he  is  estopped  from 
denying  that  relation  and  insisting  that  he  is  a  trespass- 
er."   But  if  the  doctrine  of  Jones  v.  Shears  is  correct,  the 
election  lies  with  the  tenant  as  well  as  with  the  landlord, 
and  he  may  stand  as  a  trespasser  or  as  a  tenant,  at  his 
option,  and  the  landlord  has  no  election  in  the  matter 
whatever,  but  is  left  at  the  mercy  of  the  tenant,  and  the 
doctrine  of  the  previous  EngUsh  cases  would  be  left 
without  any  foundation  upon  which  to  stand.     "If  there 
is  a  lease  for  a  year,"  says  Lord  Mansfield,  C.  J.,*  "and 
by  consent  of  both  parties  the  tenant  continues  in  pos- 
session afterwards,  the  law  implies  a  tacit  renovation  of 
the  contract."    In  a  case  where  the  original  lease  was 
void^^  it  was  said  by  Hatham,  B.,  as  to  the  status  of  a 
tenant  to  a  tenant  for  life,  who  held  over  after  the  death 
of  the  latter,  with  reference  to  the  remainder  man,  "the 
rent  having  been  received  eo  nomine  as  rent,  which  was 
evidence  of  a  contract,  the  defendant  ceased  to  be  a  tres- 
passer," and  he  held  that,  though  the  cases  had  decided 
the  lease  to  be  void,  they  did  not  go  the  length  of  decid- 


opinien  of  AfiiNGER,  C.  B.,  Gibson, 
JT,  in  Logan  v.  Herron,  8  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  459. 

»  Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  2  Penn.  St. 
144 ;  Bacon  v.  Brown,  9  Conn.  834 ; 
Osgood  V.  Dewey,  13  John.  (N.  Y.) 
240 ;  Abeel  v.  Radcliff,  18  id.  297 ; 
Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  965. 

*  Featherstonhaugh  v.  Bradshaw, 
1  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  184. 

»  Waring  V.  King,  8  M.  &  W.  574. 

*  Right  V.  Darby,  1  T.  R.  159. 
•Martin  v.  Watts,  1  Esp.  501. 

The  tenant's  assent  is  irrebutably 


presumed  from  the  fact  that  he  re- 
mained in  possession.  Conway  v. 
Starkweather,  1  Den.  (N.  Y.)  118  ; 
Schuyler  v.  Smith,  ante;  Hemp- 
hill V.  Flynn,  2  Penn.  St.  144; 
Osgood  V.  Dew^,  18  John.  (N.  Y.) 
240 ;  Hunt  v.  Bailey,  39  Mo.  257, 
and  the  landlord's  assent  may  be 
implied  from  the  receipt  of  rent 
by  him,  or  any  other  act  that 
shows  that  he  treated  the  occupant 
as  a  tenant.  Newell  v.  Semdford, 
13  Iowa,  191 ;  HoUingsworth  v. 
Stennett,  2  Esp.  716. 


CHAP,  n.]     Lakdloed's  Right  of  Election. 


39 


ir 


.% 


■        ■ 

•.'.'.if 
«■■../ 


ing  that  the  act  of  the  person  in  remainder  might  not 
create  a  new  tenancy  from  year  to  year.  This  doctrine 
was  afSrmed  in  the  King's  Bench, '  Lawrence,  J., 
among  other  things,  saying,  "if  the  defendant  was  not 
a  tenant,  he  must  have  been  a  trespasser,  and  so  he  must 
have  continued  if  he  had  remained  on  the  premises  for 
any  number  of  years ;  but  the  plaintiff  has,  by  his  own 
act,  admitted  the  defendant  to  be  his  tenant  and  cannot, 
therefore,  tiow  consider  him  a  trespasser. ^^  In  none  of 
the  cases  is  there  any  suggestion  that  the  tenant  may 
elect  as  to  the  capacity  in  which  he  will  hold,  but  having 
held  over,  and  the  landlord  having  elected  to  treat  him  as 
a  tenanty  he  is  presumed  to  be  so,  upon  the  terms  of  the 
old  agreement. '  But  in  order  to  have  this  effect  there 
must  be  an  actual  holding  over,  and  the  implication  does 
not  arise  from  a  constructive  holding  over  as,  by  the  acci- 
dental detention  of  the  key  to  the  premises  beyond 
the  term. "  So,  too,  the  previous  occupation  must  have 
been  in  the  capacity  of  tenant  under  a  contract  that 
the  person  in  possession  was  competent  to  make.  *  . 
Thus,  in  the  case  last  cited,  the  defendant,  an  incor- 
porated company,  entered  into  the  possession  of  the 
plaintiff's  premises  under  a  parol  lease  for  a  year,  and 
occupied  for  two  years,  at  the  expiration  of  which  time 
they  removed  their  goods  without  any  notice  to  quit. 
They  held  over  for  eleven  days  beyond  the  second  year, 
but  paid  a  quarter's  rent.  In  an  action  to  recover 
for  the  remaining  three  quarters'  rent,  the  court 
held  that  they  were  not  liable  for  the  rent  during 
that  period,  since  they  did  not  occupy,  and  that  no 
contract  could  be  implied  against  them,  because  being  a 


^■■■*i 


>  Martin  v.  Watts,  7  T.  R.  83. 

^Lee  T.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  665; 
Camberland  v.  Glands,  15  C.  B. 
848;  Treesv.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  86; 
Thomson  v.  Amery,  12  Ad.  &  El. 
476 ;  Mann  v.  Loveioy,  Ry,  &  M. 
855.  In  Giville  v.  De  Rutzen,  de- 
cided in  Exchequer,  butnotreimrt- 
ed,  and  in  a  dictum  of  Marten,  B., 
in  Fmlay  v.  Railway  Co.,  7  Exchq. 
418;  the  doctrine  of  Jones  y, 
Shears  finds  some  support. 


*  Grey  V.  Bompas,  11  C.  B.  N.  S. 
620.  llie  Court  neld  that  the  acci- 
dental detenation  of  the  key  by 
the  tenant  beyond  the  expiration 
of  the  term,  did  not  amoimt  to  any 
evidence  of  use  and  occuoation  by 
him,  so  as  to  render  him  liable  for 
another  quEurter's  rent. 

*  Finlay  v.  The  Bristol  and  Exe- 
ter R.  R.  Co.,  7  Exchq.  410 ;  Cole 
&  Gill,  14  Iow&,  427. 


40  Kinds  of  Tenancy.  [§  13, 

corporation,  they  could  only  contract  under  seal.  So, 
too,  the  holding  over  must  be  by  the  tenant  himself  or 
by  an  under  tenant,  with  his  assent,  and  if  he  has  let  in 
an  under  tenant  who  holds  over  *  without  his  assent,  the 
original  tenant  is  not  thereby  made  Uable  as  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  *  nor,  if  there  are  two  tenants  under 
the  original  lease,  and  one  only  holds  over,  is  the  tenant 
who  goes  out  of  possession  when  the  term  expires,  made 
liable  as  a  tenant  for  an  additional  term,  by  the  acts  of 
his  co-tenant. '  Thus,  one  Crofts  and  a  Mr.  Bartlett 
were  tenants  to  the  plaintiff  for  the  term  of  three  years. 
Crofts  never  occupied  the  premises,  but  Bartlett  held 
over.  No  assent  on  Crofts'  part  to  such  holding  over 
was  proved,  and  the  court  held  that,  as  one  tenant  can- 
not bind  his  co-tenant  by  holding  over  without  his  assent, 
no  recovery  could  be  had  against  Crofts  for  rent  subse- 
quent to  the  expiration  of  the  term,  and  such  seems  to 
be  the  doctrine  in  this  country.  *  But  if  the  lessee  gives 
his  assent  to  such  holding  over  by  the  under  tenant,  ha 
is  liable  to  the  landlord  as  tenant  for  the  entire  period  of 
holding  over,  Thus,  a  lessee  of  a  term  underlet  the 
premises,  and  the  under  tenant  held  over  for  a  portion 
of  a  year,  against  the  will  of  the  lessee,  so  that  he  could 
not  give  up  the  term.  But,  during  such  holding  over 
the  lessee  distrained  upon  the  under  tenant  for  rent  pre- 
viously due,  and  a  few  days  after  the  distress  was  made, 
the  under  tenant  quit  possession,  and  the  lessee  siurend- 
ered  the  possession  to  the  landlord,  and  the  court  held 
that  this  was  such  a  recognition  of  the  under  tenant's 
act,  as  made  the  lessee  liable  for  the  rent  of  the  premises 
during  the  period  that  they  were  actually  occupied  by 
him.  *    If  a  tenant  holds  over,  however,  and  he  has  let  in 


>  Christy  V,  Tancred,  9  M.  &  W.  (N.  Y.)  351.    In  Constant  v.  Abell, 

438.  36  Mo.  174,  the  doctorine  of  the 

*  Christy  V.  Tancred,  12  M.  &  W.  English  cases,  was  fully  adopted. 
816.  In  that  case  it  was  held  that  a 

*  Draper  v.  Crofts,  15  M.  &  W.  lessee  of  lands,  during  whose  term 
166.  the  miUtary  authorieties  topk  poss- 

*  Christy  V.  Tancred,  9  M.  Sc  W.  ession  of  the  premises  and  neld 
438 ;  Tancred  v.  Christy,  12  M.  &  over,  without  his  consent,  was  not 
W.  316.  liable  to  the  landlord   in   conse- 

fi  McKing  V.  Mumf  ord,  10  Wend,  quence  of  such  holding  over  ei}en 


^BP 


} 


CHAP,  n.]     Landlord's  Right  of  Election. 


41 


fl 


an  under  tenant  as  to  part  of  the  premises,  who  also 
holds  over,  the  under  tenant  assumed  the  same  relation 
to  him  that  he  holds  to  the  landlord.  *  Where  premises 
are  let  to  a  tenant  for  a  certain  definite  period,  tuith  an 
option  of  retaining  them  for  a  longer  term,  and  he  lets 
them  to  an  under  tenant  who  holds  over,  in  the  absence 
of  notice  to  the  landlord  of  his  intention  not  to  keep  the 
premises  beyond  the  first  term  fixed  in  the  lease,  the 
tenant  will  be  liable  for  the  rent  during  the  whole  period 
that  the  under  tenant  occupies  the  premises.  Under 
such  circumstances,  in  the  absence  of  notice  to  the  con- 
trary, the  landlord  has  a  right  to  regard  the  act  of  the 
under  tenant  as  evidence  that  the  tenant  has  exercised 
his  option  in  favor  of  retaining  the  premises.  * 

An  under  tenant  who  thus  holds  over  after  the  deter- 
mination of  the  original  lease,  and  is  permitted  to  remain 
in  possession  by  the  landlord,  is  qiuxsi  tenant  at  suffer- 
ance, and  the  mere  fact  of  occupation,  even  though  rent 
is  paid,  does  not  of  itself  raise  a  presumption  of  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  or  for  years,  upon  the  terms  of  the 
former  demise.  In  order  to  establish  such  a  presumption 
there  must  be  some  evidence  of  an  agreement  for  a  de- 
mise for  the  term.  *  During  the  entire  period  of  holding 
over,  until  the  landlord  has  in  some  manner  signified  his 


though  he  received  rent  from  the 
military  authorities  during  his 
term.  That  is,  the  court  held  that 
the  mihtaiy  authorities  stood  in 
the  relation  of  an  under  tenant,  to 
the  lessee,  and  that,  as  the  under 
tenant  coiild  not  bind  the  lessee  by 
his  acts,  without  his  consent,  the 
lessee  could  not  be  held  chargeable 
for  the  rent  of  the  premises  during 
'^'  the  period  that  the  under  tenant 
^  held  over.  In  CJonnecticut,  in  Ba- 
i'  con  V.  Brown,  3  Conn.  334,  it  was 
held  that  the  tenant  was  rendered 
liable  for  the  rent  for  a  whole  year, 
by  the  act  of  an  under  lessee  in 
holding  over  and  paying  rent'  to 
the  tenant  during  part  of  the  year. 
But  in  this  case  the  tenant's  absent 
was  confirmed  by  the  acceptance 
of  rent  for  a  part  of  the  period, 
^  ,  and  virtually  made  the  holding 
•  r '  over  by  the  under  tenant,  that  of 
the  tenant  himself. 


A* 

■4- 


» Ibbs  V.  Richardson,  9  Ad.  &  El. 
894. 

« in  Waring  v.  King,  B  M.  &  W^. 
571,  under  a  lease  such  as  is  re- 
ferred to  in  the  text,  the  defendant 
sub-let  the  premises  to  a  tenant 
who  held  over,  and  in  an  action 
against  him  for  the  rent,  Lord 
Abinoer,  C.  J.,  said:  **In  what 
capacity,  then,  is  the  plaintiff  to 
look  to  the  defendants?  Not  as 
trespassers,  but  as  tenants  Imving 
receiued  their  option  under  the 
original  contract y  by  conmiunicat- 
ingan  interest  to  other  parties.  * 
*  J  consider,  therefore,  that  until 
something  be  done  on  the  one  side 
or  on  the  other  to  put  an  end  to 
the  interest  these  parties  held  imder 
the  contract,  they  remained  in  the 
relation  of  landlord  and  tenant." 

8  Simkin  v.  Ashurst,  4  Tyr.  781, 


J 


/ 


42  Kinds  op  Tenancy.  [§  13. 

election^  the  tenant  is  a  mere  tenant  at  sufferance,  and 
however  long  continued,  cannot  be  set  up  as  adverse  to 
the  landlord  or  those  who  claim  under  him. '  Thus,  a 
tenant  being  in  possession  of  lands  under  a  lease  for  thir- 
ty-one years,  made  in  1753,  remained  in  possession  until 
1811,  and  after  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  paid  no  rent 
nor  did  he  in  any  manner  acknowledge  a  tenancy.  The 
court  held  that,  after  the  expiration  of  the  tenancy,  he 
became  a  tenant  at  sufferance,  and  could  not  set  up  an 
adverse  title  against  the  lessor  or  those  claiming  under 
him, "  but  if  a  new  tenant  comes  in  under  a  lease  from 
the  landlord,  and  the  under  tenant  holds  over  for  a  few 
months  and  then  quits  without  any  notice,  he  cannot, 
from  the  mere  circumstance  of  holding  over,  be  charged 
with  a  new  continuing  tenancy  for  a  year,  or  made  to 
pay  rent  beyond  the  period  of  his  actual  occupancy.  *  If 
a  person  enters  upon  the  possession  of  premises  under  a 
parol  lease  that  is  void  under  the  statute  of  frauds,  he 
may  quit  possession  when  the  period  for  which  a  parol 
lease  would  be  good  has  expired ;  but  if  he  holds  over 
beyond  such  period,  he  is  liable  for  another  year's  rent, 
or  for  rent  for  the  balance  of  the  term,  if  it  expires  in- 
side of  another  year.  *  For  other  instances  as  to  the  ef- 
fect of  holding  over,  see  Chap.  V. 

'  Logan  V.  Herron,  8  S.  &  R.         » Freeman  v.  Jury,  M.  &  M.  19. 
(Penn.)  459.  *  Savage  v,  Dupuis,  8  Taunt,  410. 

*  Howard  v.  Sherwood,  1  Al  db 
Nap.  (Irish)  217. 


* 


CHAP.  nL] 


What  Is. 


43 


*•  'S 


CHAPTER  HI. 

TENANCY  AT  WILL. 

Sec.  14.  What  is. 

Sec.  15.  How  a  tenancy  at  will  may  be  created. 

Sec.  16.  Vendor  and  Vendee.    What  relation  exists  between. 

Sec.  17.  Rights  of  tenant  at  will  to  crops,  &c. 

Sec.  18.  How  determined. 

Sec.  19.  Notice  to  quit. 

Sec.  14.  What  is.— A  tenant  at  will,  is  one  who  enters 
into  the  possession  of  the  lands  or  tenements  of  another^ 
lawfvlly^  hvifor  no  definite  term  or  purpose^  hut  whose 
possession  is  subject  to  the  determination  of  the  land- 
lord^ at  any  time  he  sees  Jit  to  put  an  end  to  it.  He  is 
called  a  tenant  at  will  '*  because  he  hath  no  certain  or 
sure  estate,  for  the  lessor  may  put  him  out  at  what  time 
it  pleaseth  him.^^ 

It  differs  from  a  tenancy  at  sufferance,  in  that,  under 
a  tenancy  at  will,  both  the  entry  and  the  occupancy  are 
lawful  until  determined  by  the  landlord,  while  under  a 
tenancy  M  sufferance,  the  entry  is  lawful,  but  the  occu- 
pancy is  wrongful.  ''There  is  a  great  diversity  between 
a  tenant  at  will,  and  a  tenant  at  sufferance ;  for  tenant 
at  will  is  always  by  rights,  and  tenant  by  sufferance  en- 
ters by  lawful  lease,  and  holds  over  by  wrong."  *    So  too, 


^  Munson  v.  Plummer,  59,  Iowa, 
120 ;  Duley  v.  NuUy  74,  Me.  556 ; 
Cunnes  v.  Feeley,  132  Mass.  346; 
Johnson  v.  Johnson,  18  R.  I.  467 ; 
Sallabah  v.  Marsh,  34  La.  Am.  1058 ; 
Ives  V.  Wilhams,  50  Mich.  100; 
Thomas  v.  Steamship  Co. ,  71  Me. 
548 ;  Nemnister  v.  Palmer,  8  Mo. 
App.  491 ;  People  v.  Paldmg,  22 
Hun.  (N.  Y.)  91 ;  Hulett  v.  Nugent, 
71  Mo.  131;   Semmes  v.   United 


States,  14  Ct.  of  a.  493 ;  Morgan 
V.  United  States,  14  id.  319 ;  Davis 
V.  Murphy,  126  Mass.  143 ;  Brown- 
eU  V.  Welch,  91  lU.  528 ;  Wilson  v. 
Taylor,  8  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  253 ; 
Wniiams  v.  Hodge,  41  Mich.  695 ; 
Banks  v.  Carter,  7  Daly  (N.  Y.  C. 
P.)  417 ;  Goodman  v.  Allen,  68  Me. 
308 ;  Webb  v.  Seekins.  62  Wis.  26 ; 
LeTaumeau  v.  Smith,  53  Mich. 
478 ;  Mter  v.   Thiemann,  15   Mo. 


44 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§14. 


a  tenant  at  will  is  liable  for  rent,  unless  he  was  let  in  free 
of  rent,  and  if  the  rent  is  fixed,  it  may  be  distrained  for,* 
or  if  no  rent  is  agreed,  an  action  for  use  and  occupation 
may  be  brought ; "  while  a  tenant  at  sufferance,  being  a 
►wrong-doer,  cannot  be  compelled  to  pay  rent  at  all,*  "for 
it  was  the  folly  of  the  lessor  to  suffer  his  lessee  at  suffer- 
ance to  continue  his  possession  of  the  land  after  his 
term,"  *  and  if  the  landlord  receives  rent  from  him,  he 
ceases  to  be  a  tenant  at  sufferance  and  becomes  a  tenant 
at  will,  or  from  year  to  year,  according  to  the  circum- 
stances.' 

Either  party  may  put  an  end  to  the  tenancy  at  any  time 
he  pleases,  even  though  it  is  expressed  to  be  a  tenancy 
at  the  will  of  the  lessor  only.*  Where  the  tenant  holds 
at  a  fixed  rent,  the  rent  may  be  distrained  for,'  or  if  no 
rent  is  fixed  upon,  and  there  was  no  understanding  that 
the  tenant  should  occupy,  free  of  rent,  the  landlord  may 
recover  a  fair  sum  for  use  and  occupation.    But  there 


App.  307 ;    Allen  v.  Mansfield,  82 
Mo.   688;     Elwood  v.   Forkel,   35 
Hun.  (N.  Y.)  202 ;  Singer  Mfg.  Co. 
V.  Sayne,  75  Ala.  270 ;  Co.  iJtt.  57 
B.;    Cole    on    Ejectment,    448;    2 
Blackstone's  Com.  145 ;  Fawcett's 
L.  &  T.  50.     **  Strictly  speaking," 
says  the  court  in  Sarsfield  v.  Hea- 
ley,  50  Barb.  (N.    Y.)   345,    "an 
estate  at  will  arises  when  one  man 
lets  land  to  another  to  hold  at  the 
will  of  the  lessor ;  the  agreement 
expressly  providing  that  it  shall  be 
held  at  the  will  of  the  lessor.    But 
if  the  tenant  be  placed  on  the  land 
without  any   time  prescribed,   or 
rent  reserved,  and  as  a  mere  occu- 
pier, he  is  a  tenant  at  will.    Mr. 
Taylor,  in  his  work  upon  Land- 
lord and  Tenant,  copying  from  1 
Piatt  on  Leases,  p.  o52,  says  that 
this  species  of  estate  is  compara- 
tively unknown.  But  an  examina- 
tion of  the  cases  discloses  that  such 
estates  are  very  well  knmcn  at  the 
present  time  both  in  this  country 
and  England,  and  that  the  only 
instance  in  which  the  courts  have 
exhibited  a  tendency  to  discourage 
them,  is  in  those  instances  where 
a  fixed  annual  or  quarterly  rent 
is  reserved,  f air Ijr,  referable  to  a 
yearly  tenancy,    in   which   case, 


in  the  absence  of  any  express  agree- 
ment creating  a  tenancy  at  will, 
they  construe  it  as  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year.  In  many  of  the 
States,  by  statute,  all  tenancies  un- 
der parol  leases  are  made  tenancies 
at  will,  and  it  will  be  seen  by  the 
cases  cited  hereafter  in  this  chap- 
ter, that  they  were  well  known  to, 
and.  recognized  by  the  courts. 

*  Davies  v.  Thomas,  6  Exchq. 
858;  Anderson  v.  Midland  R.  fi. 
Co.  30  L.  G.  B.  94. 

«  Hyde  v.  Moakes,  5  C.  &  P.  42 ; 
Marwood  v.  Waters,  13  C.  B.  820 ; 
Half  ord  v.  Hatch,  1  Doug.  188. 

« 10  Viner's  Abr.  415  ;  Flood  v. 
Flood,  1  AUen  (Mass.),  217.  But 
now,  in  Massechussetts,  and  in- 
deed in  many  of  the  States,  pro- 
vision is  made  by  statute  for  the 
recovery  of  rent  from  such  ten- 
ants. 

*  Sir  Moile  Finch's  Case,  2  Le. 
143,  pi.  178. 

*  Hollingsworth  v.  Stennett,  2 
Esp.  716. 

« Smith's  L.  &  T.  17 ;  Co.  Litt. 
65  a ;  Cole  on  Ejectment,  448,  552. 

**  Davies  v.  Thomas,  6  Exchq. 
858 ;  Anderson  y.  Midland  R.  R. 
Co.  ante. 


CHAP,  in.] 


How  Created. 


46 


must  have  been  an  occupancy  of  the  premises  by  him  as 
tenant  to  the plairUiff^  by  his  permission  or  sufferance.* 
If  there  was  an  occupancy  merely,  as  the  tenant  of  an- 
other person,  as,  under  the  lessee  of  the  plaintiff,  and 
there  had  been  no  express  substitution  of  tenants,  this 
fonn  of  action  will  not  lie,"  and  such  substitution  is  not 
wrought,  even  though  the  tenant  agrees  to  pay  the  rent 
to  the  landlord,  so  long  as  there  is  a  lease  outstanding 
in  favor  of  the  person  under  whom  the  tenant  entered, 
nnless  the  lease  has  been  assigned  to  him,  or  the  lessee 
has  assented  to  the  tenant  being  substituted  in  his  place, ' 
or  if  the  defendant  was  in  possession  as  a- trespasser,  and 
holding  adversely  to  the  plaintiff,  no  recovery  for  the 
use  and  occupation  of  the  land,  as  such,  can  be  had.  He 
is  not  a  tenant  in  any  sense,  but  a  mere  trespasser,  against 
whom  a  recovery  can  only  be  had  as  for  a  tort.  * 

Sec.  15.  How  a  tenancy  at  will  may  be  created.— Leases 
for  an  uncertain  time,  are  prima  facie  leases  at  will.*  A 
reservation  of  rent  is  not  essential  to  uphold  a  tenancy  of 
this  character,  as  a  person  who  occupies,  rent  free,  by  the 
sufferance  of  the  owner,  may  occupy  that  relation,*  or  one 


»  Marwood  v.  Waters,  18  C.  B. 
820 ;  Hyde  v.  Mokes,  5  C.  &  P.  42 ; 
Cripps  V.  Blank,  9  D.  &  R.  480 ; 
Churchwarden  v.  Ford,  3  H.  &N. 
449;  Tew  v.  Jones,  13  M.  &  W. 
12 ;  Litchfield  v.  Beady,  5  Ezchq. 
539 ;  Turner  v.  Coal  Co.,  5  id.  933. 

'  Phipps  V.  Sculthorpe,  1  B.  & 
Aid.  50 ;  Hyde  v.  Moakes,  ante. 

'Hyde  v.  Moakes,  ante.  But 
the  rule  is  otherwise  where  the  de- 
fendant enters  under  the  plaintiff, 
as  tenant  instead  of  another  whose 
term  has  not  fully  expired.  Phipps 
V.  Sculthorpe,  ante. 

*  In  Tew  V.  Jones,  13  M.  &  W. 
12,  the  defendant  conveyed  to  the 

Elaintiff  an  undivided  moiety  of 
ve  houses,  and  he  continued  to 
occupy  one  of  them  after  the  con- 
v^rance.    The  court  held  that  this 
afiu>rded  no  evidence  of  a  tenancy 
.  of  any  kind,  and  that  no  recovery 
'  for  use  or  occupation  could  be  had. 
In  such  a  case,  the  onlv  remedy  is, 
either  in  ej^tment,  or  by  an  action 
\  tor  not  dehvering  the  imssession. 


Churchwarden  v.  Ford,  2  D.  &  N. 
449. 

»  Rich  V.  Bolton,  46  Vt.  84 ;  Jack- 
son V.  Bradt,  2  Cai.  (N.  Y.)  169; 
Lamed  v.  Hudson,  60  N.  Y.  102 ; 
Jones  V.  Shay,  50  Cal.  508 ;  Rich- 
ardson V.  Langridy,  4  Taunt.  128 ; 
Rae  V.  Lewis,  2  W.'Bl.  1173. 

•  Rex  V.  JobUng,  2  Ross.  C.  &  M. 
28 ;  Rex  v.  CoUett,  R.  &  R.  (C.  C.) 
498 ;  NichoU  v.  McKing,  10  B.  &  C. 
721;  Jones  v.  Jones,  10  B.  &  O. 
718 ;  Rex  v.  Fillogley,  1  T.  R.  458. 
Thus,  where  the  owner  permits  a 
person  to  occupy  premises  without 
any  lease  or  agreement  to  pay  rent, 
and  the  occupier  merely  takes  care 
of  the  premises  for  the  owner,  he 
is  a  tenant  at  will.  Jones  v.  Shay, 
50  Cal.  508 ;  HerreU  v.  Sizeland,  81 
111.  467.  In  Humphries  v.  Hmn- 
phries,  3  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  362,  it  was 
neld  that,  where  a  person  is  put  in 
possession  of  land  without  any 
agreement  for  rent,  but  with  an 
express  provision  that  he  shaU 
leave  whenever  the  owner  shall  re* 


46 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  15. 


who  occupies,  by  the  naked  permission  of  the  owner,'  or 
one  who  enters  without  permission,  even  as  a  squatter, 
disclaiming  title,'  or  a  person  who  holds  imder  a  void  deed 
or  lease,*  or  who  enters  under  a  contract  to  purchase*  or 

a  tenant  entering  under  it  is  held 
to  be  a  tenant  at  will,  Duke  v. 
Harper,  6  Yeng.  (Tenn.)  280,  and 
in  Maine,  a  parol  lease  at  an  an- 
nual rent  creates  a  tenancy  at  will. 
Wethers  v.  Larabee,  48  Me.  570 ; 
Cole  on  Ejectment,  456;  but  he 
holds,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the 
lease  in  all  other  respects,  except 
as  to  duration  of  the  term.  Rigga 
V.  Bell,  5  T.  R.  471 ;  Tress  v.  Sav- 
age, 4  E.  &  B.  86;  Richardson  v. 
Giflford,  1  Ad.  &  El.  52 ;  Penning- 
ton T.  Taniere,  12  Q.  B.  998 ;  Lee 
V.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  662 ;  Arden  v. 
Sullivan,  14  Q.  B.  832,  but  upon 
payment  of  rent,  he  becomes  a  ten- 
ant from  year  to  year,  xmder  the 
terms  of  the  void  lease  so  far  as 
they  are  applicable  to,  and  not  in- 
consistent with,  a  yearly  tenancy. 
People  V.  Rickert,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
226 ;  Strong  v.  Crosby,  21  Conn. 
398;  Schuyler  v.  Leggett,  2  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  660.  But  see  Jackson  v. 
Rogers,  1  John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.)  88, 
where  a  tenant  who  went  into  pos- 
session under  a  void  lease  was 
held  to  be  a  mere  trespasser,  and 
not  entitled  under  the  statute  to 
a  notice  to  quit.  Gkxxititle  y.  Her- 
bert, 4  T.  R.  680 ;  Denn.  v.  Fearn- 
side,  1  Wils.  176. 

*  Patterson  y.  Stoddard,  48  Me. 
855;  ^oprietors,  &c.  y.  McFar- 
land,  12  Mass.  825 ;  Jones  y.  Jones, 
2  Rich.  (S.  C.)  542;  Manchester  y. 
Doddridge,  3  Que.  860 ;  Stanway  y. 
Rock,  6  Jur.  266.  Considerable 
confusion  exists  in  the  cases  as  to 
the  true  relation  between  the  own- 
er and  occupier  during  the  pend- 
ency of  a  contract  to  purchase. 
Some  of  the  cases  hold  that,  wheth- 
er the  contract  is  completed  by  a 
conveyance  or  not,  no  tenancy  ex- 
ists, Cari)enter  v.  United  States,  6 
Ct.  of  Bl.  (U,  S.)  167.  But  while 
it  is  true  that  the  relation  of  land- 
lord and  tenant  does  not  exist  in 
its  fuU  sense,  or  to  the  extent  that 
rent  may  be  recovered  unless 
specially  so  c^r^ed,  yet,  there 
would  seem  to  be  no  question  but 
that  the  relation  in  a  restricted  or 
limited  aenae^  does  exist.    The  con- 


quire  him  to  do  so,  he  is  strictly  a 
tenant  at  will,  and  not  entitled  to 
notice  to  quit.  In  Whoon  v.  • 
Drizzle,  8  Dev.  (N.  C.)  L.  414,  the 
owner  of  land  agreed  that  A  should 
cultivate  it  during  his  life,  or  as 
long  as  he  pleased,  with  a  restric- 
tion as  to  the  sale  of  it,  and  it  was 
held  that  only  a  tenancy  at  will 

»  Hull  v.  Wood,  14  M.  &  W.  682 ; 
Williams  v.  Deriar,  81  Mo.  18; 
Jones  y.  Shay,  50  Cal.  508 ;  Lamed 
v.  Hudson,  60  N.  Y.  502.  A  mere 
general  letting,  Richardson  v. 
Langridge,  4  Taunt.  182;  Roe  v. 
Lees,  2  W.  Bl.  1173,  or  a  simple 
permission  to  occupy  unless  there 

15  an  evident  intention  to  create  a 
tenancy  from  year  to  year,  or  some 
other  term,  create  a  tenancy  at 
will,  Hull  v.  Wood,ante;  Doe  v. 
Gardiner,  12  C.  B.  319,  so  a  cestui 
que  trust  in  the  actual  possession 
by  the  consent  (.r  acquiescence  ( f 
the  trustee  is  a  tenant  at  will ;  but 
merely  receiving  tho^  rents,  does 
not  make  him  so,  Melling  v.  Leak, 

16  C.  B.  652.  The  fact  that  a  per- 
son pays  rent,  does  not  change  the 
character  of  the  tenancy,  unless 
he  pays  it  with  reference  to  a  year- 
ly holding.  Bastow  v.  Cox,  11  Q. 
B.  122 ;  Anderson  v.  Midland,  Ry. 
Co.,  3  E.  &  E.  614 ;  Cox  v.  Bent,  5 
Bing.  185;  Braithwaite  v  Hitch- 
cock, 10  M.  &  W.  497;  Hull  v. 
Wood,  ante ;  Rich  v.  Bolton,  ante. 

« In  Stamper  v.  Griffin,  20  Ga. 
312,  this  doctrine  was  held  and  the 
squatter  was  held  to  become  a  ten- 
ant at  will  to  the  true  owner ;  and 
in  Gay  v.  Mitchell,  35  Ga.  159,  it 
was  held  that  he  could  not  defeat 
the  tenancy  by  secretly  attorning 
to  another.  The  same  doctrine 
has  also  been  held  in  Alabama, 
Smith  y.  Houston,  16  Ala.  Ill; 
Weaver  v.  Jones,  24  Ala.  420. 

» Ezelle  v.  Parker,  41  Miss. 
20  Leases;  Cromelin  v.  Thies,  31 
Ala.  412;  Galloway  v.  Herbert, 
4  T.  R.  680 ;  Warren  v.  Fearnside, 
1  Wils.  176;  Medina  v.  Poison, 
Half.  47.  In  Tennessee,  where  a 
parol  lease  for  two  years  is  void, 


CHAP,  m.] 


How  Created. 


47 


who  enters  under  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  which  is  not 
executed  *  or  under  a  lease  of  premises,  until  they  are  sold,' 
or  a  person,  who,  with  the  consent  of  the  purchaser,  re- 
mains in  the  possession  of  premises  after  they  have  been 
sold  under  an  execution  against  him,'  or  a  squatter  who 
remains  in  possession  after  a  conveyance  by  him,  *  or  a  per- 
son who  goes  in  under  an  agreement  that  he  may  occupy 
as  long  as  he  remains  in  the  owner's  employ,"  or  until  a 


-.  # 


tractee  went  in  by  the  permission 
of  the  owner,  and  while  from  such 
permission  alone  a  contract  to  pay 
rent  cannot  be  implied,  and  the 
liabilities  of  strict  tenancy  are  not 
incurred,  yet,  during  the  pendency 
of  the  contract,  he  certainly  holaa 
under  the  owner,  and  his  posses- 
sion cannot  be  adverse  to  him. 
Therefore  he  stands  as  a  tenant  at 
sufferance  or  will,  and  can  be  put 
out  of  imssession  by  the  owner,  if 
from  any  cause  the  conveyance  is 
not  made  without  notice  to  quit. 
Tucker  v.  Adams,  52,  Ala.  254,  and 
is  not  entitled  to  crops  planted  by 
Tiim  if  he  is  f orcil:^  expelled  bo- 
fore  they  mature.  Harris  v.  Frink, 
2Lans.n^.  Y.)35.  InBall  v.CuUi- 
more,  5  C.M.&  R.  ,758,  thecourt  says 
that  if  a  party  contracting  for  land 
be  let  into  possession,  he  is  tenant 
at  will  by  implication  of  law.  See 
also,  holding  the  doctrine  stated  in 
the  text,  Howard  v.  Shaw,  8  M.  & 
W.  118 ;  Right  v.  Beard,  13  East, 

210 ; ^v.  MiUer,  5  C.  &  P.  595 ; 

Doe  V.  Jackson,  5  B.  &  C.  448; 
Stanway  v.  Rock,  C.  &  M.  594 ;  4 
M.  &  Or.  80 ;  6  Jur.  266 ;  Tomes  v. 
Chamberlain,  5  M.  &  W.  14.  If 
the  sale  goes  off  from  that  tim^j 
if  he  remains  in  possession,  he  still 
continues  tenant  at  will,  but  from 
that  time  may  be  liable  for  use  and 
occupation,  for  the  purchase 
money,  which  was  to  be  the  com- 
pensation for  his  occupation,  is 
l^en  at  an  end.  Howard  v.  Shaw,  v 
10  L.  J.  Exchq.  836,  by  Alderson, 
B.— Tew  V.  Jones,  13  M.  &  W.  12 ; 
Heame  v.  Tomlin  Peake,  19; 
"Winterbottom  v.  Ingham,  7  Q.  B. 

^  611 ;  Kirtland  v.  Paunsett,  2  Taunt. 
^^'  145,  but  if  the  purchase  is  made,  he 

^  cannot  be  made  liable  for  his  oc- 
cupation prior  tiiereto,  imless  there 
was  an  agreement  to  that  effect. 


:» 


Carpenter   v.    United   States,    17 
Wafi.  (U.  S.)  489. 

*  Braithwaite  v.  Hitchcock,  10 
M,  &  W.  494 ;  Emmons  v.  Scud- 
der,  115  Mass.  367;  Jackson  v. 
Kingsley,  17  John.  (N.  Y.)  158; 
Dunn  V.  Trustees,  &c.,  39  111.  578; 
Anderson  v.  Prindle,  26  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  616;  Hollingsworth  v.  Sten- 
nett,  2  Esp.  717.  In  Anders  on  v. 
Prindle,  23  Wend.  616,  it  was  held 
that  a  person  who  enters  under  a 
parol  a^eement  for  a  lease,  the 
rent  to  oe  paid  monthly,  and  re- 
fuses to  accept  the  lease,  becomes 
a  tenant  at  will  or  by  sufferance, 
and  is  liable  to  be  ejected  immedi- 
ately, but  that,  if  the  landlord  ac- 
cepts rent  from  him,  he  becomes 
eniitled,  under  the  statute,  to  notice 
to  quit.  If  the  parol  agreement 
was  for  a  term  exceeding  one  year, 
and  therefore  void  under  the  stat- 
ute of  frauds,  it  was  held  that  the 
tenancy  created  by  the  acceptance 
of  rent,  was  from  month  to  month, 
and  that  the  tenant  woidd  be  en- 
titled to  a  month's  notice  to  quit. 
See  also  S.  C.  19  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  391 ; 
Hammerton  v.  Stead,  3  B.  &  C.  488 ; 
Reynant  v.  Porter,  7  Bing.  451. 

*  Lee  V.  Hernandez,  10  Tex.  137, 
but  in  such  a  case  the  tenancy  can- 
not be  determined  by  a  merely 
colorable  sale,  as  by  a  sale  to  the 
wife,  that  is,  merely  going  through 
the  forms  of  a  conveyance,  not  in- 
tending to  make  a  valid  legal  trans- 
fer of  tne  title  for  a  good  consider- 
ation.   Ela.  V.  Banks,  87  Wis.  89. 

*  Nicholas  v.  Williams,  8  Cow, 
(N.  Y.)  13;  Jackson  v.  Stemtems. 
1  John.  Cas.  (N.Y.)  18. 

*  Currier  v.  Earl,  13  Me.  216; 
Jackson  v.  Aldrich,  13  John.  (N. 
Y.)  106. 

^McGee  v.  Gibson.  1  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  105. 


48 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  15. 


certain  contingency  happens/  and  generally,  without  stop- 
ping to  recapitulate  all  the  special  instances  in  which  a 
tenancy  at  will  may  arise,  it  may  be  said  that,  in  all  cases 
where  a  person  enters  into  the  possession  of  the  premises 
of  another  by  his  permission,  no  definite  term  of  occu- 
pancy binding  upon  the  parties  being  agreed  upon,  he  is 
a  mere  tenant  at  will,  and  this,  too,  irrespective  of  the 
question  whether  he  occupies,  rent  free,  or  pays  rent  there- 
for. "  A  mere  permission  and  occupancy  under  it  is  suf- 
ficient to  create  this  species  of  tenancy, "  and  it  may  be 
created  by  express  terms,  or  may  arise  by  construction  or 
implication  of  law.  Thus,  a  lease  of  premises,  whether 
in  writing  or  by  parol,  *'so  long  as  the  parties  please,"  or 
at  the  lessor's  "  will  and  pleasure,"  is  a  lease  at  will,*  so  a 
lease  of  premises  reserving  the  new  house,  whenever  the 
lessor  chooses  to  occupy  it,  and  at  all  other  times  to  be  used 
by  the  lessee,  constitutes  the  lessee  a  tenant  at  will  of  such 
house.  *  A  tenant  who  holds  over,  pending  a  treaty  for  a 
renewal  of  the  lease,  is  a  tenant  at  will,  and  if  the  renewal 
is  not  effected,  maybe  ejected  without  demand  or  no- 
tice ;  •  but  in  some  cases,  under  such  circumstances,  the 


*  In  Ashley  v.  Warren,  11  Gray 
(Mass.),  43,  the  tenant  went  into 
the  possession  of  premises  under 
an  agreement  that  he  might  occupy 
as  long  as  he ''  kept  a  good  school." 
.The  court  held  that  this  was  a  ten- 
ancjjT  at  will,  with  a  conditional 
limitation,  not  requiring  entry  or 
notice  to  terminate  it,  and  that 
evidence  that  the  tenant  was  defi- 
cient as  a  teacher  in  literary  and 
scientific  attainments  was  compe- 
tent evidence  of  the  contingency. 
But  if  the  contingency  does  not 
haj^pen,  his  right  of  occupancy 
continues,  and  th^  landlord  cannot 
enter  to  expel  him.  McGee  t. 
Gibson,  2  B.  Hon.  (Ky.)  353. 

« In  Herrell  v.  Sizeland,  81  Dl. 
457,  the  defendant  and  his  wife 
moved  into  a  house  by  the  ovmer's 
permission,  and  remained  there, 
rent  free,  and  took  care  of  him  un- 
til his  death  They  were  held  to 
be  tenants  at  wiU.  In  Rex  v.  Fil- 
lougby,  1  T.  R.  458,  it  was  held 
that  a  person  occupying,  under  a 


permission  given  in  those  words, 
for  it,"  followed  by  occupancy  un- 
"  I  give  you  a  lease  to  enjoy  as  long 
as  I  please,  and  to  take  again  when 
I  please,  and  vou  shall  pay  nothing 
der  it,  was  held  to  create  a  tenancy 
at  will,  and  the  relation  of  tenant 
so  strictly,  that  by  residence  under 
it  for  forty  days,  the  tenant  ac- 
quired a  settlement.  In  Groves  v. 
Groves,  10  Q.  B.  486,  the  defend- 
ant occupied  the  premises  in 
question  by  permission  of  the  own- 
er or  lessee,  for  about  forty-four 
years,  paying  no  rent  therefor.  He 
was  held  to  have  occupied  as  a  ten- 
ant at  will,  and  that  he  was  pre- 
cluded from  setting  up  an  adverse 
title  in  himself. 

^  See  cases  cited  in  the  last  note ; 
also  Hull  V.  Wood,  14  M.  &  W.  682. 

*  Richardson    v.    Lan^dge,    4 


Taunt.  128;  Bartow  v.  Cox,  11  Q. 
B.  122. 

»  Cudlip  V.  Rundall,  3  Salk.  156. 

*  Hollingsworth  v.  Stennett,  2 
Esp.  717. 


r  • 


CHAP,  m.] 


How  Created. 


49 


person  holding  over  has  been  held  a  tenant  at  sufferance.^ 
A  tenant  holding  over  after  the  expiration  of  his  term, is 
a  mere  tenant  at  will,  or  by  sufferance,  but  if  the  lessor 
accepts  rent  from  him,  his  tenancy  is  thereby  at  once 
converted  into  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  upon  the 
terms  of  the  former  demise,  so  far  as  they  are  applicable 
to  his  new  relation. '    In  order  to  convert  a  tenancv  for 


'  Simpkin  v.  Ashurst,  1  C.  M.  & 
R  261. 

'  Jackson  v.  McLeod,  12  John 
(N.  Y.)  182;  WUde  v.  Cantillon,  1 
John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.)  123 ;  Jackson  v. 
Parkhurst,  5  John.  (N.  Y.)  128; 
Clayton  v.  Blakeley,  8  T.  R.  8. 
This  Question  should  not  be  lightly 
passed  over,  as  it  is  one  that  has 
involved  considerable  conflict,  and 
that  even  now  is  not  satisfactorilv 
settled  in  all  the  States.  The  dif- 
ference, however,  in  the  decisions 
of  the  courts,  is  referable  to  the 
difference  in  the  language  of  the 
section  of  the  statute  of  frauds 
relative  to  parol  demise.  Under 
the  statute  29  Car.  2  c.  893,  it  is 
provided  that  all  leases  by  parol,  for 
more  than  three  years,  shall  have 
the  effect  of  leases  at  will  only ; 
and  in  England,  under  this  statute, 
it  is  held  that,  notwithstanding 
this  statute,  a  person  holding  under 
a  X)arol  lease  for  a  longer  term,  as 
in  our  case  under  a  parol  lease  for 
seven  years,  Rigg  v.  Bell,  5  T.  R. 
471 ;  2  Smith's  Leading  Cas.  72,  and 
paying  rent,  although  not  deriving 
an  interest  in  estate,  commensurate 
in  duration  with  that  fixed  in  the 
lease,  is  nevertheless  considered  as 
holding  upon  all  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  so  far  as  they  are  appli- 
cable to  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year.  Richardson  v.  Gifford,  1 
Ad.  &  El.  52 ;  Beale  v.  Sanders, 
3  Bing  850,  and  in  the  cases 
last  named  the  tenant  was  held 
bound  by  the  covenants  to  repair. 
In  the  case  last  cited  the  defend- 
ants had  for  several  years  occupied 
and  paid  rent,  as  assignees,  under 
avoid  lease.  The  lease  contained 
a  warrant  on  the  part  of  the  lessees 
to  keep  the  buildings  and  premises 
in  repair.  The  cotut  held  that  the 
assignees  were  liable  to  repair  to 
the  end  of  the  term,  but  that  their 
liability  to  repair  under  this  implied 
assumpsit,  ceased  with  the  termi- 


nation of  the  term  fixed  in  the  lease 
**  Although  the  lease  was  void," 
said  Park  J.,  "yet,  as  the  defend- 
ants held  the  premises  to  the  end 
of  the  term,  and  continued  to  pay 
the  rent,  they  are  liable  to  all  the 
stipulations  contained  in  the  lease, 
in  the  same  way  as  a  tenant  who 
holds  upon  the  expiration  of  a  void 
lease."  This  doctrine  was  also  held 
in  Pistor  v.  Cator,  9  M.  &  W,  815, 
in  which  the  tenant  entered  into 
possession  under  an  agreement  for 
a  lease  as  soon  as  the  lordTs  license 
could  be  obtained,  in  which  he  was 
to  covenant  to  repair.  No  lease 
was  ever  obtained,  and  no  lease 
was  ever  made,  yet  he  was  held 
liable  to  repair  so  long  as  he  occu- 
pied. In  this  case,  however,  it 
should  be  stated  tliat  the  tenant 
occupied  for  the  whole  term  agreed 
upon,  and  Abinger,  C.  B.,  says: 
"The  defendant  having  occupied 
for  the  whole  of  the  term  agreed 
upon,  and  having  had  the  full  ben-' 
ent  which  he  could  have  enjoyed 
under  the  lease,  he  cannot  now  say 
that  the  covenants  are  not  binding 
because  the  lease  was  not  granted. 
In  all  these  cases,  the  tenant  had 
the  benefit  of  the  full  term.  If  the 
landlord  had  evicted  him  before 
the  full  term  expired,  as  he  might 
have  done  bv  giving  proper  notice 
to  quit,  a  different  question  would 
have  been  presented,  and  possibly 
with  a  different  result.  In  the  case 
of  such  tenancies,  the  landlord 
may  put  an  end  to  them  at  any 
time  by  notice  to  quit  of  the  usual 
length.  Chapman  v.  Towner,  6 
M.  &  W.  100,  but  in  any  event  it  is 
put  an  end  to  by  the  determination 
of  the  term,  without  any  notice  to 
q^uit,  and  this  is  one  of  the  pecu- 
liarities of  this  species  of  tenancy 
from  year  to  year.  Tilt  v.  Strat- 
ton,  4  Bing.  446  ;  Bemey  v.  Lind- 
ley,  3  M.  &  Gr.  511.  The  doctrine 
of  these  cases  as  to  the  occupancy 

4 


50 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  15. 


an  uncertain  period,  into  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  there 


of  a  tenant,  under  a  void  lease  be- 
ing subject  to  the  terms  of  the 
lease  so  far  as  they  are  applicable 
to  the  relation  is  generally  accepted 
by  our  courts.  Lockwocii  v.  Lock- 
wood,  82  Conn.  ^5 ;  Strong  v. 
Crossly,  21  id.  396;  Taggard  v. 
Roosevelt,  2  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
100  ;  People  v.  Rickert,  8  Cow.  (N. 
Y.)  227;  Creech  v.  Crockett,  5 
Cush.  (Mass.)  138;  HoUis  v.  Pool, 
3  Met.  (Mass.)  350;  Schuyler  v. 
Leggett,  2  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  660  ;  Ed- 
wards V.  Clemmons,  24  Wend.  (N, 
Y.)  480;  Prindle  v.  Anderson.  23 
id.  616.  But  upon  the  point,  that 
a  tenant  under  a  lease  void  under 
the  Statute  of  Frauds,  becomes  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year  upon 
jmyment  of  rent,  there  is  a  great 
diversity  of  doctrine,  growing  out 
of  the  difference  in  the  language 
of  the  statute.  In  Massachusetts, 
in  several  cases  under  the  statute 
of  1783,  chap.  87,  sec.  1 ,  it  is  held 
that  nothing  more  than  a  tenancy 
at  will  exists  under  parol  leases, 
either  for  a  certain  or  uncertain 
term,  and  that  this  tenancy  can- 
not be  enlarged  into  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year  by  entry  and 
pavment  of  rent.  Ellis  v.  Paige,  8 
Pick.  (Mass.)  45 ;  Hollis  v.  Pool,  1 
Met.  (Mass.)  151 ;  KeUy  v.  Waite, 
12  id.  300 ;  Bingham  v.  Sprague, 
10  Pick.  (Mass.)  102,  and  a  similar 
doctrine  has  been  held  in  Maine. 
Davis  V.  Thompson,  13  Me.  214 ; 
Withers  v.  Larabee,  48  id.  570,  and 
in  New  Hampshire  Whitney  v. 
Swett,  22  id.  10,  and  in  the  latter 
State  it  is  held  that  a  tenancy 
shown  by  wTitten  receipts  for  rent 
to  be  from  vear  to  year,  or  month 
to  month,  is  but  a  lease  at  will. 
Whitney  v.  Swett,  ante,  and  a 
similar  doctrine  is  intimated  in 
Cromelin  v.  Theis,  31  Ala.  411. 
But  in  most  of  the  States  the  Eng- 
lish doctrine  prevails.  Hull  v. 
Wadsworth,  28  Vt.  10 ;  Prindle  v. 
Anderson,  19  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  891. 
aff 'd  23  id.  616  ;  Jackson  v.  Wilsev,  9 
Jolm.  (N.  Y.)  267  ;  Ridgely  v.  StiU- 
well,  28  Miss.  400;  McDowell  v. 
Simpson,  3  Watts  (Penn.)  135; 
Puji:sley  V.  Aiken,  11  N.  Y.  491 ; 
Porter  v.  Gk)rdon,  5  Yerg.  109; 
Drake  v.  Newton.  3  N.  J.  L.  Ill, 
and  unless  the  language  of  the 
statute  is  such  as  to  prevent  such  a 


construction,  it  would  seem  to  be 
the  better  doctrine  that,  while  in 
the  fii^t  instance  such  holdings 
are  merely  as  tenants  at  will,  vet 
the  estate  is  susceptible  of  being 
enlarged  into  a  tenancy  from  year 
to  year,  and  that  this  is  done, 
whenever  a  yearly  rent  is  reserved 
in  the  lease,  when  the  tenant  pays, 
and  the  landlord  accepts  the  rent. 
Silby  V.  Allen,  43  Vt.  172.  In 
Morris  v.  Niles,  12  Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y.) 
103,  it  was  held  that  payment  of  a 
quarter's  rent  is  evidence  of  a 
yearly  tenancy  at  that  rate.  It 
seems  tliat  ai^tfual  payment  of  the 
rent  is  not  necessary,  but  in  one 
case  an  admission  by  the  tenant  of 
a  half  year's  rent  in  an  account  of 
tiie  landlord  was  held  sufficient. 
Cox  V.  Burt,  5  Bing.  185  ;  Gk)SELER, 
J. ,  before  whom  the  case  was  tried 
at  the  aj^izes,  saying,  "  The  ad- 
mission was  equivalent  to  tlie  pay- 
ing of  so  much  rent,  and  that 
the  plaintiff  thereby  became  ten- 
ant from  year  to  ^-ear."  See  for 
English  cases  holding  tliat  a  tenant 
under  a  void  lease  is  a  tenant  from 
vear  to  year.  Tress  v.  Savage,  4  E. 
&  B.  36  ;Lee  v.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  662  ; 
Davenish  v.  Moffatt,  15  Q.  B.  257. 
Holding  that  a  similar  result  en- 
sues from  an  entry  under  an 
agreement  for  a  lease,  Bolton  v. 
Tomlin,  6  Ad.  &  El.  856 ;  Doe  v. 
Smith,  1  Man.  &.  R.  137 ;  Mann  v. 
Lovejoy,  Rv.  &  Moo.  855  ;  Bennett 
V.  Ireland,  E.  B.  &  E.  326  ;  Knight 
V.  Bennett,  3  Bing.  361 ;  Chairman 
V.  Towner,  6  M.  &  W,  100  ;  Cox  v. 
Burt,  5  Bing.  185  ;  Braith waite  v. 
Hitchcock,  10  M.  &  W.  494 ;  Doe 
V.  Ajney,  12  Ad.  &  E .  476 ;  al- 
though the  agreemnet  is  void. 
Knight  V.  Bennett,  ante ;  also  that 
it  arises  from  implication  of  law 
by  payment  of  yearly  rent.  Braith- 
waite  V.  Hitchcock,  ante ;  Hull  v. 
Wood,  14  M.  &.  W.  682 ;  Tress  v. 
Savage,  ante  ;  Davenishv.  Moffatt, 
ante ;  Doe  v.  Taniere,  12  Q.  B.  998. 
But,  this  is  only  an  inference 
of  law  that  cannot  be  raised 
against  the  intention  of  the  parties 
clearly  expressed,  and  it  seems 
that  it  cannot  arise  where  the  ten- 
ant fails  to  comply  with  the  con- 
ditions precedent,  established  either 
by  contract,  usage  or  law.  Thus, 
in   an   Iowa    case,    Dubuque   v. 


CHAP,  m.] 


How  Created. 


51 


■I 


\ 


must  be  a  reservation  of  annual  rent,  and  unless  there  is 
such  a  reservation  the  tenancy  is  prima  facie  only  a  ten- 
ancy at  will.  *  Thus,  in  an  English  case,'*  the  landlord  let 
a  shed  to  be  used  as  a  stable,  for  the  dung  that  was  made 
therein,  as  compensation.  No  definite  term  was  agreed 
upon,  and  the  court  held  that  the  tenancy  was  one  mere- 
ly at  will,  because  there  was  no  reservation  of  rent  ref- 
erable to  a  year,  or  any  aliquot  part  thereof.  And  it 
seems  that  an  implied  obligation  to  pay  rent,  is  not 
enough  to  convert  a  tenancy  at  will  into  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year.  Thus  in  a  Vermont  case, '  the  defendant, 
by  the  parol  permission  of  the  plaintiff,  went  into  pos- 
session of  certain  premises,  as  tenant,  without  any  agree- 
ment as  to  the  terms  of  holding,  or  the  payment  of  rent, 
and  continued  in  possession  about  fourteen  years.  He 
erected  a  barn  on  the  premises,  and  repaired  the  house. 
The  plaintiff  tried  to  settle  with  him,  but  could  get  noth- 
ing from  him  beyond  the  repairs,  and  it  appeared  that 
he  refused  to  pay  rent.  The  plaintiff  brought  an  ac- 
tion to  recover  the  possession  of  the  premises,  giving  no 
notice  to  quit.  The  defendant  resisted  the  action  upon 
the  ground  that  his  tenancy  had  ripened  into  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  and  consequently  that  he  was  enti- 
tled to  six  months'  notice  to  quit.  But  the  court  held 
that  the  tenancy  was  merely  one  at  will,  because  it  lacked 
the  essential  element  of  annual  rent,  and  that  the  fact 
that  the  repairs  upon  the  premises  were  to  be  allowed 
upon  the  rent,  did  not  amount  to  a  yearly  payment  of 
rent,  but  were  merely  payments  in  gross  for  the  whole 
occupancy. 

In  Vermont,  under  the  statute,  a  parol  lease,  with  a 
stipulation  to  pay  an  annual  rent,  is  an  ' '  estate  at  will " 
only,  but  it  has  been  held  in  several  cases,  that  the  char- 
acter of  the  tenancy  may  be  changed,  and  become  one 

MUler,  11  Iowa,  583,  the  tenant  of 
a  market  stall,  under  a  lease  for  one 
year,  from  the  city,  at  the  close  of 
the  lease,  held  over  without  com- 
plying with  certain  terms  as  to  the 
payment  of  rents  made  by  the  city 
for  such  second  year,  and  the  court 
held  that  his  tenancy  was  only  at 


will. 

»Roe  V.  Lewis,  2  W.  Bl.  1173; 
Jackson  v.  Brodt,  2  Cai.  (N.  Y.) 
169;  Rich  v.  Bolton,  46  Vt.  84; 
Chamberlain  v.  Dunham,  45  id.  50. 

*  Richardson  v.  Langridge,  4 
Taunt.  128. 

8  Rich  V.  Bolton,  46  Vt.  84. 


52  Tenancy  at  Will.  [§  16. 

from  year  to  year  by  subsequent  acts  of  the  parties ;  as, 
by  entry  into  possession  by  the  tenant,  and  a  payment 
by  him,  and  an  acceptance  by  the  landlord  of  the  rent 
stipulated  to  be  paid,  and  continuing  in  possession  be- 
yond the  first  year,*  and  this  change  is  not  wrought  by 
the  length  of  time  that  the  tenant  holds  and  pays  rent^ 
but  by  the  fact  that  he  enters  and  holds  under  a  stipula- 
tion to  pay  annual  rent^  and  pays  accordingly.'  It  has 
been  held  that  an  entry  upon,  and  a  continuance  in, 
possession  of  premises  for  several  years  under  a  parol 
agreement  to  support  the  owner,  creates  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year,  because  the  support  furnished  is  treated  as 
in  the  nature  of  yearly  rent.'  But  iii  New  Hampshire, 
as  well  as  in  all  other  States  where  the  statute  provides 
that  no  estate  or  interest  in  lands,  except  an  estate  at 
will,  can  be  created  except  in  writing,  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year  cannot  be  raised  from  any  occupancy,  how- 
ever long,  or  the  payment  of  annual  rent.* 

It  may  be  said  that  prima  facie  leases,  indefinite  as  to 
the  term,  merely  create  a  tenancy  at  will ;  and  only  a 
reservation  of  annual  rent  converts  them  in  leases  from 
year  to  year.*  It  is  not  essential  that  there  should  be 
stipulation  for  the  payment  of  rent  in  money,  or  of  a 
certain  amount,  but  there  should  be  a  reservation  of 
some  benefit  or  advantage  that  stands  as  yearly  rent." 
A  lease,  indefinite  as  to  terms,  but  reserving  an  annual 
rent  payable  quarterly,  is  held  in  Pennsylvania  to  be  a 
lease  from  year  to  year,  and  cannot  be  terminated  except 
by  regular  notice  to  quit,  and,  if  such  notice  is  not  given, 
and  if  the  tenant  commences  a  new  year  without  any 
notice  to  quit  having  been  given,  the  landlord  cannot  put 
him  out  until  the  end  of  the  next  year ;  but  for  the 
second  year  the  tenant  must  pay  according  to  the  terms 

» Barlow  v.  Wainwright,  22  Vt.  Young  v.  Young,  36  Me.  133 ;  Hol- 

88;    Silsby  v.  Allen,  43  Vt.  172;  lis   v.   Poole,  3  Met.  (Mass.)  351. 
HuU  V.  V^adsworth,  28  Vt.  410.  » Rich  v.  Bolton,  46  Vt.  84 ;   Roe 

« Silsby  V.  Allen,  43  Vt.  172.  v.  Lewis,  2  W.  Bl.  1178  ;  Jackson 

«  Hanchett   v.  Whitney,   1  Vt.  v.  Brodt,  2  Cai.  (N.  Y.)  169. 
311.                                               .  <  Richardson    v.    Langridge,   4 

*  Whitney  v.  Swett,  22  N.  H.  10 ;  Taunt.  128. 
Davis  v.  Thompson,  13  Me.  214 ; 


CHAP,  m.] 


How  Created. 


68 


s 

^ 


of  the  lease/  and  the  courts  latterly  are  inclined  to  con- 
strue all  leases  at  will  at  an  annual  rent,  as  leases  from 
year  to  year."  But  when  the  lease  in  terras  creates  only 
a  tenancy  at  will,  the  fact  that  rent  is  reserved  and  paid 
in  pursuance  of  such  reservation  does  not  change  the 
character  of  the  tenancy.  The  intention  of  the  parties, 
if  clearly  expressed,  wiU  control.  Thus,  where  a  tenant 
entered  under  an  agreement  'Ho  become  tenant  at  the 
will  and  pleasure  of"  the  landlord,  *'and  at  and  after 
the  rate  of  twenty-five  pounds  per  annum,  payable  quar- 
terly," the  tenancy  was  held  to  be  at  will,  and  not  from 
year  to  year.  Lord  Denman,  C.  J.,  said :  *'  The  courts 
are  desirous  to  presume  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year 
where  tlie  parties  do  not  express  a  different  intention,  but 
here  they  have  expressed  it."  *    In  another  case,*  it  was 


» *. 


*  Lesley  v.  Randolph,  4  Rawle 
(Penn.),  123. 

*Pople  V.  Garland,  4  You.  & 
C.  394.  In  many  of  the  States  all 
parol  leases  merely  create  a  ten- 
ancy at  will,  as  in  Massachusetts, 
Maine,  Vermont,  &g. 

"Bartow  v.  Cox,  11  Q.  B.  122. 
The  reservation  of  yearly  rent  is 
not  inconsistent  with  a  tenancy  at 
wiU,  Co.  Litt.  556;  Walker  v. 
Giles,  6  C.  B.  662,  and  where  the 
terms  of  the  lease  are  suchaslo 
show  a  clear  intention  to  create  a 
tenancy  at  will,  the  reservation 
and  payment  of  yearly  rent,  and 
an  occupancy  under  it  for  a  period 
of  time,  however  long,  will  not 
change  its  character,  Dixie  v. 
Davis,  7  Exchq.  89.  The  EngUsh 
courts  are  inclined  to  hold  ten- 
ancies for  an  indeterminate  period, 
except  where  otherwise  clearly 
provided,  tenancies  from  year  to 
year,  where  there  is  a  reservation 
of  annual  rent,  and  even  in  some 
cases  they  have  so  held  where 
there  was  no  such  reservation,  but 
rent  had  been  so  paid,  Parker  v. 
Walker,  1  WUs.  25,  and  a  similar 
doctrine  was  held  in  Jackson  v. 
Bryan,  1  John.  (N.  Y.)  823,  but  this 
IB  only  the  case  where  there  is 
nothing  to  indicate  a  contrary  in- 
tention. When  it  is  clearly  the 
intention  of  the  parties  to  create 
only  an  estate  at  will,  their  inten- 

*  Walker  v.  Giles,  6  C.  B.  662. 


tion  will  be  upheld,  notwithstand- 
ing the  reservation  of  an  annual 
rent,  Anderson  v.  Midland  R.  R. 
Co.,  30  L.  J.  Q.  B.  94 ;  Stedman  v. 
Mcintosh,  4  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  291 ; 
Humphries  v.  Humpries,  3  id.  368. 
In  a  Massachusetts  case  it  was  held 
that  a  written  lease  of  a  house  at 
a  certain  rent  per  annum,  payable 
**  in  monthly  payments,  otherwise, 
pro  rata,"  for  a  term  to  b^B^ 
**  where  said  house  is  suitable  to  be 
occupied  "  by  the  lessee,  and  unde- 
fined in  duration,  except  by  a  stip- 
ulation tliat  if,  after  two  years 
from  the  time  when  the  lessee 
should  move  into  the  house,  the 
lessor  should  wish  to  live  there, 
he  might  do  so,  and  the  lessee 
might  then  retain,  if  he  should  de- 
sire, certain  rooms  **for  such  a 
time  as  may  be  agreeable  to  us 
both,"  creates  only  a  tenancy  at 
will ;  and  parol  evidence  is  inad- 
missable  to  give  it  a  different  con- 
struction, Murray  v.  Cherrington, 
99  Mass.  229. 

Where,  by  the  terms  of  a  writ- 
ten lease,  the  tenancy  is  to  con- 
tinue so  long  as  the  parties  shall 
mutually  agree,  and  either  party 
may  determine  it  on  four  days* 
notice— the  rent  to  be  paid  montlily 
or  semi-monthly,  as  may  be  most 
convenient  —  such  renting  cre- 
ates a  tenancy  at  will;  and  the 
lessee,  in  sucn  case,  acquires  no 


A 


64: 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  15. 


held  that  a  clause  in  a  mortgage,  that  the  mortgagors 
should  become  tenants  to  the  mortgagees  of  the  demised 
premises  during  their  will,  at  a  yearly  rent,  created 
only  a  tenancy  at  will.'  This  species  of  tenancy 
is  of  a  precarious  character,  and  the  tenant  is 
held  not  to  be  under  any  such  liability  to  the 
landlord,    as    a    tenant    for   a   term.'    Thus,    it    has 


certain  indef  easible  interest  in  the 
premises  which  he  can  sell  and 
transfer  to  another.  Such  tenancy 
win  be  determined  by  implication 
of  law,  upon  the  death  either  of 
the  lessor  or  lessee  ;  or  by  the  de- 
sertion of  the  premises  by  the 
lessee ;  or  by  the  sale  and  transfer 
of  his  posssession  to  another. 
Therefore,  where  during  such  a 
tenancy  the  lessor  died,  having  by 
will  devised  the  premises ;  and  the 
lessee,  a  month  afterwards,  sublet 
a  portion  of  the  premises  to  the 
plaintiff,  without  the  consent  of 
the  devisee ;  and  shortly  there- 
after removed  wholly  therefrom; 
and  the  devisee  thereupon  entered 
and  removed  doors  and  windows 
from  a  dwelling-house  situated  on 
the  demised  premises,  and  in  the 
occupancy  of  the  plaintiff;  with- 
out unnecessary  interference  with 
the  person  or  property  of  the 
plaintiff,  and  without  a  breach  of 
the  peace,  such  entry  and  acts  of 
ownership  were  not  tortious,  and 
do  not  constitute  a  cause  of  action 
LQ  favor  of  the  plaintiff  against 
the  devisee.  JSay  v.  Stoddard,  27 
Ohio  St.  478. 

*  In  Dixie  v.  Davis,  7  Exchq.  89, 
an  indenture  of  mortgage,  among 
other  things,  contained  a  proviso 
and  covenant  by  the  mortgagee, 
that  no  sale,  or  public  notice,  or 
advertisement  for  any  sale,  should 
be  made  or  given,  nor  any  means 
be  taken  for  obtaining  possession, 
until  the  expiration  of  twelve 
calendar  months  after  notice  in 
writing  of  such  intention  should  . 
have  l^en  given  to  the  mortgagor, 
as  tenant  at  vnll  to  the  morgagee, 
on  the  payment  of  a  certain  yearly 
rent,  by  two  e<jual  half  yearly  pay- 
ments, No  livery  of  seizin  was 
made  to  the  mortgagor.  It  was 
held  that,  under  this  provision, 
the  mortgagor  was  tenant  at  will 
only  to  the  mortgagee,  and  that  a 


tenancy  from  year  to  year  was  not 
thereby  created.  Pollock,  C.  B., 
said  :  ''  There  can  be  no  doubt  tliat 
a  tenancy  at  will  may  be  coupled 
with  a  yearly  rent." 

*  In  Lothrop  v.  Thayer,  138  Mass. 
556,  it  was  held  tliat  a  tenant  at 
will  is  not  liable  to  his  landlord  for 
the  destruction  of  the  premises  by 
fire  by  the  mere  negligence  of  the 
tenant.  The  court  said:  **The 
diligence  of  the  counsel  for  the 
plaintiff  has  not  shown  us  any  case 
m  which  it  has  been  held  that  a 
tenant  at  will  is  liable  to  his  land- 
lord for  injuries  occasioned  by  his 
negligence  in  kindling  or  keeping 
fires  in  stoves,  fireplaces  or  chim- 
neys, intended  to  be  used  for  heat- 
ing the  premises.  Such  a  case  is 
presented  in  Scott  v.  Hale,  16  Me. 
326,  but  the  defendant  had  a  ver- 
dict. In  the  case  cited  of  Parrott 
V.  Barney,  1  Deady  (U.  S.  C.  C.) 
405,  App.,  1  Sawyer  (U.  S.  C.  C.) 
435,  the  tenancy  was  from  year  to 
year,  and  the  damage  was  for  ex- 

glosive  substances  stored  in  the 
uilding.  There  is  nothing  in 
United  States  v.  Bostwick,  84  U. 
S.  53,  or  Robinson  v.  Wheeler,  25 
N.  Y.  252,  that  decides  that  a  ten- 
ant at  will  is  liable  for  the  negli- 
gent burning  of  a  building  let. 
The  law  of  negligence  lias  been 
largely  developed  in  recent  times, 
and  is  argued  that  there  is  no 
sound  reason  why  it  should  not  be 
applied  in  the  same  manner  to  real 
property  as  to  personal,  and  to 
tenancies  at  will  as  well  as  to  ten- 
ancies for  a  term.  It  may  well  be 
doubted  whether  the  existing  con- 
dition of  the  law  of  negligence  is 
altogether  satisfactory  and  whether 
it  would  be  well  to  establish  an  un- 
hmited  liability  on  the  part  of 
every  tenant  at  will  of  real  proi>- 
erty  to  his  landlord  for  every 
injury  occasioned  by  any  act  of 
negligence  on  his  part,  or  that  of 


CHAP,  m.] 


How  Created. 


55 


been  held  in  a  recent  case,  cited  in  the  last  note, 
that  the  tenant  is  not  liable  to  the  landlord  for 
the  destruction  of  the  buildings  by  reason  of  his  negli- 
gence or  the  negligence  of  his  servants.  But  to  third 
persons,  who  know  nothing  of  the  terms  under  wliich  he 
holds,  his  liability  would  be  the  same  as  that  of  any 
tenant.  A  tenant  at  will,  whose  term  has  been  put  an 
end  to  by  the  landlord  between  two  term  days,  cannot 
be  made  liable  for  the  rent  as  such  tenant,  as  the  rent  can- 


.1 


his  servant  in  the  use  of  the  prop- 
erty. However  this  may  be,  we 
do  not  feel  at  Uberty  to  overturn 
lon^-estabhshed  rules  of  law  gov- 
emmg  real  property.  It  is  compe- 
tent for  landlords  and  tenants  to 
make  in  writing  any  stipulation 
they  see  fit.  When  there  is  no 
writing,  and  the  tenant  takes  the 
precarious  estate  of  a  tenancy  at 
will,  we  think  it  has  been  generally 
understood  that  the  tenant  is  not 
liable  for  the  burning  of  the  tene- 
ment let,  occasioned  by  his  negli- 
fence  or  that  of  his  servant  in  the 
eeping  of  fires  set  for  the  piu'pose 
of,  and  in  the  places  designed  for, 
heating  the  premises  so  that  they 
may  be  fit  for  occupation.  The 
fact  that  no  action  can  be  found  to 
have  been  maintained  for  this 
cause  of  action  is  strong  evidence 
of  this.  The  ancient  law  has  been 
acquiesced  in,  and  conscioudy  or 
unconsciously  the  cost  of  insurance 
to  the  landlord,  or  the  value  of  the 
risks,  enters  into  the  amount  of 
the  rent.  We  think  on  this  part 
of  the  case  the  exceptions  should 
be  sustained.  If  the  law  were  to 
be  established  anew,  it  might  with 
much  force  be  contended  that  the 
test  of  the  liability  of  the  de- 
fendants in  this  case  ought  to 
be   the   same   as    to   all   of   the 

Sroperty  destroyed,  but  it  would 
eserve  consideration  whether  in 
such  a  case  as  this  is,  it  would  not 
be  more  reasonable  to  hold  the  de- 
fendants liable  only  for  gross  neg- 
ligence amounting  to  reckless  con- 
duct. The  existmg  law  has  how- 
ever introduced  man  v  distinctions. 
A  bailee  of  chattels  for  hire  is 
liable  only  for  tiie  want  of  ordi- 
nary care,  but  if  the  bailee  prom- 
to   return   the  chattel  abso- 


lutely, then  he  is  liable,  although 
the  is  chattel  is  destroyed  by  m- 
evitable  accident.  Harvey  v. 
Miurray,  136  Mass.  377.  The  obU- 
gations  of  tenants  under  a  written 
lease  to  their  landlords,  except  as 
far  as  statutes  have  imposed  arbi- 
trary liabiUties,  are  determined  by 
the  construction  of  the  lease.  But 
landlords  are  at  common  law 
exempt  from  many  liabilities 
toward  their  tenants  for  the  con- 
dition of  the  premises,  which  they 
are  under  toward  strangers,  who 
are  lawfully  upon  the  premises 
while  in  their  possession.  Bowe  v. 
Hunking,  186  Mass.  880 ;  Woods  v. 
Naumkeag  Steam  Cotton  Co.,  134 
id.  857 ;  45  Am.  Rep.  844.  Disre- 
garding the  use  of  fire  in  clearing 
land  and  for  other  agricultiurai 
purposes,  and  confining  ourselves 
to  the  case  at  bar,  which  is  tbe  use 
of  fire  in  stoves  for  the  purpose  of 
heating  the  building,  it  is  manifest 
that  in  many  cases  prudence  might 
re<^uire  a  reconstruction  of  the 
chimneys  and  the  purchase  of  new 
stoves.  In  many  cases  it  would 
be  difficult  to  determine  how  far 
the  bad  condition  of  the  premises 
contributed  to  the  injury  occa- 
sioned by  the  fire.  We  think  the 
reasonable  rule  is,  that  if  landlords 
would  protect  themselves  from 
the  mere  negligence  of  their  ten- 
ants, they  shomd  take  a  written 
lease  with  proper  covenants,  and 
that  a  tenant  at  will  is  not  liable  to 
his  landlord  for  the  mere  negU- 
genceof  himself  or  his  servants  in 
kindling  or  guarding  fires  in  stoves 
or  chinmeys  for  the  purpose  of 
heating  the  premises ;  that  he  is 
liable  for  wimul  burning,  and  also 
for  such  gross  n^ghgence  as 
amounts  to  reckless  conduct. 


■  1 


56  Tenancy  at  Will.  [§  16. 

not  be  apportioned,  *  nor  can  a  recovery  be  had  against  him 
as  tenant  by  sufferance,  because  he  was  a  tenant  at  will.  * 
Thus  in  a  Massachusetts  case "  the  defendant  was  a  ten- 
ant at  will  of  premises  in  Boston,  the  rent  days  being 
January  1  and  April  1,  etc.  On  January  23,  plaintiff  con- 
veyed a  portion  of  the  premises  in  fee  to  the  city,  defend- 
ant remaining  in  possession  of  the  remainder.  In  an 
action  for  use  and  occupation  of  the  premises,  held^ 
that  the  conveyance  of  a  part  of  the  land  in  fee  by  the 
plaintiff  to  the  city  determined  the  tenancy  at  will,  *  The 
tenant  is  not  estopped  to  deny,  that  since  his  own  entry 
into  possession,  his  lessor's  title  has  been  determined  by 
the  act  of  the  lessor.  *  It  was  held  that  the  plaintiff  can- 
not recover  of  the  defendant  rent  from  January  i  to 
January  23,  when  the  conveyance  to  the  city  was  made, 
because  the  conveyance  of  a  part  of  the  land  to  the  city 
must  be  held  to  have  determined  the  tenancy  at  will  as 
to  the  whole  land,  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  principles 
of  law  to  hold  that  after  such  conveyance  and  before 
entry  by  the  plaintiff,  the  defendant  is  a  tenant  at  suf- 
ferance to  the  plaintiff  of  the  portion  of  the  land  remain- 
ing to  the  plaintiff.  He  cannot  be  a  tenant  at  will  of  the 
plaintiff  of  that  portion,  because  there  never  has  been 
any  agreement,  express  or  implied,  on  the  part  of  the 
plaintiff  to  let,  and  on  the  part  of  the  defendant  to  hire 
that  portion  of  the  land. "  The  defendant  cannot  well  be 
considered  a  trespasser  merely  from  holding  over  after 
the  determination  of  the  tenancy  at  will  by  the  plaintiff, 
for  he  came  into  possession  by  right.  The  defendant 
was  held  liable  under  a  statute  as  tenant  at  sufferance  to 
pay  rent  to  the  plaintiff  from  January  23,  for  the  use 
and  occupation  of  the  portion  of  the  land  owned  by  the 
plaintiff  after  that  time,  but  the  amount  of  rent  to  be 
paid  was  held  not  to  be  determined  by  the  proportion 
which  such  unconveyed  portion  bore  to  the  whole  estate, 

>  Fuller  V.  Sweet,  6  Allen  (Mass,)  *  McFarland  v.  Chase,  7  Gray, 

219 ;   Dexter  v.  PhillipB,  121  Mass.  (Mass.)  462. 

178.  *Lamson  v.  Clarkson,  113  Mass. 

*  Nicholson  v.  Munigle,  6  Allen  848. 

(Mass.)  215.  « Edwards    v.    Hale,     9    AUen, 

'Emmes  v.  Feelej,  Mass.  (Mass.)  462, 


b-l 


OHAP.  in.] 


Vendor  and  Vendee. 


67 


^ 


'■"■J 


■ 


but  the  sum  which  the  jury  find  the  use  and  occupation 
of  that  portion  for  that  time  was  reasonably  worth. 

Sec.  16.  Vendor  and  Vendee—What  relation  exists  be- 
tween.—As  previously  intimated,  some  confusion  exists  in 
the  cases,  as  to  the  nature  of  the  relation  existing  be- 
tween a  vendee  in  possession  under  a  contract  to  purchase, 
and  the  vendor.  But,  while  in  some  cases  it  is  held  that 
the  vendee  is  to  be  treated  as  a  mere  licansee/  yet,  in 
a  majority  of  the  cases,  and  those  entitled  to  the  most 
weight  as  authority,  it  is  held  that  the  vendee  is  a  tenant 
at  will  in  a  qualified  sense,  to  wit,  as  owner,'  the  tenancy 
being  raised  by  implication  of  law,"  and  it  has  been  held 
in  several  English  cases  that  this  relation  must  be  de' 
ter mined  by  a  demand  for  the  possession  before  eject' 

It  is  not  the  agreement,"  says 


ment  can  be  brought.* 


a 


»  Doolittle  V.  Eddy,  7  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  74. 

«  Towne  v.  Butterfield,  98  Mass. 
106 ;  Jones  v.  Jones,  2  Rich.  (S.  C.) 
542 ;  Proprietors,  &c.  v.  McFar- 
land,  12  Mass.  835;  Carpenter  v. 
United  States,  17  WaU.  (U.  S.)  489  ; 
affg  S.  C,  6  Ct.  of  Claims  (U.  S.) 
157;  WintOTbottom  v.  Ingham,  7 
Q.  B.  611 ;  Milbum  v.  Edgar,  2 
Blng.  (N.  C.)  498 ;  Manchester  v. 
Doddridge,  3  Ind.  360;  Love  v. 
£dmon(£ton,  1  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L. 
152 ;  Patterson  v.  Stoddard,  47  Me. 
355;  Heame  v.  Tomlins,  Peake, 
192 ;  Newby  v.  Jackson,  1  B.  &  C. 
498 ;  Hope  v.  Booth,  1  B.  &  Ad. 
498;  Kirkland  v.  Paunsett,  2 
Taunt.  145. 

»  Ball  V.  Cullimore,  5  Try w.  753 ; 
Lewis  V.  Beard,  13  East,  210, 
•*  There  is  no  doubt,"  said  Parks, 
B.,  in  Gray  v.  Stanion,  1  M.  &  W. 
700,  "  but  that  if  there  be  an  agree- 
ment to  purchase,  and  the  intended 
purchaser  is  thereupon  let  into 
possession^  such  possession  is  law- 
ful, and  amounts,  at  law,  strictly 
speaking,  to  a  bare  tenancy  at  will?* 

*  Gray  v.  Stanion,  1  M.  &  W. 
700 ;  Lewis  v.  Beard,  13  East,  210 ; 
Stanway  v.  Rock,  4  M.  &  G.  80 ; 
Milbum  V.  Edmur,  2  Bing.  N.  C. 
498;  Newby  v.  Jackson,  1  B.  &  C. 
448.  If  the  landlord  does  that 
'which  is  equivalent  to  a  demand 
cl  possession,  as,  if  he  exercises 


any  act  of  ownership  upon  or  over 
the  land,  as  by  entering  and  cut- 
ting down  trees,  or  maEes  a  feoff- 
ment or  lease  for  years  to  com- 
mence immediately,  the  estate  at 
will  is  determined,  Ball  v.  Culli- 
more, 2  C.  M.  &  R.  122 ;  Howell  v. 
Howell,  7  Ired.  (N.  C.)  496 ;  Ris- 
ing V.  Stannard,  17  Mass.  282 ;  Kel- 
ly V.  Waite,  12  Met.  (Mass.)  300 ; 
Keay  v.  Goodwin,  16  Macs.  1 ;  El- 
lis V.  Paige,  1  Pick.  ^Mass.)  48,  a 
partition  of  the  land.  Rising  v. 
Stannard,  ante,  the  granting  of  an- 
other lease  at  will  and  giving  seiz- 
in and  possession  to  the  lessee,  El- 
lis V.  Paige,  ante,  or  the  death  of 
the  landlord,  Robie  v.  Smith,  21 
Me.  114 ;  Page  v.  Wright,  14  Allen 
(Mass.),  182,  or  by  anv  act  that  de- 
termines the  will  under  which  the 
estate  is  held,  Howell  v.  Howell, 
ante,  Lord  Denman,  C.  J.,  in  Tur- 
ner V.  Bennett,  9  M.  &  W.  643, 
very  forcibly  expressed  the  true 
rule  as  to  the  effect  of  an  entry  by 
the  landlord  in  the  case  of  a  tenan- 
cy at  will.  He  said,  "The  intent 
of  an  entry  is  undoubtedlv  in  many 
cases  important,  but  in  the  ca^e  of 
a  tenancy  at  xdU,  whatever  be  the 
intent  of  the  landlord,  if  he  do  any 
act  upon  the  land  for  which  he 
would  otherwise  be  liable  in  an  ac- 
tion of  trespass  ai  the  suit  of  the 
tenant,  such  act  is  a  determination 
of  the  will,  for  so  only  can  it  be 


58 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  16. 


Baron  Parke,'  ^^but  the  letting  into  possession^  that 
creates  such  tenancy,  for  the  person  suffered  so  to  occupy 
cannot,  on  the  one  hand  be  considered  as  a  trespasser 
when  he  enters,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  have 
more  than  the  interest  of  a  tenant  at  will,  the  lowest 
estate  known  to  the  law." ' 

A  tenant  thus  let  into  possession,  cannot  in  the  absence 
of  an  agreement  to  that  effect,  be  charged  for  use  and 
occupation,  at  least  so  long  as  the  contract  is  in  force  * 
whether  the  contract  subsequently  goes  off  in  consequence 
of  the  fault  of  the  occupier  or  of  the  owner  of  the  estate.  * 
And  this  is  so,  even  though  he  is  to  pay  interest  at  a 
specified  rate  annually  upon  the  purchase  money.  '    But 


lawful,  and  not  a  wrongful  act." 
Lord  Abinger,  C.  B.,  in  Ball  v. 
CuUimore,  ante,  says,  ^*  A  tenant 
at  will  luis  a  mere  scintilla  of  in- 
terest ^  which  the  landlord  may  de- 
termine by  making  a  feoffment, 
with  livery  upon  the  land,  or  bv  a 
demand  of  possession."  In  Ball  v- 
CuUimore,  ante,  one  Ricliard  W^ith- 
ers  entered  into  a  contract  with 
his  son  Thomas  Withers,  to  sell  to 
him  a  certain  estate  for  the  sum  of 
£5,  and  in  pursuance  of  that  agree- 
ment Thomas  went  into  possession 
and  remained  in  possession  six  or 
seven  years,  but  at  the  expiration 
of  that  time,  the  father  not  having 
received  the  purchase  money,  at 
the  plaintiff's  request,  agreed  to 
sell  him  the  land  tor  £5,  which  the 
plaintiff  paid  and  a  feoffment  was 
executed  by  the  father  with  livery 
of  seizin  endorsed,  and  livery  of 
seizin  was  made  when  Thomas 
was  off  the  land,  but  Thomas 
Withers  disputed  the  possession  of 
the  land,  and  the  jury  found  that 
he  did  not  go  off  the  land  for  the 
purpose  of  giving  up  possession. 
It  did  not  appear  that  he  had  any 
notice  of  the  determination  of  the 
will,  but  the  court  held  that  the 
feoffment  with  livery  of  seizin  as 
stated  determined  the  will.  "I 
am  entirely  of  the  opinion,"  said 
Parke,  B.,  "  that  Withers,  the  son, 
was  nothing  more  than  a  tenant  at 
will.  He  had  nothing  more  than 
a  lawful  possession ;  and  must  be 
considered  as  having  that  kind  of 
kgal  title  to  the  possession,  which. 


in  law,  is  recognized  as  a  tenancy 
at  will.  Then  the  father  executes 
a  feoffment,  to  the  plaintiff,  and 
livery  of  seizin  is  given.  I  am 
clearly  of  opinion  that  the  entry 
on  the  land  to  make  livery  of  setz- 
in  determined  the  imll ;  any  act  of 
that  kind  determines  the  tcill, 
wliether  the  tenant  knows  it  or 
not:' 

"  Gray  v.  Stanion,  1  M.  &  W. 
700. 

«  Howard  v.  Shaw,  8  M.  &  W. 
118 ;  Ball  v.  CuUimore,  2  C.  M.  & 
R.  120;  Kirtland  v.  Paunsett,  2 
Taunt.  145. 

» Winterbottom  v.  Ingham,  7  Q. 
B.  611 ;  In  Be  Banks,  2  Law.  M.  & 
R.  452. 

*  Saunders  v.  Musgrave,  2  C.  & 
P.  294,  Lord  Denman,  C.  J.,  in 
Winterbottom  v.  Ingham,  ante; 
Tomes  v.  Chamberlain,  5  M.  &  W. 
15 ;  Bell  v.  Ellis,  1  Stew.  &  P. 
(Ala.)  295. 

*  In  Tomes  v.  Chamberlain,  ante, 
the  defendant,  upon  the  22d  of 
Feb.,  1833,  enterea  into  a  contract 
with  the  plaintiff  to  purchase  of 
him  a  certain  estate,  and  >va8  let 
into  possession  forthwith,  and  was 
to  pay  interest  on  the  purchase 
money  at  the  rate  of  £5  per  an- 
num, until  the  purchase  was  com- 
pleted, which  was  to  be  done  by 
the  22d  of  the  ensuing  May.  There 
was  no  evidence  that  any  convey- 
ance had  ever  been  made  or  ten- 
dered, or  that  the  plaintiff  had  tak- 
en any  steps  to  complete  the  pur- 
chase.    The  defendant  remained 


CHAP.  UI.] 


Vendok  and  Vendee. 


59 


4 

tfr 


•je* 


where  a  yearly  sum  is  reserved  which  is  to  stand  as  rent 
if  the  contract  goes  off,  or  as  purchase  money  if  the  sale 
is  completed,  the  I'elation  of  landloid  and  tenant  is  created, 
and  the  tenant  is  entitled  to  notice  to  quit.  *  So  where 
a  person  goes  into  possession  under  a  parol  contract  to 
purchase,  and  advances  the  purchase  money,  but  sub- 
sequently refuses  to  accept  a  deed,  it  has  been  held  that 
he  thereby  becomes  liable  to  the  vendor  for  use  and 
occupation  for  the  time  he  was  actually  in  possession. 

But  while  this  doctrine  has  been  sustained  by  the  dicta 
of  a  few  cases,'  and  was  predicated  upon  the  doctrine  of  an 
English  case,  *  yet,  it  is  not  believed  that  it  can  be  regard  • 
ed  as  expressive  of  the  true  doctrine  as  now  held,  either 
by  the  English  or  American  cases.  It  is  not  apprehend- 
ed that  any  distinction  can  be  said  to  exist,  because  the 
purchase  money  is  paid  in  advance,  but  that  whether  the 
purchase  money  is  paid  in  advance,  or  not  paid  at  all,  if 
the  contract  goes  off,  the  parties  must  be  relegated  to 
their  contract,  and  that,  unless  there  is  something  in  the 
contract  itself,  for  which  a  promise  to  pay  for  the  benefi- 


in  possessioD  and  built  upon  the 
lana.  After  the  estate  had  been 
occupied  several  years  by  the  de- 
fendant, the  plaintiff  brought  eject- 
ment against  him.  The  defendant 
insisted  that  he  was  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year  under  the  agreement, 
and  that  the  stipulation  for  the 
payment  of  annual  interest,  must 
in  law  be  treated  as  a  stipulation 
for  so  much  annual  rent,  But  the 
court  held  that  this  stipulation  for 
the  payment  of  interest  annually 
was  clearly  not  in  the  nature  of 
rent.  "At law,"  said  Parke,  B., 
''this  is  nothing  more  than  an  es- 
tate at  will;  there  is  a  provision 
also  for  payment  of  interest,  but 
not  by  way  of  compensation  for 
the  occupation  of  the  land.  The 
agreement  for  payment  of  interest 
is  <^uite  independent  of  the  occu- 
pation of  the  estate.  *  *  ♦  He 
has  nothing  but  the  lowest  estate 
known  to  the  law,  viz.,  an  estate 
at  will,  which  may  be  determined 
by  demand,  or  by  entry." 

1  Saunders  v.  Musgrave,  6  B.  & 
C.  524,  disapproving  S.  C.  2  C.  & 
P.  294.    See,  also,  to  same  effect. 


Gk)uld  V.  Thompson,  4  Met.  (Mass.) 
224,  also  Anderson  v.  Midland  R, 
R.  Co.,  SOL.  J.  Q.  B.  94. 

*  Gould  V.  Thompson,  4  Met. 
(Mass.)  224.  But,  according  to  the 
doctrine  of  this  case,  liis  refusal  to 
accept  a  deed  determines  the  ten- 
ancv  at  will,  and  from  that  time 
he  becomes  a  trespasser,  and  no 
longer  liable  for  rent.  Upon  this 
ix)int  there  are  several  English 
cases  in  full  harmony  with  it,  hold- 
ing that  where  a  contract  is  made 
for  the  sale  of  lands  to  be  paid  for 
in  installments,  and  providing  that 
if  default  is  made  therein,  aU  pre- 
vious installments  paid  shall  be  for- 
feited, and  the  vendor  not  com- 
pellable to  convey,  and  the  pur- 
chaser is  let  into  possession  and 
makes  default,  from  the  time  of 
default  the  purchaser  becomes  a 
mere  tenant  by  sufferance,  Moore 
V.  Lawder,  1  Stark,  308 ;  Rogers  v. 
Pullen,  2  Bing.  N.  C.  749. 

«  Clough  V.  Hosford,  6  N.  H.  231 ; 
Alton  V.  Pickering,  9  id.  494; 
Whitney  v.  Cochran,  2  111.  210. 

*  Hull  V.  Vaughn,  6  Price,  157. 


60  Tenancy  at  Will.  [§  16. 

cial  enjoyment  of  the  property  can  be  implied,  an  action 
for  use  and  occupation  cannot  be  maintained.  In  the 
absence  of  such  circumstances,  the  vendee  is  treated  as  a 
naked  tenant  at  will,  and  the  payment  of  the  purchase 
money  is  the  only  compensation  that  the  vendor  had  any 
right  to  rely  upon,  for  the  vendee's  occupation.  If  par- 
ties see  fit  to  jeopardize  their  interest  by  entering  into 
contracts  in  such  a  manner  that  they  cannot  be  enforced, 
or  so  loosely  that  certain  rights  that  ought  to  have  been 
saved  to  them  are  lost,  the  law  cannot  be  distorted  to 
protect  them  against  the  consequences  of  their  folly.  The 
fault  is  not  with  the  law,  but  with  the  parties.  In  fact, 
the  doctrine  of  the  Massachusetts  case '  is  not  sustained 
by  the  English  case  upon  which  it  relied.  "  In  the  English 
case  the  action  was  not  brought  by  the  vendor,  but  was 
an  action  brought  by  the  vendee  against  the  vendor  for 
the  use  and  occupation  of  the  premises,  during  the  pen- 
dency'of  an  action  brought  by  the  vendee  against  him 
for  specific  performance,  which  was  subsequently  decreed. 
The  ground  upon  which  the  court  proceeded  in  that  case 
was,  that  the  vendor  got  into  possession  by  the  vendee's 
permission,  under  a  mistake  of  facts,  and  Richards,  C. 
B.,  held  that  the  judge  below  erred  in  ruling  that  the 
action  could  not  be  maintained,  because  it  was  brought 
by  one  who  had  no  right  to  the  land,  against  one  who 
had.  He  held  that  a  person  equitably  entitled  to  the 
land  was  to  be  considered  as  the  owner  from  the  time  of 
making  the  contract,  if  specific  performance  was  after- 
wards decreed^  and  that  the  vendor,  entering  into  pos- 
session by  the  permission  of  the  vendee,  if  not  indeed  by 
practising  a  fraud  upon  him,  was  answerable  to  him  for 
use  and  occupation.  That  is,  where  a  person  enters  into 
the  possession  of  lands,  with  the  permission  of  the  oumer^ 
under  such  circumstances  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  his 
occupancy  was  to  be  gratuitous,  and  the  compensation 
therefor  is  not  referable  to  any  other  consideration,  the 
law  will  imply  the  requisite  promise  to  uphold  an  a>ction 
for  use  and  occupation  therefor.    But,  where  a  vendee 

'  Gonld  V.  Thompson,  ante.  « Hull  v.  Vaughn,  6  Price,  167. 


CHAP,  m.] 


Venbor  and  Vekdee. 


61 


goes  into  possession  under  a  contract  to  purchase,  and 
there  is  nothing  in  the  contract  to  indicate  that  anything 
is  to  be  paid  for  such  occupancy,  the  fact  that  he  went  in 
by  the  permission  of  the  vendor,  as  a  part  of  the  contract, 
has  no  tendency  whatever  to  create  liability  on  his  part 
for  the  use  and  occupation  of  such  premises,  because  the 
payment  of  the  purchase  money  is  the  only  compensation 
thaty  in  the  eye  of  the  laWy  the  parties  had  in  contempla- 
tioUj  and  the  law  cannot  imply  a  promise  where  the  con- 
tract is  express,  and  repels  any  such  presumption;  and 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  to  that  extent,  does 
not  exist  until  the  contract  goes  off  by  the  default  of  one 
or  both  of  the  parties  thereto.  *    It  was  formerly  thought. 


\ 


■.% 


% 
\ 


*  Kirtland  v.  Pounsett,  2  Taunt. 
145,  in  Howard  v.  Shaw,  10  L.  J. 
Exchq.  336;  Hearne  v.  Tomlin, 
Peake,  192;  Right  v.  Beard,  13 
East,  210.  jn  Smith  v.  Stewart,  6 
John.  (N.  Y.)  46,  the  defendant 
had  been  for  several  years  in  pos- 
session of  lands  belonging  to  the 
plaintiff,  under  a  contract  to  pur- 
cliase,  and  from  time  to  time  prom- 
ised to  pay  the  purchase  money, 
but  not  naving  done  so,  the  plaint- 
iff brought  assiunpsit  for  use  and 
occupation,  against  him.  The 
court  held  that  the  action  would 
not  lay,  as  the  relation  of  landlord 
and  tenant  did  not  exist,  and  that 
the  defendant,  by  his  refusal  to 
perform,  had  become  a  trespasser, 
and  in  that  character  might  be 
turned  out  and  made  responsible 
for  the  mesne  profits;  and  the 
same  doctrine  has  been  held  in 
numerous  American  cases,  Van- 
derheuvel  v.  Storrs,  8  CJonn.  203; 
Bancroft  v.  Ward  well,  13  John. 
(N.  Y.)  489.  In  Bell  v.  Ellis,  1  S. 
&  P.  (Ala.)  295,  the  court  laid  down 
what  would  seem  to  be  the  correct 
doctrine.  **The  correct  doctrine 
of  the  books,"  said  the  court,  ''is 
that  this  action  upon  an  impUed 
promise  for  rent  will  only  be  by 
virtue  of  the  statute  when  the  re- 
lation of  landlord  and  tenant  is 
preserved,  and  that  this  relation 
will  be  destroyed  when  the  posses- 
sion is  held  under  a  contract  of 
sale,  though  that  contract  may  be 
void,  inenectual  to  convey  the 
premises,  or  even  though  the  sale 


is  prevented  by  the  purchaser  him- 
self." See  also,  to  the  same  effect. 
Hough  V.  Birge,  11  Vt.  190  ;  Brew- 
er V.  Conover,  18  N.  J.  L.  215,  and 
even  in  Kentucky,  where  it  has 
been  held  that  assumpsit  for  use 
and  occupation  lies  where  a  party 
goes  in  with  the  assent  of  the  own- 
er, and  there  has  been  a  beneficial 
occupancy,  it  was  held  that  the  ac- 
tion would  not  lie  where  the  party 
entered  as  a  purchaser,  because 
the  relation  of  vendor  and  vendee, 
rather  than  tliat  of  landlord  and 
tenant  existed,  and  thus  the  pre- 
sumption of  a  promise  was  direct- 
ly repelled,  Jones  V.  Tipton,  2  Dana 
(Ky.),  295.  See  also,  Little  v. 
Pearson,  7  Pick.  (Mass.)  301.  In 
the  case  of  WinterbotttMn  v.  Ing- 
ham, 7  Q.  B.  611,  this  question  was 
carefully  considered,  and  the  doc- 
trine settled  in  accordance  with 
the  statement  in  the  text;  Lord 
Denman,  C.  J.,  carefully  review- 
ing the  previous  cases.  In  that 
case  the  defendant  went  into  pos- 
session of  an  estate  under  a  pur- 
chase at  an  auction  sale,  and  held 
the  premises  pending  an  investiga- 
tion. The  contract  was  afterwards 
determined  for  want  of  title,  and 
the  court  held  that  an  action  for 
use  and  occupation  would  not  lie 
against  the  purchaser.  Lord 
DENMANsaid:  **  Upon  the  facts  of 
this  case,  the  plamtiffs  counsel 
contended  that  By  the  contract  of 
sale  the  defendant  was  not  to  be 
let  into  possession  until  the  pur- 
chase money  paid ;  that  his  entry 


62 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  16. 


although  not  directly  held,  that  the  right  to  recover  in 
such  cases  depended  upon  the  question  whether  such  oc- 
cupation was  beneficial  to  the  vendee  or  not; '  but  this  no- 
tion does  not  now  prevail;  but  the  right  of  recovery  is 
made  to  depend  upon  the  circumstance  whether  tliere  is 
anything  in  the  contract  that  warrants  the  inference^  that 
during  the  pendency  of  the  contract  the  parties  stood  to 
each  other  in  the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  or  merely 
in  that  of  vender  and  vendee,  or  in  other  words,  wliether 
anything  more  than  a  naked  tenancy  at  ivill  existed. ' 


therefore  could  not  be  referable  to 
that  contract,  and  his  occupation 
not  merely  as  purchaser,  but  that 
both  entry  and  occupation  must  be 
referred  to  a  distinct  contract  aris- 
ing upon  the  ordinary  implication, 
and  involving  the  ordinary  conse- 
quences as  to  the  payment  "of  com- 
l^ensation.  But  he  admitted  that 
the  entry  was  because  he  was  the 
contractor  for  the  purchase,  and 
that,  if  the  contract  had  been  com- 
pleted, and  so  long  as  it  was  pend- 
ing, this  action  could  not  have 
been  maintained.  The  more  cor- 
rect view  of  these  facts  seems  to  us 
to  be,  timt  the  entry  aTid  posses- 
sion were  not  upon  an  understand- 
ing tJiat  any  compensation  teas  to 
he  made  in  the  event  which  has 
arisen.  The  defendant  certainly 
was  considered,  both  by  himself 
and  the  plaintiff,  as  purcfiasery  not 
as  tenant,  and  the  plaintiff  cannot 
convert  him  into  an  occupier,  lia- 
ble to  pay  for  hio  twcupation.  *  * 
We  think  a  negative  must  be  put 
on  the  proposition  that  the  defend- 
ant promised  to  pay,  because  both 
XKirties  utiderstood  that  he  made 
no  such  promise.  Parties  may 
easily  secure  themselves  by  stipu- 
lating for  the  event  of  a  non-com- 
pletion of  the  purchase,  in  their 
contract  of  sale  and  purchase/' 

*  In  Heame  v.  Tomlin,  1  Peake, 
192,  the  defendant  was  permitted 
to  introduce  evidence  to  show  that 
the  occupancy  !iad  not  been  bene- 
ficial, and,  although  the  plaintiff 
was  not  ])ermitted  to  recover,  yet 
from  the  observation  of  Lord  Ken- 
yon  that  the  occupation  had  not 
l)een  productive  of  actual  loss,  al- 
thouojh  not  beneficial  to  the  de- 
fendant, and  from  the  fact  that 


defendant  was  permitted  to  give 
evidence  upon  this  point,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  he  regarded  this  as  a 
material  ]X)int.      In    Kirtland  v. 
Pounsett,  2  Taunt,  145,  it  is  evi- 
dent that,  if  the  occupation  had 
been  shown  to  have  been  beneficial, 
a  recovery  would  have  been  per- 
mitted ;  and  in  the  case  of  Winter- 
bottom  V.  Ingham,  7  Q.  B.  616,  al- 
though Lord  Denman  seemed  to 
question  whether  the  circumstance 
would  have  any  effect  upon  the 
question,  yet  he  seemed  to  go  upon 
tne  presumption  that  the  occupa- 
tion must  be  regarded  as  not  bene- 
ficial, even  though  the  jury  found 
that  it  was.    He  said :    "  Tlie  jury 
have  indeed  found  that  the  occu- 
pation   was  beneficial;    but    this 
statement  is  not  without  ambigui- 
ty.   It  may  have  been  beneficial^ 
supposing  that  he  actually  liad  be- 
come tJie  owner f  by  making  a  fair 
return  of  profits  on  all  his  outlay, 
and  the  amount  of  the  proceeds 
during  his    actual    holding.      On 
the  otner  hand,  he  may  have  ex- 
pended, as    owner,    in    improve- 
ments, a  sum  much  larger  than  a 
reasonable  rent." 

*  Right  V.  Beard,  13  East,  210 ; 
Howard  v.  Shaw,  8  M.  &  W.  118 ; 
Doe  V.  Jackson,  1  B.  &  C.  448; 
Tomes  v.  Chamberlain,  8  M.  &  W. 
14  ;  Parker  v.  Boulton,  6  M.  &  S. 
148 ;  Winterbottom  v.  Ingham, 
ante  ;  Ball  v.  Cullimore,  2  C.  &  M. 
&  R.  120 ;  Stan  way  v.  Rock.  Car. 
&  M.  549 ;  5  Jur.  121 ;  Hugh  v. 
Birge,  11  Vt.  190 ;  Jones  v.  Tipton, 
2  Dana  (Ky.),  295  ;  Little  v.  Pear- 
son, 7  Pick.  (Mass.)  301 ;  Smith  v. 
Stewart,  6  John.  (N.  Y.)  746 ;  Van- 
denheuvel  v.  Storrs,  3  Conn.  203 ; 
BeU  V.  Ellis,  1  Steu.  &  P.  (Ahi.)  295; 


CHAP,  m.] 


Vendob  and  Vendee. 


63 


■ 


■ 


:t' 


When,  at  the  time  a  contract  of  purchase  is  entered 
into,  the  vendee  is  in  possession  as  a  tenant,  the  question 
as  to  whether,  under  the  contract,  his  relation  is  changed 
from  that  of  tenant  to  a  mere  vendee,  depends  upon  the 
intention  of  the  parties  to  be  gathered  from  the  contract, 
and  the  attendant  circumstances ;  and  the  contract  and 
the  circumstances  must  be  such  as  to  overcome  the  pre- 
sumption that  a  tenancy  once  shown  to  exist,  continues 
until  it  is  shown  to  have  been  determined,  and  it  would 
seem  that  a  contract  of  sale  absolute  in  its  terms,  and 
which  involves  no  contingency,  has  that  effect.  Thus, 
in  an  Alabama  case, '  a  person  who  entered  into  posses- 
sion under  a  lease  for  a  definite  term,  subsequently 
entered  into  a  contract  with  the  administrator  of  his 
lessor  to  purchase  the  premises  from  him.  In  point  of 
fact,  the  administrator  had  no  power  to  sell  the  premises, 
and  the  contract  was  not  performed  by  him.  The  court 
held  that,  upon  the  making  of  the  contract  to  purchase, 
although  void,  the  relation  of  the  parties  was  changed 
from  that  of  landlord  and  tenant  to  that  of  vendor  and 
vendee,  and  that  no  recovery  could  be  had  from  the  ven- 
dee for  the  use  and  occupation  of  the  premises  under  the 
contract.  But  where  the  contract  is  dependent  upon 
contingency,  as,  if  the  tenant  contracts  to  purchase,  if 
the  landlord  *'can  make  a  good  title,"  it  is  held  that  the 
relation  of  the  parties  is  not  changed  by  the  contract 
until  the  purchase  is  actually  consummated.  * 


Bancroft  v.  Wardwell,  13  John. 
K.  Y.)  489. 

»  BeU  V.  Ellis,  1  Stew.  &  P.  (Ala.) 
295. 

« In  Gray  v.  Stanion,  3  M.  &  W. 
695,  the  defendant  occupied  a 
house  belonging  to  the  plaintiff  as 
tenant  from  year  to  year,  and 
while  so  occupying,  he  entered  in- 
to a  contract  with  the  plaintiff  for 
its  purchase,  as  follows:  "1831, 
Sept.  2,  Samuel  Stanton  purchases 
an  estate  in  the  parish  of  Corbey, 
bought  of  Robert  Gray,  at  the  sum 
of  £!00.  Received  on  account  10s. 
Mr.  R.  G.  is  willing  to  let  the  siun 
lie  by  paying  4  per  cent."  The 
court  held  that  as  there  was  an 


implied  condition  in  the  contract, 
that  the  vendor  should  make  out  a 
good  title,  the  agreement  for  the 
purchase  did  not  operate  as  a  sur- 
render of  the  tenancy  by  operation 
of  law,  and  consequently  that 
ejectment  would  not  lay  without 
notice  to  quit.  It  was  insisted  by 
the  plaintiff's  counsel  that  the  con- 
tract for  the  purchase  determined 
the  tenancy.  "  It  depends,"  said 
Parke,  B.,  page  697,  "entirely  or. 
the  effect  or  the  agreement.  If  it 
amounts  to  an  offreement  to  pur- 
chase tvithout  any  inquiry  into  thp, 
titley  it  may  determine  the  tenan- 
cy ;  but  if  it  is  an  agreement  to 
purchase,  provided  a  good  title  be 


64 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  It 


Whatever  may  be  the  conflict  upon  the  other  points 
stated,  it  seems  to  be  well  settled  that  no  recovery  can  be 
had  for  use  and  occupation  while  the  contract  of  sale  is 
unrescinded,  *  or  if  it  is  completed  by  a  conveyance  of  the 
property, '  or  if  the  holding  was  adverae.  * 

Sec.  17.  Bight  of  tenants  at  wiU  to  crops,  eto.-A  tenant 
at  will  possesses  no  demisable  estate  in  premises  held  by 


made,  can  it  be  contended  that  the 
tenant  was  bound  to  pay  the  pur- 
chase money  before  tne  title  was 
investigated?  In  delivering  the 
opinion  of  the  court,  Parke,  B., 
«aid  :  **  There  is  no  doubt  but  that 
if  there  be  an  agreement  to  pur- 
•chase,  and  the  intended  purchaser 
is  tliereupo7i  let  into  possession, 
fluch  possession  is  lawful  and 
amounts  at  law,  8trictl}i[  speaking, 
to  a  bare  tenancy  at  will.  Lewis 
V.  Beards  13  East,  210.  It  is  not, 
however,  the  agreement,  but  the 
letting  into  possession,  that  creates 
such  tenancy :  for  the  person  suf- 
fered so  to  occupy  cannot,  on  the 
one  hand,  be  considered  as  tres- 
passer, when  he  enters,  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  cannot  have  more 
than  the  interest  of  a  tenant  at 
will,  the  lowest  estate  known  to 
the  law.  But  where  the  purchaser 
is  alrecuijf  in  possession  as  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  it  must  depend 
npon  the  intention  of  the  parties, 
to  be  collected  from  the  agreement, 
whether  a  new  tenancy  at  tmll  is 
created  or  not,  and  from  what 
time.  In  this  case,  if  the  true  con- 
struction of  the  agreement  be,  that 
from  the  date  of  it  (or  any  other 
certain  time)  the  defendant  was  to 
be  absolutely  a  debtor  for  the  pur- 
chase  money,  paying  interest  on  it, 
and  to  cease  to  pay  rent  as  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  a  tenancy  at 
will  would  probtfibly  be  created  aft- 
«r  that  time;  and'the  acceptance 
of  such  new  demise  at  will,  would 
operate  as  a  surrender  of  the  in- 
terest from  year  to  year,  by  opera- 
tion of  iaw.  But  if  the  agreement 
is  conditionaU  only  provided  a 
good  title  should  be  made  out,  and 
to  pay  the  purchase  when  that 
would  have  lyeen  done,  and  tlie  es- 
tate conveyed,  there  is  no  room  for 
implying  any  agreement  to  hold 


as  tenant  at  will  in  the  mean  time ; 
the  effect  of  which  would  be  to  ab- 
solutely surrender  the  existixig 
term,  whilst  it  would  be  uncertain 
whether  the  agreement  would  be 
completed  or  not.  And  this  is 
strongly  illustrated  by  supposing 
such  an  agreement  to  be  made  by 
a  term  or  for  a  long  term  of  years, 
of  considerable  value  beyond  the 
reserved  rent;  in  which  case,  it 
would  at  once  strike  any  one  as 
impossible  to  give  this  effect  to  the 
agreement.  In  such  a  case  no  one 
would  doubt  but  that  the  intention 
was  that  the  lease  should  not  be 
given  up  unless  the  purchase  was 
completed.  Is,  then,  the  contract 
in  cjuestion  a  contract  of  this  con- 
ditional nature,  to  purchase  for 
£100,  provided  a  good  title  should 
be  made  and  the  estate  trans- 
ferred? We  conceive  that  there 
is  no  doubt  but  that  it  is  to  be  so 
construed ;  for,  in  the  first  place, 
in  contracts  for  Vie  sale  of  real  es- 
tate, an  agreement  to  make. a  good 
title  is  always  implied.  Souter  v. 
Drake,  5  B.  &  Ad.  992 ;  and,  in 
the  next,  it  is  out  of  the  question 
to  suppose  that  this  defendant 
meant  to  be  obliged  to  pay  the  pur- 
chase money  without  some  convey- 
ance of  the  estate,  although  sub- 
ject to  a  mortgage  for  the  purchase 
money.  For  tnese  reasons  we 
think  that  the  tenancy  from  year 
to  year  was  not  determined  by  the 
defendant's  entering  into  this 
agreement." 

*  Little  V.  Pearson,  7  Pick.  (Mass.) 
801 ;  Beauchamp  v.  Vanderhennel, 
8  Conn.  203. 

*  Carpenter  v.  United  States,  6 
Ct.  of  Claims  (U.  S.)  157  ;  Aff'd  17 
WaU.  (U.  S.)  489. 

'  Little  V.  Pearson,  ante ;  Wig- 
gin  V.  Wiggin,  6  N.  H.  298 ;  Bar- 
ton V.  Bimey,  11  Pick.  (Mass.)  1. 


CHAP,  m.] 


Bights  to  Crops. 


65 


him  ^except  that  he  may,  as  against  himself,  create  a 
tenancy  by  estoppel,  but  he  does  possess  such  an  interest 
that  he  can  maintain  trespass  against  any  person  who  in- 
terferes with  his  present  possession,  or  case  against  any 
person  who  commits  a  nuisance  or  other  injury  affecting 
either  the  comfort  or  convenience  of  his  enjoyment  of 
the  premises,"  but  not  for  an  injury  to  the  reversion,  al- 
though he  is  in  under  a  contract  to  piux^hase,  which  is 
subsequently  consummated  by  a  conveyance.  *  He  may 
terminate  his  tenancy  at  any  time  he  chooses  to  do  so, 
even  though  the  lease  is  expressed  to  be  at  the  will  of  the 
lessor,*  but  if  he  does  determine  the  estate  after  he  has 
planted  a  crop  and  before  it  is  harvested,  he  thereby  re- 
linquishes all  right  thereto,  and  it  belongs  to  the  land- 
lord ;  but  if  the  lessor  determines  the  estate  after  a  crop 
has  been  planted  or  sown,  the  tenant  is  entitled  thereto,  * 


l^  ■ 


*-j 


tyy 


■  .* 


<* 


.3r' 


.-:* 


•m 
•    1 


>  If  a  tenant  at  will  does  under- 
let, even  in  those  States  where,  by 
statute,  a  notice  to  quit  is  required, 
in  order  to  determine  the  tenancjr, 
a  notice  to  the  under  tenant  will 
be  sufficient.  Clark  y.  Wheelock, 
99  (Mass.)  14. 

*  Foley  V.  Wyeth,  2  Allen  (Mass.), 
185 ;  Hilbum  t.  Fogg,  99  (Mass.) 
11 ;  Bulwer  v.  Bulwer,  2  B.  &  Ad. 
470.  A  tenant  at  will  cannot 
maJTitain  an  action  against  his 
landlord  for  advising  and  procur- 
ing a  person  to  whom  he  has  given 
a  lease  of  the  premises  to  eject  the 
tenant;  and  evidence  of  the 
lessee's  motives  in  ejecting  the 
tenant  is  immaterial.  Groustra  v. 
Bourges,  141  Mass.  7. 

•Foley  V.  Wyeth,  ante,  where 
the  tenancy  has  not  been  legally 
determined,  he  may  maintain  tres- 
pass against  the  landlord  who  en- 
ters without  the  tenant's  .assent, 
aB  in  one  case  for  entering  and 
cuttingoff  a  pump  upon  the  prem- 
ises. Dickinson  v.  Goodrich,  8 
Cush.  (Mass.)  119. 

^  litt.  «.  68 ;  Cole  on  Ejectment, 
448 ;  Smith's  L.  &  T.  17 ;  2  Black- 
stone's  Com.  145 ;  Woodf  all's  L.  & 

rp     186 

»  In  Gland's  Case,  5  Coke,  116  a, 
the  rule  was  well  expressed,  as  it 
seems  to  exist  at  the  present  time. 
In  that  case  a  feme-sole   was  in 

5 


possession  of  lands  durante  viduir 
late  sua,  and  having  secured  the 
lands,  was  married,  and  the  ques- 
tion was,  whether  the  husband  or 
the  lord  of  the  manor  shotild  have 
the  crop,  and  it  was  held  that  the 
lord  should  have  it,  because  it  was 
determined  by  the  lessee  herself. 
See,  also,  8.  C.  sub.  nom. ,  Gland  v. 
Burdwick,  Cro.  Eliz.  60;  Rolles' 
Abr.,  tit.  Emblements,  10,  p.  727. 
In  Bulwer  v.  Bulwer,  2  B.  &  Ad. 
470,  a  similar  doctrine  was  held, 
and  the  tenant  at  will,  who  re- 
mained in  possession  after  he  had 
determined  his  tenancy  by  his 
own  act,  was  held  liable  in  tres- 
pass for  cutting  and  taking  away 
the  crops.  In  that  case  the  de- 
fendant had  been  the  rector  of  the 
garish  of  Sail,  and  he  resigned  that 
ving,  on  May  2l8t,  and  the  plain- 
tiff was  presented  June  4,  and  in- 
stituted to  it  July  7th,'  and  after- 
wards inducted.  The  defendant 
retained  possession  until  the  fol- 
lowing JVuchaelmas  day,  and  cut 
the  hay,  com,  and  other  crops, 
which  had  been  sown  previously. 
The  plaintiff  had  not  taken  actual 
possession,  but  it  was  held  that  the 
crops  inured  to  him  on  his  induc- 
tion, and  he  was  held  entitled  to 
recover,  and  he  had  a  verdict  for 
£188.  A  similar  doctrine  was  held 
in  Moyle  v.   l^wer,  2  Bulstr.  184, 


66 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§  IT. 


unless  the  estate  is  determined,  because  it  has  expired  by 
breach  of  some  condition  therein,  or  by  its  own  limita- 
tion by  the  happening  of  a  contingency  upon  which  its 
duration  depended, '  or  if  "the  estate  is  determined  before 
severance  by  uncertainty,  by  the  forfeiture  of  the  lease 
or  for  a  condition  broken.  So,  if  the  lessor  enters  for  a 
tort  done,  or  by  title  paramount,  or  if  the  tenancy  ex- 
pires by  limitation,  the  lessor  shall  have  the  crops."*  If 
a  feme-sole  tenant  at  will  marries  and  her  husband  sows 
a  crop,  but  before  it  is  harvested  they  are  divorced,  y^t 
it  is  said  that  the  husband  shall  have  the  crop,  because 
the  tenancy  is  determined  by  the  judgment  of  law,  rather 
than  by  the  acts  of  the  parties,'  and  the  same  rule  prevails 
where  the  tenancy  is  determined  by  the  act  of  God,  as, 
by  death  of  the  tenant  or  by  the  act  of  a  stranger,  or  by 


and  the  same  rule  is  laid  down  in 
Digge,  Chap.  2,  pi.  2.  But  if  the 
crops  are  severed  before  the  lessee 
determines  liis  estate,  or  if  they  are 
secured  before  his  death,  they, 
having  vested  in  him  by  severance, 
pass  to  him  or  his  estate.  Gibson's 
Codex,  Vol.  I.,  p.  661.  See  also, 
Sheppard's  Toucnstone,  244;  Fin- 
layson*s  L.  &  T.  p.  289 ;  Debow  v. 
Colfax,  10  N.  J.  L.  128. 

1  Gland's  Case,  5  Coke,  116  a ;  1 
Rolles'  Abr.  762 ;  Gland  v.  Bard- 
wick,  Cro.  Eli£.  461.  In  Bulwer  v. 
Bulwer,  ante,  Abbott,  C.  J.,  said; 
**The  generaJ  rule  of  law  appli- 
cable to  cases  of  this  description  is, 
that  where  a  tenant  of  land  has 
an  uncertain  interest  which  is  de- 
termined  by  the  act  of  Ood,  or  the 
act  of  another f  there  he  shaU  have 
the  emblement ;  but  that  is  not  so 
when  the  tenancy  is  determined  by 
his  awn  act.  That  is  laid  down  in 
a  variety  of  instances  which  will 
be  found  in  Comyn's  Digest,  VoL 
I.,  p.  6ol.  As  where  the  lessee 
surrenders,  or  a  woman  who  is 
tenant  durante  induitate  marries, 
or  the  estate  determines  by  for- 
feiture, condition  broken,  etc.  In 
aU  tlvese  cases  they  are  not  entitled 
to  emblements."  See,  also,  Davis 
V.  Thompson,  13  Me.  209;  Shel- 
boume  v.  Jones,  20  id.  70;  Davis 
V.  Brocklebank,  9  N.  H.  73 ;  Debow 
V.  Colfax,  10  N.  J.  L.   128.     The 


tenant  is  only  entitled  to  each 
crops  as  were  sown  before  the  es- 
tate was  determined.  If  the  crops 
were  sown  after  his  estate  was 
determined  by  notice,  or  otherwise, 
he  is  not  entitled  to  the  crop  or  the 
expense  of  manuring  and  prepar- 
ing the  ground.  Stewart  v. 
Doughty,  9  John.  (N.  Y.)  108:  Pri- 
or V.  Pickett,  21  Ala.  741. 

3  In  Gland's  Case  it  was  said  that 
"  if  a  lease  be  made  to  one  until  he 
doth  \raste,  and  he  sows  the  land 
and  afterwards  doth  waste,  he 
shall  not  have  the  emblements.** 
See,  also,  1  RoUes'  Abr.  726.  In 
some  of  the  States,  and  especially 
is  this  so  in  New  Jersey,  Delaware 
and  Pennsylvania,  by  the  custom 
of  the  country,  a  tenant  even  un- 
der a  lease  for  a  definite  term,  is 
by  the  custom  of  the  country  en- 
titled to  the  away  going  crops. 
That  is,  to  all  crops  sown  tne 
autunm  previous  to  the  termina- 
tion of  his  tenancy.  Van  Dover  v. 
Everett,  5  N.  J.  L.  460;  Temple- 
man  V.  Biddle,  1  Harr.  (Del.)  522; 
Stuttz  V.  Dickey,  5  Binn.  (Penn.) 
285 ;  Clark  v.  Harvey,  54  Penn.  St. 
142,  but  not  crops  planted  or  sown 
in  the  spring,  Demi  v.  Bassler,  1 
Penn.  224;  Templeman  v.  Biddle, 
ante.    See  past  £mblementb. 

*  Gland  y.  Burdwick,  Cro.  Eliz. 
461. 


CHAP,  m.]  How  Deteemined.  67 

operation  of  law, '  or  in  any  manner  otherwise  than  hy 
his  own  act, 'and  he  may  enter  upon  the  land  for  the 
purpose  of  cutting  and  carrying  them  away."  But  if  the 
tenancy  relates  to  agricultural  lands  he  cannot  take  away 
the  manure  made  upon  the  land,*  even  though  it  is  piled 
in  heaps  in  the  farm  yard,  and  was  made  by  his  own 
cattle,  from  his  own  fodder. '  But  the  rule  is  otherwise 
where  the  manure  is  made  upon  premises  not  devoted  to 
farming  purposes,*  as  in  hvery  stables,  or  in  any  way  not 
connected  with  agriculture, '  A  tenant  at  will  who  has 
erected  a  building  upon  the  premises,  who  does  not  re- 
move it  within  a  reasonable  time  after  his  tenancy  has 
expired,  or  after  notice  and  request  to  do  so,  loses  his 
rights  to  the  building  and  it  becomes  the  property  of  the 
owner  of  the  land. ' 

Sec.  18.  How  determined. — Either  party  may  put  an 
end  to  a  tenancy  at  will  at  any  time  he  pleases,  and  in- 
gtanter, '  and  without  notice,  "  unless,  as  is  the  case  in 

'  Ibid.  which  forcible  entr;  and  detainer 

See  also,  Gould  T.Webeter.lAik.      will  lie.     Davis  v.   ThompBon,   18 

{Vt.)409;  Bulwerv.  Bulwer,  2  B.     Maine,  208.     See  also.    Davie  v. 

A  Aid.  471.  Brocklebank,  e  N.  H.  TS.    In  New 

'  Bulwer  v.  Bulwer,  ante;  DaTia     Jersey,  in  Debow  v.  Colfai,  10  N. 

T.  Eyton,  7  Bing.  154.     It  is  laid     J.  L.  128,  it  is  held  Ihaf ,  if  a  tenant 

tote  in  lands 
until  the  seed 
row  and  ripen 
inter  and  reap 
B  tenancy  has 
n  detennined 
r  of  the  law, 
le  was  deter- 


6  Me.  S22; 
10  N.  H.  558 ; 
rin,  15  Wend. 


17:  Co.  Litt, 
lent,  446  552. 
■oe.  10  Gray 
E^lish  case 
;8t  considera- 
re,  a  Cr.  M.  & 


68 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§18. 


several  States,  the  statute  requires  that  notice  should  be 
given  by  the  party  determining  the  estate,  either  of  a  cer- 
tain number  of  days  or  reasonable  notice,  *  and  in  the  case 
of  a  strict  tensLncy  at  will,  it  is  held  in  England  that  eject- 
ment will  not  lie  until  there  has  been  a  demand  of  pos- 
session "  or  the  estate  has  been  determined  by  impUcation 
of  law  by  some  act  of  a  decisive  character,  done  by  the 
landlord,  and  that  is  the  rule  in  this  country,  as  a  land- 
lord cannot  determine  the  estate  except  by  some  decisive 
act  that  irresistibly  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  no 
longer  held  by  his  assent.  *  At  the  common  law,  this 
species  of  tenancy  may  be  determined  without  notice  by 
implication  of  law,  and  in  any  event  it  is  safe  to  say  that 
a  tenancy  at  will  may  be  effectually  determined  by  a  de- 
mand of  possession,  or  by  the  express  declaration  of  the 
parties,  *-  and  this  is  held  to  be  the  case  in  those  States 


R.  121.,  which  was  an  action  of 
trespass  oy  a  grantee  of  the  land- 
lord for  an  entry  made  by  a  ten- 
ant at  will,  upon  premises  that 
had  for  a  long  time  been  in  hi^ 
possession  as  tenant  at  will  under  an 
unperformed  contract  to  purchase, 
the  landlord,  the  contract  not 
having  been  performed  by  the  de- 
fendant, made  a  conveyance  of 
them,  with  livery  of  seizin  to  the 
plaintiff.  No  notice  was  given  to 
the  defendant,  and  he  subsequently 
entered  upon  the  premises,  and 
the  question  was  whether  the  con- 
veyance of  itself  operated  such  a 
termination  of  the  will,  that  an 
entry  upon  the  land  imder  it  by 
the  plaintiff,  when  the  defendant 
was  casually  off  the  premises,  gave 
him  lawful  possession  thereol'. 
The  court  held  that  it  did.  **  Any 
mode,"  said  Lord  Abinger,  C.  B., 
**  by  which  the  will  was  deter- 
mined, would  entitle  the  father 
(the  landlord  in  this  case)  to  main- 
tain ejectment.  *  *  The  gen- 
eral rule  of  law  that  any  act  done 
up>on  the  land  by  the  lessor  in  as- 
sertion of  his  title  to  possession  de- 
termines the  will,  is  a  sufficient 
ground  for  us  to  say  that  this  feoff- 
ment and  livery  of  seizin  did  de- 
termine it."  "Any  act  of  that 
kind,"  said  Parke,  B.,  "deter- 
mines the  will,  wliether  the  te^iant 


"knows  it  or  not,^^  At  the  common 
law,  no  notice  of  the  termination 
of  this  species  of  tenancy  is  re- 
<iuired,  but,  by  implication  of  law, 
it  mi^ht  be  instantly  determined 
bv  either  party  by  anjr  act  that 
clearly  evinces  a  temunation  of 
the  will,  but  in  all  such  cases  he  is 
entitled  to  a  reasonable  time  to 
remove  his  family  and  personal 
effects,  and,  as  to  what  is  a  reason- 
able time  is  a  question  of  law  de- 
pendent upon  the  circumstances 
of  each  case.  Ellis  v.  Paige,  1 
Pick.  (Mass.)  49.  In  New  Hamp- 
shire, a  similar  doctrine  is  held, 
Davis  V.  Brocklebank,  9  N.  H.  73, 
^nd  in  Maine,  b^  statute,  the  ten- 
ant is  given  thirty  days  for  this 
Surpose.  Davis  v.  Thompson,  13 
[e.  209. 

'Mizner  v.  Munroe,  10  Gray 
(Mass.)  292,  and  as  to  what  is  rear 
sonable  notice  is  a  question  de- 
pendent upon  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances of  each  case.  T^^Vlia  v. 
Paige,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  49. 

*Cole  on  Ejectment,  58,  458; 
Woodf all's  L.  &  T.  186. 

3  Ball  V.  Cullimore,  2  Cr.  M.  &  R. 
120 ;  Rising  v.  Stannard,  17  Mass. 
282 ;  HoweU  v.  Howell,  7  Irmed. 
(N.  C.)  L.  496. 

4  Woodfall's  L.  &  T.  188 ;  Bartow 
V.  Ck)x^  11  Q.  B.  123.  See  note  4, 
ante. 


CHAP,  m.] 


How  Detebminep. 


69 


where  the  statute  requires  notice  of  the  determination  by 
either  party  to  be  given  to  the  other. '  So,  too,  the  ten- 
ancy may  be  terminated  by  implication  of  law.  As  by  a 
conveyance  of  the  premises  by  the  landlord,*  the  making 
of  a  new  demise  to  commence  presently,*  by  the  death  of 
either  party,*  by  the  tenant's  disclaimer  of  the  landlords' 
title  even  by  parol,'  by  his  authority/  or  entering  into 
an  agreement  with  the  landlord  for  the  purchase  of  the 
premises,^  or  by  a  commission  of  waste  by  him  upon  the 
premises.'     So,  the  estate  is  determined  if  the  tenant 


>  Mizner  v.  Mmiroe,  ante. 

*  And  this  is  the  effect  of  a  oon- 
Teyance,  whether  the  tenant  had 
notice  of  it  or  not.  Ball  v.  Culli- 
more,  ante ;  and  even  though  it  was 
made  for  the  purpose  of  getting  rid 
of  the  tenant,  Curtis  v,  Galvm,  1 
Allen  (Mass.)  215,  unless  the  lease 
runs  until  the  landlord  sella  the 
premises,  in  which  caae,  unless  the 
conveyance  is  honafide^  it  will  not 
determine  the  tenancy,  Ela  v. 
Banks,  87  Wis.  89. 

•Ittsdale  V.  Ives,  2  Lev.  88; 
Mizner  v.  Munroe,  10  Gray  (Mass.) 
290.  In  Kelly  v.  Waite,  12  Met. 
^i^ifls.)  800,  and  a]BO  in  Howard  v. 
Morris,  5  Gush.  (Mass.)  563,  it  was 
held  that  an  alienation  of  the  prem- 
iaes,  or  a  re-letting  of  them  by  the 
landlord,  either  in  fee  or  for  years, 
operated  ipso  facto  as  a  determina- 
tion of  the  will,  although  the  tenant 
bad  no  notice  thereof ,  out,  that  the 
tenant  could  not  be  made  a  tres- 
pefiser  for  acts  subsequently  done 
by  him  upon  liie  premises  before  he 
had  notice  of  the  determination  of 
tenancy  by  those  acts.  See  also, 
Davies  v.  Thomas,  6  Ezchq.  854 ; 
Ball  V.  Cullimore,  2  Or.  M.  &  R. 
120;  Goody  v.  Carter,  9  Q.  B.  868 ; 
Cole  on  Ejectment,  452. 

*Stanway  v.  Roch, 4  M.  & Gr.  80 ; 
Atty.  Genl.  v.  Lord  Faley,  2  Dick. 
668;  Crockerell  v,  Owerell,  Holt 
417 ;  James  v.  Dean,  11  Vis.  891 ; 
Risiiig  V.  Stannard,  17  Mass.  284 ; 
EUis  V.  Paige,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  48 ; 
Cody  V.  Quiarterman,  12  Ga.  886 ; 
BoMev.  Smith,  21  Me.  114;  Camp 
V.  Camp,  5  Conn.  291 ;  Paige  v. 
TV^ight,  14  Allen  (Mass.)  182 ;  Co. 
Litt.  57  &.  But  the  English  Courts 
are  now  inclined  to  hold  that  the 
death  of  the  landlord  does  noti>er  se 


dissolve  the  tenancy,  but  that  the 
question  whether  it  shall  continue 
or  not  depends  upon  the  action  of 
the  heirs  or  those  entitled  to  the 
reversion,  Morton  v.  Woods,  L.  R. 
4  Q.  B.  806. 

*  DeLancy  v.  Gtanong,  9  N.  Y. 
9 ;  Montgomery  v.  Craig,  5  Dana 
(KyO  101. 

*  Kising  V.  Stannard,  17  Mass. 
284 ;  Warren  v.  Fearnside,  1  Wils. 
176 ;  Co.  Litt.  56  6. 

^  Daniels  v.  Davison,  16  Yes.  249. 

*  Cole  on  Ejectment,  449 ;  Co. 
litt.  55  &.  But  this  must  be  un- 
derstood as  applying  only  in  case 
of  voluntary  waste,  for  merely 
X)ermis8ive  waste,  for  which  no 
action  lies  against  him,  the  ten- 
ancv  is  not  determined,  Countess 
of  Shrewsbury's  Case,  5  Coke  18  b. 
IX)RD  Coke,  in  Co.  Litt.  57  a,  says : 
**  For  permissive  waste  by  a  tenant 
at  will,  the  lessor  has  no  remedy 
at  all,  for  the  statute  of  Gloucester 
extends  not  to  tenant  at  will." 
From  this,  and  what  is  said  by 
Littleton,  sec.  71,  that  *Hhe  lessee 
at  wUl  is  not  hound  to  sustain 
or  repair  the  houses  as  tenant  fof 
term  of  years  is  tyedy"  it  might 
be  inferred  that  an  action  for  per- 
missive waste  would  lie  agamst 
tenant  for  years,  and  Serot. 
WiLUAHS  in  ms  note  to  Pomf  red  v. 
Ricroft,  1  Saund.  828  b,  inclines  to 
the  same  opinion ;  but  Gibson  v. 
Wells,  1  N.  K.  290 ;  Heme  v.  Ben- 
bow,  4  Taunt.764 ;  Jones  v.  Hill,  7 
id.  892,  hold  the  contrary.  There 
are,  upon  the  other  hand,  some  old 
cases  holding  that  a  tenant  for 
years  who  has  demised  to  tenants 
at  will,  may  have  an  action  against 
such  tenants  at  will  for  permissive 
waste,  because  they  (the  tenants  for 


70 


lEUfXSCr  AT  WHiIi. 


C§  18. 


demises,  leases  or  assigns  the  premises  over  ;  *  but  such 
demise  or  assignment  does  not  determine  the  will  to  the 
prej  idice  of  the  landlord.  That  is,  the  landlord  may- 
treat  it  as  a  determination  of  the  tenancy  or  not  at  his 
election,'  and  in  any  event  it  is  not  a  determination  of 
the  tenancy  as  to  the  landlord  unless  he  has  notice  of  the 
facts,*  and  until  such  notice  is  given,  the  landlord  may 
distrain  for  the  rent  against  the  tenant/  So,  any  act 
done  by  the  tenant  inconsistent  with  an  estate  at  will, 
determines  his  tenancy.  •  Any  act  of  ownership  exercised 
upon  the  land  by  the  landlord  which  is  inconsistent  with 
an  estate  at  wiU,  operates  as  a  determination  of  it,'  and 
this  is  so  without  any  reference  to  the  landlord's  inten- 
tion in  doing  them.  "  The  intent  of  an  entry, "  says  Lord 
Denman,  C.  J./  '^  is  imdoubtedly  in  many  cases  important. 


years)  areaDswerable  over  in  waste 
to  their  lessors,  Panton  v.  Isham, 
1  Salk.  19 ;  Cudlip  v.  Rundle,  Garth. 
268.  For  a  full  statement  of  the 
rules  applicable  in  these  cases,  see 
chap,  on  Waste,  post. 

»  Melling  v.  Leake,  16  C.  B.  N.  S. 
652 ;  Pinhom  v.  Souster,  8  Exchq. 
763. 

«  Cole  on  Ejectment,  453;  Pin- 
hom Y.  Souster,  ante,  and  all  the 
cases  in  which  it  is  held  that  a 
demise  by  the  tenant  determines 
the  will,  are  to  be  taken,  subject  to 
this  qiiahfication.  Thus  in  Birch 
V.  Wnght,  1  T.  R.  378,  BULLEE,  J., 
says  **  If  a  tenant  at  will  leases,  it 
determines  the  will;"  or,  again, 
'*  if  a  tenant  at  will  grant  over  his 
estate,  though  the  ^rant  be  void  it 
determines  his  wilL"  See,  also, 
Jones  V.  Clark,  Hard.  47 ;  Co.  Litt. 
57  a.  But  these,  as  well  as  all 
other  cases,  are  subject  to  the  qual- 
ification that  the  landlord  may 
elect  to  treat  the  acts  of  the  tenant 
as  a  determination  of  the  tenancy 
or  not,  unless  the  tenant  has  noti- 
fied him  of  the  facts,  or  that  he 
has  determined  the  estate.  *  *  Sure- 
ly," said  Martin,  B.,  in  Pinhom  v. 
Souster,  ante,  in  reply  to  a  claim 
that  a  demise  by  the  tenant  deter- 
mines the  estate,  *'the  determina- 
tion of  the  tenancy  must  be  at  the 
election  of  the  landlord,  "and 
in  the  final  judgment  in  that  case, 
the  court  held  that  a  demise  by  the 


tenant  does  not  ipso  facto  dissolve 
the  tenancy,  nor  unless  the  land- 
lord elects  to  treat  it  as  having  that 
effect,  or  the  tenant  gives  notice 
to  the  landlord  of  the  demise,  may 
still  be  treated  as  tenant.  See, 
also.  Little  v.  Pallister,  4  Me.  209, 
to  same  effect.  In  Massachusetts, 
by  statute,  a  tenant  at  will  is  liable 
for  rent  imtil  he  has  given  tiief 
landlord  noticeof  thedetermination 
of  the  tenancy  by  him.  Batchelder, 
V.  Batchelder,  2 Allen  (Mass.)  105. 

•  Carpenter  v.  Colins,  Yelv.  73 ; 
Pinhom  v.  Souster,  ante. 

•  Pinhom  v.  Souster,  ante. 

»  Wallis  V.  Dehnar,  29  L.  J.  Ex. 
276;  Moss  v.  Gkdlimore,  1  Doug. 
269;  Hinchman  v.  Isles,  1  Vent. 
247 ;  Pallen  v.  Brewer,  7  C.  B.  N. 
S.  371 ;  Countess  of  Shrewsbury's 
Case,  5  Coke,  13  b. 

•  Lord  Abinger,  C.  R,  in  Ball  v. 
CulUmore,  2  Cr.  M.  &  R.  123,  or 
that  indicates  clearl^r  to  the  tenant 
that  he  resumes,  or  intends  to  re- 
sume, possession  of  the  estate,  as 
by  sending  for  the  keys  of  the 
building,  Patten  v.  Brewer,  7  C.  B. 
N.  S.  371,  or  that  he  does  not  de- 
sire the  tenancy  to  continue.  Dins- 
dale  V.  Ives,  2  Sev.  88,  and  re- 
sumeSi  possession  of  and  dominion 
over  it.  Davis  v.  Turner,  7  M. 
&  W.  224 ;  Hiring  v.  Stannard,  17 
Mass.  282. 

^  In  Turner  v.  Bennett,  .9  M.  & 
W.648. 


CHAP.  UL] 


How  Determined. 


n 


but  in  the  case  of  a  tenancy  at  vriUy  whatever  be  the  in- 
tent  of  the  landlord^  if  he  do  any  act  upon  the  land  for 
which  he  would  otherwise  be  liable  to  an  action  of  trespass 
at  the  suit  of  the  tenant^  such  act  is  a  determination  of 
the  witty  for  so  only  can  it  be  a  lawful  and  not  a  wrong- 
ful act. "  In  pursuance  of  this  principle  it  has  been  held 
that  if  the  landlord  enters  upon  the  premises  without 
the  tenant's  consent  and  cuts  down  trees/  or  takes  and 
carries  away  soU  or  stones,  these  acts  ipso  facto,  de- 
termine  the  tenancy,  unless  they  are  specially  reserved 
from  the  demise. '  But  a  mere  naked  entry  upon  the 
premises,  and  declaring  the  tenancy  ended,  does  not  have 
that  effect  unless  the  tenant  is  present  and  hears,  or  has 
notice  of,  the  words  used, 'because  the  landlord  has  done 
no  act  inconsistent  with  the  continuance  of  the  tenancy. 
When  the  act  is  such  as  is  inconsistent  with  the  tenancy 
and  is  done  on  the  land,  it  is  immaterial  whether  the 
tenant  is  present  or  not,  as  it  is  presumed  that  he  was 
there  and  knows  it;  *  but  if  the  act  is  not  inconsistent  with 
the  tenancy,  *  or  if  it  was  done  off  the  landy  the  landlord 
must  give  the  tenant  notice  of  the  determination  of  the 
tenancy.  *  A  demand  made  for  possession,  or  notice  of 
the  determination  of  the  tenancy  given  to  an  imder  tenant 
of  the  lessee  at  will, 'or  from  the  wife  of  an  under  tenant, 
or  it  would  seem,  of  any  person  in  charge  of  the  premises 
for  such  imder  tenant,  is  sufficient,  akd  determines  the 
estate  against  the  tenant,  himself. '  No  formal  demand 
of  possession  is  necessary.  Anything  said  or  written  to 
thtf  tenant,  even  though  accompanied  with  a  condition, 
that  informs  him  that  the  landlord  terminates  the 
tenancy,  will  be  equivalent  to  a  demand.  Thus,  in  one 
case  *  the  landlord's  agent  wrote  the  tenant  "unless  you 
pay  what  you  owe  me,  I  shall  take  immediate  measure  to 
recover  the  property,"  was  held  sufficient  both  as  a  de- 


1  Rising  T.  Stannard,  17  Mass. 

•  Bennett  v.  Turner,  7  M.  &  W. 
296;  al8o9id.  648;  Co.  litt  65  b. 

*  Cook  T.  Cook,  28  Ala.  660. 

^  Ballv.  Cnllimore,  ante ;  Carpen- 
ter V.  Colins,  YelT.  78 ;  Pinhom  v. 


Souster,  Exchq.  768 ;  Cole  on  Eject- 
ment, 452. 

•  Cook  V.  Cook,  ante. 

•Co. litt.  566. 

"*  Clark  v.Wheelook,  99  MzM.  14. 

"  Blair  y.  Street,  2  Ad.  &  EL  829. 

•Price  V.    Price,  9   Bing.    856. 


'\» 


72 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§18. 


termination  of  the  will  and  as  a  demand  of  possession  to 
enable  the  lessor  to  maintain  ejectment. '  Anything 
which  amounts  to  a  demand  of  possession,  although  not 
expressed  in  precise  and  formal  language,  is  sufficient  to 
indicate  the  determination  of  the  landlord's  will.  And 
if  the  demand  is  coupled  with  a  condition,  it  at  once  im- 
poses upon  the  tenant  the  duty  to  act,  and  to  comply 
with  the  condition,  or  lose  his  estate  without  further  ac- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  landlord.*  The  words  "  you  must 
leave,"  addressed  by  the  owner  of  the  fee  to  the  tenant, 
have  been  held  sufficient. "  It  has  previously  been  stated 
that  the  estate  is  determined  by  the  death  of  either  party  ; 
but  this  is  not  the  rule  when  the  premises  are  owned  by 
two  or  more  as  joint  tenants.  In  such  case  the  death  of 
one  of  the  lessors,*  or  if  there  are  two  or  more  lessees, 
the  death  of  one  of  them,  does  not  determine  the  ten- 
ancy. '  The  marriage  of  a  feme-sole  tenant  at  will  does 
not  determine  the  tenancy,' nor  is  a  lease  at  will  made 
by  her  when  sole  determined  thereby,* nor  does  a  lease 
made  by  husband  and  wife  determine  by  the  husband's 
death,  nor  by  the  wife's  death  if  the  husband  is  tenant 
by  curtesy,  or  otherwise  take  the  estate. '  The  bank- 
ruptcy of  the  landlord  and  the  vesting  of  his  estate  in  the 
assignee  dissolves  the  tenancy  from  the  time  the  tenant 
has  notice  thereof.  *  The  rights  of  tenants  at  will  to 
crops,  etc.,  have  been  previously  stated,"  but  it  maybe 
added  that  if  rent  is  payable  monthly,  quarterly  or  year- 
ly, and  the  landlord  puts  an  end  to  the  tenancy  before  the 
rent  becomes  due,  he  loses  the  rent  for  the  month, 
quarter  or  year  that  had  not  then  become  due.  " 


>  A  demand  of  possession  with- 
out notice  to  quit  is  sufficient. 
Rubp  V.  Maisey,  8   B.    &   C.    767. 

'  Price  V.  Pnce,  ante. 

8  Locke  V.  Matthews,  13  C.B.  N. 
S.  758. 

«  Henstead's  Case,  5  Coke.  10  b. 

»Ibid. 

•Ibid. 

*>  Henstead's  Case,  ante. 

^  Co.  Litt.  55  6. ;  1  Rolles'  Abr. 
861.  Estates  (z),  6;  Henstead's 
Case,  0  Coke,  10  6. 


•  Davies  v.  Thomas,  6  Exchq.  854. 

"  See  ante,  pp.  45,  46. 

"  Anonymous,  Keilw.  65  pL  6 
Carpenter   v.    Colins,    Yelv.    78 
Title  V.  Grovett,  2  Ld.  Rayd.  1008 
Layton  v.  Field,  3  Salk.  222 ;  Park- 
er V.  Harris,  4  Shad.  79;  Keyhly 
V.  Bulkley,  1    Sid.    338 ;  Leighton 
V.  Theed,  2  Salk.    413.    See,    also. 
Cole  on  Ejectment,  448 :  Comyn's, 
Digest,    tit.    Estates  (H.)  9;  Cos. 
Litt.  55  a.    6.    note  874 ;  2   Black- 
stone's  Com.  146. 


CHAP.  IIL] 


NoncE  TO  Quit. 


73 


Sec.  19.  K'otice  to  quit — The  rule  is  well  established, 
both  in  England  and  in  this  country,  that  a  tenant  at  will 
is  not  entitled  to  notice  to  quit. '  There  is  a  class  of 
cases  holding  that  a  tenant  at  will  is  entitled  to  notice  to 
quit,  *  but  it  will  be  found  upon  an  examination  of  most 


'  HoUingsworth  v.  Stennett,  2 
Esp.  717;  Tilt  v.Stratton,  4  Bing. 
446;  Right  T.  Baird,  18  East,  210; 
Ejiight  V.  Quigley,  2  Camp.  505; 
Rich  V.  Bolton,  46  Vt  84  ;  Cham- 
berlain V.  Donohue,  45  Vt.  50. 
In  Sheldon,  v.  Davy,  42  Vt.  687, 
the  defendant  leased  a  slate  quarry 
for  a  term  of  years,  paying  as  rent 
the  price  per  square,  as  stipulated 
in  the  lease.  Subsequently  he 
took  possession  of,  and  worked  for 
several  years,  without  the  consent 
of  the  lessor,  a  part  of  the  quarry 
outside  the  limits  fixed  in  the  lease, 
and  the  lessor  during  all  that  time 
accepted  rent  for  the  same,  accord- 
ing to  the  provisions  of  the  lease. 
It  was  held  by  the  court  the  ten- 
ancy had  not,  under  the  circum- 
stances,  ripened  into  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  and  that  no  no- 
tice to  quit  was  necessary. 

In  Uooton  v.  Holt,  189  Mass.  54. 
it  was  held  that  a  notice  from  A 
to  B,  a  tenant  at  sufferance,  to 
quit,  dated  January  80,  1883,  after 
reciting  that  a  lease  had  been 
given  to  A  for  the  term  of  one 
year  from  January  29,  1888,  noti- 
fied B  to  vacate  the  premises 
'*  within  two  days  from  the  above 
date,''  was  sufncient.  A  verbal 
agreement  by  the  owner  of  land 
that  A  may  remain  in  possession 
dtiring  hfe,  without  paying  rent, 
constitutes  A  a  tenant  at  will,  and 
his  tenancy  is  terminated  by  the 
execution  of  a  written  lease  of 
the  land  by  the  owner  to  a  third 
pers4>n.  If  an  action  is  brought 
against  a  tenant  at  sufferance,  af- 
ter a  notice  to  quit  has  been  given, 
and  before  the  tenant  has  had  a 
reasonable  time  to  remove,  this 
does  not  render  the  notice  incom- 
petent in  evidence,  but  is  a  matter 
to  be  shown  in  defence.  It  is  no 
cause  for  the  abatement  of  an  ac- 
tion by  the  lessee  of  a  tenement 
against  a  tenant  at  sufferance, 
that,  pending  the  action,  the  es- 
tate of  the  plaintiff  has  ceased  in 
consequenoe  of  the  foreclosure  of 


a  mortgage,  and  the  purchaser  has 
brought  an  action  against  the  ten- 
ant, which  is  pending. 

In  an  action  upon  a  written 
lease  "for  the  term  of  one  year, 
with  privilege  of  two  years  more 
at  lessee's  option,''  if  the  lessee 
holds  over  and  pays  rent  after  the 
expiration  of  tne  first  vear,  evi- 
dence is  admissible  to  show  that 
he  did  so,  as  a  tenant  at  will  under 
an  oral  agreement  with  the  lessor, 
made  before  the  execution  of  the 
lease.  Atlantic  National  Bank  v. 
Demmon,  189  Mass.  420. 

A  notice  from  A  to  B,  a  tenant 
at  sufferance,  to  quit,  dated  July 
8,  1885,  and  served  between  six 
and  seven  o'clock  on  the  evening 
of  that  day,  after  reciting  that  A 
had  **this  day  leased  the  tene- 
ment," notified  B  to  vacate  the 
tenement  **  by  Monday,  6th  day  of 
July,  current,  by  twelve  o'clock, 
noon."  In  an  action  on  the  Pub. 
sts.  c.  175,  by  A  against  B,  to  re- 
cover possession  of  the  tenement, 
it  appeared  that  it  was  occupied 
by  B,  a  married  man,  and  was  in 
the  second  story.  The  judge  who 
tried  the  case  without  a  jury, 
found  as  a  fact  that  the  notice  was 
sufficient  in  point  of  time.  It  was 
held  that  no  error  in  law  appeared. 

In  an  action  to  recover  posses- 
sion of  a  certain  tenement,  if  the 
plaintiff,  who  has  received  a  writ- 
ten lease  of  the  premises,  notifies 
the  defendant,  who  holds  under 
an  oral  agreement  to  vacate  the 
tenement  on  a  certain  day  "by- 
twelve  o'clock,  noon,"  and  the  writ 
is  dated  and  the  officer's  return 
shows  that  it  was  served  on  that 
day,  the  officer  may  testify  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  that  the  ac- 
tion was  not  prematurely  brought, 
that  he  served  it  in  the  evening. 
WardeU  v.  Etter,  148  Mass.  19. 

A  notice  to  quit  served  upon  one 
of  two  tenants  in  common  is  no- 
tice to  both,  Gnmdy  v.  Martin, 
148  Mass.  279. 

«  Ellis  V.  Paige,  1  Pick.  48 ;  Par- 


74 


Tenancy  at  Will. 


[§19. 


of  the  cases,  particularly  those  in  the  Term  Reports,  and 
that  from  Burrows,  that  the  tenancy  was  really  from 
year  to  year,  and  that  an  anniud  rent  was  reserved,  while 
most  of  the  others  are  referable  to  some  statute  that  gave 
rise  to  the  peculiar  doctrine. '  In  Massachusetts,  Maine, 
and  many  of  the  States,  notice  is  required  to  be  given 
either  by  the  landlord  or  the  tenant,  in  ok*der  to  put  an 
end  to  the  tenancy,  or  some  act  must  be  done  equivalent 
thereto,  so  that  in  determining  whether  notice  to  quit  is 
required  in  a  given  case,  reference  must  be  had  to  the 
statute. 


ker  V.  Constable,  8  Wils.  25 ;  Jack- 
son V.  Wheeler,  6  John.  (N.  Y.) 
271;  Jackson  v.  Bryan,  id.  822; 
Viner*8  Abr.  Est.  B.  8 ;  Layton  v. 
Field,  8  Salk.  222 ;  Rising  v.  Stan- 
nard,  17  Mass.  282 ;  Right  v.  Dar- 
by, 1  T.  R.  159 ;  Shore  v.  Porter,  8 
id  18 ;  Riggs  v.  Bell,  5  T.  R.  471 ; 


Timmins  v.  Rawlinson,  8  Burr. 
1608 ;  Martin  v.  Watts,  7  T.  R.  88. 
*  Tomes  v.  Chamberlain,  5  M.  & 
W.  14 ;  Jones  v.  Jones,  10  B  DC. 
718;  Smith  &  Soden's  Landlord 
and  Tenant,  269 ;  Creech  v.  Crock- 
ett, 5  Cush.  (Mass.)  188 :  Miznar  v. 
Munro^,  10  Gray  (Mass.)  290. 


J 


CHAP.  IV.]       Occupation  of 


CHAPTER  IV. 

HASTES  AND  SEBVAKT. 

Sec.  20.    Occiipuic^  of  master's  premiseB  by  eervant — relation  there- 
by created. 

Sec.  20.  Ooonpana?  of  moater's  premlBes  by  serrant— re- 
lation thereby  created.— A  person  who  occupies  premises  as 
the  servant  or  agent  of  another  for  the  more  convenient 
performance  of  his  duties,  acquires  no  estate  therein  ;  is 
neither  a  tenant  at  will  nor  by  sufferance,  even  though 
he  is  permitted  to  carry  on  an  independent  business  there- 
in,'and  less  wages  are  paid  to  him  on  that  account.  *  "In 
such  cases,  and  indeed  in  all  cases  where  tiie  possession  is 
given  for  a  special  purpose,  the  transaction  is  treated  as 
a  Ucense,and  not  as  a  lease,'  and  does  not  confer  any  estate 
in  the  property  to  which  it  relates  and  is  determined  when- 
""  (occupancy 

Ad.  478 ;  Kex 
t  C.  1«  ;  Bex 
a.  278;  RoxT. 
.  884 ;   Eei  V. 

186. 

lev,  11  Ad.  & 
I  the  plaintiff'B 
he  defendant, 
iditions  of  the 
lyer  was  to  bo 

take  it.  The 
I  operated  as  a 


76  Master  akd  Servant.  [§  20. 

of  a  servant  of  premiaes  of  the  master  for  the  more  con- 
venient performance  of  his  duties,  or  as  a  mere  remun- 
eration for  services,  is  in  law  the  occupation  of  the  master, 
and  not  of  the  servant, '  and  the  relation  of  master  and 
servant  does  not  exist.  *  The  rule  may  be  said  to  be  that, 
when  a  servant  occupies  a  dwelling-house  belonging  to 
the  master,  or  in  the  master's  possession,  as  an  accessory 
to  the  performance  of  his  duties  as  such  servant,  and  as 
a  part  of  the  consideration  for  the  rendition  of  such  ser- 
vices, as  where  A  employs  B  to  labor  for  him  for  one  year, 
at  $20  a  month,  and  gives  him  the  use  of  a  dwelling  dur- 
ing the  term,  B's  occupancy  of  the  dwelling  is  that  of  a 
servant,  and  not  as  a  tenant ;  and  if  he  quits  A's  service 
before  the  expiration  of  the  term,  or  if  he  is  discharged 
therefrom  by  A,  his  right  to  the  possession  of  the  dwell- 
ing ceases,  and  he  must  surrender  it  up  to  A,  or  A  may 
enter  and  forcibly  eject  him  therefrom.  The  master,  in 
such  cases,  has  never  parted  with  the  possession  of  his 
premises,  the  servant's  possession  being  regarded  as  the 
possession  of  the  master  ;  hence  the  master  is  not  a  tres- 
passer if  he  enters  forcibly  and  expels  him  with  a  strong 
hand. '  And  when  a  servant  is  discharged,  the  master's 
right  in  this  respect  does  not  depend  upon  the  question 
whether  the  servant  is  rightfully  or  wrongfully  dis- 
charged, but  exists  in  the  one  case  as  well  as  in  the  other, 
the  master  incurring  the  peril  of  paying  damages  for  a 
breach  of  the  contract  if  the  discharge  is  wrongful ;  but, 
the  right  to  expel  the  servant  from  the  house  exists 
whether  he  had  good  cause  therefor  or  not.  * 

In  the  case  referred  to  in  the  last  note,  the  defendant 
(Hay  wood)  was  a  farmer  owning  two  farms  several  miles 
distant  from  each  other,  one  of  which  was  called  the  up- 
per and  the  other  the  lower  farih.     On  the  16th  March, 

'  Rex  V.  Cheehunt,  ante  ;  Bertie  14 ;  Rex  v.  EEen,  2  Ad.  &  El.  147 ; 

V.  Beaumont,   ante ;  Rex  v.  Kel-  Rex  v.   Seacroft,  2  M.  &  S.  472 ; 

stem,  ante.  Rex  v.  Tynemouth,  12  East,  46; 

« Mayhew  v.  Suttle,  4  E.  &  B.  Haywood  v.  Miller,  8  Hill  (N.  Y.) 

847  ;   Doe  v.  Derrv,  9  C.  &  P.  494.  90 ;    Kerrains  v.  People,  60  N.  Y. 

'Bertio  v.   Beaumont,  16  East,  221. 

84 ;  Re^na  v.  Rees,  7  C.  &  P.  568 ;  ^Haywood  v.  Miller,  3  Hill  (N. 

Rex  V.  Stock,  2  Taunt.  329  ;  Regina  Y.)  90., 
V.  Ponsonby,  3  Ad.  &  EL  (N.  S.) 


CHAP.  IV.]        Occupation  op  Phemises.  77 

1839,  Haywood  and  Miller  entered  into  a  written  contract, 
by  which  Miller  agi-eed  that  he  and  his  wife  would  labor 
for  Haywood  one  year,  "  he  (Miller)  to  labor  on  farm,  etc. ; 
and  she  (Miller's  wife)  to  discbarge  the  duties  of  houEe* 
keeper,  etc. ;  term  of  labor  to  commence  on  the  let  of  April, 
1839."  The  contract  further  provided  that  Haywood 
should  pay  Miller  for  the  services  thus  to  be  rendered, 
$160.  There  was  a  dwelling-house  on  the  lower  farm,  in- 
to which  MiUer  and  his  wife  moved  on  the  Ist  of  April, 
1839,  taking  with  them  their  household  furniture,  and 
commenced  their  labor.  Haywood  aided  in  the  removal. 
The  court  below  allowed  parol  evidence  to  be  given  on 
the  part  of  Miller,  that  the  farm  intended  by  the  written 
contract,  andon  which  heand  his  wife  were  to  labor,  was 
the  lower  farm. 

In  the  course  of  the  summer  of  1839,  Haywood  desired 
Miller  to  perform  some  labor  on  the  upper  farm,  which 
the  latter  declined.  Differences  arose  between  the  par- 
ties, and  Miller  became  irritated  and  threatened  to  injure 
some  of  Haywood's  cattle.  Haywood,  becoming  dissatis- 
fied, gave  Miller  notice  to  leave  his  service,  which  Miller 
declining,  Haywood  entered  the  house  and  put  Miller's 
furniture  out  of  it. 

r's  refusal 
jury  to  the 
'  the  writ- 
i intended 
and  Hay- 
iion  of  the 
I  a  verdict 

e  contract 
ower  farm 
elation  be- 
■  and  serv- 
le  contract 
se;  and  so 
luse-room, 
vants.    It 


78  Master  and  Servant.  [§  20. 

does  not  follow  that,  when  he  becomes  dissatisfied  and 
gives  his  servant  warning  to  depart,  and  the  latter  refuses, 
that  the  master  may  not  turn  the  servant  away  and  re- 
move his  goods.  To  be  sure  the  master  does  this  under 
the  peril  of  paying  damages  for  a  breach  of  the  contract 
with  his  servant,  if  he  cannot  show  good  grounda  for  disr 
missing.  Mnr.  Hut  he  is  not  a  trespasser,  whether  he 
have  good  cause  or  not.  Here  the  labor  was  to  be  on  a 
salary  of  so  much  for  the  year.  Suppose  the  plaintiflf  be- 
low had  refused  to  work  and  held  over  the  year,  could 
the  defendaQt  have  distrained  for  rent,  or  sued  for  use 
and  occupation  ?  Or  could  the  plaintiff  have  had  ejectment 
for  the  ouster  within  the  year  i  Clearly  neither,  and  that 
shows  there  was  no  more  a  tenancy  created  than  there 
would  be  under  any  other  retainer  for  a  year's  service." 
A  tenancy  does  not  exist  at  aU  in  such  cases,  nor  does 
a  tenancy  at  will  spring  up  at  once  upon  a  termination 
of  the  service.  In  order  to  turn  the  servant's  possession 
into  a  tenancy  at  will,  the  occupancy  must  be  for  such  a 
period  as  to  warrant  an  inference  of  a  consent  to  a  hold- 
ing different  from  that  under  which  the  servant  origi- 
nally entered.  The  fact  that  a  few  days  have  elapsed 
since  the  service  was  terminated  does  not  warrant  such 
an  inference,  but  any  considerable  delay  would  have  such 
a  result.  *  It  is  the  duty  of  the  employer  to  resume  the 
control  of  his  building  within  a  reasonable  timey  or  con- 
sent to  the  servant's  occupancy  will  be  presumed,  and  he 
will  lose  his  right  to  enter  and  expel  him  by  force.  But 
as  to  what  is  a  reasonable  time,  whether  a  day  or  a  week, 
is  a  question  to  be  determined  by  the  circumstances  of 
each  case.  *  In  the  case  last  referred  to,  the  employer 
consented  that  the  servant  might  remain  until  his  wife 
recovered  from  an  illness  with  which  she  was  suffering 
when  the  service  ended,  and  it  was  held  that  this  did  not 
amount  to  such  a  consent  as  ci'eated  a  tenancy  at  will. 
In  Kerrains  v.  People,  ante,  the  service  ended  in  the 
latter  part  of  June,  and  the  master  did  not  expel  the 

'Church,  C.  J.,  in  Kerrains  v.         » Doyle  v.  Gibbs,  6  Lans.  (N.  Y.) 
People,  60  N.  Y.  225.  180. 


^. 


OHAP.  IV.]      Occupation  of  Peemises, 


79 


servant  untU  the  fifth  of  the  following  July,  and  it  was 
held  that  the  delay  was  not  unreasonable,  and  did  not 
change  the  character  of  the  occupancy.  The  right  of  the 
master  to  enter  forcibly,  and  the  right  of  the  servant  to 
resist  such  entry,  depends  upon  the  nature  and  character 
of  the  occupancy — whether  it  is  that  of  a  servant  or  a 
tenant.  If  he  holds  as  servant,  the  master  may  enter 
within  a  reasonable  time  after  the  period  of  service  is 
ended ;  but  if  his  occupancy  is  that  of  a  tenant,  the 
master  cannot  enter  with  a  strong  hand.  In  determin- 
ing this  question,  the  mere  fact  that  the  master  owned 
the  house,  and  that  the  right  of  occupancy  ceased  when 
the  term  of  service  expired,  is  not  decisive,*  nor  is  the 
fact  that  he  does  or  does  not  pay  rent  therefor.  Thus, 
in  one  case,^  the  claimant  was  a  master  ropemaker  in  a 
royal  dock-yard,  and,  as  such,  had  a  house  in  the  dock- 
yard for  his  residence.  He  had  the  exclusive  use  of  the 
house,  without  paying  rent  therefor,  as  a  part  of  his 
remuneration,  no  part  of  the  house  being  used  for  pub- 
lic purposes,  and  it  appeared  that  if  he  had  not  had  the 
use  of  the  house,  he  would  have  had  an  allowance  in 
addition  to  his  salary  for  the  rent  of  a  house.  It  was 
held  that  the  occupancy  was  that  of  a  tenant,  and  not  as 
a  servant.  The  real  test  seems  to  be  whether  the  occu- 
jmncy  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  master  and  as  an  axicessory 
€>r  aid  to  the  performance  of  his  duties  as  a  servant.  The 
occupancy  must  in  some  way  be  in  aid  of  or  necessary 
to  J  the  performance  of  the  service.  *    **  If,"  says  Church, 


:  I 


■    -J' 

m      ■ 


*  Kerrains  v.  People,  ante. 

'  Hughes  V.  Chatnam,  5  Man.  & 
Gr.  54. 

» In  Kerrains  v.  People,  ante,  the 
respondent  had  been  for  severed 
years  in  the  employ  of  Isaac  Son, 
ygvho  was  operating  a  paper  mill  at 
Chatham,  ColimiDla  county.  He 
had  Lived  in  a  dwelling-house  be- 
longing to  the  mill  proi)ert7.  Li 
January,  1871,  they  made  a  new 
a^^reement ;  this,  as  stated  by  Son 
on  the  trial,  was  that  the  prisoner 
■waa  to  work  for  him  for  a  year  if 
tbey  could  agree ;  Son  to  pay  thir- 
teen shillings  per  day , and  to  furnish 


Kerrains  with  a  house ;  the  latter 
to  work  at  whatever  the  former  had 
for  him  to  do,  the  same  as  he  had  for 
years  before.  As  testified  to  by 
the  prisoner,  he  was  to  work  for 
Son  for  one  year  at  thirteen  shil- 
lings per  day,  he  to  have  the  same 
house  and  garden  he  had  alwavs 
occupied,  with  a  provision  that  he 
was  not  to  be  required  to  "  haul 
the  bleach."  Kerrains  worked  for 
Son  until  the  latter  part  of  June, 
1871,  when  Son  requested  him  to 
''haul  the  bleach;"  this  he  re- 
fused, and  Son  discharged  him, 
imid  him  up,  and  told  him  to  leave 


80 


Masteb  jlsd  Sebvant* 


[§30. 


C.  J.,  in  Kerrains  v.  The  People,  ante,  ''the  occt^pation 
is  connected  with  the  servicej  or  if  it  is  requiredy  ex- 
pressly or  impliedly y  by  the  employer  for  the  necessary  or 
better  performance  of  the  service^  then  it  is  for  his  bene- 
fit, and  he  continues  in  possession. "  * 


the  premises  or  he  would  bring  a 
force  to  throw  his  things  out.  Ker- 
rains refused  to  leave.  On  the 
fifth  of  July,  1871,  Son  went  to  the 
house  with  two  men  and  com- 
menced removing  Kerrains'  furni- 
ture. The  latter  was  absent  at  the 
time,  but  was  sent  for  by  his  wife; 
he,  returning,  saw  what  was  ^oing  • 
on,  went  to  the  wood-house,  picked 
up  an  axe  and  went  into  the  house 
and  ordered  Son  and  the  men  out. 
Son    refused    to  go,  presented  a 

Sistol ;  an  altercation  occurred, 
uring  which  Kerrains  struck  Son 
with  the  axe,  inflicting  a  serious 
injury. 

The  court  charged,  among  other 
things,  in  substance,  that  the 
prisoner  occupied  the  house  as 
servant,  not  as  tenant ;  that  Son 
had  the  right  of  possession,  and  to 
remove  the  prisoner  with  liis  ef- 
fects, and  to  employ  all  the  neces- 
sary force  for  thaf  purpose. 

The  ruling  of  the  court  was  sus- 
tained by  the  Court  of  Appeals, 
and  Church,  C.  J. ,  in  commenting 
U{x>n  the  tests  by  which  to  deter- 
mine the  character  of  the  servant*8 
occupancy,  said :  ^^  Each  party  re- 
lied upon  the  terms  of  the  contract, 
with  only  the  additional  facts  that 
the  house  was  a  part  of  the  Tnill 
property,  and  had  been  occupied 
lor  several  years  previously  by  the 
prisoner  while  engaged  as  laborer 
m  the  mill.  There  was  no  request 
to  submit  the  facts  to  the  jury  to 
determine  whether  the  house  was 
occupied  to  enable  the  prisoner  the 
better  to  perform  the  service  in 
which  he  was  engaged;  or,  in 
other  words,  whether  it  was  not 
occupied  as  an  appendage  to  the 
mill,  and  really  for  the  benefit  of 
the  owner ;  nor  was  there  any 
evidence  of  an  allowance  for  rent, 
but  it  was  left  to  the  court,  upon 
the  contract  an(i  facts  before 
stated,  to  be  determined  as  a  ques- 
tion of  law,  and,  in  my  judment, 
the  court  decided  correctly,  that 
the  defendant  occupied  as  a  serv- 


ant, and  not  as  a  tenant.  The  in- 
ference from  these  facts  is  reas- 
onable, if  not  irresistible,  in  the 
absence  of  any  provision  for  an 
allowance  for  rent,  that  the  house 
was  intended  to  be  occupied  by  an 
employee  for  the  benefit  of  the 
owner  in  carrying  on  the  milL 
The  case  thus  presented  is  anal- 
ogous to  that  of  a  person  employ- 
ing a  coachman  or  gardener,  and 
allowing  or  requiring  him  to  re- 
side in  a  house  provided  for  that 
purpose  on  the  premises ;  or  a 
farmer  who  hires  a  laborer  for 
wages,  to  work  his  farm,  and  live 
in  a  house  upon  the  same.  In 
these  cases  tne  character  of  the 
holding  is  clearly  indicated  by  the 
mere  statement  of  facts.  It  is  not 
impossible  that  other  facts  may 
exist  to  strengthen  or  weaken  the 
inference  that  the  prisoner  oocu* 
pied  as  a  servant,  and  not  as  a  ten- 
ant, but  from  the  facts  proved  there 
was  no  error  in  holding  that  he 
occupied  as  a  servant.  Both  parties 
regarded  it  as  a  question  of  law  upon 
substantially  undisputed  facts,  al- 
though there  are  cases  where  the 
character  of  the  holding  is  so  un- 
certain, from  conflicting  evidence 
or  inferences  which  may  be  drawn, 
as  to  render  it  proper  to  submit 
the  question  to  a  jury." 

*  People  V.  Annis,  45  Barb,  (N. 
Y.)  804 ;  Regina  v.  Spurrell,  L.  R., 
1  Q.  B.  73;  Haywood  v.  Miller, 
ante  ;  Kerrains  v.  People,  ante. 

In  Hughes  v.  Chatham,  the  facts 
in  which  are  given  ante,  Tindal, 
C.  J.,  gave  the  rule  for  determin- 
ing the  character  of  the  occupancy 
thus  :  **  There  is,"  said  he,  "  no  in- 
consistency in  the  relation  of 
master  and  servant  with  that  of 
landlord  and  tenant.  A  master 
mav  pay  his  servant  by  conferring 
on  him  an  interest  in  real  property, 
either  in  fee,  for  years,  or  at  will, 
or  for  any  other  estate  of  interest, 
and  if  he  do  so  the  servant  then 
becomes  entitled  to  the  legal  inci- 
dents of  the  estate,  as  much  as  if 


CHAP.  IV.]  OCOOTATIOH   OB"  PREMISES,  81 

The  question  is,  whether  it  is  subservient  and  necessa- 
ry to  the  service.  The  mere  fact  that  the  relation  of 
master  and  servant  exists,  and  that  the  servant  occupies 
one  of  the  master's  rooms,  without  pajang  rent  therefor, 
as  a  part  of  his  compensation,  is  not  of  itself  sufSciont  to 
establish  a  holding  as  a  servant,  but  the  occupancy  must 
also  be  subsidiary,  and  necessary  to  the  service.  It 
must  be  dependent  upon  and  necessarily  connected  with 
the  service,  for  if  it  is  independent  or  unconnected  with 
the  service,  and  not  in  aid  thereof,  although  the  house 
belongs  to  the  master  and  jio  rent  is  paid  therefor,  or 
even  though  the  house  is  hired  by  the  master  and  he 
pays  the  rent  therefor,  the  occupancy  is  that  of  a  tenant, 
and  the  master  cannot  eject  him  at  will,'  If  the  occu- 
pancy is  connected  with  the  service,  and  in  part  pay- 
ment of  it,  there  is  no  independent  occupation,  and  the 
occupancy  is  that  of  the  master. '  Gtener^ly,  the  charac- 
ter of  the  occupancy  when  there  is  no  dispute  as  to  the 
facts,  is  a  question  of  law  to  be  determined  by  the  courts 
but  when  the  evidence  is  conflicting,  or  the  inferences 
from  the  facts  are  uncertain,  the  question  is  for  the 
jury.' 

it  were  purchased  for  aay  other     B.  72,  the  appellant,  John  Spnirell, 
"  "  of  8ia  acres, 

Qi-house  and 
ge  adjoining, 
the  premieee, 
>re  from  die 
entire  rent. 
separate  and 
Ibe  farm  was 
he  parish  of 
id  John  ^ur- 
8  family  and 
house,  which, 
,  was  the  only 
1  theparish. 
iam  Walker, 
to  Spuirell, 
le  men.  ^  Be 
,  and  received 
and  occupied 
iras  fumiahed 
re),  rent  free, 
:  bis  services. 
3,  his  wages 
ler.  No  poor 
the  pmnfth  of 


82 


Master  akd  SebvantJ 


[§  20. 


Officers  or  servants  of  the  government,  whether  muni- 


Padding  Norton,  but  Spurrell  paid 
tothe  treasurer  of  the  w  alsingnam 
Union,  which  comprises  the  parish, 
the  county  rate  in  respect  of  the 
farm,  premises,  and  cottage. 

The  parish  of  Pudding  Norton  is 
an  immemorial  parish  and  rectory. 
The  church  is  in  ruins ;  the  present 
rector  was  appointed  in  1864,  and 
receives  the  nthes. 

On  behalf  of  the  appellants  it 
was  contended  that  William 
Walker  was  not  a  ''substantial 
householder"  within  the  meaning 
of  the  43d  Eliz.,  c.  2,  s.  1.  The 
court  of  quarter  sessions  gave  the 
following  judgment : 

**We  find  that  under  the  cir- 
cumstances of  this  case  both  ap- 
pellants were  substantial  house- 
holders within  the  meaning  of  the 
48d  Ehz.,  c.  2,  8.  1,  and  we  con- 
firm the  order  subject  to  a  case," 
etc. 

The  question  for  the  court  was, 
whether  William  Walker  was  a 
''substantial  householder"  within 
the43dEliz.,c.  2,  s.  1. 

CJocKBURN,  C.  J.,  delivering  the 
opinion  of  the  court,  said :  "I 
think  a  man  cannot  be  a  house- 
holder within  the  true  coustmc- 
tion  of  the  statute,  who  has  not  an 
independent  occupation.  I  do  not 
think  a  man  who  occupies  as  serv- 
ant, in  which  case  the  occupation 
is  that  of  the  master,  can  be  said 
to  be  a  householder  in  the  proper 
sense  of  that  term.  But  when  we 
come  to  the  question  whether, 
upon  the  facts  found  by  the  ses- 
sions, we  can  say  there  was  here 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant 
between  the  parties,  or  whether 
the  occupation  was  simply  the  oc- 
cupation of  a  servant,  I  think  the 
facts  are  not  sufficiently  found,  the 
most  essential  element  in  the  con- 
sideration of  that  question  being 
omitted,  namely,  whether  this  oc- . 
cupation  was  an  occupation  for 
the  purpose  of  the  service  or  not — 
whether  it  was  necessary  to  the 
service  or  not.  If  the  occupation 
of  the  servant  be  necessary  to  the 
service,  then  I  think  his  occu- 
pation is  the  occupation  of  the 
master,  although  tne  remunerar 
tion  which  the  servant  receives 
18    the  less  on    account  of    his 


having  the  advantage  of  premi- 
ses or  a  house  of  the  master  for 
the  purpose  of  his  habitation.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  occupation 
be  not  necessary  to  the  service, 
then  the  fact  that  the  advantage  of 
the  occupation  is  part  of  the  re- 
muneration for  the  service,  will 
not  render  that  occupation  less  an 
occupation  qua  tenant,  than  it 
would  have  been  if  the  man  had 

Eaid  rent.  It  may  be  that  it 
appensto  be  convenient  both  co 
the  master  and  to  the  servant, 
that  the  servant  requiring  some 
place  of  habitation  shall,  by  agree- 
ment with  the  master,  instead  of 
receiving  so  much  for  his  wages, 
out  of  vmich  wages  he  would  have 
to  find  himself  a  separate  habita- 
tion, inhabit  some  premises  of  the 
master  as  part  of  the  remuneration 
for  his  services ;  but  it  is  only  an 
equivalent  for  wages.  He  would 
be  receiving  in  the  one  instance 
the  whole  amount  of  his  wages ; 
out  of  those  wages  he  would  have 
to  find  himself  a  habitation,  for 
which'  he  would  have  to  pay  rent ; 
in  the  other  he  inhabits  premises 
of  his  master,  and  instead  of  pay- 
ing the  master  the  rent,  the  master 
deducts  it  from  the  wages. 

Although,  therefore,  the  relation 
of  master  and  servant  happens  to 
exist  between  the  parties  by  a  sub- 
ordinate arrangement,  and  the  ser- 
vant occupies  premises  of  the  mas- 
ter rent  free,  as  part  of  the  wages 
that  he  would  otherwise  receive  if 
he  paid  the  rent,  it  does  not  follow, 
from  the  relation  of  master  and 
servant  happening  to  exist  between 
the  parties,  that  the  occupation 
may  not  be  an  occupation  of  qua 
tenant y  independent  of  the  master. 
As  I  said  beiore,  the  essential  ele- 
ment in  the  determination  of  the 
question  is,  whether  or  not  the  ser- 
vant simply  occupies  as  part  re- 
muneration for  his  services,  or 
whether  the  occupation  is  subser- 
vient to  and  necessary  to  the  ser- 
vice. That  is  a  question  of  fact 
that  might  very. easily  be  ascer- 
tained by  obtaining,  from  the 
parties  concerned,  evidence  as  to 
the  terms  on  which  the  occupa- 
tion of  these  particular  premises 
takes  place.    It  is  a  most  essential 


CHAP.  IT.]  OOOUPATION  OP 

cipal,  state  or  national,  are  considered  as  tenants,  if  they 
are  permitted  to  occupy  houses  or  premises  as  part  of 
their  remuneration  for  their  services,  but  if  they  are  re- 
quired to  occupy  them  with  a  view  to  the  more  efficient 
performance  of  their  duties,  the  occupation  ha^  relation 
to  the  oflBce,  and  they  are  not  tenants,  but  their  right  of 
occupancy  ends  with  the  termination  of  their  official 
term. 

matter  that  the  eessioiis  have  either     eentid  to  state  ;  but  it  ia  eeeential 
not  ioi^uired  into,  or,  having  in-     we  sbould  bays  that  before  us. 
qoiied  into,  have  not  thought  it  e»- 


84 


TBNANOT  FBOlC  Yeabto  Yea.b. 


[§21. 


CHAPTER  V. 


TENANCY  FBOH  YEAR  TO  YEAR. 

Sec.  21.  Difltinctioii  between,  and  tenancy  at  wi]L 

8bc.  22.  How  created. 

Sec.  28.  Entry  under  agreement  for  a  lease ;  effect  of. 

Sec.  24.  What  covenants  will  or  will  not  be  implied. 

Sec.  25.  Void  lease.    Payment  of  rent  under  the  effect  of. 

Sec.  26.  Holding  over  and  paying  rent. 

Sec.  27.  Determmation  of  tenancy  from  year  to  year.  When  de- 
terminable. 

Sec.  28.  Notice  to  quit.    Where  there  is  no  express  agreement. 

Sec.  29.  Where  there  is  an  express  a^eement. 

Sec.  80.  Period  with  reference  to  which  notice  must  be  given. 

Sec.  81.  Admission  by  tenant. 

Sec.  82.  Where  tenant  keeps  possession  after  expiration  of  lease. 

Sec.  88.  Where  tenant  enters  under  a  void  or  parol  lease. 

Sec.  84.  Where  tenant  enters  on  different  parts  of  demised  premiBes 
at  differeilt  times. 

Sec.  85.  Where  tenant  enters  between  two  quarter  days. 

Sec.  86.  When  notice  to  quit  is  indispensable,  and  when  not 

Sec.  87.  Form  of  notice. 

Sec.  88.  By  whom  notice  may  be  given. 

Sec.  89.  Agents. 

Sec.  40.  To  whom  given. 

Sec.  41.  Mode  of  service. 

Sec.  42.  Waiver  of  notice  to  quit. 

Sec.  48.  Second  notice  to  quit. 

Sec.  44.  Acceptance  of  rent.    Holding  over. 

Sec.  45.  What  amounts  to  a  disclaimer.    By  verbal  disclaimer. 

Sec.  21.  Distinotion  between,  and  tenancy  at  will.— A  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year  dijBfers  from  a  tenancy  at  will  in 
that  the  tenant  has  a  lease  for  one  year  certain,  with  a 
growing  interest  every  year  thereafter,  springing  ont  of 
the  original  contract,  and  as  parcel  of  it/  and  in  the  no- 


"  Cattley  v.  Arnold,  IJ.  &  H.  651. 
A  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  not 
a  continuous  tenancy,  but  is  re- 
garded as  conmiencing  each  year. 
If  six  months'  notice  to  quit  is  not 
given,  or  notice  for  such  a  period 
as  is  required  by  statute,  the  ten- 
ancy continues,  however,  until  such 
notice  for  its  termination  is  given, 


or  there  is  a  legal  surrender  of  the 
premises.  And  this  right  enures 
to  the  benefit  of  the  tenant's  credit- 
ors. Read  v.  Ridout,  5  Taunt.  519. 
When  a  new  year  commences,  the 
tenant's  ri^ht  to  the  premises  for 
that  year  becomes  fixed  and  cer- 
tain. Skaggs  V.  Elkus,  45  Cal.  154. 
But,  whether  he  holds  under  the 


CHAP,  v.] 


Distinction  Bbtween. 


85 


tice  required  to  be  given  by  fche  landlord  or  tenant,  in 
order  to  put  an  end  to  the  tenancy.*  It  is,  strictly  speak- 
ing, the  offspring  of  a  tenancy  at  will,  and  bad  its  origin 
in  the  strong  desire  of  the  courts  to  protect  tenants  at  will 
against  being  deprived  of  the  crops  sown,  by  the  arbitrary 
termination  of  their  estates,  or,  in  other  words,  from  the 
determination  of  the  courts  to  uphold  the  just  and  equit- 
able policy  of  allowing  a  tenant  "who  sows,  to  reap."* 


terms  of  the  former  demise  or  not, 
depends  upon  the  circumstance 
whether  anew  agreement  has  been 
entered  into  or  seasonable  notice 
has  been  giyen  him  that  if  he  re- 
mains he  does  so  upon  certain  dif- 
ferent terms.  Hunt  v.  Bailey,  89 
Mo.  257.  The  intention  of  the  ten- 
ant, in  holding  over,  isnot  material, 
as  the  right  of  election,  whether 
the  tenant  shiJl  be  treated  as  a 
trespasser  or  as  a  tenant,  rests  ex- 
clusively with  the  landlord,  Hemp- 
hiU  V.  Flynn,  2  Penn.  St  144; 
Schuyler  v.  Smith,  51  N.  Y.  809 ; 
Warner  v.  Brown,  8  East,  167 ;  but 
a  contrary  doctrine  has  been  held 
in  some  English  cases,  Jones  v. 
She«rs,  4Ad.  &  El.  832;  Lord  v. 
Grago,  6  C.  B.  90,  and  seeming  to 
miJce  the  question  as  to  whether  a 
tenancy  from  year  to  year  exists, 
where  the  tenant  holcis  over,  de- 
pendent upon  tTie  intention  of  the 
tenant,  and  consequently  a  ques- 
tion for  the  jury  ;  but  the  docnine 
of  these  cases  is  repugnant  to  the 
principles  upon  which  this  species 
of  tenancy  rests,  and  which  con- 
trol it,  and  leaves  it  within  the 
power  of  the  tenant  to  terminate 
the  tenancy  at  his  option,  without 
notice  of  his  intention ;  and,  as 
stated  previously,  it  has  been  re- 
pudiate in  this  county,  Schuyer 
V.  Smith,  ante ;  Hemphill  v.  Flynn, 
4nte,  and  is  not  the  rule  in  Eng- 
land. Dunn  V.  Rathermel,  112 
Penn.  St.  272 ;  Shipman  v.  Mitchell, 
64  Tex.  174 ;  Withrell  v.  Pitzold, 
17  Mo.  App.  669 ;  Ck>udon  v.  Barr, 
47  N.  Y.  L.118  ;M.  Prime  v.  League, 
66  Cal.  446.  A  tenant  who  holds 
over  without  the  lessor's  consent  is 
held  not  to  be  a  tenant  at  wilL 

>Ck)Ie  on  Ejectment,  29,  441; 
Clark  V.  Smarbridge,  7  Q.  B.  957 ; 
Hiompson  ▼.  MacNBrley,  2  Camp. 
678. 


<  Mr.  Smith's  note  to  Keech  ▼. 
Hall,  2  Smith's  Leading  Cases,  76. 
**This  feeling,"  he  says,  '*inani- 
fested  itself  during  the  earliest  ages 
of  our  law,  in  the  doctrine  of  em- 
blements, which  entitles  a  tenant 
at  will  to  them  after  the  determina- 
tion of  his  tenancy  by  the  landlord. 
Litt.  Sec.  68."  In  Martin  v.  Watta, 
7T.  R.  85,  Lord  Kenton  says; 
'  'So  long  ago  as  the  time  of  the  year 
books,  it  was  held  that  a  general 
occupation  was  an  occupation  from 
year  to  year,  and  that  the  tenant 
could  not  be  turned  out  without  a 
reasonable 'notice  to  quit,"  to  wit, 
a  halfyear's  notice.  Snore  v.  Port- 
er, 3  T.  R.  18.  In  the  latter  case 
Lord  Eenyon  said:  *' The  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  succeeded  to  the 
old  t^ancy  at  will,  which  was  at- 
tended by  many  inconveniences, 
and  in  order  to  avoid  them,  tiie 
courts  very  early  raised  an  implied 
contract  for  a  year,  and  added,  that 
the  tenant  could  not  be  removed  at 
the  end  of  the  year,  without  re- 
ceiving six  months'  previous 
notice. "  Leavitt  v.  Leavitt,  47  N. 
H.  329 ;  Timmins  v.  Rawlinson,  8 
Burr.  1609 ;  Ellis  v.  Paige,  2  Pick, 
(Mass.)  71  71.  All  general  lettings 
are  regarded  as  creating  only  a 
tenancy  at  will,  and  only  ripen  in- 
to a  tenancy  from  ^earto  year, 
when  rent  is  paid  with  reference 
to  a  yearly  holding,  or  the  contract 
or  circumstances  are  such  as  to 
raise  such  a  tenancy.  Rich  v.  Bol- 
ton, 46  Vt.  84 ;.  Richardson  v.  Lang- 
ridge,  4  Taunt.  128;  Cattiey  v. 
Arnold,  1  John.  &  H.  651.  In 
Braithwaite  v.  Hitchcock,  10  M. 
&  W.  497,  Parke,  B.  says:  "Al- 
though the  law  is  clearly  settied, 
that,  where  there  has  been  an 
agreement  for  a  lease,  and  an  oc- 
cupation without  payment  of  rent, 
the  occupier  is  a  mere  tenant  at 


86 


TENiHrOT  FEOM  YeAB  TO  YeA.E. 


[§21 


At  the  first  view,  leases  from  year  to  year  appear  to  con- 
fer several  distinct  estates,  but  in  fact,  they  give  only  one 
time  of  continuance.  The  law  considers  the  lease  with 
a  view  to  the  time  which  has  elapsed,  as  arising  from  an 
estate  for  aU  the  time  that  has  elapsed,  including  the  bal- 
ance of  the  year,  and  with  a  view  to  the  time  to  come,  as 
a  lease  from  year  to  year.  The  reason  for  this  is,  that  as 
all  the  time  that  the  land  may  be  held  under  a  running 
lease  is  originally  given,  and  in  efEect  passed  by  the  same 
instrument,  the  whole  time  is  consolidated,  and  every 
ye.ar,  as  it  commences,  forms  a  part  of  the  term.*  The 
term  is  treated  as  recommencing  each  year,  and  may  be 
set  up  in  the  pleadings  as  having  commenced  upon  the 
first  day  of  the  current  year,  although  the  tenant  has  in 
fact  occupied  for  several  years  previously,"  and,  except 
where  the  terms  of  the  holding  have  been  changed  by  the 
agreement  of  the  parties,  express  or  implied,  the  holding 
for  each  year  is  treated  as  being  upon  the  same  terms  as 
those  agreed  upon  for  the  first  year's  occupancy. 

The  tenant  is  substantially  a  tenant  at  will,  except 
that,  as  previously  stated,  he  cannot  be  turned  out  silm- 
marily,  or  without  a  regular  notice  to  quit,  of  the  dura- 
tion named,*  and  if  snch  notice  is  not  given,  he  may  con- 
tinue in  possession  from  year  to  year,  ftyr  any  number  of 
yearSj  until  his  tenancy  is  surrendered,  or  extinguished 


will ;  vet,  it  has  been  held  that  if 
he  swoseguently  pays  rent  utider 
that  agreement^  he  thereby  becomes 
tenant  from  year  to  ^ear."  See 
also  Cox  V.  ^nt,  5  Bing.  185,  to 
the  same  effect.  Also  Hull  v. 
Wood,  14  M.  &  W.  682  ;  Jones  v. 
Willis,  8  Jones  (N.  C.)  430 ;  Wil- 
liams V.  Deriar,  81  Mo.  18,  and  an 
a^eement  to  pay  rent  has  the  same 
effect  as  its  actual  payment.  There 
are  a  class  of  cases  in  which  it  is 
apparently  held  thAt  a  general 
holding  from  year  to  year  without 
reference  to  the  circumstance  of 
annual  rent  or  other  incident  point- 
iiig  to  such  a  tenancy,  constituted 
a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  but  it 
will  be  found  that  in  all  these  cases 
there  was  either  an  express  reserva- 
tion of  annual  rent,  or  an  actual 


payment  of  rent  with  reference  to 
a  yearly  holding,  or  an  express  an- 
nual demise,  Martin  v.  Watts,  7 
T.  R.  85 ;  Timmins  v.  Rawlinson, 
8  Burr.  1609 ;  Den.  v.  McKay,  2  N. 
J.  L.  420 ;  Jackson  v.  Bryan,  1  John. 
(N.  Y.)  822;  Leavitt  v.  Leavitt, 
ante,  or  the  question  arose  in  rela^ 
tion  to,  or  tiimed  upon,  the  right 
to  emblements.  Ellis  v.  Paige, 
ante.  See  as  to  necessity  of  six 
calendar  months'  notice  to  quit. 
Hall  V.  Myers,  43  Md. ;  Hancnett 
V.  Whitney,  1  Vt.  815. 

*  8  Preston's  Conveyancing,  76. 

8  Cattlev  V.  Arnold,  1  J,  &  H. 
651;Bartlett  v.  Baker,  84  L.  J. 
Exchq.  11. 

'Smith's  Landlord  and  Tenant, 
24;  Walker y.  Constable,  8  Wils, 


[ 


CHAP,  v.] 


PiSTiNcrioN  Between. 


87 


I 


by  the  Statute  of  Limitations,  or  by  the  cessor  of  the 
landlord's  title/  and  it  is  not  determined  by  the  death  of 
either  party,"  except  in  a  case  where  the  estate  of  the  les- 
sor terminates  at  his  death ; '  in  which  case,  unless  the 
lease  was  made  imder  some  valid  power  that  binds  the 
reversioner,  the  tenant  at  ante  becomes  a  tenant  at  suf- 
ferance, and  may  be  ejected  by  those  entitled  to  the  es- 
tate, immediately  and  without  notice.^  Each  year  of  the 
tenancy  is  treated  as  a  prolongation  of  the  original  term, 
and  is  not  a  lease  for  two  years  and  afterwards  at  will, 
but  is  a  continuance  of  the  original  lease  for  every  par- 
Ocular  year  during  thd  continuance  of  the  demise,  and 
cannot  be  determined  until  the  year  is  ended,*  and  in 
pleading,  it  has  been  held  that  it  may  be  set  up  as  a  pro- 
longation of  the  term  under  the  original  demise.  "*    Leases 


1  Smith's  Landlord  and  Tenant, 
94 ;  Cole  on  Ejectment,  80, 441. 

•  Shore  v.  Porter,  ante ;  Cole  on 
Ejectment,  90,  441 ;  Mackay  v. 
Mackeith,  15  Yes.  241.  In  Hull  v. 
Wood,  14  M.  &  W.  682,  it  was  held 
that  an  unexpired  tenn  of  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year  passed  to 
the  administrator,  and  that  this 
estate  was* not  defeated  because 
the  widow  of  the  tenant  remained 
in  possession  and  paid .  rent  to  the 
landlord*  ' '  The  lessor  of  the  plain- 
tiff," says  Pabke,  B.,  *'  has  proved 
a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  in 
William  Hull  and  letters  of  ad- 
ministration granted  to  himself. 
♦  ♦  The  term  (for  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year  is  a  term)  therefore 
Tests  in  him,  untU  there  is  some 
legal  determination  of  it ;  and  thus 
he  has  made  out  a  good  prima  J^acie 
case,  because  the  onus  of  proving  a 
legal  determination  of  the  term 
rests  on  the  defendant. 

»  Thomas  v.  Roberts,  17  M.  &  W. 
T71. 

*  Parke,  B.,  in  Thomas  v. 
Roberts,  16  M.  &  W.  780. 

^Stomsil  Y.  Hickes,  2  Salk.  413 ; 
L^g  V.  Strudwick,  2  Salk.  414. 
*'E^ry  year  after  is  a  springing 
interest  arising  upon  the  first  con- 
tract and  parcel  of  it ;  so  that  if 
the  lessee  had  occupied  eight,  or 
ten  years  or  more,  these  years  by 
computation  from  the  time  past, 
made  an  entire  lease  for  so  many 


years ;  and  if  rent  was  in  arrear 
for  one  of  those  years,  and  part  of 
another,  the  lessor  might  distrain, 
and  need  avow  as  far  as  for  so 
much  rent  upon  one  entire  lease, 
and  need  not  avow  as  for  several 
rents  due  upon  several  leases,  ac-  , 
counting  each  year  a  new  lease. 
It  was  also  adjudged  (alluding  to 
Legge  V.  Strudwick,  2  Salk.  214), 
that  after  the  commencement  of 
each  new  year,  this  had  become  an 
entire  lease  certain  for  the  years 
past,  and  also  for  the  year  entered 
upon,  so  that  neither  .party  could 
determine  their  wills  till  that  year 
was  run  out,  and,"  he  adds,  '*  this 
seems  no  way  impeached  by  the 
Statute  of  Frauds,  which  enacts, 
&c.,  *  *  for  at  first,  this  being  a 
lease  certain  only  for  one  vear, 
and  each  accruing  year  after  being 
a  springing  interest  to  that  year, 
it  IS  not  a  lease  for  any  three  years 
to  come,  though  by  a  computation 
backward  when  five  or  six  or  more 
years  are  past,  this  may  be  said  a 
parol  lease  for  so  many  years,  but 
with  this  the  statute  has  nothing 
to  do  but  only  looks  forward  to 
parol  leases  for  above  three  years 
to  come." 

«  Pabke,  B,,  in  Oxley  v.  James, 
13  M.  &  W.  212.  But  in  Alex- 
ander V.  Harris,  4  Cr.  (U.  S.)  2»9, 
it  was  held  that,  where  a  party 
entered  under  a  demise  for  a  year 
certain  and  held  over  by  oonaent. 


-J 


88 


TeNAI^CY  FBOM   lEAR  TO  YSAB» 


[§21 


from  yeax  to  year  give  only  one  time  of  continuance,  and 
only  one  estate.*  But,  where  the  lease  does  not  contem- 
plate a  holding  except  for  one  year,  or  any  other  limited 
tenn,  and  the  lessee  by  holding  over  and  paying  rent  be- 
comes a  tenant  from  year  to  year,  he  is  treated  a^  holding 
under  a  new  demise  for  each  year  upon  the  terms  of  the 
original  lease.  That  is,  his  tenancy  commences  with  each 
year,  upon  the  terms  of  the  old  leasey  unless  the  terms  have 
been  modified^  and  it  is  held  that  it  may  be  so  plead.'  In- 
deed, it  must  be  so  plead,  and  a  plea  setting  it  up  as  a 
continuous  term  and  parcel  of  the  original  term  would  be 
bad.*    A  tenant  from  year  to  year  has  a  demisable  estate 


his  tenure  could  not  be  set  up  in 
pleading  as  for  the  whole  nurnber 
of  years,  during  which  it  had  ex- 
isted, except  where  such  prolongor 
tion  vjos  contemplated  by  the  ongt- 
nal  lea^.  And  this  would  seem  to 
be  in  accordance  with  the  practice 
in  this  country. 

"  Mb.    Preston,   in   his  works 
upon   conveyancing    (76,    77)    in 
speaking  of  the  qualities  of  this 
species  of  estate,  says  :    "  Leases 
from  year  to  year  appear  at  first 
view  to  give  several  distinct  es- 
tates.   In  truth,  they  give  only  one 
time  of  continuance.    That  time, 
however,  may  be  confined  to  one 
year,  or  extended  to  several  years, 
according  to  circumstances  attend- 
ing the  tenancy  in  its  progress.  In 
the  first  place,  the  lease  is  for  one 
year  certain,  and  after  the  com- 
mencement of  every  year,  or  per- 
haps after  the  eayptration  of  that 
part  Of  the  year  %n  which  a  notice 
determining  the  tenancy  may  he 
given,  it  is  a  lease  for  the  second 
year;  and  in  consequence  of  the 
the  original  agreement  of  the  par- 
ties every  year  of  the  tenancy  con- 
stitutes a  part    of  the  lease,  and 
eventually  becomes  a  parcel  of  the 
term ;  so  that  a  lease,  which  is  in 
the  first  instance  but  for  one  year 
certain,  may,  in  the  event  of  a 
term,  be  one   hundred   years  or 
more.    Under  this  species  of  ten- 
ancy the  laxv  considers  the  lease 
with  a  view  to  the  time  which  has 
elapsed,  as  arising  from  an  estate 
for  all  that  time,  including   the 
<surxent  year.    For,  as  aU  the  time 


for  which  the  land  may  be  held 
under  a  running  lease  is  orieinaUy 
given,  and  in  effect  passes,  oy  the 
same  instrument  or  contract,  the 
whole  time  is  consolidated,  and 
every  year  as  it  commences,  forms 
part  of  the  time."  See  also,  CJole 
on  Ejectment,  441-3 ;  Bacon's  Abr. 
Title  Leases  (L.)  3,  p.  180. 

^  A  person  holding  over,  is  pre- 
sumed to  do  so  upon  the  terms  of 
the  original  holding,  Beithmun  v. 
Brandenburgh,  7  Cal.^  480;  but 
this  presumption  may  ISe  overcome 
by  proof  that  the  tenant  was  noti- 
fied that  an  increased  rent  would 
be  charged,  Thompson  v.  Sanborn, 
52  Mich.  141.  A  mere  verbal  no- 
tice to  a  tenant  from  year  to  year 
of  an  increase  of  rent  if  he  liolds 
over  is  held  not  sufficient,  Witte  v. 
Witte,  6  Mo.  App.  488 ;  St.  Louis 
Q.  R.  Co.  V.  Ludwig,  6  id.  583 ; 
Cattley  v.  Arnold,  1  J.  &  H.  ^51 ; 
Tompkins  v.  Lawrence,  8  C.  &  P. 
729,  as  to  implied  terms  of  tenancy 
resulting  from  holding  over  under  a 
lease  for  a  year,  &c. ,  as  stated  in  the 
text.  See  Frantz  v.  Wood,  2  Hill 
(S.  C.)  367  ;  Quinette  v.  Carpenter, 
a5  Mo.  502 ;  Ellis  v.  Paige,  1  Pick. 
(Mass.)  43 ;  Laguerenne  v.  Dough- 
erty, 35  Penn.  St.  45 ;  De  Young  v. 
Buchanan,  10,  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  149  ; 
Diller  v.  Roberts,  17  S.  &B.  (Penn.) 
226;  Hoff  v.  Ladd,  1  CJr.  fU.  S.  C. 
C.)  167;  Hemphill  v.  Hynn,  2, 
Penn.  St  144  -  Jackson  v.  Salmon, 
4  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  327. 

*  Tompkins  v.  Lawrence,  8  C.  &  P. 
729 ,'  Cattley  v.  Arnold,  ante ; 
Glandy  v.  Jubber,  5  B.  &  S.  78, 48C^^ 


Cp*P-  v.] 


How  Ckkatbd. 


in  the  premises,  and  he  may  mortgage'  or  assign  the 
same,'  and  it  may  also  be  taken  upon  an  execution  against 
Mm.'  If  the  terms  of  the  original  lease  have  been  chang- 
ed in  any  respect,  either  by  notice  or  by  agreement,  aa, 
if  the  rent  had  been  increased  or  decreased,  the  old  lease 
will  control  except  in  so  far  aa  it  has  been  so  changed. '  If 
a  tenant  is  notified  hefctre  the  expiration  of  his  term  that 
if  he  remains  he  will  be  required  to  pay  an  additional  rent 
named  and  in  a  certain  mode,  by  remaining,  although 
imder  protest  and  with  a  notice  to  the  landlord  that 
he  will  remain  only  until  he  can  secure  another  place, 
he  becomes  liable  for  the  rent  for  the  year, ' 

Sec.  22.  How  created.— A  tenancy  from  year  to  year 
may  be  created  by  express  agreement,  even  by  parol,  aa, 
i£  AletstoB  atenement  "from  year  to  year  "at  a  certain 
rent  per  year,  and  from  a  certain  time,  and  B  enters 
into  possession,  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  created, 
which  A  may  determine  at  the  end  of  the  first  year,  by 
giving  six  months'  notice  to  quit/  as  from  the  very  first. 


.  Qradin,  1    Dowl.     Caatrike 


'  Burrows 
A  L.  213. 

*  Austin  T.  Thomson,  54  N.  H. 
118 ;  Pleaaant  t.  Benson,  14  East, 
234;  Cady  v.  <Jnartennan.  13  Ga. 
886 ;  Hsckaj  v.  Mackeith,  4  Doug. 
318.  CoNTEA,  and  holdingthat  an 
affiigmnent  bj  the  landlord  oper- 
"*"  "  destruction  of  the  tenant's 
to  notice,  see  Hemphill  v. 
Bt,  66  N.  C.  513. 
Doe  V.  Ridout,  Q  Taunt,  619. 


right 


\..t»<uiKB  V.  Haaon,  3  Keb.  S43; 
Potkiu's  Case,  6  Coke,  35  f>.  ana 
some  that  it  was  a  lease  for  two 
Tears  certain,  and  after  that  the 
lessee  became  a  tenant  at  wiQ. 
Stomfil  V.  Hickes.  %  Salk.  413,  and 
Gid.  135.  Bellasis  t.  Burbricbe, 
1  Ld.  Rayd.  170.  But  in  l«e»  a. 
doctrine  in  Tariance  with  all  these 
cases  was  held,  and  also  in  "van- 
ance  with  the  doctrine  stated  in 
the  text.  Holding  that  a  lease  for 
"  "■""-  "'— *"iii  and  bo  from  year  to 

ta  lease  for  tvjo  years. 

;n  cited ;  1  Ld.  Bayd. 

irtually,   to  the  same 

ymous    IS;    Mod.   10. 

as  stated  in  the  text. 
.  Smarbridge,  ante,  it 
pressly,  that  a  tonanty 
1  year,  so  long  as  boui 
»,  is  detemunable  at 
he  first  as  well  as  any 
p-ear,  unless  in  creating 
y  the  parties  use  words 
e  that  they  intended  to 
lancy  for  two  years  at 
herefore,  that,  wherea 
le  expiration  of  a  term 
Id  orei,  and  the  land- 


do 


Tenancy  from  Teab  to  Tear. 


[§22, 


it  being  a  lease  from  year  to  year,  it  is  subject  to  all  the  inci- 
dents of  that  tenancy,  one  of  the  most  important  of  which 
is  the  right  to  terminate  it  by  a  half  year's  notice  to  quit. 
But,  if  a  tenancy  is  created  for  one  year  certain,  and  after 
that  from  year  to  year,  as,  if  A  lets  a  tenement  to  B  "  for 
one  year  and  from  year  to  year  thereafter,"  it  is  at  least 
a  lease  for  two  years,  and  so  on  for  any  number  of  years, 
unless  terminated  by  six  months'  notice  given  before  the 
first  half  of  the  second  or  any  succeeding  year  has 
elapsed.  It  cannot  be  terminated  by  a  notice  given  the 
first  year.*  The  right  to  determine  such  a  tenancy  by 
six  months' notice,  or  such  other  notice  as  may  be  provid- 
ed by  statute,  is  an  inseparable  incident  to  it,"  and  will 
control,  even  where  there  is  an  express  provision  that  the 
lease  is  to  continue  so  long  as  the  rent  is  paid."  The 
right  is  exercisable  by  either  the  lessor  or  the  lessee,  and, 
as  previously  stated,*  by  a  surety  for  the  lessee,  and  until 


lord  received  rent  from  him,  the 
landlord  mi^ht  by  a  half  yearns  no- 
tice require  him  to  quit  at  the  end 
of  the  nrst  year  after  the  time  had 
expired.     "There   is   no  reason," 
said  Lord  Denmaiy,  C.  J.,  '*  why  it 
should  not  be  determined  at  the 
end  of  the  l^rst  year,  as  well  as  at 
the  end  of  any  subsequent  year, 
urdesa  the  parties  have  by  express 
contract  prevented  such  determinor 
tion.    In  the  cases,  Agsuid  v.  King^, 
Cro.   Eliz.   775 ;    Jacklin  v.   Cart- 
wright,  4  East,  291;    Bellasis   v. 
Burbriche    1  Salk.  204;    Legg  v. 
Strudwick,  2  Salk.  414 ;  Bii-ch  & 
Wright,   17  R.   378;  Chadbom  v. 
Green,  9  Ad.  &  El.  A.  58  ;  Rex  v. 
Chawton,  1 Q.  B.  247,  such  express 
contract  appeared,  either  by   the 
pleadings   or   the   evidence.      In 
this  case,  there  is  no  such  express 
contract,  but  a  tenancy  of   two 
years  at  least  is  supposed  to  be 
implied  of  necessity  by  law.     The 
case  of  Bishop  v.  Howard,  2  B.  & 
C.  100,  was  cited  for  the  defend- 
ant, some  words  which  fell  from 
Lord  Tenterden  being  supposed 
to  be  applicable ;    but  on  looking 
at  that  case  it  will  be  found  that 
the  words  there  used  do  not  affect 
the  present  question ;    tliey  show 
only  that   by  holding  over,  and 
payment  of  rent  as  rent  a  tenancy 
&om  year  to  year  is  created ;  but 


they  do  not  touch  the  question 
when  that  tenancy  may  be  de- 
termined. We  are  of  the  opinion 
that  the  tenancy  from  year  to 
year,  so  long  as  both  parties  please, 
IS  determinable  at  the  end  of  any 
year,  the  first  as  well  as  any  sub- 
sequent year,  imless  the  parties 
use  words  showing  that  they  con- 
template a  tenancy  of  two  years 
at  least." 

A  lease  to  hold  from  a  certein 
date  from  year  to  year,  is  not 
necessarily  a  lease  for  more  than 
one  year,  and  the  lease  expires  on. 
the  last  day  of  the  succeeding 
twelf  thmonth,  and  a  notice  to  quS 
given  on  the  last  day  of  such 
twelfthmonth  is  good.  Fox  v 
Nathans,  32  Conn.  548. 

» Birch  V.  Wrijght,  1  T.  R.  380  ; 
Den.  V.  Cartwright,  4  East,  31-2 ; 
Chadbom  v.  Green,  9  Ad.  &  EL 
658  ;  Monck  v.  Geekie,  5  Q.  B.  841 ; 
Rogina  v.  Chawton,  1  Q.  B.  247 ; 
Hall  V.  Myers  43  Md.  581 ;  Han- 
chett  V.  Whitmey,  1  Vt.  315. 

*  In  Pleasant6n*s  Appeal,  75 
Penn.  St.  344,  it  was  held  that  a 
surety  for  a  lessee  who  held  over 
might  avail  himself  of  the  right  to 
terminate  the  tenancy  by  giving 
the  requisite  legal  notice. 

'  Warner  v.  Brown,  8  East,  16& 

^Ante,  n.  2. 


CHAP,  v.] 


How  Created. 


91 


I  ■ 


such  notice  is  given  by  one  of  the  parties,  the  tenancy 
continues  from  year  to  year,  until,  in  contemplation  of 
law,  it  is  destroyed,'  and  the  fact  that  the  tenant  quits 
the  premises,  or  sublets  them,  wiU  not  defeat  the  land- 
loird's  remedy  against  him  for  the  rent  for  the  cuirent 
year,  unless  he  accepts  the  surrender,  or  adopts  the  sub- 
tenant as  his  own  by  accepting  rent  from  him,  or  other 
unequivocal  act  that  shows  an  election  upon  his  part  to 
treat  the  former  tenancy  as  at  an  end.*  If  an  annvxd 
rent  is  reserved,  the  holding  is  from  year  to  year,  although 
it  is  expressly  agreed  in  the  lease  that  the  tenant  shall 
quit  at  thirty  or  any  other  number  of  days'  notice,  the 
tenancy  differing  in  no  other  respect  from  an  ordinary 
tenancy  from  year  to  year,  except  in  the  notice  required 
for  its  termination.  But  if  it  is  expressly  agreed  that 
the  tenant  shall  always  be  subject  to  leave  at  six  months' 
notice,  and  there  is  only  a  half-yearly  rent  reserved,  it 
is  a  halJf-yearly  tenancy,*  and  if  the  tenancy  is  at  so  much 
rent  a  quarter,  and  there  is  an  express  agreement  that  the 
tenant  shall  quit  at  a  quarter's  notice,  it  is  a  quarterly 
tenancy  only.*      Where  the  letting  is  by  the  day,  week, 


» Witt  V.  New  York,  5  Robt.  (N. 
Y.  Supr.  Ct.)  248. 

» Jompkins  v.  Lawrence,  8  C.  & 
P.  729 ;  Levi  v.  Lewis,  6  C.  B.  N. 
S.  766 ;  Denn  v.  Mcintosh,  4  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  291.  See  as  to  the  right  of 
the  landlord  where  the  tenant 
holds  over  for  a  single  dav  and 
then  quits  the  premises,  and  even 
^when  ne  has  notified  the  landlord 
that  he  intends  to  quit,  Schuyler  v. 
Smith,  ante. 

»In  King  v.  Grafton,  18  Q.  B. 
496,  premises  were  let  from  April 
19, 1841,  at  the  yearly  rent  of  £42, 
payable  quarterly,  the  first  pay- 
ment of  £7  13s.  6d.  to  be  made 
June  24th,  1841,  being  the  propor- 
tion of  the  quarter  occupied  by  the 
defendant  aown  to  that  date,  the 
tenant  to  have  and  enjoy,  &c.,  at 
the  said  rent,  until  one  of  the  said 
jKirties  should  give  the  other  six 
calendar  months'  notice  to  quit. 
The  l^idlord  gave  such  notice 
Jxme  24th  for  December  26thy  1841, 
and  it  was  held  sufficient.  '*  It  is 
HO  doubt  true,'*  said  Lobp  Camf- 


ms 


BELL,  C.  J.,  "that,  oJTan  ordinary 
yearly  letting,  the  six  months' 
notice  must  expire  at  the  end  of 
the  year.  But  here,  no  such  wordis 
appear  as  make  such  construction 
necessary.  The  word  yearly  is 
only  a  word  of  calcidation,  the 
payment  is  to  be  af  the  rate  of  a 
yearly  rent  of  £42.  The  first  pay- 
ment is  to  be  for  the  periods  irom 
19th  of    April  to    24th    of  June, 

*  *  then  comes  the  regular  hab- 
lendum^  *'  until  one  of  said  parties 
shall  give  unto  the  other  six  calen- 
dar months'  notice  in  writing,  to 
quit."  That  indicates  the  term, 
**  which  is  not  to  be  less  than  six 
months,  and  not  necessarily  longer, 

*  *  The  tenancy  is  not  shown  to 
have  been  yearly,  and  if  it  was  not, 
there  was  no  need  that  the  notice 
should  expire  at  the  periods  when 
the  tenancy  commen<^.'* 

^In  Kemp  v.  Derrett,  8  Camp. 
510,  the  defendant  became  a  ten- 
ant of  the  premises,  to  the  plaintiff 
on  the  29th  Oct ,  1810.  The  agree- 
ment between  them  was,  '*that 


92 


Tenancy  fbom  Ysab  to  Tear. 


[§32. 


month,  or  quarter,  at  a  specific  rent  for  the  specific  term^ 
the  letting  is  a  daily,  weekly,  monthly  or  quarterly  tenan- 
cy, according  to  the  circumstances.  Thus,  where  a  wharf, 
warehouse  and  buildings  were  let  at  a  certain  rent  per 
quarter  upon  the  terms  that  the  rent  should  be  paid  down 
on  the  day  of  the  commencement  of  the  tenancy,  and  so 
on  so  long  as  the  huing  continued,  it  was  held  a  quarterly 
and  not  a  yearly  hiring,  and  the  term  expires  at  the  end 
of  each  quarter.*  In  one  case  where  a  stable  was  let 
'^for  a  week  for  85.,  and  so  from  week  to  week,  so  long 


die  defendant  was  always  to  be 
subject  to  quit  at  three  months' 
notice.''  The  defendant  had  three 
months'  notice  to  quit  at  Christ- 
mas or  pay  double  rent,  but  he 
did  not  quit.  In  action  to  recover 
double  rent,  Lord  Ellknborough 
said,  '*This  appears  to  me  to  be 
%  holding  from  three  months  to 
rhree  months.  Thereupon  a  notice 
o  quit  expiring  at  the  end  of  any 
{U£ui;er  from  the  time  of  entry 
vould  have  been  sufficient  to  de- 
ermine  the  tenancy.  I  am  quite 
dear,  however,"  he  added,  ''that 
ihe  notice  should  have  expired  on 
the  29th  of  January,  29th  April, 
d9th  July,  or  the  29th  of  October. 
The  defendant'  mieht  have  been 
made  to  hold  from  the  preceding  or 
succeeding  general  quarter  day ; 
but  in  the  absence  of  all  evidence  to 
the  contrary,  I  must  presume  that 
he  held  from  the  time  ne  entered  as 
teoiant."  See  King  v.  Grafton,  18  Q. 
B.  276,  where  it  was  held  that  a 
lease  determinable  by  either  party 
at  six  months'  notice  to  quit,  need 
not  be  a  notice  expiring  at  the 
end  of  the  year,  but  that  the  ten- 
ancy was  ended  by  the  giving  of 
six  months'  notice,  expiringatany 
time.  See  also  Carter  v.  Koe,  10 
M.  &  W.  670.  In  Rhode  Island 
the  statute  requires  "notice  in 
writing  "  to  terminate  a  lease  and  it 
is  held  that  this  requires  an  origin 
nal  and  that  a  copy  wiU  not  suffice, 
Matthewson  v.  Thompson,  12  R.  I. 
228.  In  Massachusetts  it  is  held 
that  if  any  notice  to  a  tenant  at 
will  is  necessary,  two  davs'  notice 
is  reasonable,  Arnold  v.  Nash,  126 
Mass.  396.  In  New  Jersey  it  is 
held — in  accordance  with  the  well 
nettled  rule— that  a  tenant  for  a 


month,  who  holds  over,  is  not  en. 
titled  to  notice  to  quit,  State  ▼ 
Moore,  41  N.  Y.  L.  515.  See  also 
Dale  V.  I>oddridge,9  Neb.  188 ;  Kun- 
zie  V.  Wixon,  39  Mich.  884. 

1  Wilkinson  V.  HaU,  4  Scott,  801 ; 
Towne  v.  Campbell  8  C.  B.  921. 
In  People  v.  Shacko,  48  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  551,  a  parol  agreement  for  a 
lease,  providing  for  the  renting  of 
the  premises  for  one  month  and 
for  each  successive  month  there- 
after until  the  owner  should  want 
the  premises  for  his  own  use,  was 
held  to  create  a  tenancy  at  will, 
which  might  be  terminated  with- 
out thirty  days'  notice  to  quit. 
Witt  V.  Mayor,  &c.,  6  Robt.  (N.  Y. 
Supr.  Ct.)  441.  In  Towne  v. 
Campbell,  16  L.  J.  C.  P.  104,  the 
only  evidence  on  which  apart- 
ments were  hired  was  a  receipt  as 
follows:  /'Received  C.  £126,  for 
rent  of  furnished  house  from  the 
8th  of  May  to  the  1st  of  August, 
1846,"  and  the  court  held  thatfrom 
these  facts  the  jury  might  properly 
find  a  weekly  tenancy.  In  Coffin 
V.  Lunt,  2  Pick.  (Mass.)  70,  it  was 
held  that,  in  case  of  a  tenancy 
from  month  to  month,  sixty  days' 
notice  was  sufficient.  In  Missouri 
it  lias  been  held  that  a  general 
hiring  without  limitation  as  to 
time,  though  at  a  monthly  rent,  is 
a  tenancy  from  year  to  year. 
Ridgely  V.  StilweU,  25  Mo.  570.  A 
demise  from  year  to  year  is  not 
established  by  proof  that  the  ten- 
ant held  by  the  quarter.  Wilkii^- 
son  V.  Hall,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  508.  In 
Shorey  v.  Farrell^  114  Mass.  441, 
where  a  tenant  hired  a  room  with 
steam  power,  at  a  monthly  rent,  it 
was  held  that  he  was  not  entitled 
to  a  month's  notice  to  quit. 


CHAP.  V,] 


How  CEEATBa). 


93 


as  both  parties  should  please, ''  it  was  held  that  this  at 
most  was  but  a  lease  for  three  weeks  certain/  but  un- 
der the  decisions  previously  referred  to,"  it  would  be  a 
lease  only  for  a  week  certain.  In  the  case  of  farms  and 
lands  generally,  if  no  term  is  specifically  agreed  upon,  by 
custom,  the  presumption  is  that  it  is  a  yearly  hiring,*  and 
in  the  absence  of  any  stipulation  to  the  contrary,  this  is 
the  rule  as  to  all  general  hiring.  * '  So  long  ago  as  the  ti  me 
of  the  year  books,"  says  Lord  Kenyon,  0.  J.,  "  it  was 
held  that  a  general  occupation  was  an  occupation  from 
year  to  year,"*  and  this  rule  was,  as  previously  stated. 


>  Panton  v.  Isham,  8  Lev.  850. 
In  Western  Union  Tel.  Ck>.  v.  Fain, 
62  Ga.  18,  a  tenancy  under  a  parol 
lease  for  three  years  at  a  monthly 
rent,  was  held  not  to  be  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  but  terminable 
as  a  tenancy  at  will  by  two  months' 
notice. 

*  See  ante,  p.  00,  note. 

» Martin  V.  Wetts,  7  T.  R.  85. 

«  Martin  T.  Watts,  ante.  Until 
the  time  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  a 
general  letting  of  land  created 
merelj^  a  tenancy  at  will,  but  the 
injustice  of  this  doctrine  and  its 
serious  injury  to  agricultural  in- 
terests, led  to  a  change  in  the 
doctrine,  and  it  was  then  decided 
that  a  general  lettinc^  or  occupation, 
should  be  considered  asprima  facte 
a  letting  from  year  to  year.  Ghitty 
on  Contracts,  820,  but  it  is  now 
competent  for  parties  by  express 
agreement  to  create  a  tenancy  at 
will.  Parker  v.  Constable,  8  Wils. 
25;Cudlip  v.  Bundle,  4  Mod.  9; 
Timmins  v.  Rawlinson,  8  Burr, 
1608;  Warner  v.  Brown,  8  East. 
1«5 ;  Rex  v.  Fillongley,  Cald.  569. 
This  has  led  several  authors,  among 
them  Mr.  Chttty,  Mr.  Platt  and 
others  (Chitty  on  Contracts,  320 ;  1 
Platt  on  leases,  652),  to  intimate 
that  tenancies  at  wiU  are  compara- 
tively  imknown  in  modem  practice, 
but  such  is  not  the  case,  and  such 
tenancies  ore  now  quite  common 
and  are  well  known  to  and  rec- 
ognized by  the  courts.  Mr.  Smith, 
in  a  note  to  Clayton  v.  Blakely,  8 
T .R. 8 ;  2  Smithes L.  C.  76a,8ays: 
"There  is  no  doubt  that  a  tenancy 
at  tem,  strictly  speaking,  may  stiU 
be  created.   Ball  ▼.  Cullimore,  5 


Tyrwh.  758.  It  may  be  so  by  ex- 
press words.  Richardson  v.  Lang- 
ridge,  4  Taimt.  128 ;  Cudlip  v.  Run- 
die,  8  Mod.  9;  R.  V.  Fillongley. 
Cald.  569 ;  Bastow  v.  Cox,  12  Q.  B. 
122.  A  person  who  holds,  rent  free, 
by  the  permission  of  the  owner  is  a 
tenant  at  will.  R.  v.  Collett,  Russ. 
&  Ry.  498 ;  ex.  or,  a  minister  placed 
in  possession  by  trustees  for  the 
congregation.  Doe  v.  Jones,  10  B. 
&  C.  718 ;  vide  tamen  Wilkinson  v. 
Malin,  2  Tyrwh.  544.  So  a  person 
entering  under  an  agreement  to 
purchase,  or  for  a  lease,  and  who 
nas  not  paid  rent,  see  Regnart  v. 
Porter,  8  Bingh.  451 ;  Doe  v.  Miller, 
5  C.  &  P.  595 ;  Riseley  v.  Ryle,  11 
M.  &W.  16 ;  although  he  has  paid 
interest.  Tomes  v.  Chamberudn, 
5  M.  &  W.  14;  see  Howard  v. 
Shaw,  8  Ibid.  119 ;  on  payment 
of  rent,  hofusener^  Jie  becomes  tenant 
from  year  to  year ;  Mann  v.  Love- 
ioy,  R  &  M.  855 ;  see  Saunders  v. 
Musgrove,  6  B.  &  C.  524 ;  Chapman 
V.  Towner,  6  M.  &  W.  100 ;  pro- 
vided that  he  pays  it  unth  reference 
to  a  yearly  tenancy;  for,  as  Baron 
Parke  observes,  in  Braithwaite  v. 
Hitchcock,  10  M.  &  W.  497,  "al- 
though the  law  is  clearly  settled 
that  where  there  has  been  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  and  an  occupation 
without  payment  of  rent,  the 
occupier  is  a  mere  tenant  at  will, 
yet  it  has  been  held,  that  if  he  sub- 
sequently pays  rent  imder  that 
agreement  he  thereby  becomes 
tenant  from  year  to  year.  Pay- 
ment of  rent,  indeed,  must  be 
understood  to  meaxi  payment  with 
reference  to  a  yearly  holding ;  for 
in    Richardson  v.   Langric^,    a 


94 


Tenanct  from  Tear  to  Yeab. 


[§23, 


predicated  upon  the  principle,  "  that  he  who  sows  shall 
reap,"  and  in  the  case  of  farms  and  lands  used  for  agii- 


party  who  had^d  rent  under  an 
agreement  of  tms  description,  but 
had  not  paid  it  with  reference  to  a 
year,  or  any  aliauot  part  of  a  year 
was  held,  neveruieless,  to  be  a  ten- 
ant at  will  only.  See  also  the 
judgment  of  the  same  learned 
ludge  in  Doe  d.  Hull  v.  Wood,  14 
M.  &  W.  687 ;  and  the  reason  is, 
because  the  pa^rment  of  rent  by 
the  occupier,  with  reference  to  a 
yearly  holding,  and  the  receipt  of 
itb^  the  landlord,  is  evidence  of 
the  intention  of  the  parties  that  a 
yearly  tenancy  should  be  created. 
It  is,  "however,  only  evidence ;  and 
although  in  the  absence  of  other 
circumstances,  showing  a  contrary 
intention,  it  would  be  &emed  con- 
clusive, yet  where  it  appears  the 
parties  do  not  intend  it  to  have 
that  effect,  the  tenancy  at  will  re- 
mains imaffected  by  it  f  thus  in  the 
case  of  Bastow  v.  Cox,  11  Q. ' 
B.  112,  where  ejectment  waa 
brought  by  B.  E.  &  M. ,  mortgagees, 
against  the  defendant,  mortgagor, 
the  mortgage  deed  contain^  the 
foUowiuR  clause,  ''And  the  said 
W.  Cox  nereby  a^ees  to  become 
tenant  to  the  said  B.  E.  &  M. 
henceforth  during  their  will  and 
pleasure,  at  and  after  the  rate  of 
£25  fis.  pier  year,  payable  quarterly 
on  the  18th  of  September,  18th  of 
December,  18th  of  March,  and  18th 
of  Jime;'*  the  defendant  having 
made  default  in  payment  of  the 
installments  of  the  mortgage  mon- 
ey and  rent,  the  lessors  distrained 
for  four  quarters' rent;  afterwards, 
thev  gave  a  week's  notice  to  quit 
and  brought  ejectment.  It  was 
contended  on  behalf  of  the  de- 
fendant that  he  waa,  under  the 
circim[istances,  tenant  from  year 
to  year,  and  that  a  six  months' 
notice  was  requisite ;  the  learned 
judge  (Mr.  Justice  Coltman)  how- 
ever, decided,  that  the  defendant 
continued  tenant  at  will,  and  that 
the  notice  was  sufficient.*  Hie 
Court  of  Queen's  Bench  was  clear- 
ly of  opinion  that  he  was  right, 
and  refused  a  rule  for  a  new  trial. 
It  has  already  been  shown  in  the 
notes  to  Keech  v.  Hall,  that  there 
are  certain  cases  in  which  a  mort- 
gagor in  possession  becomes  tenant 


at  will  to  the  mortgagee.  [A  ven- 
dor who  remains  in  possession  after 
having  conveyed,  is  not  tenant  at 
will  to  the  vendee  (Tew  v.  Jones, 
18  M.  &  W.  18),  because  he  is  not 
in  possession  necessarily  by  the 
consent  of  the  vendee ;  but  it  may 
perhaps  be  laid  down,  that  wher- 
ever a  person  is  in  possession  of 
land  in  which  he  has  no  freehold 
estate,  nor  tenancy  for  any  certain 
term,  and  which  he  nevertheless 
holds  by  the  consent  of  the  true 
owner,  that  ^rson  is  tenant  at  will, 
and  as  such  is  liable  to  pay  for  his 
occupation,  if  beneficial  (Ibbs  v. 
Richardson,  9  Ad.  &  El.  849 ;  How- 
ard V.  Shaw,  8  M.  &  W.  119),  im- 
less  there  be  a  stipulation  that  he 
shall  occupy  rent  free.  See  per 
Alderson,  fi. ,  in  Howard  v.  Shaw, 
and  Winterbottom  v.  Ingham,  7 
Q.  B.  611,  in  which  case  it  was 
held  that  a  party  remaining  in  pos- 
session under  a  contract  for  pur- 
chase which  ultimately  fails  for 
want  of  title,  is  not  liable  to  pay 
for  such  occupation,  though  it  be 
found  to  be  beneficial  up  to  the 
time  of  the  determination  of  the 
contract ; — secus  if  he  remain  after 
such  determination,  Howard  v. 
Shaw.] 

On  account  of  the  peculiar  origin 
of  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year, 
and  its  being  still  in  contemplation 
of  law  a  tenancy  at  willy  it  seems 
to  have  been  thought  by  three 
judges,  in  Doe  v.  Wells,  10  Ad.  & 
El.  437,  that  it  would  be  possible  to 
put  an  end  to  it  by  the  parol  con- 
sent of  both  parties,  such  parol  con- 
sent not  operating  as  a  disdavtnery 
which  cannot  be  by  mere  words, 
nor  as  a  surrender,  which  would 
be  opposed  to  the  Statute  of  Frauds, 
but  as  a  determination  of  the  wiU 
of  both  parties.  But  imtil  de- 
termined, the  tenancy  from  year 
to  year  is  a  term  which  will  pass 
to  the  personal  representative. 
Doe  d.  Hull  V.  Wood,  14  M.  &  W. 
682.  So  tenant  from  year  to  year, 
demising  from  year  to  year,  or  for 
a  term  of  years,  has  a  reversion 
which  enables  him  to  distrain. 
CJurtis  V.  Wheeler,  Moo.  &  M.  498, 
and  see  Oxley  v.  James,  13  M.  & 
W.  209,  where  tenant  from  year  to 


dSAP.  v.] 


How  Crkated. 


95 


cultural  purposes,  it  applies  with  additional  force,  as  the 
harvest  is  gathered  but  once  a  year,  and  the  enjoyment 
of  the  produce  is  presumed  to  have  been  the  consideration 
for  which  rent  was  agreed  to  be  paid.*  If  a  lease  is 
made  of  land  to  be  used  as  a  nursery  for  raising  fruit-trees 
at  a  yearly  rent,  it  will  be  treated  as  a  lease  from  year  to 
year  so  long  as  is  necessary  to  accomplish  the  purpose.* 
So,  if  a  wheat  field,  a  vineyard,  an  orchard,  an  orange 
grove,  &c.,  be  leased  at  a  usual  and  ordinary  rent,  and 
no  Umitations  are  imposed  as  to  time,  it  will  be  deemed 
a  tenancy  for  a  year,  and  so  on  from  year  to  year,  in 
order  that  the  tenant  may  reap  the  harvest  and  gather 
the  fruits  and  products  of  the  soil  when  they  mature,, 
upon  the  principle  that  the  rent  is  presumed  to  be  paid 
for  those  products,  and  not  for  the  barren  occupation  of 
the  land  itself .  "If,"  says  Mr.  Adams  in  his  excellent 
work  upon  Ejectment,'  "the  produce  of  the  land  re- 
quires two  years  to  come  to  perfection,  as,  if  it  be  licorice, 
madder,  &c.,  a  general  holding  will,  it  seems,  ensure  as 
a  tenancy  from  two  years  to  two  years,  and  cannot  be 
determined  by  a  notice  at  the  end  of  the  second  or  third 
year.'^  According  to  Pothter,  the  same  rule  prevails  in 
the  French  law.  He  says,*  "if  the  parties  have  omitted 
to  express  the  duration  of  the  term,  the  lease  will  never- 
theless be  valid.  If  it  is  a  demise  of  an  inheritance  of 
which  the  fruits  are  gathered  every  year,  such  as  a 
meadow,  vineyard,  &c.,  the  lease  is  deemed  to  have 
been  made  for  a  yeai\  When  it  is  a  lease  of  an  in- 
heritance, the  fruits  of  which  are  gathered  at  intervals 
of  several  years,  the  lease  is  deemed  to  continue  for  all 


year  having  demised  for  thirty- 
four  years  to  the  plaintiff,  who 
sub-let  for  eighteen  years  and  a 
quarter  to  the  defendant,  against 
whom  he  declared  in  covenant  for 
non-repair,  pursuant  to  the  terms 
of  the  sub-lease.  It  was  held  that 
the  plaintiff,  if  he  could  not  in 
pleading  describe  his  interest  as  an 
absolute  term  for  thirty-four  years 
(which  however  semble  he  could 
after  its  expiration),  might  clearly 
allege  it  to  oe  a  tenancy  for  thirty- 
four  years  "provided  the  tenancy 


from  year  to  year  should  so  long 
continue." 

1  Ellis  V.  Paige,  1  Pick.  (Mass.) 
43 ;  Hanchett  v.  Whitney,  2  Aik. 
(Vt.)  240 ;  Fawke  v.  Beck,  1  Speers. 
(8.  C.)  291 ;  Hall  v.  Hall,  8  G.  &  J. 
(Md.)  386 ;  Frantz  v.  Wood,  2  HiU 
(8.  C.)  867. 

« King  V.  Wilcomb,  7  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  263;  MiUer  v.  Baker,  1  Met 
(Mass.)  27. 

*  Adams  on  Ejectment,  188. 

«  Pothier*8  Louage,  28. 


96 


Tenancy  from  Teab  to  Tear. 


[§22. 


the  time  that  is  requisite  to  enable  the  tenant  to  gather 
in  the  fruits.  For  instance,  if,  after  having  fished  my 
fish-pond,  which  has  been  accustomed  to  be  fished  every 
three  years,  I  grant  it  to  farm  to  another  at  a  certain 
price,  without  expressing  the  term  of  hiring,  I  am  deemed 
to  have  demised  it  for  the  term  of  three  years."  '  When 
lands  are  leased  at  an  annual  rent  ^^  forever,"  so  long  as 
the  rent  is  regularly  paid,  the  tenancy  is  merely  from 
year  to  year,*  and  this  is  also  the  rule  when  an  agree- 
ment under  which  the  tenant  enters  provides  that  the 
lessor  is  not  to  determine  the  lease  so  long  as  the  tenant 
pays  the  rent  and  performs  the  conditions  of  the  agree- 
ment. It  is  merely  a  lease  from  year  to  year,  and  may 
be  determined  by  the  lessor  by  six  months'  notice  to 
quit,  given  during  the  first  half  of  any  year ;  otherwise 
it  would  be  a  lease  for  life,  which  can  only  be  by  deed, 
or  a  lease  from  year  to  year,  determinable  only  at  the 
election  of  the  lessee,  which,  in  the  language  of  Lobd 
Ellenbobough,  ^^is  entirely  repugnant  to  the  nature 
of  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year," '  and  the  rule  is  the 
same,  whether  the  lease  is  made  by  or  to  a  corporation, 
or  by  or  to  an  individual.* 

A  lease  granted  for  seven,  fourteen,  or  twenty -one 
years,  as  the  lessee  shall  think  proper,  is  a  lease  for  sev- 


1  See  also  to  same  effect,  King 
V.  Wilcomb,  ante. 

«  Doe  V.  Gardiner,  12  C.  B.  819 ; 
Sealey  v.  Randolph,  4  Bawle 
(Penn.)  123 ;  People  v.  Rickert,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  226 ;  Danforth  v.  Sar- 

Sent,  14  Mass.  491 ;  Vrooman  v. 
[cKjaig,  4  Md.  456;  Brewer  v. 
Knapp,  1  Pick;  (Mass.)  882 ;  Thom- 
as V.  Ringle,  9  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  87. 
« Warner  v.  Brown,  8  East,  166. 
See  also  to  same  effect.  Doe  v. 
Orago,  6  C.  B.  90 ;  Pennington  v. 
Tamere,  12  Q.  B.  998. 

*  Pennington  v.  Taniere,  ante ; 
Wood  V.  Tate,  2  N.  R.  247.  A  cor- 
poration stands  in  the  same  relar 
tion  to  tenants  that  an  individual 
does.  If  it  makes  a  void  or  void- 
able lease  for  a  term  of  years,  and 
the  tenant  enters  under  it  and  pays 
yearly  rent  or  rent  with  reference 
to  a  yearly  holding,  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year,  subject  to  the 


conditions  of  the  lease  so  far  as 
applicable,  is  created.  Rent  im- 
plies a  demise ;  and  from  its  pay- 
ment an  inference  arises,  that 
everything  essential  to  the  demise 
has  been  done,  and  whether  the 
lease  may  be  said  to  operate  as  a 
demise  or  as  a  bare  permission,  it 
binds  the  lessor  whether  he  be  an 
individual  or  corporation;  the 
party  occupying  and  paying  rent 
under  it  acquires  rights  from  the 
corporation,  becomes  their  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  and  can  be 
ejected  only  by  the  same  means  as 
would  be  available  to  an  individ- 
ual landlord.  Beverley  v.  Gas 
Light  Co.,  6  Ad.  &  EL  829.  And  a 
corporation  may  become  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  and  liable  for 
rent  or  use  and  occupation  the 
same  as  an  individual.  Lowe  v. 
L.  &  N.  W.  R.  R,  Ck), ,  18  Q,  B.  68G. 


CHAP,  v.] 


How  Created. 


97 


en  years  certain ;  then  if  the  lessee  commences  another 
term  of  seven  years,  it  is  a  lease  for  fourteen  years,  and 
if  at  the  end  of  that  time  ho  commences  another  term 
it  is  a  lease  for  twenty-one  years,'  and  is  determinable 
at  the  option  of  the  lessee  only.'  So  it  has  been  held 
that  a  lease  for  ten  years  with  a  provision  that  upon  the 
performance  of  certain  conditions  it  shall  be  renewed  for  • 
ten  years  more,  is,  upon  the  performance  of  such  condi- 
tions, a  lease  for  twenty  years.'  In  the  absence  of 
words  limiting  or  defining  the  nature  of  a  tenaucy,  the 
principal  test  of  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  whether 
there  is  a  reservation  of  annual  rent,  or  payment  of,  or 
an  agreement  to  pay  rent  for  such  an  aliquot  part  of  a 
year,  as  monthly,  quarterly,  or  half-yearly,  so  that  a 
presumption  can  be  raised  that  the  parties  intended  to 
create  such  a  tenancy.*  A  mere  permission  to  occupy 
for  an  indefinite  period,  no  rent  being  reserved,  does  not 
create  this  species  of  tenancy ; '  but  if  weekly  or  month- 
ly rent  even  is  reserved,  it  is  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year,'  it  being  presumed  that  it  is  a  monthly  rent  with 
reference  to  a  yearly  boldiiig.'     But  even  though  an  an- 


■  Ferguson  v.  Comish.  3  T.  R. 
463,  To  same  effect  see  Good- 
right  V.  Richardson.  3  id.  482. 

'  Diinn  V.  Spurrier,  7  Vea.  Jr. 
231  :  Doe  v.  Dixon,  9  Enst,  ITi. 

'  Rarlett  v.  C<x>k.  44  N.  H.  512. 

*  Hull  V.  Wood,  14  M,  &  W.  685; 
Rifhardton  v.  LauRiidge,  4  Taunt. 
128.  A  general  letting,  without 
limitation  as  to  the  time,  though 
for  a  monthly  rent,  creates  an  es- 
tate from  year  to  year,  Redgley  t. 


notice  to  quit  of  less  than  three 
months  as  provided  hj  statute,  re- 
ducing the  notice  required  hv  the 
common  law.  is insuflicient.  Leav- 
itt  V.  Leiivitt,  47  N.  H.  829.  But 
if  rent  is  reserved  in  any  form, 
that  is  referable  to  annual  rent,  it 
is  sufficient.  Hanchett  v.  Whit- 
ney, a  Aik.  (Vt.)  249.  In  Maine 
end  Ma^Si.cliua. tts  tt'nancies  from 
jear  to  year  do  not  eiitit,  oh,  in  all 
cases  of  indefinite  hiring,  notice  to 
sary,  WifherB  v.  Lax- 
.  4T0 ;   Ellis  T.  Paige, 


7.Slihve11,25M 


.570, 


V.    Cozens,   Ashm. 


year  upon  condition 
nt  was  not  paid  in  ten 
uarter-day,  the  lease 
ill  and  void.    It  was 

leane  was  from  year 
'ithstanding  the  con- 


98 


Tenancy  from  Year  to  Year. 


[§22. 


nual  rent  is  reserved,  and  ttie  term  is  indejfinite,  yet,  if 
the  term  is  determinable  at  the  election  of  the  lessee  at 
any  time^  or  if  it  is  determinable  at  his  election  before  a 
certain  time,  it  is  not  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year. ' 

It  is  not  essential  that  there  should  be  an  agreement  to 
pay  in  money,  but,  if  the  rent  is  fixed  at  a  certain  sum 
*  for  the  year,  although  the  lease  is  upon  condition  that 
the  tenant  may  occupy  at  such  yearly  rent  until  he  has 
re-imbuEsed  himself  for  repairs  made  upon  the  premises, 
yet,  it  has  been  held  thata  tenancy  from  year  to  year  is 
thereby  created,  because  the  two  elements,  annual  rent 
and  indefiniteness  of  term,  concur.'  Even  though  there 
has  been  no  lease  or  agreement  at  all,  if  an  annual  rent 


'  Stedmaa  v.  Mcintosh,  4  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  L.  292,  "It  is,"  said  Lord 
Ellenborouoh  inWamer  v.  Brown 
8  East,  167,  "entirely  repugnant 
to  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year, 
that  the  option  of  determining  it 
should  rest  solely  with  the  tenant." 
« Thomas  v.  Wright,  9  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  87.  In  a  Vermont  case, 
Hanchett  v.  W^hitney,  3  Aik.  (Vt.) 
210,  the  defendant  went  into  pos- 
session of  his  father*s  farm,  upon 
condition  that  he  should  support 
his  father.  The  father  became 
dissatisfied  and  moved  away  and 
sold  the  farm  to  the  plaintiff,  who 
brought  ejectment  to  recover  pos- 
session without  giving  six  months* 
grevious  notice  to  quit.  The  court 
eld  that  the  son  w^as  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  and  could  not 
be  ejected  except  at  the  end  of  a 
current  year,  and  then  only  by  six 
months*  previous  notice  to  quit. 
In  a  Maryland  case,  A  conveyed 
to  B  certain  tracts  of  land  and  per- 
sonal property,  to  be  held  by  B 
"in  trust  for  the  use  of  A  during 
his  life;  and  after  his  death,  in 
trust  for  his  daughter  C  and  her 
four  children,  share  and  share 
alike,  as  tenants  in  common." 
Upon  the  death  of  A,  the  trustee 
went  into  full  possession  of  the 
whole  property,  and  soon  after  re- 
quested C  to  take  possession  of  the 
farm,  agreeing  with  her,  at  the 
time,  that  she  and  her  children 
should  eat  and  wear,  each,  her 
and  his  fifth  part  of  the  proceeds 
of  the  property  under  the  deed  of 


trust ;  reserving  to  himself,  B,  the 
right  at  all  times  to  manage  and 
control  all  the  trust  property  by 
himself  and  agents.  tTnder  these 
circimistances,  C,  with  her  child- 
ren, went  upon  a  farm,  part  of  the 
trust  property.  It  was  held  that 
the  right  of  management  reserved 
to  B  was  to  be  exercised  during  0*8 
possession ;  that  it  did  not  autnor- 
ize  him  to  dispossess  her  at  pleas- 
ure, nor  depute  others  to  do  it; 
but  was  a  mere  right  of  super- 
vision and  general  direction,  as  to 
the  course  of  cultivation  and  gen- 
eral conduct  of  the  property  ;  that 
the  legal  effect  of  the  agreement 
was  not  to  create  a  tenancy  at 
will,  but  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year,  on  that  part  of  the  premises 
onlv  which  was  secured  to  the 
children  by  the  deed,  leaving  C  to 
the  full  enjoyment  of  her  absolute 
right  of  proi)erty  in  her  fifth  part 
of  the  estate.  Hall  v.  Hall,  6  G. 
&  J.  (Md.)  386.  A  lease  for  no 
definite  time,  ivith  an  annual  rent, 
payable  quarterly,  is  a  lease  from 
year  to  year,  and  cannot  be  ter- 
minated except  at  the  close  of  the 
year,  by  previous  notice  to  quit  of 
the  duration  required  by  statute, 
or  in  the  absence  of  any  statutory 
regulation  upon  that  subject,  by 
the  common  law,  and,  if  the  ten- 
ant commences  a  new  year  with- 
out having  had  notice  to  quit  from 
the  landlord,  he  cannot  be  turned 
out  until  the  next  year;  but  he 
must  pay  his  rent  quarterly  as  pro- 
vided in  the  lease,  and  peAonn  all 


CHAP,  v.]  How  Created.  99 

has  been  paid  for  several  years,  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year  is  thereby  raised  ; '  but  there  must  be  a  payment  of 
rent  as  rent;  if  the  party  enters  under  an  agreement  to 
purchase,  and  pays  down  a  certain  sum,  which  it  is 
agreed  shall  be  considered  as  a  year's  rent,  in  case  he 
fails  to  perform,  and  failing  to  perform,  he  holds  ovei' 
into  another  year,  he  is  not  a  tenant  fi-om  year  to  year, 
because  there  can  be  no  presumption  raised  from  these 
facts  that  the  amount  of  the  advance  sum  puid  by  him 
was  paid  as  rent,  or  that  it  was  fixed  with  any  reference 
to  the  actual  rental  value  of  the  premises,  and  conse- 
quently that  the  person  holding  over,  held  over  at  that 
rental,'  and,  even  though  such  a  presumption  could  be 
raised  from  the  circumstances,  yet  in  this,  as  all  other 
cases  of  a  tenant  holding  over  by  the  permission  of  the 
landlord,  it  may  be  rebutted  by  showing  that  the  hold- 
ing was  not  in  the  character  of  tenant,  or  that  it  was 
for  some  other  purpose.'  If  a  lease  contains  a  provision 
that,  unless  the  tenant  gives  notice  of  a  certain  duration, 
of  his  intention  not  to  continue  in  possession  beyond  the 
expiration  of  the  term,  he  shall  be  regarded  as  electing 
to  stay  for  another  year,  unless  the  tenant  complies 
with  the  notice,  he  will  be  bound  as  tenant  for  another 
year.* 

the    other    conditions    contained      v.  Paxton,  18  Gratt,  (Va.)  173,  but 

therein.      Lealev    v,   Bandolph,   4      thiB  presumption  may  be  repelled 

fiawle  (Penn.)  "l28 ;  Rich   v.  Bol-      by  proof  of  a  holding  in  a  differ- 

ton,  ante.  ent  character  or  for  a   different 

iHaUT.Wadsworth.aSVt.  410;      purpose.    Williumson  v.  Paxton, 

Hunt  V.  Morton,  18  111.  75,  ante ;  Harvey  v.  Francis,  2  M,  & 

-— "■  "     ■       •"'■---       -  ■    "■     "'-"-■---.  Moeely,  1  C. 

hen  paid  qua 

ith.4BinK.  91. 

if  rent  under  a 

to  year  is  iin- 

t  under  a  lease 
ring  no  power 
icy  from  year 
Bfrom.  Tuck- 
Ad.  3«5 :  Jor- 
.  Bl.  97 ;  Mar- 


100 


Tenancy  fbom  Year  to  Yeak. 


[§23. 


Sec.  23.  Entry  under  agreement  for  a  lease  ;  effect  of.— 
Where  a  person  is  let  into  possession  under  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  or  under  a  lease  void  under  the  Statute 
of  Frauds,  he  is  a  mere  tenant  at  will ;  but  upon  payvient 
of  rent  by  Aim,  he  at  once  becomes  a  tenant  from  year  to 
year,  upon  the  terms  of  the  intended  lease,  so  far  as  they 
are  appUcable  to  and  not  inconsistent  with  a  yearly 
tenancy.  * 


*  Westmorland  v.  Smith,  1  M.  & 
K.  187.  The  rule  as  established  hj 
numerous  authorities  is,  that  if  a 
party  enters  into  possession  under 
an  agreement  for  a  future  lease, 
and  in  expectation  of  it,  and  pays 
rent,  he  hecomes  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year.  Aldershaw  v. 
breach,  6  Esp.  106 ;,  Sullivan  v. 
Jones,  3  C.  &  P.  579 ;  Hamerton 
V.  Stead,  8  B.  &  C.  478 ;  Broom- 
field  V.  Smith,  6  East  530 ;  Knight 
V.  Bennett,  3  Bing.  361 ;  Cox  v. 
Bent.  5  Bing.  185;  Chapman  v. 
Towner,  6  M.  &  W.  100 ;  Doe  v. 
Smith,  1  Myl.  &  K.  137 ;  Bolton 
V.  Tomlin,  5  Ad.  &  El.  856 ;  Doe  v. 
Foster,  3  C.  B.  215 ;  Bannister  v. 
Usbome,  Peake's  Addl.  Cas.  76, 
and  according  to  the  latter  case,  a 
constructive  possession  by  the  ten- 
antis  sufficient,  as,  if  he  puts  up  a 
to  let  upon  the  premises.  Upon 
the  point  that  entry  and  payment 
of  tne  rent  as  previously  stated 
constitute  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year,  see,  in  addition  to  the  cases 
already  cited,  Thompson  v.  Amey, 
12  Ad.  &  El.  476  ;  Berry  v.  Lindley, 
8  M.  &  G.  498  ;  Riggs  v.  Bell,  5  T. 
B.  471 ;  Bennett  v.  £*eland,  E.  B. 
&  E.  326 ;  Richardson  v.  Giflford, 
1  Ad.  &  El.  52;  Braithwaite  v. 
Hitchcock,  10  M.  &  W.  494  ;  Man- 
ning V.  liovejoy,  Ry.  &  M.  355. 
Thus,  in  Thompson  V.  Amey,  ante, 
A  agreed  to  lease  a  certain  farm  to 
B,  at  a  certain  yearly  rental,  and 
ako  upon  condition  that  B  would 
cultivate,  pay  rent,  &c.,  and  B  en- 
tered into  possession  and  paid  rent 
under  the  agreement,  but  no  lease 
was  ever  m^e.  The  tenant  having 
violated  the  conditions  of  the  in- 
tended lease,  as  expressed  in  the 
agreement  as  to  the  cultivation  of 
the  land,  the  landlord  brought 
ejectment,  and  the  court  held  that 
the  defendant  having  entered  un- 


der the  agreement  for  a  lease 
which  was  to  contain  a  covenant 
against  taking  successive  crops  of 
corn,  and  a  condition  for  re-entry 
in  case  of  breach  was  subject  to 
such  condition,  and  that  ejectment 
lay  for  its  breach  because  the  agree- 
'  ment  was  such  that  either  ^xirty 
might  have  procured  a  specific  per- 
formance thereof  in  equity. — Pat- 
terson, J.,  said,  *'It  is  said  that  a 
covenant  resi)ecting  a  rotation  of 
crops  cannot  be  engrafted  on  a 
yearly^  tenancy;  but  I  see  no  reason 
why  it  should  not.  The  tenant  in 
possession  under  such  circum- 
stances is  bound  to  cultivate  the 
land,  as  if  he  were  going  to  con- 
tinue in  possession  as  long  as  the 
lease  itself  would  have  lasted.  It 
is  argued  that  the  tenancy  arises  by 
operation  of  law  upon  the  pay- 
ment of  rent,  and  that  the  law  im- 
plies no  particular  mode  of  crop- 
mng,  nor  any  conditions  of  re-entry. 
Bmthe  terms  upon  which  the  ten- 
ant holds  are  in  truth  a  conclusion 
of  law  from  the  facts  of  the  case, 
and  the  terms  of  the  articles  of 
agreement, "  and  a  similar  doctrine 
has  been  held  in  tliis  country  in 
numerous  cases,  where  a  tenant 
entered  imder  a  void  lease,  Tag- 
gard  V.  Roosevelt,  2  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  100;  People  v.  Rickert,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  226 ;  Strong  v.  Crosby, 
21  Conn.398 ;  Schuyler  v.Leggett,  3 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  660.  A  tenancv  from 
year  to  year  is  imphed  where  a 
tenant  enters  into  possession  under 
parol  or  other  lease  void  by  the 
Statute  of  Frauds,  and  the  rights 
of  the  parties  may  be  ascertained 
by  a  reference  to  the  lease.  Mar- 
tin V.  Smith,  43  L.  J.  Exchq.  42 ; 
Porter  v.  Blielery,  17  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
149 ;  Barlow  v.Wamwright,  22  Vt. 
88 ;  Thurber  v.  Dwyer,  10  R.  L 
855 ;  Riggs  v.  Bell,  5   T.  R.   473 


r 


CHAP,  v.]        Entry  Under  AoREEaiENT. 


101 


[■ 


A  stipulation  for  two  years'  notice  to  quit  is  held  to 
be  inapplicable  to  such  a  tenancy  ;  *  consequently,,  if  an 
agreement  for  a  lease  under  which  a  tenant  enters  and 


Oollins  V.  Weller,  7  id.  478 ;  Gaston 
V.  Smith,  33  N.  Y.  245  ;  Shepherd 
V.  Cmnmings,  1  Caldw.  (Tenn.) 
354;  Lounsbury  v.  Snyder,  31  N. 
Y.  514;  Thomas  v.  Nelson,  5  id. 
118;  Berry  V.  lindley,  3  M.  &G. 
498 ;  Clayton  v.  Blakely ,  8  T.  R.  3. 
But,  in  order  to  raise  such  an  infer- 
ence, the  agreement  of  all  the  par- 
ties must  be  shown,  and  if  there 
are  three  or  more  parties,  and  the 
agreement  of  two  only  is  shown, 
such  a  tenancy  cannot  be  impUed 
as  against  the  other  party.  Good- 
title  V.  Herbert,  4  T.  R.  680.  In 
Dodge  V.  Bowers,  2  M.  &  W.  365, 

A,  B  and  C,  0  bein^  an  unmarried 
woman,  entered  into  an  agree- 
ment, dated  25th  December,  1834, 
to  take  a  house  of  the  plaintiff  for 
seven  years,  at  a  certain  annual 
rent,  payable  quarterly;  under 
which  they  entered.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1835,  C  married  ;  in  December 
A  became  bankrupt.  In  an  action 
of  debt  by  the  plaintiff  against  A, 

B,  C  and  Cs  husband,  for  two 
years'  rent,  claimed  to  be  due  un- 
der the  demise  contained  in  the 
above  agreement,  the  defendants 
t^  their  plea  denied  the  demise. 
There  was  also  a  count  for  use  and 
occupation,  to  which  they  pleaded 
payment  of  all  the  rent  due  before 
CTs  marriage.  The  defendants 
proved  payment  by  A's  assignees 
of  the  quarter's  rent  at  Michael- 
mas, 1835,  and  an  admission  by  the 
plaintiff  of  the  receipt  of  the  two 
previous  quarters'  rent ;  but  it  is 
not  shown  when  or  by  whom  these 
latter  payments  were  made. — 
Heldf  that  this  was  not  evidence 
from  w'hich  a  new  yearly  tenancy, 
on  the  terms  of  the  agreement, 
could  be  inferred,  so  as  to  charge 
all  the  defendants,  inasmuch  as  it 
was  not  shown  that  the  payments 
were  made  before  C's  marriage,  or 
with  her  assent  after  her  marriage. 
An  entry  under  such  a  lease 
creates  a  t-enancy  from  year  to 
year  regulated  by  the  parol  demise 
m  aJl  respects  except  as  to  the  du- 
ration of  the  term.  2d.  In  Braith- 
waite  V.    Hitchcock,  ante,  in  an 

ction  of  debt  for  rent,  stating  a 


demise  of  premises  by  the  plaintiff 
to  W.  H.,  for  one  year,  and  so  on, 
from  year  to  vear,  if  they  should 
respectively  please,  at  a  yearly  rent 
of  £140,  payable  quarterly,  and  an 
assignment  by  W.  H.  to  the  de- 
fenaant,  the  plaintiff  proved  an 
agreement  (signed  by  himself  only) 
for  a  lease  of  the  premises  by  him 
to  W^  H.,  for  seven  years,  at  £140 
a  year;  that  no  lease  had  been 
actually  executed,  but  that  W.  H. 
had  entered  into  possession  shortly 
after  the  date  of  the  agreement, 
and  had  paid  two  quarters  rent,  at 
the  rate  of  £140  a  year. — It  was 
held  that  this  was  sufficient  evi- 
dence of  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year,  as  stated  in  tiie  declaration, 
and  in  w^hich  W.  H.  had  an  as- 
signable interest.  Braithwaite  v. 
Hitchcock,  10  M.  &  W.  4»4. 
Where  a  person  held  premises 
under  an  agreement  in  writing, 
from  quarter  to  quarter,  and  that 
the  agreement  provided  that  the 
tenant  should  quit  possession  upon 
receiving  six  months'  notice  in 
writing,  and,  in  the  event  of  his 
losing  his  license  to  sell  ale,  &c., 
through  misconduct  at  any  time 
during  the  term,  should  then  forth- 
with quit  possession,  on  being  re- 
?luestJed  to  do  so  by  his  landlord. — 
t  was  held  that  he  had  neither  a 
tenancy  from  year  to  year  nor  a 
term  certain  in  the  premises,  so  as 
to  entitle  the  lanolord  in  eject- 
ment to  compel  him  to  give  se- 
curity for  costs  under  the  statute. 
Cai-ter  v.  Roe,  10  M.  &  W.  670. 
Where  there  has  been  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease  and  an  occupa- 
tion without  payment  of  rent,  the 
occupier  is  a  mere  tenant  at  will. 
If  he  subsequently  pays  rent  under 
that  agreement,  he  thereby  be- 
comes tenant  from  year  to  year. 
But  in  order  to  establish  a  tenancy 
from  year  to  year  in  such  case,  the 
payment  of  rent  means  a  payment 
of  rent  with  reference  to  a  yearly 
holding.  Braithwaite  v.  Hitch- 
cock, 10  M.  &  W.  494.  See  Risely 
V.  Ryle,  11  M.  &  W.  16. 
» Tooker  v.  Smith,  1  H.  &  N.  732. 


102  Tenancy  from  Tear  to  Year.  [§  23. 

occupies  for  several  years,  paying  rent,  contains  a  stipu- 
lation that  the  tenancy  shall  continue  until  after  two 
years'  notice,  it  will  not  be  implied  that  such  stipulation 
was  one  of  the  terms  under  which  the  tenant  held,  and 
all  stipulations,  incompatible  with  a  tenancy  from  year 
to  year,  are  always  rejected,  and  those  only  applied  that 
are  consistent  therewith.  *  It  is  held  that  an  agreement 
as  to  the  duration  of  the  term  is  uot  binding,  as,  if  the 
agreement  is  for  a  lease  for  three  years,  it  may  be  put 
an  end  to  at  anytime  prior  thereto  by  giving  six  months' 
notice  to  quit  at  the  end  of  either  year,  but,  if  the  ten- 
ant continues  to  occupy  for  the  whole  time,  his  tenancy 
expires  by  its  own  limitation  with  the  expiration  of  the 
term  agreed  upon,  and  ejectment  n^y  be  maintained  at 
the  expiration  of  such  term  without  notice  to  quit,  un- 
less a  new  term  has  been  commenced  and  rent  paid  in 
pursuance  of  it,  so  as  to  destroy  the  effect  of  the  expira- 
tion of  the  term  by  limitation.  *  The  principle  upon  which 
this  rule  is  predicated  is,  fhat  the  tenant's  legal  interest 
ceases,  when  his  right  in  equity,  if  assigned,  would  have 
ceased.  •  Thus  in  a  case  *  where  the  defendant  entered  into 
an  agreement  for  a  lease  with  the  plaintiff  by  letter  of  Sept. 
5th,  1823,  by  which  he  was  to  have  it  for  five  years  and 
a  half  from  Michaelmas,  1823,  and  he  entered  and  paid 
rent,  it  was  held  that  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  was 
thereby  created,  which  could  be  determined  only  by  a 
half  year's  notice  during  any  one  of  the  years,  but  that 
the  defendant  was  bound  to  go  out  at  the  end  of  the 
term  stated  in  the  letter,  without  notice.  Maule,  J., 
very  forcibly  laid  down  the  rule  and  explained  it,  as  fol- 
lows :  "  It  is  admitted,"  said  he,  *^ on  all  hands,  that  the 
defendant,  upon  his  entry,  became  tenant  from  year  to 
year.  Parties  may  stipulate  that  there  shall  be  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year  determinable  at  a  particular  time. 
If  a  party  enters  under  an  invalid  agreement,  or  under 

»  Tress  V.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  86;  »  Bromfield  v.  Smith,  6  East,  580. 
Stratton  v.  Pettitt,  16  C.  B.  420;  *  Berry  v.  Lindley,  3  M.  dU  G. 
Arden  v.  Sullivan,  14  Q.  B.  832.  498. 

« Davenish  v.  Moffatt,  15  Q.  B. 
257;  Tress  v.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  86 ; 
Poe  V.  Stratton,  4  Bing.  446. 


CHAP,  v.]        What  Covenants  Implied. 


103 


an  agreement  not  amounting  to  a  demise^  he  may  still 
hold  subject  to  the  terms  of  that  agreement  so  far  as 
they  are  not  at  variance  with  the  species  of  tenancy 
"which  the  law,  under  the  circumstances,  creates.  The 
effect  of  what  passed  between  the  parties,  appears  to  me 
to  be  this :  the  defendant  became  tenant  to  the  plaintiff 
from  year  to  year,  from  Michaelmas,  1823,  for  so  long  a 
time  as  they  should  respectively  please,  determinable  at 
the  end  of  any  year,  at  a  half -year's  noticey  the  defendant 
to  go  out  at  the  end  of  five  years  and  a  half  without  no- 
tice." ' 

Sec.  24.  What  covenants  vnll  or  vnH  not  be  implied  .A 
covenant  to  build,  or  to  do  such  substantial  repairs  as 
are  not  usually  done  by  a  teaant  from  year  to  year,  will 
not  be  implied  or  held  as  applicable  to  the  relation, 
even  though  the  agreement  stipulates  for  such  covenants  in 
the  lease,'  but  the  rule  is  otherwise  as  to  a  stipulation  to 
keep  the  premises  in  good  and  tenantable  repair.  Thus, 
in  an  English  case,  the  defendant"  went  into  possession 
of  premises  under  an  agreement,  by  the  terms  of  which 
lie  was  to  have  possession  for  the  term  of  three  years 
and  a  quarter,  he  to  keep  the  premises  in  tenantabl© 
repair  during  the  tenancy.  The  agreement  was  neither 
stamped  as  a  lease,  nor  signed  by  both  parties,  but  the 
court  held  that  the  defendant  was  bound  to  repair  dur- 
ing his  occupancy,  though  the  agreement  was  void  as  to 
the  duration  of  the  term  under  the  Statute  of  Frauds. 
"He  did  not,"  said  Parke,  J.,  ''legally  agree  for  a 
term  of  three  years,  but,  in  point  of  law,  he  was  ten- 
ant at  will  for  the  first  year,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  on  his  own  part,  and  afterwards  tenant  from 
year  to  year  subject  still  to  that  agreement,  which  bound 
him  to  keep  the  premises  in  good  repair  so  long  as  he 


^  In  Davenish  v.  Moftatt,  ante, 
Lord  Campbell,  C.  J.,  said,  "We 
think  the  tenancy  created  from 
year  to  year  must  be  understood  to 
continue  only  during  the  three 
years  (which  in  this  case  was  the 
time  named  in  the  lease  which  was 
void  because  not  under  seal),  hable 


to  be  determined  during  the  three 
years  by  a  notice  to  quit,  and  ex- 
piring at  the  end  of  three  years,  by 
efflux  of  time,^^ 

«  Bowes  V.  Croll,  6  E.  &  B.  264. 

'  Richardson  v.  Gifford,  1  Ad.  & 
£1.52. 


104 


Tenancy  from  Tear  to  Tear. 


[§24. 


should  occupy."  And  so,  generally,  when  a  tenant  goes 
into  possession  under  an  agi'eement  for  a  lease,  or  under 
a  void  lease,  he  will  be,  after  payment  of  rent  under  it, 
treated  as  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
agreement  or  lease  so  far  as  they  are  applicable  to  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year,  but  no  farther.  If  any  of  the 
conditions  are  inconsistent  with  such  a  tenancy,  they  wiU 
be  rejected.  Thus,  where  a  shop  was  taken  under  an 
agreement  for  a  lease  that  contained  a  stipulation  that 
the  tenant  should  '*keep  open  the  shop  and  use  his  best 
endeavors  to  promote  the  trade  of  it  during  the  ten- 
ancy ; '"  a  condition  that  he  shall  be  paid  for  improve- 
ments,* or  that  the  landlord  may  re-enter  for  non-pay- 
ment of  rent,  or  breach  of  any  covenants,  are  all  ap- 
plicable to  the  tenancy.*  So  that  the  tenant  may  retain 
and  sow  certain  land  demised  at  the  seed  time  next  after 
the  end  of  the  term,  and  have  the  privilege  of  gathering 
and  threshing  it  on  the  premises,*  that  the  tenant  shall 
leave  aU  the  manure  at  the  end  of  his  term  *  against  suc- 
cessive crops*  for  the  payment  of  rent  in  advance,'  and, 


»  Sanders  v»  Kamell,  1  F.  &  F» 
856. 

*  Bracklington  v.  Saunders,  13 
W.  R.  48. 

» Thomas  v.  Parker,  1  H.  &.  N. 
669. 

♦  Hyatt  V.  Griffith,  7  Q.  B.  505. 

*  Roberts  v.  Barker,  1  Cr.  &  M. 
808. 

•  Thomas  v.  Amey,  12  Ad.  &  El. 
476. 

^Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Excha.  662. 
In  Steffens  v.  Earl,  40  N.  J.  L.  128, 
it  is  held  that  in  tenancies  where 
no  time  is  mentioned,  and  no 
annual  rent  is  reserved,  the  char- 
acter of  the  tenure  as  to  time  will 
be  controlled  by  the  intervals  be- 
tween the  payments,  monthly  or 
weekly  payments  implying  month- 
ly or  weekly  tenancies ;  and  that 
in  cases  of  a  monthly  tenancy,  a 
month's  notice  to  quit,  expiring  at 
the  end  of  one  of  the  periods  of 
holding,  is  sufficient.  The  rule 
relative  to  notices  seems  to  be  as 
follows:  Where  there  is  a  lease 
for  a  certain  period,  the  term  de- 
termines tvithout  notice,  Cobb  v. 
Stokes,  8  East,  358 ;  Right  v.  Darby, 


1 T.  R.  159.  In  uncertain  tenancies 
reasonable  notice  was  necessary, 
which  reasonable  notice  had  from 
the  time  of  Henry  VIII.,  accord- 
ing to  Lord  Ellenborough,  been 
six  months.  Doe  v.  Spenc« ,  6  Ekkst, 
120.  In  cases  of  tenancies  for 
periods  running  less  than  a  year, 
the  rule  enunciated  by  the  text 
writers  is  that  the  notice  must  be 
regulated  by  the  letting  and  must 
be  equivalent  to  the  period.  Archb, 
Land.  &  Ten.,  §  87.  This  rule 
must  have  originated  in  custom 
and  not  in  any  decision  of  the 
coiuijs.    See  Huffell  v.  Armistead, 

7  C.  &  P.  56 ;  Towne  v.  CampbeU, 

8  C.  B.  921.  In  Doe  v.  Hazell,  1 
Esp.  94,  which  was  a  case  of  eject- 
ment, the  defendant  liad  taken  the 
house  by  the  month  and  a  month's 
notice  to  quit  had  been  given.  It 
was  agreed  that  the  notice  had 
reference  in  all  cases  to  the  letting, 
and  thatamonth^s  notice  was  suf- 
ficient to  entitle  the  plaintiff  to  re- 
cover. In  Peacock  v.  Ruffin,  6 
Esp.  4,  the  court  remarked  tliat  a 
week's  notice  to  quit  was  certainly 
BidOicient  where  the  holding  was 


CHAP,  v.] 


Void  Lease. 


105 


indeed,  any  covenant  that  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
character  of  such  a  tenancy. '  Bat  all  covenants  incon- 
sistent therewith,  or  for  the  doing  of  that  which  is  not 
usually  done  by  such  tenants,  as  to  paint  once  in  three 
years,  *  or  to  put  the  premises  in  repair  before  he  goes 
into  possession, '  will  be  rejected  as  inconsistent.  * 

Sec.  25.  Void  lease.  Payment  of  rent  under  the  eSbot  of. 
— The  same  rules  and  principles  apply  in  the  case  of  a  ten- 
ant entering  into  possession  of  premises  for  a  term  of 
years  under  a  void  lease,  as  apply  in  the  case  of  an  en- 
try under  an  agreement  for  a  lease.  A  person  entering 
under  such  a  lease,  void  for  any  cause,  who  pays  or  agrees 
to  pay  any  part  of  the  yearly  rent  reserved  therein,  be- 
comes a  tenant  from  year  to  year,  subject  to  all  the 
covenants  and  conditions  of  the  lease  applicable  to  such 
a  tenancy,  except  as  to  its  duration,  *  and  at  the  end  of 


; 


weekly.  In  Doe  v.  Scott,  6  Binr. 
862,  the  same  rule  was  recognized, 
and  being  incorporated  in  the  text 
books  of  authority,  may  be  con- 
sidered as  settled,  both  in  England 
and  in  this  country,  excepting 
where  the  matter  of  notice  has 
been  the  subject  of  the  statutory 
regulation.  Prindle  v.  Anderson, 
19  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  891;  Seem  v. 
McLees,  24  111.  192;  Walker  v. 
Sharpe,  14  Allen  ^ass.)  48.  In 
the  principal  case  it  is  also  held, 
that  while  a  notice  must  be  to  quit 
at  the  end  of  one  of  the  recurrmg 
periods  of  holding,  one  to  quit  on 
the  day  corresponding  with  the 
date  of  letting  and  entry  is  suf- 
ficient. So  in  Waters  v.  Young,  11 
R.  1. 1 ;  28  Am.  Rep.  409,  where  the 
date  of  letting  by  the  month  was 
December  18,  notice  to  vacate  on 
or  before  January  17  was  held  bad. 
It  should  have  been  **on  or  before 
January  18.*'  See,  as  to  this  point, 
Wilcox  V.  Wood,  9  Wend.  (N.  Y.j 
845 ;  Sheets  v.  Sheldon's  Lessee,  2 
Wall.  (U.  S.)  177 ;  Pugh  v.  Duke  of 
Leeds,  CJowp.  714 ;  Doe  v.  Lumbly, 
2  Esp.  685;  Kemp  v.  Derrett,  8 
Camp.  510;  Roe  v.  Ward,  1  H. 
Black,  97 ;  Doe  v.  Weller,  7  Term 
R.  478 ;  Mills  V.  Goff,  14  M.  &  W. 
72 ;  Doe  v.  Bayley ,  5  C.  &  P.  67. 
»  Thomas  v.  Parker,  1  H.  &  N. 


669 ;  Bridges  v.  Potts,  17  C.  B.  N. 
S.  814 ;  Berry  v.  Lindley,  8  M.  &. 
Gr.  514. 

'  Pinero  v.  Judson,  6  Bing.  210- 
11. 

» Ibid. 

♦  Bowes  V.   CroU,  6  E.  &  B.  264. 

»  Strong  V.  Crosbv,  21  Conn.  898, 
Thurber  v.  Dwyer,  10  R.  I.  855. 
In  Schuyler  v.  Leggett,  4  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  60,  a  parol  demise  was 
made  for  seven  years  which  was 
void  under  the  Statute  of  Frauds, 
but  the  tenant  having  entered  into 
possession  and  paid  rent  under  it. 
It  was  held  that  it  inured  as  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year,  and  that 
it  regulated  the  terms  of  the  ten- 
ancy in  all  other  respects  except 
the  term  of  the  tenancy,  such  as 
the  amount  of  rent  to  be  paid,  the 
time  of  the  year  when  the  tenant 
must  quit,  &c.  See  also  People  v. 
Rickert,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  226.  In 
New  York,  a  tenancy  at  will  is 
treated  as  a  tenancy  from  year  to 
year,  so  far  as  is  necessary  for  the 
tmrpose  of  a  notice  to  eject. 
Bradley  v.  Covel,  4  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
849.  m  Massachusetts,  and  in 
several  of  the  States,  it  is  held  that 
all  tenancies  under  parol  leases  are 
void,  and  are  mere  tenancies  at  wilL 
EUis  V.  Paige,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  43 ; 
Withers  v.  Larabee,  48  Me.  570. 


108 


Tenancy  From  Yeab  to  Teab. 


[§26. 


the  void  term,  the  tenancy  ceases  without  any  notice  to 
quit,  by  efflux  of  time,'  or  it  may  be  previously  ended  by 
notice  to  quit  at  theend.of  any  year,  or  by  an  entry  of  the 
landlord  for  a  forfeiture.* 

Sec.  26.  Holding  over  and  paying  rent.— If ,  when  prem- 
ises are  let  for  a  year,  or  from  year  to  year,  the  tenant 
holds  over,  the  landlord  may  elect  to  treat  him  as  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  or  when  the  renting  is  for  a  shorter 
period,  and  the  tenant  holds  over,  he  will  be  deemed  to 
hold  upon  the  terms  upon  which  he  entered,  and  the  land- 
lord may  recover  rent  of  him  according  to  the  terras  of 
the  original  contract  or  lease,'  or  the  landlord  may  at  his 


In  Tennessee  they  are  treated  either 
as  creating  a  tenancy  at  will  or 
from  year  to  year,  according  to  the 
circumstances.  Duke  v.  Harper, 
6  Yerg.  (Tenn.)  380,  and  in  Penn- 
sylvania, a  tenancy  at  will  is  treated 
as  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  and 
the  same  notice  to  quit  is  required 
in  either  case.  Clark  v.  Smith,  25 
Penn.  St.  137.  Holding  that  an 
entry  under  void  lease  and  pay- 
ment, &c.,  of  rent  creates  tenancy 
from  year  to  year  upon  the  terms 
of  the  lease,  see  Tress  v.  Savage,  4 
E.  &  B.  36 ;  Martin  v.  Watts,  7.  T. 
R.  83;  Riggs  v.  Bell,  5  id.  471; 
Davenish  v.  Moffatt,  15  Q.  B.  257 ; 
Doe  V.  Collings,  7  C.  B.  939 ;  Penn- 
ington V.  Taniere,  12  Q.  B.  998 ; 
Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Excha.  662; 
Richardson  v.  Gifford,  1  Aa.  &  El. 
52 ;  Beale  v.  Sanders,  8  Bing.  N. 
C.  850 ;  Clayton  v.  Blakely,  8  T.  R. 
8. 

'  Tress  v.  Savage ;  Doe  v.  Strat- 
ton,  4  Bing.  446;  Davenish  v. 
Moffatt,  15  Q.  B.  257. 

«  Thomas  v.  Parker,  1  H.  &  N. 
669 ;  Hayne  v.  Cumming,  16  C.  B. 
N.  S.  421. 

'Noel  V.  McCravy,  7  Coldw. 
(Tenn.)  623;  Hall  v.  Myers,  48 
Md.  446 ;  Burbank  v.  Dyer,  54Ind. 
392  ;  Parker  v.  HoUis,  50  Ala.  411 ; 
Usher  v.  Moss,  50  Miss.  208 ;  Gard- 
ner v.  Commissioners,  &c.,  21 
Minn.  83 ;  Hoof  v.  Ladd,  1  Cr.  (U. 
S.  C.  C.)  167 ;  Bacon  v.  Brown,  9 
Conn.  384;  Frantz  v.  Wood,  2  Hill 
(S.  C.)  867;  Haskins  v.  Pope,  10 
Ala.  493 ;  Quinette  v.  Carpenter,  85 


Mo.  502 ;  Lagueremne  v.  Dougher- 
ty, 85  Penn.  St.  45 ;  Hyatt  v.  Grif- 
fiths, 17  Q.  B.  505 ;  HoUingsworth 
V.  Stennett,  2  Esp.  717 ;  Thomas  v. 
Amey,  12  Ad.  &  El.  746;  Digbv 
V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  275;  Finct 
V.  Miller,  5C.  B.  438;  Pierce  v. 
Shaw,  2  M.  &  R.  418 ;  Schuyler  v. 
Smith,  51  N.  Y.  809.  A  tenant 
who  has  leased  premises  for  a  year 
took  them  for  a  second  on  the  ex- 

Eiration  of  tJie  first  year.  It  was 
eld,  that  if  the  second  lease  was 
void,  from  want  of  authority  of 
the  lessee,  an  officer  of  a  corpora- 
tion, and  if  the  tenant  should  be 
regarded  as  holding;  over  under 
the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  for- 
mer lease,  he  became  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year,  and  must  give  six 
months'  notice  to  determine  his  ten- 
ancy ;  and  that  if  he  shoidd  be  re- 
garded as  having  entered  under 
thevoid  lease,  possession  under  it, 
and  payment  and  acceptance  of 
rent  would  create  a  tenancy  from 
quarter  to  quarter,  not  to  be  deter- 
mined without  three  months'  no- 
tice. A  lessee  for  years  whose 
term  depends  on  a  certainty,  who 
holds  over  after  the  termination  of 
the  lease  merely  to  remove  his 
goods  and  chattels,  none  the  less 
becomes  a  tenant  from  year  to 
year  by  such  holding  over.  A  ten- 
ant for  years  whose  term  depends 
on  a  certainty,  has  no  right  to  re- 
main a  reasonable  time  after  his 
term  expires  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
moving his  chattels.  To  entitle  a 
landlord  to  regard  a  tenant  undior 


CHAP,  v.] 


Holding  Over. 


107 


election  treat  him  as  a  trespasser  and  may  bring  eject- 
ment against  him  without  any  previous  notice,  unless  the 
holding  over  has  been  for  such  a  time  that  it  may  be 
presumed  that  he  assented  thereto.  * 

But  this  is  only  a  presumption  of  law,  which  stands 
until  the  contrary  is  shown,*  and  it  may  be  shown  that 
the  landlord  accepted  the  rent  under  a  mistake  and  in 
ignorance  of  the  facts,'  or  that  the  holding  was  in  a 
character  and  for  a  purpose  inconsistent  with  a  tenancy.* 
An  impUed  tenancy  from  year  to  year  will  be  jH'esumed 
to  have  commenced  on  the  same  day  of  the  year  as  the 
original  tenancy  ;  but  this  is  sometimes  a  question  for  the 
jury,  upon  a  consideration  of  all  the  facts.*  Although  a 
parol  lease  for  more  than  one  year  is  invalid  under  the 
Statute  of  Fi-auds,  in  most  of  the  States,  yet,  if  a  person 
enters  into  possession  under  a  parol  lease  for  four  years, 
and  holds  over  into  a  second  year,  he  becomes  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year  upon  the  terms  of  the  parol  lease,  and 
so  continues  as  long  as  he  remains  in  possession  without 
any  new  or  other  agreement,  and  an  occupancy,  by  hav- 
ing a  portion  of  his  property  upon  the  premises,  is 
sufficient  to  establish  his  liability,  although  there  is  no 
personal  occupancy.  Thus,  where  the  defendant  went 
into  possession,  under  a  parol  lease,*  of  a  brick-yard  and 
dwelling  house  for  one  year,  with  the  privilege  of  four 
years,  at  his  option,  and  continued  in  possession  for  two 
years,  it  was  held  that,  although  the  lease  was  void  as  to 


J". 


a  demise  for  a  year  or  more,  as  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year  upon  his 
holding  over  after  the  expiration 
of  his  term,  it  is  not  necessary  that 
theholding  over  should  be  of  such 
a  character  as  to  raise  a  presump- 
tion that  the  tenant  intends  to  oc- 
cupancy. Witt  V.  Mayor,  &c.,  of 
New  York,  6  Rob.  (N.  Y.)  441. 

>  Smith  V.  Littlefield,  51  N.  Y. 
639;  Blain  v.  Everett,  86  Md.  73; 
Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  2  Penn.  St.  144  ; 
Jackson  v.  Salmon,  4  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  327 ;  Brown  v.  Keller,  32  lU. 
151 ;  Crommelin  v.  Theiss,  31  Ala. 
412;  Schuyler  v.  Smith,  51  N.  Y. 
809. 

'Quinette  v.  Carpenter,  35  Mo. 


502;  Frantz  v.  Wood,  ante;  Dar- 
rill  V.  Stevens,  4  McCord  (fcJ.  C.) 
59;  De Young  v.  Buchanan,  10  G. 
&  J.  149 ;  Dellar  v.  Roberts,  13  S. 
&  R.  (Penn.)  60 ;  Brewer  v.  Knapp, 
1  Pick.  (Mass.)  332 ;  Moore  v.  Beas- 
ley,30hio,  294;  Mayor  of  Thetford 
V.  Tyler,  8  Q.  B.  95. 

'Lord  V.  Crago,  6  C.  B.  90 ;  Oak- 
ley V.  Monck,  3  H.  &  C.  706 ; 
Clemett  v.  Bradbee,  1  B.  C.  Rep. 
65. 

*  Williamson  v.  Paxton,  18  Gratt. 
(Va.)  475. 

» Walker  v.  God6,  6  H.  &  N.  594 ; 
Oakley  v.  Monck,  3  H.  &  C.  714. 

« Dorr  V.  Barney,  12  Hun  (N.  Y.) 
259. 


K.' 


108 


Tenancy  from  Year  to  Tbae. 


[§26, 


the  four  years,  yet,  by  the  entry  of  the  defendant  and  his 
holding  over  after  the  first  year,  it  became  a  lease  from 
year  to  year,  subject  to  all  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
verbal  lease,  except  as  to  the  term.  He  went  into  pos- 
session in  June,  1857,  and  in  April,  1869,  substantially 
told  the  plaintiff  that  he  intended  to  leave  at  the  end  of 
that  year,  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  he  abandoned  the 
house  and  removed  most  of  the  brick,  but  he  left  a  por- 
tion of  it  in  a  shed  which  he  had  erected  upon  the 
premises  to  protect  the  brick  from  the  effects  of  the 
weather,  and  did  not  remove  it  until  some  time  after- 
wards. The  lease  was  never  surrendered,  nor  did  the 
plaintiff  ever  give  his  assent  to  the  brick  and  shed  being 
left  there.  The  court  held  that  the  fact  that  the  brick 
and  shed  were  left  upon  the  premises  by  the  defendant, 
after  the  expiration  of  the  second  year,  operated  as  such 
a  continuance  of  his  occupancy  as  to  enable  the  landlord 
to  treat  him  as  a  tenant  for  another  year.*  The  question 
as  to  whether  the  holding  is  upon  the  terms  of  the  for- 
mer lease,  depends  upon  the  circumstance  whether  a  new 
agreement  has  been  entered  into,  or  the  tenant  has  re- 
ceived notice  that,  if  he  remains,  he  must  do  so  upon 
certain  other  terms.'  But  upon  principle,  it  would  seem 
that,  after  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  has  actually  set 
in,  the  terms  of  the  tenancy  cannot  be  changed  by  a  mere 
notice,  or  by  any  notice  except  such  as  would  be  operative 
as  a  notice  to  quit,  unless  such  terms  are  accepted. 
Where  a  tenant  holds  over  with  an  understanding  be- 
tween him  and  the  landlord  that  it  is  only  for  a  brief 
period,  the  landlord  cannot  hold  the  tenant  liable  for  the 
rent  for  another  year.* 


>  See  also  to  same  effect,  Schuy- 
ler V,  Leggett,  2  Ck)w.  (N.  Y.)  66 ; 
Lounsbury  v.  Snyder,  31  N.  Y. 
514 ;  Schuyler  v.  Smith,  51  id.  309 ; 
People  V.  Rickert,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
226 ;  Reader  v.  Sayre,  6  Hun  (N. 
Y.)  564 ;  Conway  v.  Stark- 
weather, 1  Den.  (N.  Y.)  113,  and, 
where  the  tenant  holds  over,  see, 
holding  that  the  terms  of  the  for- 
mer lease  control,  Stopplekamp  v. 
Manyeat,  42  Cal.  316 ;  Thiebaud  v. 
Vevay,  42  Ind.  212 ;  Hall  v.  Myers, 
48  Md.  446 ;  Bright  v.  McOuat,  30 


Ind.  521.  But,  it  may  be  shown 
that  the  holding  is  really  upon 
different  terms,  either  wholly  or  in 

?art,  Hunt  v.  Bailey,  39  Mo.  257 ; 
)espard  v.  Walbridge,  15  N.  Y. 
374 ;  Mark  v.  Bent,  5  Hun  (N.  Y. 
S.  C.)   28. 

•Hunt  V.  Bailey,  39  Mo.  257; 
Despard  v.  Walbridge,  ante;  Mack 
V.  Bent,  ante. 

»  Pickett  V.  Bartlett,  13  Daly  (S. 
Y.  C.  P.)  229 ;  Smith  v.  Alt,  7  id. 
492. 


CHAP,  v.]   Determination  of  Tenancy. 


109 


Sec.  27.  Deterzniiiatlon  of  tenancy  from  year  to  year. 
When  determinable.— A  tenancy  from  year  to  year  may  be 
determined  by  either  party  at  the  end  of  the  first  or  any 
subsequent  year ; '  unless,  in  creating  the  tenancy,  the 
parties  use  expressions  showing  that  they  contemplate  a 
tenancy  for  two  years  at  least.'  A  tenancy  *^  for  one 
year  certain,  and  so  on  from  year  to  year, "  cannot  be 
determined  before  the  end  of  the  second  year." 

Sec.  28.  Notice  to  qtiit.  Where  there  is  no  express  agree- 
ment.—Where  no  express  stipulation  is  made  between  the 
parties  as  to  the  length  of  notice  required  to  be  given,  it 
seems  that  this  may  be  regulated  by  custom  ;  *  but  there 
must  be  strong  evidence  of  such  custom,*  and  the  tenaat 
takes  the  onus  of  establishing  it,*  which  must  be  shown 
by  facts,  rather  than  by  the  opinions  of  witnesses,^  and, 
if  the  custom  is  not  general,  it  must  be  shown  to  exist  in 
the  particular  locality  to  which  it  is  sought  to  apply  it, 
and  proof  of  a  custom  in  an  adjoining  town  is  not 
sufficient.' 

If  no  such  custom  exists,  it  is  a  general  presumption  of 
law  that  if  an  estate  from  year  to  year  is  created,  and 
nothing  is  said  about  determining  it,  the  notice  intended 
is  haK  a  year's  notice,  expiring  at  the  end  of  some  curren 
year  of  the  tenancy.* 


1  Doe  V.  Smaridge,  Q.  B.  057 ; 
Thompson  v.  Maberly,  2  Camp. 
573 

« Doe  V.  Smaridge,  7  Q.  B.  959. 
See  Demi  v.  Cartwright,  4  East  29 ; 
Doe  V.  Mainby,  Q.  B.  473 ;  Chad- 
bum  Y.  Green,  9  Ad.  &  £1.  658. 

« Doe  V.  Green,  9  Ad.  &  El.  658 ; 
Reg.  V.  Chawton,  1  Q.  B.  247.  See 
Jones  V.  Nixon,  1  H.  &  C.  48. 

*  Roe  T.  Wilkinson,  cited  in  note 
228  to  Co.  litt.  270  h.  See  Roe  v. 
Chamock,  Peake,  N.  P.  C.  4 ;  also 
judgment  in  Doe  v.  Snowdon,  2 
W.  Bl.  at  p.  1225. 

*Roe  V.  Chamock,  Peake  5; 
Caldecott  v.  Smythers,  7  C.  &  P. 
808;  Tyler  v.  Seed,  Skin.  649; 
Brown  v.  Wilkinson,  Co.  Litt.  270 
&.  note. 

*  Caldecott  v.  Smythiee,  7  C.  & 
P.  108. 


^Henderson  v,  Chamock,  ante. 

*  Brown  V.  Wilkinson,  ante. 

*  Judgment  of  Earle,  C.  J.,  in 
Bridges  v.  Potts,  17  C.  B.,  N.  S. 
382 ;  HaU  v.  Myers,  43  Md.  581 ; 
Hanchett  v.  Whitney,  1  Vt.  315. 
Cole  on  Ejectment  33 ;  Smithes  L. 
&  T.  319 ;  Murray  y<  Armstrong, 
11  Miss.  209 ;  Hamitt  v.  Lawrence, 
2  J.  K.  Mar.  (Kv.)  366 ;  DarreU  v. 
Johnson,  17  Pick.  (Mass.)  263 ;  Bed- 
ford V.  McEtherron,  2  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  49 ;  Whitnev  v.  Gordon,  1 
Cush.  (Mass.)  266 ;  Allen  v.  Jaquish, 
21  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  261 ;  Clapp  v. 
Paine,  18  Me.  264 ;  Goddard  v.  R. 
R.  Co.,  2  Rich.  (S.  C.)  346 ;  Goade 
V.  Howell,  4  M.  &  W.  198 ;  Walker 
V.  Constable,  3  Wils.  25;  Braner 
V.  Wilkinson,  Co.  Litt.  279  6,  note 
Flower  v.  Darby,  1  T.  R.  159 
Pitcher  v.  Donovan,  1  Taunt.  555 


110 


Tenancy  from  Tear  to  Tear. 


[§29. 


There  is  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  length  of  the  notice 
required  to  determine  a  quarterly,  monthly,  or  weekly 
tanancy.  It  does  not  appear  to  have  ever  been  decided, 
that  in  the  case  of  an  ordinary  monthly  or  weekly  tenancy, 
a  month's  or  week's  notice  to  quit  must  be  given.  A  ten- 
ant who  enters  upon  a  fresh  week  may  be  bound  to  con- 
tinue until  the  expiration  of  that  week,  or  to  pay  the 
week's,  rent ;  but  that  is  a  very  different  thing  from  giv- 
ing a  week's  notice  to  quit.  *  A  weekly  tenancy  cannot, 
generally,  however,  be  determined  without  some*  notice, 
and  the  safest  course  is  to  give  a  notice  corresponding  to 
the  letting,  i,  e.,  a  week's  notice  in  a  weekly  letting,  amd 
a  month's  notice  in  a  monthly  letting.  * 

Sec.  29.  Whero  there  is  an  express  agreement.— The  par- 
ties to  the  tenancy  may  alter  the  notice  necessary  to 
determine  it ;  thus,  they  may  agree  that  a  three  months' 
notice,  or  even  a  week's  notice,  shall  be  sufficient,*  and 
they  may  also  stipulate  that  the  notice  shall  expire  at 
any  period  of  the  year.  * 


Shore  v.  Porter,  8  T.  R.  13  ;  Martin 
V.  Coutts,  7  id.  85.  In  many  of 
the  States  the  common-law  re- 
quirement aa  to  the  length  of 
notice  required  has  been  materially 
changed  oy  statute,  being  fixed  in 
some  at  thirty  days.  Larkin  v. 
Averv,  28  Conn.  304,  three  months, 
&c. ,  tut  in  all  of  them  the  rule  re- 
mains the  same  as  to  the  time 
when  the  tenancy  can  be  so  ended, 
to  wit,  at  tfie  encl  of  the  current 
year.  Prescott  v.  Elm,  7  Gush. 
(Mass.)  346.  In  others  the  right  to 
notice  is  mutual,  and  either  the 
landlord  or  tenant  desiring  to  end 
the  tenancy,  must  give  the  re(^ui- 
site  notice.  Moreliead  v.  Watkms, 
5  B.  Mon.  (Kt.)  228;  Grant  v. 
White,  43  Mo.  285.  In  New  Jersey, 
a  half-year's  notice  is  required  in 
all  cases  of  uncertain  tenancy, 
whether  from  year  to  year  or  at 
will.  Den  v.  brake,  14  N.  J.  L. 
523.  In  all  the  States,  except 
w^here  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  common-law  rule  pre- 
vails 

'Per  Parke,  B.,  in  HoflFell  v. 
Armitstead,  7  C.  &  P.  58.  But  see 
Doe  V.  Hazel,  1  Esp.  84 ;  Doe  v. 


Ruffin,  6  Esp.  4.  In  Wisconsin, 
the  statute  relating  to  notice  to 
quit  in  cases  of  a  tenancy  at  will 
or  by  sufferance,  does  not  applyto 
a  tenancy  from  year  to  year.  The 
common-law  rule  applies  to  the 
latter.  Brown  v.  Keyes,  60  Wis.  1. 
» Jones  V.  Mills,  10  C.  B.,  N.  S. 
788,  796. 

*  See  per  Williams,  J.,  in  Jones 
V.  Mills,  10  C.  B.,  N.  S.,  798.  In 
Illinois,  by  statute  of  1861,  a  ten- 
ancy from  month  to  month  can 
only  be  terminated  by  a  month's 
notice.  Seem  v.  McLees,  24  111. 
192.  In  Massachusetts,  no  such 
notice  is  required.  Shorey  v. 
Farrell,  114  Mass.  441 ;  nor  in 
New  York,  Gibbons  v.  Dayton, 
4  Hun  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  451 ;  People 
V.  Shackno,  48  Barb.  (N.  Y.)55. 
In  Michigan,  monthly  tenants  are 
entitled  to  a  month's  notice.  Huy- 
ser  V.  Chase,  13  Mich.  98. 

*  Judgment  of  Earle,  C.  J.,  in 
Bridges  v.  Potts,  L.  J.,  C.  P.  343. 

*See  Bridges  v.  Potts,  17  C.  B., 
N.  S.,  33::< ;  Doe  v.  Grafton,  18  Q. 
B.  490  ;  CoUett  v.  Curling,  10  Q.  B. 
785. 


CHAP,  v.] 


When  to  Give  Notice. 


Ill 


Where  there  is  no  express  or  implied  stipulation,  the  no- 
tice agreed  upon  between  the  parties  must  be  given  so  as 
to  expire  at  the  end  of  some  current  year  of  the  tenancy. 

Thus,  an  agreement  by  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  to  quit 
at  a  quarter's  notice,  means  a  quarter's  notice  expiring  at 
the  end  of  some  year  of  the  tenancy,  *  and  the  same  rule 
applies  to  implied  as  to  express  tenancies.' 

Sec.  30.  Period  with  reference  to  which  notice  must  be 
given.— The  implied  condition  as  to  the  notice  expiring  at 
the  end  of  some  year  of  the  tenancy  renders  it  important 
that  the  time  of  commencement  of  the  tenancy  should  be 
correctly  ascertained  and  the  question,  at  what  period  a 
tenancy  began,  is  a  matter  for  the  decision  of  a  jury  upon  a 
consideration  of  all  the  facts. '  If  the  tenant  alleges  that  a 
notice  to  quit  given  to  him  does  not  correspond  with  the 
time  at  which  his  tenancy  commenced,  it  is  incumbent 
on  him  to  prove  the  true  time  of  commencement.* 

When  the  lease  provides  for  thirty  days'  notice,  or  any 
other  period,  whether  more  or  less  than  that  required  by 
law,  it  must  be  given/  but  while  less  notice  than  that 
stipulated  for  is  insufficient,  yet,  the  tenant  cannot  com- 
plain because  more  is  given.*  In  the  first  case  cited  in 
in  the  last  note,  it  was  held  that,  where  it  was  provided 
that  six  months'  notice  should  be  given,  a  notice  for 
six  lunar  months  was  good.  In  North  CaroUna,  three 
months'  notice  to  quit  must  be  given  to  a  tenant  from  year 
to  year.''  In  Missouri,  ten  days'  notice  must  be  given  by 
a  landlord  before  instituting  proceedings  to  obtain  pos- 
session.'   Where  a  person  denies  that  he  is  a  tenant,  no 


» Doe  V.  Donovan,  1  Taunt.  555 ; 
2  Camp.  78 ;  Kemp  v.  Derrett,  8 
Camp.  510.  See  Bridges  v.  Potts, 
17C.  B.,N.  S.,388. 

« Collins  V.  WeUer,  7  T.  R.  478; 
Wawn  V.  Horn,  3  M.  &  W.  333 ; 
Beale  v.  Saunders,  3  Bing.  N.  C. 
580 ;  Cater  v.  Somerville,  6  B.  &  P. 
126 ;  Potter  v.  Archer,  1  B.  &  P. 
581;  Bowes  v.  Croll,  6  E.  &  B. 
255 ;  Bishop  v.  Howard,  2  B.  &  C. 
100 ;  Spicer  v.  Lea,  11  East,  312 ; 
Plumer  v.  Nainby,  10  Q.  B.  473 ; 
Thomas  v.  Packer,  1  H.  &  N.  669. 

2  Walker  v.  Gode,  6  H.  &  N.  504. 


*  Doe  V.  Wrightman,  4  Esp. 

*  See  previous  note. 

«  Rogers  v.  Kingston-upon-HuU 
Dock  Co.,  84  L.  J.  Ch.  165 ;  Peacock 
T.  Raffan,  6  Esp.  4;  Dayenish  v. 
Moffatt,  15  Q.  B.  257 ;  Richardson 
V.  Gifford,  1  Ad.  &  El.  52. 

'  Vincent  v.  Corbin,  85  N.  C.  108. 

8  Johnson  v.  Douglass,  73  Mo. 
168,  and  this  requires  ten  days 
exclusive  of  the  day  of  service. 
Thus,  where  a  notice  is  served  on 
the  18th,  a  suit  commenced  on  the 
28th  is  premature. 


112 


Tenancy  from  Year  to  Year. 


[§31. 


notice  is  necessary  *  nor  where  the  term  expires  at  a  fix- 
ed date.'  In  Illinois,  a  month's  notice  is  required  in  case 
of  a  tenancy  from  month  to  month.' 

Sec.  31.  Admission  by  tenant.— When  a  tenant,  on  be- 
ing applied  to  respecting  the  commencement  of  his  hold- 
ing, informs  the  person  making  the  inquiry  that  it  be- 
gins on  a  certain  day,  and  notice  to  quit  on  that  day  is 
given  at  a  subsequent  time,  the  tenant  wiU  not  be  allowed 
to  set  up  a  holding  from  a  different  day.  It  makes  no 
difference  whether  the  information  so  given  proceeds 
from  mistake  or  design.*  The  mere  notice  to  quit  at  a 
certain  time,  given  by  the  landlord,  is  not,  in  itself,  evi- 
dence of  a  holding  from  that  time  ;  *  but  if  it  is  served  per- 
sonally on  the  tenant,  and  he  makes  no  objection  at  the 
time,  this  is  prima  facie  evidence  from  which  a  jury  may 
find  that  the  tenancy  commenced  at  the  period  specified 
in  the  notice.'     The  tenant,  however,  is  not  precluded 

1  Eberwine  v.  Cook,  74  Md.  877. 

«  Alcorn  V.  Morgan,  77  Md.  184. 

»  Eberlein  v.  Abel,  10  111.  App. 
626.  Where  a  term  properly  ends 
at  midnight  of  April  30,  a  notice 
to  quit  on  May  1,  is  good.  Detroit 
Savines  Bank  v.  Bellamy;  49  Mich. 
317.  Notice  to  quit,  where  premises 
are  held  from  month  to  month, 
must  be  given  a  full  month  before 
the  day  on  which  a  new  holding 
would  begin.  When  such  holding 
begins  on  the  first  of  the  month,  a 
notice  given  May  6  would  not  be 
operative  until  July  1.  Hart  v. 
Lmdley,  50  Mich.  20.  A  tenant  in 
X)Osses8ion,  who  has  attorned  to  a 
stranger  to  the  title,  is  not  entitled 
to  notice  to  quit.  Steinhauser  v. 
Kuhn,  50  Mich.  867.  Where, 
in  a  case  of  tenancy  at  will, 
to  notice  to  quit  having  been 
given,  the  landlord  and  tenant 
agree  that  the  latter  shall  leave  the 
premises  on  a  day  named,  within 
the  time  in  wliich  the  tenancy 
might  be  terminated  by  notice,  it 
is  a  valid  agreement,  changing  the 
tenancy  to  one  for  a  fixed  term, 
and  the  giving  up  by  each,  of  his 
right  to  hold  the  other  to  the  ten- 
ancy beyond  the  day  named,  is  a 
sufticient  consideration  to  sustain 
it.  Eugels  v.  MitcheU, 30Mmn.l22. 
Seven   days'  notice  to  quit  is  not 


BufiScient ,  unless  the  precise  amount 
of  rent  due  has  been  demanded 
and  its  payment  refused.  Nowell 
V.  Wentworth,  58  N.  H.  819. 
The  occupant  of  land  merely  un- 
der a  license  is  not  entitled  to  a 
notice  to  quit.  Johns  v.  Mc- 
Daniel,  60  Ikliss.  486.  After  expira- 
tion of  a  parol  tenancy  of  a 
year,  the  tenant  remained  for 
several  years,  under  a  verbal 
agreement  that  he  should  go  when 
requested  by  the  landlord.  Held, 
that  his  tenancy  was  either  a  ten- 
ancy at  will,  or  one  from  year  to 
year,  and  that,  in  either  case,  he 
was  entitled  to  a  notice  to  quit  be- 
fore a  suit  could  be  brought  against 
him  for  the  possession  or  the  prem- 
ises. Coomler  v.  Hefner,  86  Ind. 
108.  The  notice  to  leave  required 
by  Neb.  Comp.  St.  p.  648,  to  be 
served  three  aays  before  the  com- 
mencement of  an  action  for  forc- 
ible entry  and  detention,  may  be 
served  as  well  before  as  after  the 
expiration  of  the  term.  Hawley  v. 
Robeson,  14  Neb.  435. 

*  Doe  V.  Lambley,  2  Esp.  635. 

*  Per  Lord  Ellenborough,  C. 
J.,  in  Doe  v.  Forster,  13  East,  406. 

*  Doe  V.  Forster,  13  East,  405 ; 
Thomas  v.  Thomas,  2  Camp.  647; 
Doe  V.  Biggs,  %  Taunt.  109. 


CHAP,  v.]  Where  Tenant  Ke^ips  Possession.  113 

from  afterwards  insisting  on  the  insufficiency  of  the  no- 
tice. * 

Sec.  32.  Wliere  tenant  keeps  possession  after  expiration  of 
lease.—  Where  a  tenant  continues  in  possession  after  the 
expiration  of  his  lease,  without  having  entered  into  any 
new  contract,  he  holds  upon  the  former  terms  as  to  the 
time  of  quitting. '  If  he  assigns  his  interest,  the  tenancy 
of  the  assignee  wUl  also  be  held  to  commence  on  the  same 
day  as  the  original  lease.  * 

Sec.  33.  Where  tenant  enters  under  a  void  or  parol  lease.— 
A  void  lease  or  agreement,  under  which  a  tenant  has  en- 
tered and  paid  rent,  will  regulate  the  terms  on  which  the 
tenancy  subsists,  as  to  the  time  of  the  year  when  a  ten- 
ant is  to  quit.*  Parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  show 
to  what  the  lease  applies,  or  what  premises  are  embraced 
in  it,  where  there  is  no  sufficient  description  in  the  lease 
itself ;  and  this  applies  as  well  in  the  case  of  valid,  as  of  a 
void  lease.  Thus,  in  a  case  where  a  person  sold  a  quanti- 
ty of  hay  to  the  defendant,  and  receiving  payment,  made 
out  a  receipted  bill  therefor  as  follows  :  "P.,  bought  of 
H."  &c.,  and  added  thereto,  **left  at  stable  onO  street, 
where  P.  takes  possession.  Rent  to  begin  October  1, 1870, 
for  one  year  at  $150, "  it  was  held  that  this  was  a  lease,  and 
that  oral  evidence  was  admissible  to  show  that  the  demised 
premises  consisted  of  a  lot  of  land  on  which  was  a  sta- 
ble and  a  small  house  which  had  been  occupied  by  the 
groom  of  the  vendor  of  the  hay,  and  that  the  defendant 
took  possession  of  the  whole  premises  under  the  lease. ' 
Where  a  parol  lease  of  premises  is  made,  and  the  lessee 
enters  under  it,  but  during  his  entire  occupancy  repudiates 
the  lease,  yet,  having  enjoyed  the  use  of  the  pt^emises, 
the  landlord  may,  at  his  option,  seek  his  remedy  upon  the 
lease,  or  he  may  sue  for  use  and  occupation, "  and  in  the 

>  Oakapplev.  Copoii8,4T.  R.  361.  «  Doe    v.  Samuel,  5   Esp.    173, 

»  See  judgment  m  Doe  v.  Bell,  5  But  see  Doe  v.  Lines,  11  Q.  B.  402, 

T.  R.  472 ;  Roe  v.  Ward,  1  H.  Bl.  *  Riggs  v.  Bell,  5  T.  R.  471. 

96;  Doe  v.  Weller,  7  T.  R.  478.  » Eastman  v.  Perkins,  111  Mass, 

See  Doe  v.  Dobell,  1  Q.  B.  806;  30. 

Humphreys  v.  Franks,  18  C.  B.  *  Scott  y.  Hawsman,  2  McLean 

323.  (U.  S.)  180. 


J 


114  Tenancy  from  Year  to  Year.  [§  34. 

latter  case  the  amount  agreed  upon  in  the  parol  lease  as 
rent,  will  control  as  to  the  amount  of  recovery.  Gten- 
erally,  in  most  of  the  States,  a  lease  for  a  year  may  be 
made  by  parol,  and  in  some  of  the  States,  a  parol  lease 
for  three  years  is  good.  In  order  to  ascertain  whether 
a  parol  lease  for  a  certain  term  is  valid  or  not,  reference 
should  be  had  to  the  Statute  of  Frauds.  If  the  void  lease 
or  agreement  contains  no  express  stipulation  on  this  sub- 
ject, the  tenancy  from  year  to  year  wiU  be  determinable 
by  notice  to  quit,  expiring  at  the  time  of  the  original  en- 
try of  the  tenant.* 

Sec.  34.  Where  tenant  enters  on  difibrent  parts  of  demised 
premises  at  different  times.  —In  cases  where  the  incom- 
ing tenant  enters  upon  different  parts  of  the  demised  prem- 
ises at  different  times,  it  is  sufficient  to  give  half  a- 
year's  notice  to  quit  before  the  substantial  time  of  en- 
try ;■  t.  e.,  the  time  of  entry  on  the  principal  part  of  the 
premises.  In  these  cases  the  question  of  what  is  the  prin- 
cipal and  what  the  accessory,  must  depend  upon  the  rel- 
ative value  and  importance  of  the  premises  let  together, 
and  is  a  matter  for  the  decision  of  a  jury.' 

Sec.  35.  Where  tenant  enters  between  two  quarter  days.— 
Where  a  tenant  from  year  to  year,  having  entered  in  the 
middle  of  a  quarter,  pays  rent  to  the  next  quarter-day, 
and  thenceforth  from  quarter  to  quarter,  his  tenancy 
is  held  to  commence  on  the  quarter-day  after  his  entry.* 

Where  he  has  not  paid  rent  for  the  fraction  of  a  quarter, 
the  period  of  his  entry  is  taken  to  be  the  time  of  com- 
mencement of  his  tenancy. ' 

Sec.  36.  When  notice  to  qtiit  is  indispensable,  and  when 
not*— A  notice  to  quit  is  indispensable  in  all  cases  where  a 

'  See  judgment  of  Coltman,  J.,  W.  189;  Doe  v.  Hhodes,  11  M.  & 

in  Berrey  v.  Lindley,  3  M.  &  Gr.  W.  600. 

498.  >  Doe  v.  Howard,  11  East,  498, 

^See  judgment  of  Lord  Ellen-  601. 

BOROUGH,  C.  J. ,  in  Doe  v.  Watkins,  *  Doe  v.  Johnson,  6  Esp.  10 ;  Doe 

7  Ewt,  555 ;  Doe  v.  Snowden,  2  W.  v.  Stapleton,  3  C.  &  P.  275. 

Bl.  1224 ;  Doe  v.  Spence,  6  East,  *  Doe  y.  Matthews,  11  C.  B.  675. 
120,  m ;  Doe  v.  Hughes,  7  M.  & 


CHAP,  v.]      Notice  to  Quit  Indispensable.  115 

tenancy  from  year  to  year  exists,  unless  expressly 
waived  by  a  writii^  under  the  hands  of  the  parties,  and 
the  fact  that  the  estate  comes  into  the  possession  of  an 
infant  as  reversioner,  does  not  obviate  the  necessity  of 
giving  the  usual  notice, '  and  the  fact  that  the  tenant 
paid  rent  to  an  infant,  during  his  minority,  or '  that  he 
went  into  possession  under  a  lease  given  by  an  infant, 
does  not  enable  the  infant,  upon  attaining  his  majority, 
to  maintain  ejectment,  unless  the  usual  notice  has  first 
been  given.'  The  husband  of  a  feme  covert,  must  give 
the  usual  notice  to  quit,  before  he  can  maintain  eject- 
ment against  such  a  tenant,  even  though  the  tenant 
went  into  possession  under  a  lease  executed  by  the  wife 
alone,  and  without  the  husband's  assent,'  and  an  heir, 
executor,  or  administrator,  after  the  death  of  the  lessor 
or  lessee  must,  in  order  to  terminate  the  tenancy,  give 
such  notice  as  the  lessor  or  lessee  would  have  been  re- 
quired to  give,'  and  so  must  the  assignor  of  the  rever- 
sion'or  of  the  term.'  A  notice  to  quit,  however,  need 
not  be  given  to  terminate  a  tenancy,  the  duration  of 
which  is  limited  in  the  lease  itself,  as,  if  a  lease  is  given 
for  one,  two,  or  any  number  of  years,  the  parties  are 
both  apprised  of  the  determination  of  the  estate,  and  it 
expires  by  eflBux  of  time,'  nor  where  the  tenancy  if  to  be 
determined  upon  the  happening  of  a  certain  event,  as, 
■where  a  tenant  agrees  to  quit,  if  the  premises  are  sold 
during  the  term,  notice  only  of  the  fact  of  a  bona  fide 

•  Baker  t.  White,  3  T.  R.  159 ;         '  CaBtleton  v.  Samuel,  5  Esp.  178 ; 
Hannine  v.  Deuer.  85  O.  B.  (Ont.t      ArmitaKe.  ante.    If  the  rule  was 

f  would  ^n- 


ict  whether  the  tenancy 
om  week  to  week,  &c., 
'  there  ia  an  eipresa  or 
itract  between  the  par- 
lotice  shall  be  given. 
>arbv,  1  T.  R.  162. 
V.  Saver,  8  Camp.  8; 
kee,8^8t,S58;  Hend- 
mon,  5  Tex.  248;  Mea- 
AmiBtronfr.  1  T.  R.  54; 
T.  MaxweU,  3Cr.  &M. 
11 T.  Inglia,  8  Taunt  51. 


116 


Tenancy  fkom  Year  to  Year. 


[§36. 


sale  is  necessary/  or  if  a  lease  is  given  so  long  as  the 
landlord  lives,*  or  ^*  during  the  continuance  of  the  part- 
nership between  A  and  B/' '  or  so  long  as  the  tenant  re- 
remains  in  the  emploj^-  of  B. ;  *  in  all  these  cases,  the  estate 
terminates  upon  the  happening  of  the  event  specified.  So, 
even  where  a  tenant  enters  under  an  agreement  for  a  lease 
for  a  certain  time,  and  no  lease  is  ever  executed,  his  term 
expires  at  the  end  of  the  term  for  which  the  lease  was 
agreed  to  be  given,  *  but  if  the  agreement  is  for  a  lease  for  a 
certain  definite  term,  as,  for  twenty-one  years,  determin- 
able at  the  end  of  seven  or  fourteen  years  by  notice  to  quit, 
unless  such  notice  is  given,  the  estate  continues  for  the  full 
term,*  but  a  notice  once  given  is  good,  althousjh  the  ten- 
ant has  been  permitted  to  remain  for  a  year  after  it  was 
given, ^  unless  the  landlord  accepts  rent  for  the  period  of 
occupancy  specified  in  the  notice.*  As  previously  stated, 
when  the  tenant  goes  in  under  a  lease  for  a  definite 
term,  as  for  a  week,  month,  quarter,  or  a  year,  his  estate 
ceases  without  notice,  when  the  term  is  ended,"  but  if 
he  holds  over  with  the  landlord's  assent,  which  may  be 
impUed  from  his  silence,  he  becomes  a  tenant  from  year 
to  year,  and  the  usual  notice  becomes  necessary  to  termi- 
nate the  new  tenancy. "  Notice  is  not  necessary,  in  the 
absence  of  any  local  custom,  or  of  a  statue,  in  the  case 
of  a  weekly,  monthly  or  quarterly  tenancy,  as  in  such 
cases  the  tenancy  is  regarded  as  for  a  week,  month  or 
quarter,  rather  than  as  a  tenancy  from  week  to  week, 


'Millan  v.  Kephart,  18  Gratt. 
(Va.)  1.  See  also  Bithell  v.  Blen- 
cowe,  3  M.  &  G.  119. 

''Broomfield  v.  Smith,  6  East, 
530. 

aColnaghi  v.  Black,  8  C.  &  P. 
464. 

*Huges  V.  Corbett,  9  C.  &  P.  494 ; 
Butler  V.  Rice,  24  N.  Y.  S.  C.  406. 

« Stockwell  V.  Marks,  17  Me.  455 ; 
Tress  v.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  36 ;  Tilt 
V.  Stratton,  3  C.  &  P.  164 ;  Berrey 
V.  Lindley,  3  M.  &G.  498 ;  Jackson 
V.  McLeod,  12  John.  (N.  Y.)  182 ; 
Young  V.  Smith,  28  Mo.  65  ;  Mosh- 
ier  V.  Reding,  12  Me.  478 ;  DonneU 
V.  Johnson,  17  Pick.  (Mass.)  263. 

•  Brown  V.  Trumper,  26  Beav.ll ; 


Chapman  v.  Towner,  6  M.  &  "W. 
100. 

'  Boggs  V.  Black,  1  Binn.  (Penn.) 
333. 

»  Collins  V.  Carty,  6  Cush.  (Mass.) 
415 ;  Doe  v.    Batten,   Camp.    243. 

»  Preble  v.  Hay,  32  Me.  456  •  Lith- 
gow  V.  Moody,  35  id.  314 ;  Logan 
V.  Herron,  8  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  459 ; 
Hamit  v.  Lawrence,  2  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  366 ;  Clapp  v.  Paine,  18  Me. 
264;  Allen  V.  Jaquish,  21  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  628.  As  to  weekly  ten- 
ancies, see  Huffell  v.  Armistead,  7 
C.  &  P.  56 ;  Wilson  v.  Abbott,  3  B. 
&  C.  88 :  Towne  v.  Campbell,  3  C. 
B.  920. 

»o  Moshier  v.  Reding,  12  Me.  478. 


CHAP,  y.] 


Form  of  Notice. 


117 


&C.*  Notice  is  not  necessary  when  a  mortgagor  holds 
possession  after  the  mortgagee  is  entitled  thereto; 
in  such  case  the  mortgagee  or  those  claiming  under  him, 
may*  enter  without  either  notice  or  demand  of  pos- 
session, 'and  in  the  absence  of  any  statute  to  that  effect, 
such  is  the  case  in  the  case  of  a  tenancy  at  will "  or  by 
sufferance.*  A  mere  intruder  is  not  entitled  to  notice,* 
nor  one  who  claims  to  hold  by  title  paramount,"  or  who 
denies  the  landlord's  title.  ^ 

Sec.  37.  Form  of  notice.— Where  any  doubt  exists  as  to 
the  period  at  which  the  current  year  of  the  tenancy  ex- 
pires, the  notice  to  quit  may  be  expressed  in  general 
terms,  requiring  the  tenant  to  quit  at  the  end  of  the  cur- 
rent year  of  his  tenancy,  which  shall  expire  next  after 
the  end  of  one  half -yeajr  from  the  date  of  the  notice." 
It  is  not  essential  that  a  notice  to  quit  should  be  in  writ- 
ing,* or  that  it  should  state  to  whom  possession  is  to  be  de- 
livered up."  It  must,  however,  be  expressed  with  rea- 
sonable certainty,  not  giving  an  option  to  the  tenant  to 


>  Wilson  V.Abbott,  ante;  Huffell 
V.  Armistead,  ante.  Where  the 
tenancy  is  really  from  week  to 
week,  &c.,  it  is  certainly  much 
safer  to  give  reasonable  notice, 
which  never  need  to  exceed  the 
period  of  tenancy.  Jones  v.  Mills, 
10  C.  B.  N.  8.  788.  If  a  custom  to 
give  notice  in  the  case  of  such  ten- 
ancies prevails,  it  must  be  followed. 
Henderson  v.  Charwick,  Peake,  6 ; 
Tvler  V.  Seed,  Skin.  649.  In  Huf- 
feU  V.  Armistead,  7  C.  &  P.  56,  it 
was  held  that  a  weekly  tenant, 
whose  tenancy  c#mmenced  on 
Saturday,  might  leave  without  no- 
tice on  the  succeeding  Saturday, 
but  generally,  if  a  weekly  tenant 
holds  over  into  a  fresh  week,  he  is 
liable  for  the  rent  for  such  w^eek. 
When  a  notice  in  the  case  of  such 
tenancies  is  necessary,  it  must  be 
of  the  duration  of  the  term,  and 
expire  on  the  last  day  thereof. 
Jones  V.  Mills,  ante ;  Perry  v.  Haz- 
el!, 1  Esp.  94 ;  Finlayson  v.  Bayley, 
6  C.  &  P.  67. 

'  Garrod  v.  OUey,  12  Ad.  &  EL 
481 ;  Roby  v.  Maisey,  8  B.  &  C. 


767 ;  Wilkinson  v.  Goodier,  10  Q. 
B.  557  ;  Fisher  v.  Giles,  5  Bing. 
421 ;  SneU  v.  Tom,  4  Q.  B.  615. 
*Gallaway  v.  Herert,  4  T.  R. 
680;  Jacobs  V.  Phillips,  10  Q.  B. 
130;  Brane  v.  Rawlms,  10  East, 
261 .  See  chap,  on  Tenants  at  Will, 
ante. 

*  Leeson  v.  Sayer,  8  Camp.  8 ; 
Moore  v.  Lawder,  1  Stark.  380. 
See  Chap,  on  Tenants  by  Sufferance. 

*  Knight  V.  Quigley,  2  Camp.  205. 
•Putland  V.  HUder,  2  B.  «fc  Aid. 

782. 

'Ramsey  v.  Henderson,  (Mo.)  10 
West'n.  Rep.  33  ;  Pavton  v.  Steth,  5 
Pit.  (U.  S.)  485 ;  Willson  v.  Wat- 
kins,  3  id.  48  ;  Smith  v.  Ogg,  Shaw 
16  Cal.  88 ;  Bolton  v.  Landers,  27 
id.  104. 

8  Doe  V.  Batler,  2  Esp.  589;  Doe 
V.  Steel,  8  Camp.  117;  Doe  v. 
Smith,  5  Ad.  &  El.  850 ;  Doe  v. 
Timothy,  2  C.  &  K.  851 ;  Hanchett 
V.  Whitney,  1  Vt.  315. 

•Doe  V.  Crick,  5  Esp.  196 ;  Bird  v. 
Defonvielle,  2  C.  &  K.  415 ;  Roe  v. 
Pierce,  2  Camp.  96. 

"  Doe  V.  Foster,  3  C.  B.  215. 


L 


118 


Tenancy  from  Year  to  Year. 


[§38. 


quit  or  to  do  something  else/  A  notice  to  quit  on  one  of 
two  days  is  good,  if  served  six  months  before  the  day  of 
which  the  tenancy  commenced/  An  error  in  the  de- 
scription of*  the  premises  will  not  invaUdate  the  notice  if 
the  person  to  whom  it  is  given  has  not  been  mislead  by 
it/  and  a  mistake  in  the  Christian  name  of  the  tenant 
will  not  be  fatal  if  the  notice  is  kept  by  him  without  ob- 
jection.* A  notice  to  quit  a  part  only  of  premises  leased 
together,  is  void. ' 

Sec.  38  By  and  to  whom  notioe  may  be  given.— The  no- 
tice may  in  all  cases  be  given  by  either  landlord  or  ten- 
ant, or  the  person  legally  entitled  to  the  reversion  or  the 
term.  The  notion,  thrown  out  by  Lord  Mansfield,  of  a 
a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  in  which  the  lessor  binds 
himseK  not  to  give  notice  to  quit,  has  been  long  ex- 
ploded,' but  it  maybe  stipulated,  that,  upon  a  particular 
event,  the  lessee  may  quit  without  notice.^  But,  if  the 
tenant  stipulates  that  he  will  leave  at  any  time  when  re- 
quired to  do  so  by  the  landlord,  only  a  tenancy  at  will 
exists,  although  the  lease  expressly  purports  to  be  from 


»See  Doe  v.  Goldwin,  2  Q.  B. 
146.  But  see  Roberts  v.  Hayward, 
8  C.  A;  P.  482. 

«  Doe  V.  Wrightman,  4  Esp.  6. 

»Doe  V.  Cox,  4  Esp.  185;  Doe  v. 
WUkinson,  12  Ad.  &  El.  748. 

*Doe  V.  Spiller,  6  Esp.  70. 

•Doe  v.  Archer,  14  East  245.  A 
notice  to  quit,  given  by,  or  on  be 
half  of,  the  landlord,  may  be  in 
the  following  form,  the  words  be- 
Ween  brackets  being  used  when 
the  notice  is  by  an  agent : — 
To  Mr.  C.  D. 

I  hereby  [as  (went  for  and  on  6©- 
half  of  Mr.  E.  Jr.,  your  landlord] 
give  you  notice  to  quit  and  deliver 
up  possession  of  the  premises,  situ- 
ate at ,  in  the  county  of , 

which  you  now  hold  of  me  [him] 

on  the day    of ^next,  or  at 

the  expiration  of  the  year  of  your 
tenancy  thereof,  which  shall  ex- 
pire next  after  the  end  of  one  half- 
year  from  tiie  date  of  this  notice. 

Dotted  the day  of ,  18—. 

E.  F. 


[R  8.  agent  for  the  said  E,  F.] 
Hanchett  v.  Whitney,  ante. 

'A  notice  to  quit,  given  by,  or  on 
behalf  of,  the  tenant,  may  be  in 
the  following  form,  the  words  be- 
tween brackets  being  used  when 
the  notioe  is  by  an  agent : — 

To  Mr.  E.  F. 

I  hereby  [as  agent  for  and  on  be- 
half  of  Mr.  C.  D.,  your  tenant] 
give  you  notice  that  on  the-^— day, 

of next,  I  shall  [he  will]  quit 

and  deliver  up  possession  of  ihe 
premises  situate  at ,  in  the  coun- 
ty of ,  which  I  [fve]  now  hold 

[holds]  of  you  as  tenant  thereof. 

Dated    the day    of ,    18—. 

C.  D. 

JR.  S.,  agent  for  the  said  C.  D,] 

The  form  is  not  essential,  but  in 
substance,  a  notice  should  contain 
all  that  is  embraced  in  the  forms 
given. 

•  Per  Lawrence,  J. ,  in  Warner 
v.  Browne,  8  East,  167. 

^  Bethell  v.  Blencowe.  8  M.  &  Gr. 
119. 


CHAP,  v.] 


Giving  Noticb. 


119 


year  to  year/  Where  a  tenant  stipulates  that  he  will 
quit  upon  proper  notice,,  in  case  the  landlord  shall  sell  the 
premises,  the  landlord  is  not  bound  to  give  the  usual  le- 
gal notice  required  in  the  case  of  tenancies  from  year  to 
year,  as  it  will  be  presumed  that  the  parties,  by  the 
words  "proper  notice,"  intended  to  waive  the  legal  no- 
tice, and  any  notice  that  distinctly  informs  the  tenant 
of  the  sale  is  "proper  notice,"  without  reference  to  its 
form  or  duration.  Beasonable  notice  as  to  duration  is 
all  that  can  be  required  in  such  a  case,  and  as  to  what 
is  reasonable  notice,  must  depend  upon  the  circumstances 
of  the  case,  as  the  nature,  character,  and  purpose  of  the 
occupancy.  *  The  notice  should  be  given  to  the  person 
who  is  legally  entitled  to  the  reversion  or  the  term."  The 
notice  required,  may  be  given  by  either  party,  or  by 
their  agent,  or  by  any  person  for  the  time  being  legally 
entitled  to  the  reversion,  or  the  term,*  but  where  it  is 
given  by  an  agent,  or  by  any  other  person  than  the  par- 
■^ties  themselves,  their  authority  should  be  estabUshed.* 
•An  executor,  heir,  administrator,  devisee  or  assignee  of 
:  either  party  may  give  the  notice,  *  and,  after  notice  is 
given  by  a  person  lawfully  empowered  to  give  it,  any 
subsequent  owner  may  avail  himself  of  it.^  A  notice 
given  by  one  of  several  executors  or  administrators, 
is  good,*  but  one  joint  tenant,'  or  tenant  in  common," 
cannot,  by  a  notice  given  in  his  own  name,  give  a  notice 


>  Harrison  v.  Middleton,  11  Gratt. 
(Va.)  527. 

*  In  Millan  t.  Kephart,  18  Gratt. 
(Va.)  1,  there  was  a  lease  under 
which  the  tenant  entered,  contain- 
ing a  stipulation  as  stated  in  the 
text.  The  lease  had  been  destroyed 
before  action  was  brought.  The 
plaintiff  sold  the  premises  and  noti- 
fied the  tenant  of  the  sale.  The  court 
held  that  it  was  for  the  jury  to  say 
what  the  intention  of  the  parties 
was,  and  that  for  the  purpose  of 
ascertaining  such  intent,  the  whole 
contract,  and  not  this  provision 
merely,  should  be  considered,  and 
that  parol  evidence  as  to  what  the 
contract  was,  might  be  given. 
Where  the  tenant  stipulates  that 


he  will  quit  upon  notice  in  a  cer- 
tain event,  the  notice  will  not  be 
good  unless  it  states  that  such 
event  has  happened.  Sloan  v. Cant- 
well,  5  Caldw.  (Tenn.)571. 
*Cole  on  Ejectment,  85. 

•  Ck)le  on  Ejectment,  42. 

«  Fisher  V.  CutheU,  5  East,  491 ; 
Mann  v.  Walters,  10  B.  &  C.  626. 

•  Cole  on  Ejectment,  42. 

'  Higgs  V.  Terry,  4  Ad.  &  El. 
274 ;  Egremont  v.  Forwood,  3  Q. 
B.  627. 

®  Cole  on  Ejectment,  48. 

•  Whayman  v.  Chaplin,  8  Taunt. 
120. 

»o  Robertson  v.  Gardiner,  12  C. 
B.  323 ;  Cutting  v.  Derby,  2  W.  BL 
1075. 


120 


Tenancy  fkom  Tear  to  Tear. 


[§38. 


that  will  be  operative,  except  as  to  his  own  share,'  but, 
if  the  notice  is  professedly  given  for  himself  and  his  co- 
tenants,  it  eflfectually  ends  the  tenancy.*  A  receiver 
appointed  by  a  Court  of  Chancery,  or  by  an  individual 
**with  general  authority,"  may  give  the  notice.' but  a 
mere  receiver  of  rents,*  or  one  appointed  for  a  special 
purpose,  or  with  only  a  limited  authority,  has  no  such 
power.*  Where  notice  is  given  by  an  agent,  it  should 
be  given  in  the  name  of  the  principal,  or  expressly  on  his 
behalf.* 

Sec.  39.  Agents.— A  notice  to  quit,  given  by  the  land- 
lord, rpust  be  such  as  the  tenant  may  safely  act  on  at 
the  time  of  receiving  it ; '  that  is  one  which  is,  in  fact, 
and  which  the  tenant  has  reason  to  believe  to  be,  then 
binding  on  the  landlord.*  A  notice  to  quit,  given  with- 
out authority  will  not  be  made  valid  by  the  subsequent 
adoption  or  ratification  of  the  landlord.'  It  is  not  es- 
sential to  the  validity  of  a  notice  to  quit,  given  by  a  gen- 
eral agent,  that  his  agency  should  appear  on  the  face  of 
the  document.  There  is,  however,  a  distinction  in  this 
respect  between  a  general  agent  and  one  having  a  special  or 
Umited  authority,'"  and  in  the  case  of  the  latter,  it  would 
appear,  that  a  notice  is  bad,  if  it  does  not  state  that  it  is 
given  by  authority  or  in  the  name  of  the  principal." 

A  cestui  que  trust,  who  has  been  permitted  for  many 
years  by  the  trustees  to  have  the  entire  management  of 
the  trust  estates,"  and  a  receiver  appointed  by  the  Court  of 
Chancery,  with  a  general  authority  to  let  lands  to  ten- 
ants from  year  to  year,"  are  deemed  general  agents, 


^  See  last  two  notes. 

«  Alford  V.  Vickery,  C.  &  M. 
280 ;  Aslin  v.  Summersett,  1  B.  & 
Ad.   137 ;  Cole  on  Ejectment.  44. 

^  Manners  v.  Mizem,  2  M.  &  R. 
56 ;  Wilkinson  v.  Colley,  5  Burr. 
2697;  Marsack  v.  Read,  12  East, 
67. 

^Pearse  v.  Boulter,  2  F.  &  F. 
133  ;  Rhodes  t.  Robinson,  8  Bing. 
N.  C.  677 ;  Hasler  v.  Lemoyne,  5 
C.  B.  N.  S.  550. 

*  Mann.  v.  Walters,  ante. 

*  Buron  v.  Penman,  2  Exchq. 
188. 


'  Doe  V.  Goldwin,  2  Q.  B.  143 ; 
Doe  V.  Walters,  10  B.   &  C.  626. 

^  Judgment  in  Jones  v.  Phipps, 
L.  R.  3  Q.  B.  572. 

•  Doe  V.  Gk)ldwin,  ante. 

»o  Jones  V.  Phipps.  L.  R.,  3  Q.  B. 
572. 

"  Doe  V.  Goldwin,  2  Q.  B.  148 ; 
10  L.  J.,  Q.  B.  275.  See  Judgment 
in  Jones  v.  Phipps,  L.  R.,  3  Q.  B. 
572. 

"Jones  V.  Phipps,  L.  R.,  3  Q. 
B.  567. 

"  Wilkinson  v.  CoUey,  5  Burr. 
2694 ;  Doe  v.    Read,    12  East  57. 


CHIP,  v.]  To  "Whom  Given.  121 

and  may  give  valid  notices  to  quit,  in  their  own  names, 
A  notice  to  quit,  signed  by  one  of  two  joint  tenants  on 
behalf  of  the  other,  is  sufficient  to  put  an  end  to  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year  as  to  both,' 

An  assignee  of  the  reversion  may  avail  himself  of  a  no- 
tice to  quit  given  by  the  preceding  owner.' 

Sec.  40.  To  whom  giTen.— A  notice  to  quit  proceeding 
from  the  landlord  must  be  served  upon  the  original  ten- 
ant. Since  there  is  no  privity  of  contract  between  the 
landlord  and  under-tenant,  the  landlord  cannot  entitle 
himself  to  recover  against  such  under-tenant  by  giving 
a  notice  to  quit,  in  his  own  name,' 

Sec.  41.  Mode  of  service.— It  is  not  necessary  that  the 
notice  should  be  directed  to  the  tenant,  if  it  can  be  proved 
to  have  been  delivered  to  him  in  proi>er  time,*  It  may 
be  either  served  upon  him  personally,  or  upon  his  attor- 
ney ;'  or  it  may  be  left  with  his  wife'  or  servant  at  his 
dweUing-honse,'  but  in  this  case  an  explanation  of  the 
nature  of  the  notice  should  be  given  at  the  time  when  it 
is  Ber\'ed,'  The  service  of  a  notice  upon  the  demised 
premises  on  one  of  two  tenants,  holding  under  a  joint 
demise,  is  presumptive  evidence  that  the  notice  reached 
the  other,'  A  notice  put  under  the  door  of  the  tenant's 
house  will  be  valid  if  it  can  be  proved  to  have  come  to 
the  tenant's  hands  half  a  year  before  the  expiration  of 
the  current  year  of  the  tenancy."    WTiere  a  corporation 

'  Doe  T,  Summersett,  1  B.  & 
Ad,  135 ;  Doe  v.  Uuline.  3  Man, 
&  Ey.  434;  Doe  v.  Hughes,  7  M. 
&  W,    189.  141, 

^riRhtman,  4  Eap,  5, 
r.  Onfcley.  10  C.  B.  25. 
■  V,   Blielton,   v.   Vee. 

Mareh,  4  T.  R.  404. 

V.  Lucas.  f>  Eep.   153; 
j-k,  9  Dowl.  208. 
WatkinB,  7  East,   551. 
:rick,5EBp.  IB*. 
r.  Vickerr,  Car.  &  W. 
le  V.  HaU,  8  M,  &  Or. 


322 


Tenancy  from  Year  to  Tear. 


[§42. 


is  the,  tenant,  the  notice  to  quit  may  be  served  on  one  of 
its  oflScers.* 

If  the  notice  proceeds  from  the  tenant,  it  should  be 
given  to  his  immediate  landlord  or  to  the  attorney  or 
agent  of  such  landlord  authorized  to  receive  such  notices, 
and  not  to  a  mere  collector  of  rents.'  When  a  notice  is 
sent  by  post  to  the  landlord  or  his  agent,  it  seems  that 
the  dav  on  which  the  letter  is  delivered  will  be  consider- 
ed  as  the  time  at  which  the  notice  is  given.  *  It  is  sufficient 
if  the  notice  sent  by  post  can  be  proved  to  have  reached 
the  office  of  the  person  on  whom  it  is  served  at  any  time 
during  the  last  day  on  which  service  can  be  made,  al- 
though after  business  hours.*  At  the  time  of  service  of 
a  notice  to  quit,  a  memorandum  of  the  fact  of  such  service 
should  be  endorsed  upon  a  duplicate  of  the  notice.' 

Sec.  42.  Waiver  of  notice  to  quit.— If ,  after  the  expira- 
tion of  a  notice  to  quit,  the  parties  by  their  acts  unmis- 
takably acknowledge  a  subsisting  tenancy  between  them, 
the  notice  will  be  deemed  to  be  waived.* 

Sec.  43.  Second  notice  to  quit.— A  second  notice  to  quit 
is  considered  an  acknowledgment  of  a  tenancy,"  unless, 
under  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  the  person  to  whom 
it  was  given  would  not  understand  it  as  waiving  the 
former  notice.* 

Sec.  44.  Acceptance  of  rent.  Holding  over.— A  landlord 
may  waive  a  notice  to  quit  by  accepting  either  personally,* 
or  by  an  agent  specially  authorized  to  receive  it,"  rent 
due  for  the  occupation  of  premises  after  the  expiration  of 
the  notice, "  or  by  distraining  for  rent  accniing  thereafter. " 


>  Doe  V.  Woodman,  8  Eaat,228. 
'Pearse  v.  Boxilter,  2  F.  &  F. 
188. 

*  See  Reg  v.  Slawstone,  18  Q.  B. 
388;  Reg.  v.  Recorder  of  Rich- 
mond, E.  B.  &  E.  253. 

*  See  PapiUon  v.  Brunton,  5  H. 
&  N.  518,  522. 

*  See  Doe  v.  Turford,  8  B.  &  Ad. 
890  ;  Doe  v.  Somerton,  7  Q.  B.  58. 

«  See  Doe  v.  Palmer,  16  East,  58 
6. 

^  Per  Lord  Ellenborouqh,  in 
Doe  V.  Palmer,  16  East,  56. 

*  See     judgment    in    Doe    v. 


\ 


Hmnphreys,  2  East,  240 ;  Doe  t. 
Steele,  3  Camp,  117. 

» Goodright  v.  Cordwent,  6  T.  R 
219. 

"  See  Doe  v.  Calvert,  2  Camp. 
887. 

Goodright  v.    Cordwent,    ante. 

"See  Doe  v.  Batten,  Cowp.  243; 
Collins  V.  Canty,  6  Cush.  (Mass.) 
415. 

"  Zouch  V.  Willingale,  1  H.  Bl. 
311.  The  landlord  cannot  distrain 
from  such  rent,  unless  a  new  ten^ 
ancy  has  been  created ;  ante,  pp 
111,  181. 


CHAP,  v.] 


By  Verbal  Disoladieb. 


123 


A  mere  demand  of  rent,  due  after  the  expiration  of  the 
notice,  *  or  a  holding  over  or  accidental  detention  of  the 
key  by  the  tenant,  after  that  event,  does  not  necessarily 
operate  as  a  waiver  of  the  notice. ' 

When  a  valid  notice  to  quit  is  given  by  landlord  or 
tenant,  the  party  to  whom  it  is  given  is  entitled  to  count 
upon  it,  and  it  cannot  be  withdrawn  without  the  consent 
of  both  parties.  *  If  such  consent  is  given,  there  is  a  new 
agreement  between  the  parties,  and  a  new  tenancy  is 
created  which  exists  only  under  that  new  agreement ; 
consequently  a  guarantor  of  the  rent  under  the  original 
tenancy  is  not  liable  for  rent  which  became  due  after  the 
time  when  the  notice  would  have  expired.  *  An  agree- 
ment by  the  landlord,  at  the  request  of  the  tenant,  to 
suspend  the  exercise  of  his  rights  under  the  notice  to  quit 
will  not  operate  as  a  waiver  of  the  notice,  or  as  license  to 
the  tenant  to  be  on  the  premises  otherwise  than  subject 
to  the  landlord's  right  of  acting  on  such  notice  if  neces- 
sary.' 

Sec.  45.  By  verMl  disolaimer.  What  amounts  to  a  dis- 
claimer.— If  a  tenant  from  year  to  year,  verbally  or  in 
writing,  unequivocally  denies  the  title  of  his  landlord, 
and  renounces  his  character  of  tenant,  either  by  setting 
up  title  in  another,  or  by  claiming  title  in  himself,  *  the 
tenancy  may  be  determined  by  the  landlord,  without  any 


>  Blight  V.  Dennet,  18  C.  B.  178. 

•  Jenner  v.  Clegg,  1  Moo.  &  Rob. 
218,  215 ;  Gray  v.  Bompaa,  11  C. 
B. ,  N.  S.  520.    See  Jones  v.  Shears. 

Ad.  &  El.  882. 

*  See  Doe  V.  MUward,  3M.  &  W. 
828. 

*  Tayleur  v.  WUdin,  L.  R.  8  Ex. 
808,805;  BIyth  v.  Dennett,  18  C. 
B.  178. 

•  Whiteacre  v.  Symonds,  10  East, 
16. 

•Per  Tmdal,  C.  J.,  in  Doe  v. 
Cooper,  1  M.  &  Or.  189.  See  Jones 
V.  Mills,  IOC.  B.,  N.  S.  788;  Doe 
V.  Cawdor,  1  Cr.,  M,  &  R.  898 ; 
Huntv.  Allgood,  10  C.  B.,  N.  S. 
258.  While  a  tenant  is  in  posses- 
sion in  subordination  to  the  land- 
lord's title  he  cannot  deny  the 
landlord's  title,    and   the  tneory 


upon  which  this  doctrine  rests  is, 
that  he  is  estopped,  which  the 
landlord  reposes  upon  the  eecurity 
of  the  tenancy,  believing  the  pos- 
session of  the  tenant  to  be  his  own. 
from  denying  that  title.  But,  if, 
when  the  term  is  ended,  the  ten- 
ant distinctly  jdisclaims  holding 
under  the  landlord's  title,  and  so 
notifies  him,  and  the  landlord  per- 
mits him  to  remain  in  possession 
without  any  attempt  to  maintain 
his  title  to  the  premises  until  the 
statute  of  limitations  has  run,  he 
cannot  recover  possession  either 
from  the  tenant  or  the  grantees, 
Wilson  v.Watkins,  8 Pet.  (U.  S.)50. 
The  notice  terminates  the  term 
and  from  that  time  the  tenant  is  a 
wrong  doer. 


12i 


Tenancy  from  Tear  to  Year. 


[§45- 


notice  to  quit.*  It  seems  that  whether  a  particular  ex- 
pression does  or  does  not  amount  to  a  disclaimer,  is  a 
question  for  the  decision  of  the  jury.'  An  omission  to 
acknowledge  the  landlord  as  such,  by  requesting  further 
information,  will  not  be  enough ;  nor  will  a  mere  refusal 
to  pay  rent.  A  refusal  to  deliver  possession,  or  a  declara- 
tion by  the  tenant  that  he  will  continue  to  hold  posses- 
sion, cannot  have  that  effect,  at  a  time  when  the  landlord 
has  no  right  to  claim  it.'  A  tenant  cannot  by  disclaim- 
ery,  or  by  mere  words  denying  the  landlord's  title,  and 
asserting  title  in  himself,  reUeve  himself  from  the 
tenancy,  or  in  that  manner  open  the  way  for  the  assertion 
of  an  adverse  possession,*  as  the  possession  of  the  tenant 
is  the  possession  of  the  landlord  and  enures  to  his  title 
and  benefit "  and  is  presumed  to  continue  in  subordination 
to  the  landlord's  title,  not  only  during  the  term  named  in 
the  lease,  but  also  until,  twenty  years  after  the  term  is 
ended,  during  which  no  rent  has  been  paid  or  other  act 
done  recognizing  the  landlord's  title.  This  presumption 
may  be  rebutted  however,  but  to  have  the  effect  of  putting 
the  statute  in  operation,  the  tenant  must  surrender  the 
possession  to  the  landlord,  or  do  some  other  act  of  an 
equally  decisive  character,  and  bring  home  to  him  knowl- 
edge of  the  adverse  claim.* 

A  notice  to  quit  is  regarded  as  unnecessary  in  a  case 
where  the  tenant  denies  the  landlord's  title,  because  in 
such  a  case  he  is  treated  as  denying  the  tenancy.^  As  to 
whether  the  tenant  has  done  or  said  that  which  amounts 


»Doe  V.  Whittick,    Gow,  195; 

i'udgment  in  Doe  v.  Pasquali, 
*eake,  N.  P.  C,  197  ;  Doe  v.  Frowd, 
4  Bing.  557  ;  Doe  v.  Grubb,  10  B. 
&  C.  816 ;  Doe  v.  Rollings,  4  C.  B. 
188 ;  Doe  v.  Thompson,  5  A.  &  A. 
532 ;  Doe  v.  Evans,  9  M.  &  W.  48 ; 
Doe  V.  Gower,  17  Q.  B.  589 :  Bolton 
V.  Landers,  27  Cal.  104 ;  Tuttle  v. 
Reynolds,  1  Vt.  80;  Brown  v. 
Keller,  32  111.  151;  Jackson  v. 
French,  3  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  387. 

« See  Doe  v.  Long,  9  C.  &  P. 
773. 

^  See  judgment  in  Doe  v.  Stanion, 
IM.  &  W.  695;  Jones  v.  Mill, 
ante. 


*  DeLancey  v.  Ganong,'  9  N.  Y. 

^  Jackson  v.  Davis,  5  (Sow,  (N.Y.) 
129  ;  W^hiting  v.  Edmunds,  94  N. 
Y.  314 ;  Sands  v.   Hughes,  53  id. 
293. 

«Townev.  Butterfield,  97  Mass. 
105;  Thayer  v.  Society  &c.,  20 
Penn.  St,  62 ;  Jackson  v.  Stiles,  1 
Cow.  N.  Y.  575. 

'  Calvert  v.  Frowd,  4  Bing.  560 ; 
Jeffrus  V.  Whittick,  Gow.  195; 
Phillips  V.  RolUngs,  4  C.  B.  188. 
Li  such  a  case,  by  denying  the 
landlord's  title,  the  tenant  is  es- 
topped from  setting  up  a  tenancy. 
Cole  on  Ejectment,  41. 


CHAP,  v.] 


By  VEEBAL   DiaCLAIMEB. 


125 


to  a  disclaimer  is  a  mixed  question  of  law  and  fact. 
When  the  facts  ai-e  admitted,  it  ia  purely  a  question  of 
law,  and  the  essential  point  is,  whether  what  was  said 
or  done  amounts  to  a  denial  of  the  existence  of  any  ten- 
ancy between  him  and  the  landlord.  If  it  does,  no  notice 
is  necessary.'  What  wiis  said  or  done,  must  amount  to 
a  renunciation  of  the  tenancy,  either  by  setting  up  title 
in  himself,  or  claiming  to  hold  under  another.'  The  fact 
that  the  tenant  did  not  intend  to  repudiate  the  tenancy, 
will  not  protect  him,  if  such  was  the  legal  effect  of  what 
he  said  or  did.*  Thus,  in  an  Enghsh  case,*  it  was  held 
that  a  refusal  to  pay  rent  to  a  person  legally  entitled  there- 
to, unless  such  person  proved  his  right  to  the  rent,  amount- 
ed to  a  disclaimer.  But  such  would  not  be  the  case  if  a 
person  claimed  the  reversion  under  a  will  which  was  being 
contested." 


'  Jonta  y.  Mills,  ante ;  Lewis  y. 
Cawdor,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  388; 
WUliama  t,  Pasqimlli,  Peake,  258 ; 
Hunt  V.  AUgood,  10  C.  B.  N.  8. 
203 ;  Williama  v.  Cooper,  1  M.  & 
Q.  135  ;  Tuttle  v.  Iteynoids,  1  Vt. 
80  ;  Brown  v.  EeUer,  82  HI.  151  ; 
Bolton  T.  Landers,  27  CbI.  104; 
Bennett  v.  Long,   8    C.    &  P.  773. 

'  Gray  V.  Stanion,  1  M.  &  W. 
685 ;  Jones  v.  Mills,  ante. 

'  Curzon  v.  Erans,  6  M.  &  W. 
295.  But  see  Bennett  v.  Long, 
ante,  where  in  a  case  where  several 


joined  in  leasing  the  land,  and  tho 
rent  was  to  be  paid  to  an  agent, 
and  afterwards  one  of  the  lessors 
who  was  really  the  sole  owner,  de- 
manded the  rent,   and   the  tenant 


left  it  for  the  jury  to  say  whether 
by  this  he  intended  to  deny  the 
tenancy,  or  simply  that  the  rent 
was  to  be  paid  to  the  ai^nt. 

'  Covert  V.  Frowd,  4  Bing.  557 ; 
Phillips  T.  Boilings,  ante. 


'Id. 


126  Tenaitcy  fob  Less  Toas  a  Ysab.         [§  46. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

TENANCY  FOB  LESS    THAN  A  TEAB. 

Sec.  46.  Weekly,  Monthly,  Quarterly,  and  Semi- Annual  Tenancies. 

Sec.  47.  Letting  and  Hiring  of  Furnished  Houses  and  Lodgings. 

Sec.  47.  Lodgings  let  for  immoral  purposes. 

Sec.  49.  Liabilities  of  hirers  of  furnished  houses,  apartments,  &c. 

Sec.  50.  Letting  for  storage  or  deposit. 

Sec.  61.  Duration  of  term  notice  to  quit,  &c. 

Section  46.  Weekly,  Monthly,  Quarterly,  and  Semi- 
Annual  Tenancies.— As  we  have  seen  from  what  has  been 
stated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  if  an  annual  rent  is  re- 
served, the  tenancy  is  from  y.ear  to  year,  although  there 
is  a  stipulation  that  only  a  quarter's  notice  for  its  deter- 
mination shall  be  given,  and  the  same  is  true  though  it 
is  stipulated  that  any  notice,  as  a  day's,  week's,  or  year's 
notice  shall  suffice,  because  such  stipulations  are  not  in- 
consistent with  the  nature  of  the  tenancy ;  but  if  there 
is  a  stipulation  for  thirteen  months'  or  two  years'  notice, 
the  tenancy  cannot  be  said  to  be  from  year  to  year,  because 
the  length  of  notice  agreed  upon  is  inconsistent  with  the 
tenancy,  and  the  tenancy  becomes  one  from  two  years  to 
two  years.  * 

Where  no  definite  time  is  agreed  upon,  and  the  rent  is 
fixed  at  so  much  a  week,  month,  quarter,  or  half  year, 
the  tenancy  is  weekly,  monthly,  quarterly  or  half  yearly, 
according  to  the  circumstances  and  the  custom,  if  any,  in 
the  locality  where  the  premises  are  located,  *  and  in  the 
absence  of  any  stipulation  to  the  contrary  they  may  at 

>  Wilkinson  v.  Hall,  8  Bing.  N.  to  month  to  pay  rent  in  advance, 

C.  508.     In  Hilsendegen  V.  Scheich,  is  a  mere  personal  covenant  and 

55  Mich.  468,  it  was  held  that  an  not  a  condition  precedent  to  the 

agreement  by  a  tenant  from  month  rights  of  possession. 


CHAP.  VI.] 


Weekly  Tenancies. 


127 


least  be  terminated  by  a  reasonable  notice  to  quit.  As  to 
what  is  a  reasonable  notice,  is  to  be  ascertained  from  the 
custom  of  the  place,  if  there  is  any,  or  if  not,  then  by  the 
circumstances  of  the  case.  It  seems  to  be  settled,  how- 
ever, that  a  notice  of  a  week  in  the  case  of  a  weekly  ten- 
ancy, or  of  a  month  in  the  case  of  a  quarterly  tenancy, 
are,  in  any  event,  unless  otherwise  provided  in  the  con- 
tract of  letting,  sufficient. ' 


>  In  Huffell  V.  Armistead,  7  C. 
&  P.  56,  this  queetion  arose  under 
the  following  circumstances :  The 
defendant  hired  furnished  apart- 
ments in  the  plaintifTs  house  for  a 
week  at  a  certain  sum,  and  con- 
tinued to  occupy  them  for  three 
weeks  without  any  new  contract. 
He  went  into  occupation  about  the 
middle  of  the  day  on  Monday,  and 
left  on  the  Monday  month,  about 
the  same  time,  without  giving  any 
notice  to  quit.  The  plamtiff 
claimed  that  he  went  into  posses- 
sion the  Saturday  before.  Noth- 
ing was  said  about  any  notice  to 
quit  when  the  lodgings  were  taken. 
The  plaintiff,  a  few  days  before 
the  defendant  left,  admressed  to 
him  a  letter,  requesting  him  to 
give  him  a  week's  notice  previous 
to  his  leaving.  The  defendant 
tendered  the  plaintiff  four  weeks* 
rent.  The  ptauitiff  claimed  five 
weeks'  rent.  Parke,  B.,  instruct- 
ed the  jury  as  follows :  **  The  on- 
ly question  is,"  said  he,  "  whether 
the  tenancy  commenced  on  the 
Saturday  or  the  Monday.  K  it 
commenced  on  the  Monday,  I  think 
the  defendant,  who  entered  on  that 
day,  was  at  liberty  to  quit  on  the 
same  day  in  another  week.  I  can- 
net  say  a  week  has  been  exceeded 
b^  holding  six  days  and  two  frac- 
tions of  a  day.  Upon  the  question 
of  a  notice  to  quit,  the  law  is  clear- 
ly settled  that  a  yearly  tenancy 
cannot  be  determined  without  a 
half  year's  notice.  But  that  rule 
cannot  be  applied  to  a  weekly  tak- 
ing, for  the  effect  of  it  would  be  to 
show  that  a  half  week's  notice  was 
necessary  to  put  an  end  to  such  a 
tenancy.  I  am  not  aware  that  it 
has  ever  been  decided  that  in  the 
case  of  an  ordinary  monthly  or 
-weekly  tenancy  that  a  month's  or 
week's  notice  must  be  given.    A 


tenant  who  enters  upon  a  fresh 
week  may  be  bound  to  continue 
until  the  expiration  of  that  week, 
or  to  pay  the  week's  rent,  but  this 
is  a  very  different  thing  from  giv- 
ing a  week's  notice  to  quit."  In 
Parry  v.  Hazell,  1  Esp.  94,  the  ten- 
ant took  a  house  by  the  month, 
and  he  had  a  month's  notice  to 
quit,  which  the  court  held  was 
sufficient.  In  Peacock  v.  Rufiln, 
6  Esp.  4,  an  action  of  ejectment 
was  Drought  for  a  shed  in  Ck)vent 
Garden.  A  week's  notice  to  quit 
had  been  given,  but  the  defendant, 
having  shown  that  the  plaintiff 
a^eea  to  give  him  four  weeks'  no- 
tice, he  was  non-suited,  but  Lord 
Ellei^borouoh  said,  '*A  week's 
notice  is  certainly  sufficient  where 
the  holding  is  weekly,  but  the  rule 
of  law  as  to  the  legality  of  notice 
is  still  controllable  by  the  agree- 
ment of  the  parties."  As  to  what 
is  a  sufficient  proof  of  usage  see 
Wood  V.  Wood,  1  C.  &  P.  59. 
There  is  no  English  case  in  which 
it  has  ever  been  held  that  a  notice, 
in  the  case  of  short  tenancies, 
must  be  given  e<}ual  in  length 
with  the  term,  but  it  has  been  held 
that  some  notice  must  be  given, 
Jones  V.  Mills,  10  C.  B.,  N.  S.  788, 
and  the  safest  course  to  pursue  is 
to  give  a  week's  notice  in  case  of 
a  weekly  tenancy,  &c.  See  opin- 
ion of  WiLLLOfS,  J.,  in  Jones  v. 
Mills,  ante.  In  Illinois,  by  statute, 
thirty  days'  notice  is  required. 
Seem  v.  McLees,  24  HI.  192,  and 
such  also  is  the  rule  in  Michigan, 
Hujrser  v.  Chase,  18  Mich.  98, 
while  in  Massachusetts  and  in  New 
York,  it  is  held  that  no  such  notice 
is  necessarv,  but  simply  reasonable 
notice.  Shorey  v.  Farrell,  114 
Mass.  441  ;  People  v.  Shacko,  48 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  581 ;  Gibbons  v.  Day» 
ton,  4  Hun.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  451. 


128  Tenancy  for  Less  Than  a  Year.         [§  47. 

Sec.  47.  Letting  and  Hiring  of  Furnished  Houses  and  Lodg- 
ings.—Contracts  of  letting  and  hiring  furnished  houses  or 
apartments  are  of  a  mixed  nature,  partaking  partly  of  the 
nature  of  a  demise  of  lands,  and  partly  of  the  letting  and 
hiring  of  personal  chattels,  but  in  law  the  rent  is  deemed 
to  issue  out  of  the  reality,  and  not  in  part  from  the  fur- 
niture. *  But,  if  a  house  is  let  as  ready  furnished,  and  it 
turns  out  to  be  only  partially  furnished,  or  if  the  landlord 
agrees  to  send  in  certain  necessary  furniture,  and  neglects 
to  do  it  within  a  reasonable  time,  the  agreement  respect- 
ing the  furniture  being  in  a  condition  precedent  to  the 
payment  of  rent,  the  landlord  must  show  performance  of 
such  condition  before  he  can  distrain  for  the  rent, '  and 
the  agreement  to  supply  the  furniture  being  an  inseparable 
part  of  the  contract  for  an  interest  in  land,  will  not  fur- 
nish the  basis  of  an  action  in  favor  of  the  tenant  for  its 
breach,  unless  in  writing,  as  required  by  the  Statute  of 
Frauds.  * 

A  different  rule  prevails  as  to  the  liabiUty  of  a  landlord, 
or  rather  as  to  the  implied  obhgations  between  the  letting 
of  an  unfurnished  and  a  furnished  house.  In  the  former 
case,  there  is  no  impHed  contract  or  covenant  that  the 
house  is  tenantable,  *  or  fit  for  the  purpose  for  which  it 
was  let,  *  while  in  the  latter  the  landlord  is  treated  as  im- 
phedly  holding  it  out  and  contracting  that  it  is  fit  for  im- 
mediate habitation  and  use  by  the  tenant;  and  if  the 
furniture  is  not  fit  for  use,  or  if  it  is  incumbered  with  a 
nuisance  of  such  a  character  as  practically  to  deprive  the 
tenant  of  its  beneficial  use,  the  tenant  may  abandon  the 
tenancy  and  recover  damages  of  the  landlord  for  the  breach 
of  his  contract.  *  In  the  case  last  referred  to,  a  furnished 
house  was  let  to  the  defendant  by  the  plaintiff  for  five  or 
six  weeks.  The  defendant  went  into  possession,  but  found 
the  house  and  furniture  so  infested  with  bugs,  as  to  in- 

»  Nunan  v.  Huderton,  2  B.  &  P.  *  Witty  v.  Matthews,  52  N.  Y. 

224 ;  Emmett's  Case,  Dyer  212  6. ;  512 ;  Sutton  v.  Temple,  12  M.  &  W. 

Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke  16 ;  Cado-  62 ;  Powell  v.  Lumley,  89  Cal.  151. 

gan  V.  Kennett,  Camp.  432.  ^  Sutton  v.  Temple,  ante ;  Buss- 

*  Meehelen  v.  Wallace,  7  Ad.  &  man  v.  Gauster,  72  Penn.  St.  285. 

El.  54  Ti.  «  Smith  v.  Marrable,  11  M.  &  W. 

« Id.  5. 


CHAP.  VI.]      Letting  Furnished  Houses.  129 

terfere  seriously  with  the  comfortable  enjoyment  of  the 
premises.  The  defendant  complained  to  the  landlord 
about  the  nuisance,  and  he  sent  a  person  to  take  means 
for  the  extermination  of  the  vermin,  but  without  success, 
and  before  the  end  of  the  first  week  the  defendant  moved 
out  of  the  house  and  sent  the  key  to  the  plaintiff,  with  a 
week's  rent.  In  an  action  to  recover  for  five  weeks'  rent, 
it  was  held  that  no  recovery  could  be  had.  "  A  man  who 
lets  a  ready  furnished  house,"  said  Lord  Abinoee,  C.  B., 
"surely  does  so  under  the  implied  condition  or  obligation 
that  the  house  is  in  a  fit  state  to  be  inhabited.  Suppose,  " 
he  added,  "instead  of  the  particular  nuisance  which  ex- 
isted in  this  case,  the  tenant  discovered  the  fact  (unknown 
perhaps  to  the  landlord)  that  lodgers  had  pi'eviously  quit- 
ted the  house  in  consequence  of  having  ascertained  that 
a  person  had  previously  died  in  it  of  plague  or  scarlet  fever, 
would  not  the  law  imply  that  he  ought  not  to  be  com- 
pelled to  stay  in  it  ? " ' 

When  rooms  or  apartments  in  a  house  or  other  build- 
ing are  rented,  the  landlord  impliedly  demises  all  the 
necessary  and  proper  accompaniments  to  their  beneficial 
and  comfortable  enjoyment.  Thus  if  a  person  take  lodg- 
ings on  the  first  and  second  floors  of  a  house,  he  has  a 
right  to  the  use  of  the  door  bell,  the  knocker,  the  skylight 
of  the  staircase  and  the  water  closet,  and  every  other  con- 
venience connected  with  the  building,  essential  to  the 
comfortable  enjoyment  of  the  leasal  portion,  unless  it  be 
otherwise  stipulated  at  the  time  of  the  taking  of  the  lodg- 
ings; therefore,  if  the  landlord  deprives  the  tenant  of  the 
,.^^  «f  auv.^..  o.,  «^*;^„  i;=c  .,™;„o(  t,;™  +»'erefor.' 


a  skylight  to  light 
d  a  haodr&il  along 
sequently,  the  dt- 
t  ihe  water  cloeet, 
flight,  covered  the 
r,  toofc  the  knock- 
nd  on  several  cases 
B  cut.  The  plamt- 
iction  on  the  case 
;ndant  for  the  in- 
<t  appear  that  aov  - 
iboul  the  handrail, 
9 


130 


Tenancy  for  Less  Than  a  Year. 


[§48. 


The  landlord  letting  rooms  and  apartments,  and  retain- 
ing the  general  possession  of  the  house,  is  bound  to  exer- 
cise reasonable  care  for  the  protection  of  the  persons  and 
property  of  his  tenants  or  lodgers,  to  see  that  the  outer 
doors  are  properly  locked  at  night,  and  that  no  suspicious 
or  doubtful  characters,  unknown  to  the  lodger,  are  al- 
lowed to  congregate  in  the  house  at  unseasonable  hours  of 
the  night.  So,  too,  he  is  bound  to  exercise  ordinary  care 
in  the  selection  of  servants  within  the  house,  and  to  take 
all  reasonable  care  to  provide  against  robbery  and  fire. 
But  he  is  bound  only  to  the  exercise  of  such  reasonable 
care  as  an  ordinarily  prudent  housekeeper  would  exercise, 
and  does  not  stand  as  an  insurer  against  possible  loss  or 
injury  from  any  of  these  causes ;  nor  does  he  assume 
such  liabihties  as  are  imposed  on  an  innkeeper ;  and  after 
having  exercised  proper  care  in  the  selection  of  his  ser- 
vants, he  is  not  responsible  for  the  larceny  of  the  tenant's 
goods  in  consequence  of  an  outer  door  being  accidentally, 
or  even  carelessly,  left  open  by  one  of  the  servants, '  nor 
is  he  responsible  for  property  stolen  from,  the  tenant  by 
another  lodger,  by  a  servant  or  a  stranger,  unless  actual 
neghgence  on  his  part  in  reference  to  the  admission  of 
the  lodger,  or  the  hiring  of  the  servant,  is  fully  establish- 
ed.' 

Sec.  4S.  Lodgings  let  for  immoral  purposes.— If  rooms 
or  buildings  are  knowingly  let  for  immoral  purposes,  no 
recovery  for  their  rent  can  be  had,  as  in  such  a  case 
the  parties  are  treated  as  being  in  pari  delicto. '  Thus,  if 
a  lodging-house  keeper  knowingly  lets  lodgings  to  a  pros- 


the  skylight,  the  knocker  or  the 
bell,  at  the  time  the  contract  of 
renting.  The  defendant  offered  to 
show  tnat  nothing  was  said  about 
these  things,  but  Lord  Abinger, 
C.  B.,  rejected  the  evidence,  say- 
ing that  they  spoke  for  themselves. 
That  is,  they  were  there  when  the 
rooms  were  rented,  and  were  ac- 
cessories to  the  enjoyment  of  the 
rooms  and  the  tenant  had  a  right 
to  have  them  remain,  whetner 
anything  was  said  about  them  or 
2iot.    The  defendant  insisted  that 


as  nothing  was    said    about   the 

Slaintiff  having  the  use  of  knocker, 
:c.,  he  had  no  right  thereto. 
Lord  AsmoERsaid  "There  would 
be  a  positive  right  for  him  to  use 
it,  unless  it  were  expressly  exce- 
ed" The  plaintiff  nad  a  verdict 
for  £50,  which  was  sustaiued. 

*  Dansey  v.  Richardson,  3  El.  & 
Bl.  144 ;  Holder  v.  Soulby,  8  C.  B., 
N.  S.  254. 

«  Smith  V.  White,  L.  R.  1  Eq. 
Cas.  626 ;  Rawlston  v.  Brady,  dO 
Ga.  449. 


4 


CHAP.  VI.]  LiABiLrriEs  OF  Hirers.  131 

titute  to  enable  her  to  prosecute  her  vocation  in  consorting 
with  men,  no  recovery  can  be  had  for  the  rent,  *  or  if, 
after  having  admitted  her,  he  ascertains  the  fact  that 
she  is  using  her  lodgings  for  that  purpose,  and  permits 
her  to  remain.  *  But,  the  mere  fact  that  the  woman  is  a 
prostitute,  if  she  merely  lodges  there  and  receives  her 
visitors  elsewhere,  does  not  prevent  a  recovery,  and  such 
is  also  the  rule  even  though  she  receives  and  consorts 
with  men  at  her  lodgings,  if  the  landlord  does  not  know 
the  fact. '  The  same  rule  applies  to  lodgings  or  buildings 
knotvingly  let  for  any  immoral  or  unlawful  purpose.  * 

Sec.  49.  laiabUities  of  hirers  of  furniBhed  housesy  apart- 
ments, Ac.— Contracts  for  the  hiring  of  furnished  houses 
or  apartments,  being  for  an  interest  in  or  concerning  lands 
under  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  cannot  be  enforced  unless  in 
writing,  or  the  hirer  achially  enters  into  possession^  nor 
will  any  action  lie  for  a  breach  of  the  contract.  But  if 
the  tenant  enters  into  possession  he  may  be  compelled  to 
I)ay  the  rent  in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation,  and  his 
goods  may  be  distrained  by  the  landlord.  *  He  is  subject 
to  the  same  rules  of  liability  as  to  the  use  of  the  house 
and  furniture  as  an  ordinary  hirer  of  realty,  and  of  per- 
sonal chattels  for  use.  He  is  not  responsible  for  ordinary 
wear  and  tear  resulting  from  its  reasonable  use,  but  in 
other  respects  he  is  bound  to  deliver  up  the  property  clean, 
and  in  as  good  condition  as  he  received  it.  If  he  receives 
linen,  plate,  crockery,  and  other  household  utensiLs  clean 
and  fit  for  use,  and  agreed  to  leave  them  as  he  found  them, 
he  is  bound  to  return  them  to  the  lessor  in  that  condition.  * 
But  as  to  lodgers,  where  the  landlord  retains  general  pos- 
session, this  rule  does  not  prevail,  and  they  are  only  re- 
responsible  for  wilful  injury  to  the  property,  or  such  as 
resulting  from  their  negligence. 

Sec.  50,     Letting  for  storage  or  deposit.— A  person  let- 

'  Jennings  v.  Throgmorton,  Ry.  *  Smith  v.  White,   ante;  Bowry 

So  Moo.  261.  T.  Bennett,  1  Camp.  348. 

•  Giraudy  v.  Richardson,  1  Esp.  *  Newman  v.  Anderton,  5  B.  &  P. 

1.3.  Jennings  v.  Throgmorton,  ante.  227. 

'  Appleton  V.  Campbell,  2  C.  &  P.  •  Stanley  v.  Aynur,  12  M.  &  W. 

847.  •  827. 


132  Teitakcy  for  Less  than  a  Year.  [§  61, 

ting  a  room,  vault,  store  or  other  place  of  deposit  in  a 
warehouse  or  other  building,  stands  in  a  position  analo- 
gous to  that  of  a  person  who  lets  apartments  for  lodgings. 
By  the  civil  law  a  man  who  lets  out  a  store  or  place  of  de- 
posit for  com,  wine,  oil  or  merchandise  of  a  perishable 
nature,  is  treated  as  impliedly  warranting  his  store-house 
to  be  fit  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  known  to  be 
required.  If  the  hirer  has  inspected  it,  and  approved  it 
prior  to  the  contract,  the  storekeeper  is  held  not  respon- 
sible for  patent  defects  which  the  hirer  might  have  ascer- 
tained by  the  exercise  of  ordinary  vigilance,  but  for  all 
latent  defects  causing  injury  to  the  goods  he  is  responsi- 
ble. He  is  bound  to  keep  the  roof  tight,  and  if  the  goods 
are  in  a  basement  or  cellar,  to  keep  it  properly  drained 
and  free  from  water,  and  if  he  remains  in  general  posses- 
sion of  the  building  it  is  his  duty  to  see  that  the  outer  gates, 
doors,  and  the  windows  are  properly  fastened  at  proper 
hours  of  the  night,  and  that  suspicious  persons  are  not 
permitted  upon  the  premises,  or  to  lurk  around  the  place, 
and,  in  a  word,  to  keep  a  proper  watch  upon  the  building, 
and  to  take  all  proper  precautions  to  secure  the  building 
from  attacks  without,  and  from  dangers  within,  such  as 
fire  and  damp  and  all  other  hurtful  things  to  the  p^-operty 
deposited  there.*  Contracts  of  this  character  must  be 
largely  construed  in  reference  to  the  circumstances  of 
each  case,  and  the  nature  and  character  of  the  property, 
as  well  as  the  knowledge  of  the  depositor  of  the  condition 
of  the  premises. 

Sec.  51.  Duration  of  time,  notice  to  quit,  &c.— Lodgings 
and  furnished  apartments  are  rarely  the  subject  of  a  year- 
ly hiring,  consequently  there  is  no  presumption  from  a 
general  hiring,  that  it  is  a  hiring  for  a  year,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  hiring  of  unfurnished  houses  or  of  lands.  *  The 
duration  of  the  tenancy  is  usually  measured  by  the  periods 
fixed  for  the  payment  of  the  rent,  and  is  a  weekly,  semi- 
monthly, monthly,  quarterly,  or  half-yearly  tenancy,  ac- 

»  Pandect  ed.  Poth.  lib.  19,  tit.  » Wilson  v.  Abbott,  4  D.  &  B. 
2,  Bee.  8,  art.  8, 71.  694. 


CHAP.  TI.]  DUEATION  OF  TiME.  133 

cording  to  the  periods  in  which  the  rent  is  to  be  paid.  If 
the  rent  is  payable  weekly,  moutbly  or  quarterly,  it  is  re- 
garded as  a  weekly,  monthly  or  quarterly  tenancy,  and 
the  same  rule  prevails  whether  the  time  for  the  payment 
of  the  rent  is  fixed  at  longer  or  shorter  periods.  By  the 
French  law,"  if  the  tenancy  is  for  a  single  week,  month 
or  quarter,  no  notice  to  quit  is  necessary,  as  the  duration 
of  the  tenancy  is  fixed,  and  is  determined  at  the  expiration 
of  such  respective  periods  by  the  efiSux  of  time,  and  such 
is  the  rule  at  the  common  law."  But  by  the  French  law, 
if  the  tenancy  is  from  week  to  week,  month  to  month, 
quarter  to  quarter,  or  from  half  year  to  half  year,  a  notice 
to  quit  of  the  same  duration  as  the  tenancy  must  be  given, 
and  if  the  lodger  quits  without  giving  such  notice,  he  is 
liable  for  the  rent  for  the  whole  term  which  he  had  enter- 
ed upon.  By  the  common  law,  as  we  have  seen,'  no  such 
rule  prevails,  and  no  more  than  reasonable  notice  is  requir- 
ed. If,  however,  there  is  a  custom  or  usage  in  this  re- 
spect, or  if  the  tenant  has  failed  to  give  a  reasonable  no- 
tice of  his  intention  to  quit,  or  to  comply  with  an  usage 
in  that  respect,  or  if  he  has  commenced  a  new  week, 
month  or  quarter,  he  remains  liable  to  the  landlord  for 
the  rent  for  the  balance  of  such  week,  month  or  quarter, 
even  though  the  landlord  has  posted  a  notice  of  "  To  Let " 
in  the  windows  of  the  room,  or  has  l^hted  or  used  fires 
therein.' 

1  PoTHiEE's  Louftge,  No.  80.  Joquish,  31  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  6Sa 

*  Moeher  v.  Riding,  13  Me.  478  ;  >  See  ante,  p.  90. 

Hamitt  V.  Lawrence,  3  A.  K.  Mar.  *  GrifBth  v,  Hodges.  1  C.  &  P. 

(Kr.)  see  ;  Logan  v.  HeiTon,  8  S.  419  ;  Bedpatb  v.  Soberte,  3  Ecm. 

&  R.  (Fenn.)4S9  ;  DonneUv.  John-  23S. 

son,  IT  Pick.  (Mass.)  368  ;  AUen  v. 


13i  Tesa£!CY  fob  Life.  [§  52. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

TENANCY   FOB  LOTS. 

Sbc.  52.    How  created— qualities  of . 
Sec.  68.    Rights  of  tenant  for  life. 
Sec.  54.    Liabilities  of  life  tenant. 

Sec.  53.  How  created— qualities  of.— An  estate  or  teii-> 
ancy  for  life  may  be  created  by  deed,  demise  or  devise, 
and  either  with  or  without  rent.  This  species  of  estate 
or  tenancy  differs  in  many  essential  respects  from  a 
lease  for  years,  the  principal  of  which  is,  that  it  confers 
a  freehold  upon  the  tenant,  while  a  lease  for  years  is  a 
mere  chattel  interest,  although  there  are  other  marked 
distinctions.  It  cannot  be  created  by  parol,'  nor,  except 
by  an  instrument  operating  under  the  statute  of  uses, 
can  it  at  the  common  law  be  made  to  commence  in 
futurty  because  of  the  fact  that  it  must  be  accompanied 
with,  or  perfected  by,  livery  of  seizin."  In  contempla- 
tion of  law,  it  is  equal  to  a  seven  years'  purchase  of  the 
fee,*  and  may  be  set  off  on  execution  as  real  estate.* 
Without  words  of  inheritance,  it  cannot  be  enlarged  in- 
to a  fee,  either  by  a  warranty  in  fee,  or  by  a  covenant 
for  quiet  enjoyment  to  the  grantee  and  his  heirs, '  nor 
by  reference  to  a  will  which  creates  a  fee  without  words 
of  inheritance.  *    In  all  cases  where  there  are  no  words 

1  Stewart  V.Clark,  13  Met.  (Maas.)  'Garland   v.    Crow,    2    Ba^ey 

79 ;  8  East  1«6 ;  Garrett  t.  Clark,  (S.  C),    24. 

6  Oregon,  464.  *  Wheeler  v.  Gk>rham,  2    Root 

«  Piatt  on  Leases,  678 ;  Webster  (Conn.)  828. 

V    Gilman,  1  Story   (U.    S.)  499;  » Roberts  v.  Forsythe,   8    Dev. 

Barwick's  Case,    5    Coke,    93   h;  (N.  C.)  L.  26. 

Bucklin's  Case,  2  Coke,  55  6 ;  2  •  Lytle  v.  Lvtle,  10  Watt.  (Penn.) 

Blackstone's  Com.  144,  814 ;  Shep.  259. 
Touch  272. 


CHAP,  vn.]  How  Created.  185 

of  inheritance  in  the  instrument  conveying  the  estate,  a 
life  interest  only  is  created,  and  the  grantee  becomes 
merely  a  tenant  for  life. '  Thus,  a  deed  to  A,  "  his  ex- 
ecutors, administrators,  and  assigns,"  omitting  the  word 
"  heira, "  conveys  simply  a  life  estate,"  So  a  conveyance 
to  "  A  and  his  generation,  to  endure  as  long  as  the  waters 
of  the  Delaware  shall  run,"  conveys  only  a  Ufe interest ;' 
and  an  instrument  conveying  an  interest  in  real  estate 
"  so  long  as  he  may  desire  to  use  it  as  a  drug  store,"  con- 
fers a  Ufe  estate,  *  there  being  no  limitation  in  point  of 
time,  it  becomes,  ab  initio,  a  grant  of  an  estate  for  life 
as.  though  no  such  event  had  been  in  contemplation. 
The  intention  of  the  parties  from  the  words  used  in  the 
deed  or  lease,  must  control,  and  parol  evidence  is  never 
admissible  to  change  it,  nor  in  the  absence  of  words  of 
inheritance  will  a  conveyance  be  construed  as  conveying 
a  loiter  estate  than  for  life,  unless  the  words  used  are 
such  as  to  conclusively  show  that  the  intention  was  to 
create  a  fee.'  The  intention  of  the  grantor  or  lessor, 
both  as  to  the  estate  conveyed  and  the  life  upon  which 
it  is  dependent,  must  be  collected  from  the  instrument 
itself,  and  will  control.  Thus,  where  A  demises  to  B 
for  the  term  of  his  natural  life,  the  demise  is  prima  facie 
for  the  life  of  B ;  hut  where  A  demised  to  B,  his  exe- 
cutors and  administrators,  for  the  term  of  his  natural 
life,  and  the  lease  contained  a  covenant  by  A  for  the  quiet 
enjoyment  of  the  premises  by  B,  his  executors,  &c., 
during  the  natural  life, of  A,  it  was  held  that  the  word 
"Ais,"  in  the  demising  clause,  must  be  referred  to  A,  the 
grantor,  and  not  to  B,  though  his  name  was  the  last 
antecedent.' 

)llect«d  from  the 
,,  it  will  be  BO  coa- 
d  V.  Dodd,  6  B.  & 

>odd.  ante. 

Dodd,  ante,  fo 
)N,  J.,  said,  "The 

demising  clause 
it  tjieo  comee  the 
lams  sliall  quietly 
Pritcharti'a  life. 
Id  satlsf  J  me  that 


1 


136  Tenancy  for  Life.  [§  52 

But  where  the  lease  does  not  mention  for  whose  life 
and  there  are  no  woixis  of  explanation  or  quahflcation, 
the  lessee's  life  will  be  intended,  on  the  principle  that  the 
grant  must  be  construed  most  strongly  against  the  lessor.* 

*'  A  lease  for  life  or  lives  may  be  granted  to  one  person, 
or  to  several,  and  where  to  several,  the  term  may  be  made 
to  endure  for  their  joint  Uves,  or  for  the  lives  or  life  of 
the  survivors  and  survivor ;  or  the  lessees  may  be  made 
to  take  beneficially  in  succession ;  or  the  estate  may  be 
held  for  the  life  or  Uves  of  a  stranger  or  strangers  alone, 
or  as  joint  cestui  que  vie  with  the  lessee  or  lessees.  In 
fact  the  modifications  of  holding  are  almost  endless."' 

Where  it  is  intended  that  a  lease  to  two  or  more  per- 
sons shall  determine  on  the  death  of  either,  the  grant 
should  be  for  their  joint  lives,  but  if  the  interest  is  to  con- 
tinue with  the  survivor,  it  is  sufficient  to  grant  it  to 
them  generally  for  their  Uves  without  inserting  words 
of  survivorship,  which  however  are  harmless ; '  and  on 
the  death  of  one  the  entire  estate  will  survive  to  the  other.* 
But  if  a  lease  be  granted  for  a  certain  term,  as  for 
one  hundred  years,  *'if  A  and  B  shall  so  long  Uve,"  the 
estate  is  determined  upon  the  death  of  either ; "  so  if  it  be 
made  ' '  so  long  as  C  and  D  shall  remain  Justices  of  the 
Peace,  upon  the  failure  of  either  of  them  to  continue 
justices,  the  estate  is  determined.*  The  estate  cannot 
be  made  dependent  upon  the  life  of  a  person  not  then 
born,  but,  if  it  be  made  to  A  during  the  natural  Uves  of 
C  and  D  and  of  E^s  granddaughter^  not  then  bom,  it 
wiU  be  good  during  the  lives  of  C  and  D  only,  although 
a  granddaughter  to  E  is  subsequently  born.' 

Where  an  estate  is  demised  to  two  persons  so  long  as 
either  of  them  shaU  live,  if  the  tenants  partition  the 
estate,  each  taking  a  moiety  thereof,  upon  the  death  of 
one  his  moiety  reverts  to  the  lessor,  as  the  partition 

a  lease  for  Pritchard's  life    was  *  Piatt  on  Leases,  679. 

contemptateil    in    the     demising  '  Ck).  Litt.  63  h, 

clause.    The  whole  demising  clause  *  Crud  well's  Case,  5  Ck>ke,  9  a. 

taken  together,  suggests  that  con-  *  Brudwell's  Case,  ante, 

struction."  'Ibid. 

*  Smith  V.  Jersey,  7  Price,  453 ;  '  Pemberton   v.  Edwards,  1  M. 

Co.  Litt.  42  a.  &  W.  553. 


CHAP,  vn.]  Eights  op  Tenant.  137 

defeats  the  survivorship  ; '  but  the  rule  is  otherwise 
where  the  lease  is  for  years,  with  a  proviso  determiniDg 
the  lease  upon  the  death  of  both  within  the  term.  In 
that  case,  if  partition  is  made,  and  one  of  the  tenants 
dies,  his  share  goes  to  his  executors  or  administrators 
during  "the  life  of  the  other  tenant.'  Estates  for  Ufe 
may  be  made  dependent  upon  future  contingencies  be- 
fore the  life  for  which  they  are  granted  expires.  As  a 
lease  to  a  woman  so  long  as  she  remains  sole,  or  to  a 
husband  and  wife  during  coverture,  or  to  a  person  so 
long  as  he  inhabits,  or  pays  a  certain  rent,'  or  until  he 
has  i-eceived  a  certain  sum  out  of  the  profits  of  the  estate, 
or  until  he  receives  a  certain  position,  *  or  so  long  as  he 
desires  to  use  it  for  a  certain  purpose ,'  and  the  reason  is, 
that  the  duration  of  the  estate  depends  upon  the  con- 
dition,' and  the  estate  is  as  perfect  an  estate  for  life  un- 
til the  event  upon  which  it  is  conditioned  happens,  as 
though  it  had  been  granted  absolutely.'  The  husband 
does  not  take  an  estate  by  curtly  out  of  lands  held  by 
his  wife  for  Ufe." 

Sec.53.  Bights  of  tenant  for  life.— A  tenant  for  life, 
whether  under  a  deed,  lease,  or  devise,  takes  a  freehold 
estate  and  may  convey  his  interest  therein  either  by  deed 
or  lease  in  any  way  not  injurious  to  the  remainder.*    He 

■  Litt.  sec.  S31 ;  Co.  LiU.  204  b ;  rS74,  the  defendant's  intestate  de- 
IJones  185;  Botoughe's  Case,  4  mised  to  the  plaintiff,  his  land  and 
Coke,  78  b.  his  negroes  so  long  as  the  plaintiff 

'  In  Farrington's  Case,  1  Dyer  should  pay  him  £100  per  annum 
67  o,  pi.  IS,  a  lease  for  years  was  during  hie  (the  defendajit's)  life, 
made  to  two  with  a  _provi80  The  court  held  that  the  lease  was 
"  that  if  the  said  lessees  die  with-  substantially  for  the  life  of  the 
in  the  term,  it  shall  cease,"  the  defendant.  See  also  MaTerick  v. 
lessees  make  partition,  where  one  Gihbs,  8  HcCord  (S.  C.)  211 ;  New- 
,  H.  &M.  (Va.)470. 
43  a;  Hoseboom  v. 


3  a. 

42  a:  Thomas  t. 
te.  Wilmarth  t. 
hiass.  407. 

.  Sobier,  114,  Uass. 
Quinlinen,  79  Penn. 


hUt.  HcCampbell.  5 


138 


Tenancy  fob  Life. 


[§53. 


is  entitled  to  the  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  estate,  and 
may  work  out  any  open  mines  or  quarries  upon  the  land 
without  being  chargeable  for  waste,*  but  he  cannot  open 
new  mines  or  quarries,  nor  dig  clay  to  manufacture  into 
brick,  or  in  fact  do  any  act  not  usually  incident  to  such 
estates,  that  injuriously  affects  the  reversion,*  nor  can  he* 
cut  and  sell  wood' or  timber  growing  upon  the  estate,  even 
though  the  avails  are  to  be  ex;)ended  in  repairs  or  im- 
provements upon  the  lands,'  or  to  pay  the  expense  of 
cutting  and  hauling  wood  to  \^hich  the  tenant  is  entitled,* 
nor  can  he  cut  fire- wood  except  for  the  use  of  the  prin- 
cipal dwelling  upon  the  land,  not  even  for  the  use  of  a 
farm  laborer  who  lives  upon  the  land,  nor  even  though 
the  farm  is  large  and  the  services  of  laborers  are  indis- 
pensable.* 

But  he  may  sue  and  recover  damages  done  to  the  estate 
interfering  with  his  enjoyment  thereof,  even  though  the 
reversion  is  also  affected  thereby.*    He  has  an  insurable 


Litt.  (Ky.)  92 ;  King  v.  Sharp,  6 
Humph.  freim.)55 ;  Price  v.  Price, 
28  Ala.  609. 

*  Lynn's  Appeal,  81  Penn.  St.  44  ; 
Irwin  V.  Cavode,  34  id.  162 ;  bo  he 
is  entitled  to  work  an  open  sand 
pit.  Reed  v.  Reed,  16  N.  J.  Eq. 
248;  and  if  a  lease  of  land  and 
mines  is  made,  and  some  are  open 
and  some  not,  only  the  open  mmes 
pass.  Astry  v.  Ballard,  2  Lev.  185 
Whitfield  V.  Benit,  2  P.  Wms.  242 
Lord  Davey  v.  Askwith,  Hob.  334 
but  new  shafts  or  pits  may  be 
opened  for  the  purpose  of  working 
the  old  mines.  Clavering  v. 
Clavering,  2  P.  Wms.  888.  Li 
Saunder's  Case,  5  Coke,  12  a,  the 
rule  as  now  held  was  advanced. 
In  that  case  it  was  resolved  that  if 
a  lease  of  land  be  made  for  life,  or 
for  years,  in  part  of  which  there  is 
an  open  mine,  the  lessee  may  work 
it,  and  that  he  could  not  open  a 
new  mine ;  but  that,  if  the  land 
and  all  mines  were  leased,  the 
lessee  might  dig  for  them,  but  that 
mere  lease  of  the  land  conferred 
no  authority  to  work  new  mines, 
and  that  if  the  lessee  did  open 
new  mines,  he  was  guilty  of  waste. 
So  a  tenant  for  years,  may  work 
an  open  mine  upon  the  premises 


unless  restricted  by  his  lease,  but 
he  cannot  open  a  new  mine  unless 
the  right  is  expressly  conferred  in 
the  lease. 

Warlow  V.  Lake  Superior  Iron 
Co.  86  Mich.  105. 

'  Livingston  v.  Reynolds,  2  Hill 
(N.  Y.)  157.  In  Westmoreland 
Coal  Company's  Appeal,  4  W.  N. 
Cas.  (Penn.)  A  died,  seized  of  two 
tracts  of  land,  separated  by  an  in- 
tervening tract.  Upon  one  of  them 
a  coal  mine  had  been  opened  in 
A's  lifetime.  A's  widow,  who 
was  a  tenant  for  life  under  A*s  will, 
leased  both  the  tracts  to  the  West- 
moreland Coal  Company,  who 
owned  the  intervening  tract.  The 
coal  company,  pursued  under- 
ground a  vein  of  coal  from  the 
open  mine  on  one  tract,  through 
their  intervening  tract  and  within 
the  boundary  of  the  other  tract. 
It  was  held  that  the  taking  of  coal 
from  the  second  tract  constituted 
w^aste 

»  Elliott  V.  Smith,    2  N.  H.  480. 

*  Johnson  v.  Johnson,  18  N.  H. 
594 ;  Miles  v.  Miles,  82  id.  147. 

» Sarles  v.  Sarles,  8  Sandf.  (N. 
Y.)  Ch.  601. 

•  Raikoad  y.  Boyer,  13  Penn.  St. 
497. 


CHAP,  vn.]      Ltabiuties  op  Life  Tenast.  139 

interest  in  the  buildings,  and  may  insure  such  interest 
in  his  own  name,'  but  in  such  cases  he  is  bound  to  apply 
the  money  to  the  repair  or  rebuilding  of  the  buildings 
injured  or  destroyed,  and  a  court  of  equity  will  compel 
such  application  of  it  upon  biU  brought  by  the  remainder- 
man.' If  the  estate  consists  of  stock  and  lands,  he  is 
entitled  to  all  the  increase  of  the  stock,  and  the  crops 
growing  upon  the  land  at  his  death,'  and  if  he  has  un- 
derlet the  premises,  his  tenant  is  entitled  to  harvest  all 
crops  sown  before  the  principal  tenant's  death.*  If  he 
makes  permanent  improvements  upon  the  land,  they 
inure  to  the  benefit  of  the  estate,  and  by  the  common 
law  the  remainderman  cannot  be  chained  therefor,  or 
compelled  to  contribute  thereto.' 

Sec.  54.  Uabilities  of  Life  Tenant.— In  the  absence  of 
any  reservation  of  rent,  or  other  provision  in  the  lease  or 
conveyance  providing  therefor,  a  tenant  for  life  as  be- 
tween himself  and  the  reversioner  is  bound  to  pay  the 
taxes  assessed  upon  the  premises,  and  if  he  fails  to  do  so, 
and  they  are  sold  therefor,  and  the  tenant  becomes  the 
purchaser,  he  cannot  claim  a  title  in  fee  against  the 
reversioner,*  and  it  seems  that  if  the  interest  of  the 
reversioner  is  sold  upon  a  judgment  against  him,  upon 
a  debt  which  is  a  legal  charge  upon  the  reversioner  and 
an  equitable  charge  upon  the  life  estate,  and  the  tenant 
buys  the  reversioner's  interest,  he  will,  in  equity,  be 
treated  as  buying  for  the  benefit  of  the  reversioner  as 
weE  as  his  own  ;'    and  so  generally,  any  incumbrance 

'  fireman's  Ins.  Co.  v.  Drake,  2         '  Patrick  t.  Sherwood,  4  Blatehf . 

B.  Men.  (Ky.)  47 ;   Curry   v,  Coni.'      fU.  8,  C.  C.)112:McDona]d  y.Hey- 

Ina.   Co.,   10   Pick.     (Mass.)    535;      Jin.  4  Phila.  (Penn.)78;  Cairas  t. 

Harris  v.  York   M.  W  Co..  50      Chobert.  8  Edw.  Ch.  (N  Y.)  BIB; 

Ikiwlaud,   11  How.    Pr. 

19.     Uponarent  reserved 

nominal  or  otlierwise  a 

ir  life    is  equally  bound 

e  tenant  bavrng  a  freehold 

keep  down  taxefi,  pay  in- 

incumbtances  and  make 

repairs.Carter  T.  Youngs, 

Superior  Ct.  418. 

9  V.  Myers,   18  B.  Afon. 


140  Tenancy  for  Life.  [§  5L 

upon  the  estate  removed  by  him  is  held  to  be  for  the 
joint  benefit  of  himself  and  the  remainderman.*  He  is 
bound  in  equity  to  keep  down  the  interest  upon  any 
mortgage  upon  the  property,  *  but  he  is  not  bound  to  pay 
any  part  of  the  principal,  and  if  he  purchases  the  mortgage 
debt  it  inures  to  his  own  benefit.  *  He  is  bound  to  make 
such  repairs  as  are  necessary  to  prevent  waste,  but  is 
not  bound  to  a  higher  duty  in  this  respect.  *  The  tenant 
will  not  be  permitted  to  commit  waste  nor  seriously  im- 
pair the  value  of  the  reversion.  He  may  use  the  proper- 
ty as  he  pleases,  except  that  he  must  do  nothing  to  inter- 
fere with  the  interests  of  the  reversioner,  or  to  impair  the 
value  of  his  estate,  and  if  he  threatens  or  attempts  to  do 
so  equity  will  enjoin  him.*  The  liability  of  a  tenant  for 
life  under  a  demise,  may  be  different,  and  controlled  en- 
tirely by  the  contract,  especially  where  an  annual  rent  is 
reserved,  and  the  lease  itself  attempts  to  regulate  the  re- 
spective relations  and  liabilities  of  the  parties,  and  in  all 
cases  the  instrument  under  which  the  estate  is  created 
must  be  consulted  to  ascertain  the  exact  position  of  the 
tenant  to  the  remainderman,  as  the  ordinary  rights  of  a 
tenant  for  life  may  be  limited  or  enlarged  thereby. 

'  Foster  v.  Hilliard,  1  Story  (U.  Eq.  504 ;  Wilson  v.  Edmonds,  24  N. 

S.)  77.  H.  517.    Matter  of  State,  19  N.  J. 

'  MoBley  T.  Marfthall,  27  Barb.  (N.  Eq.  604. 

Y.)42.  *Langworthy  v.  Chadwick,   IS 

'  Bamum  y.  Bamum,  42  Md.  251.  Conn.  42  Cheshire  v.  Cheshire,  3 

*  Kearney  v.  Kearney,  17  N.  J.  Ired.  (N.  C.)  Eq.  569. 


CHAP,  tul] 


CHAPTER  Till. 

BSTATBS  FOBYEASS. 

Sec.  6S.  What  are. 

Ssc  64.  A  year,  what? 

Sec.  67.  A  mouth  in  law,  lunar.    With  four  exceptious. 

Sec.  68.  Origin  of  estates  forbears. 

Sec.  59.  Oulj  chattels. 

Sfic.  eO.  The  term,  what  7 

Sec,  6X.  The  lease.    Gives  a  right  of  entry.    And  the  entry  gives  the 

Sec.  68.  Term  may  expire  before  the  time. 

Sec.  S8.  The  lease  gives  no  possession. 

Sec.  64.  Lease  for  years  a  contract  for  possessiou  in  consideration  of 

Sec.  6S.  Lease  or  under  lease. 

Sbc.  68.  Concurrent  lease.    Lease  in  rercreiou. 

Sec.  S7.  The  disUnction  on  livery  and  grant  simplified. 

Sec.  66.  Leasee  must  be  by  deed  and  assignment  in  writing. 

Ssc.  69.  And  leases  by  the  state,  corporations,  and  husband  and 

wife,  must  be  by  deed, 

Ssa  to:  a  deed,  what? 

BBC  71.  Feoffment,  gift,  grant,  lease. 

Skc.  72,  The  components  of  a  lease. 

8ec.  73.  Qualities  of  this  species  of  tenauciea. 


ra  18  a  con- 
1  for  some 


142  Estates  fob  Tears.  [§  56. 

determinate  period  ;  and  it  takes  place  when  a  man  lets 
them  to  another  for  the  term  of  a  certain  number  of  years 
agreed  upon  between  the  lessor  and  the  lessee,  and  the 
lessee  enters  thereon.  If  the  lease  be  but  for  half  a  year, 
or  a  quarter,  or  any  less  time,  the  lessee  is  regarded  as  a 
tenant  for  years,  and  is  styled  so  in  some  legal  proceed- 
ings ;  a  year  being  the  shortest  term  of  which  the  law  in 
this  case  takes  notice. 

Sec.  56.  A  year,  what  P  —A  year  is  365  days,  for  though 
a  leap  year  has  366  days,  yet  by  the  21  H.  3,  s.  1,  the 
increasing  and  preceding  day  are  reckoned  as  one. 

Sec.  67.  A  month  in  law,  lunar.  With  four  exceptions. 
— A  month  is  more  ambiguous,  being  either  lunar,  con- 
sisting of  twenty-eight  days ;  thirteen  of  w^hich  make  a 
year ;  or  calendar,  of  which  there  are  twelve  in  a  year. 
A  month  in  law  is  a  lunar  month ;  therefore  a  lease  for 
twelve  months  is  only  for  forty -eight  weeks ;  but  if  it  be 
for  a  twelvemonth,  it  is  good  for  the  whole  year.  In  all 
statutes  a  month  signifies  a  lunar  month,  unless  it  ap- 
pears to  be  clearly  intenderj  to  be  a  calendar  month ;  and 
in  all  legal  documents  and  proceedings,  the  legal  month 
is  a  lunar  month,  except  in  bills  of  exchange  and  prom- 
issory notes,  cases  of  lapse,  and  quare  impeditj  in  which 
four  cases,  months  are  deemed  calendar  months.' 

Sec.  58.  Origin  of  estates  for  years.— These  estates  were 
originally  granted  to  mere  farmers  or  husbandmen,  who 
rendered  every  year  some  equivalent  in  money,  provi- 
sions, or  other  rent,  to  the  lessors  or  landlords ;  but  in 
order  to  encourage  them  to  manure  and  cultivate  the 
ground,  they  had  a  permanent  interest  granted  them, 
not  determinable  at  the  will  of  the  lord.  Their  posses- 
sion, however,  was  esteemed  of  so  little  consequence, 
that  they  were  rather  considered  as  the  bailiffs  or  ser- 

'  From  the  caaes  in  8  Wils.  21  and  ter  would  b^  more  simple  and  con- 

1  T.  R.  159,  it  appears  that  a  notice  venient ;  and  that  is  understood  to 

to  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  to  be  the  proper  notice  by  the  CJourt  of 

quit  the  premises,  must  be  half  a  Common  Pleas  in  2  BL  1224;  6  Co. 

ycary  and  not  six  calendar  months,  61. 
though  the  computation  by  the  lat- 


C3HAP.  vm.]  Only  Chattexs.  lis 

Tants  of  the  lord,  who  were  to  receive  and  account  for 
£he  profits  at  a  settled  price,  than  as  having  any  prop- 
erty of  their  own ;  they  were,  therefore,  not  allowed  to 
have  a  freehold  estate,  bat  their  interest,  such  as  it  was, 
vested  after  their  deaths  in  their  executors,  who  wei-e  to 
make  up  the  accounts  of  their  testator  with  the  lord,  and 
his  other  creditors,  and  were  entitled  to  the  stock  upon 
the  form.  The  lessee's  estate  might  also,  by  the  ancient 
law,  be  at  any  time  defeated  by  a  common  J-ecoVery  suf- 
fered by  the  tenant  of  the  freehold ;  which  annihilated 
all  leases  for  years  then  subsisting,  unless  afterwards  re- 
newed by  the  recoverer,  whose  title  was  supposed  to  be 
superior  to  his  by  whom  those  leases  were  granted. 

By  the  33  H.  8,  c.  11,  Ir.,  however,  the  termor  (that  is, 
he  who  is  entitled  to  the  term  for  years),  being  protected 
against  these  fictitious  recoveries,  and  his  interest  ren- 
dered secure  and  permanent,  long  terms  began  to  be  more 
frequent  than  before ;  and  were  afterwards  extensively 
introduced,  being  found  extremely  convenient  for  family 
settlements  and  mortgages. 

Sec.  59.  onij  ohsttels.—But  though  at  this  day  terms 
are  much  longer  in  their  duration  than  formerly,  and 
there  is  ample  remedy  to  recover  the  term  itself,  yet  the 
succession  continues  the  same.  All  leases  for  years  are 
held  by  law  to  be  of  less  value,  perhaps  it  would  be  more 
proper  to  say  of  less  dignity,  than  estates  for  life,  estates 
for  life  being  freeholds,  and  for  years  but  chattels,  and 
regarded  as  part  of  the  personal  estate,  and  cast  upon 
the  executor.  An  estate  even  for  the  life  of  another  is  a 
freehold,  but  an  estate  for  one  thousand  years  is  only  a 
chattel. 

which  mnsb 
iff  created,  is 
^nly  called  a 


And  the  on- 
to another  for 


144  Estates  fob  Teaks.  [§  62. 

so  many  years  as  A  shall  name,  it  is  a  good  lease  for 
years,  for  the  maxim  id  certum  est,  quod  cerium  reddi 
potest  applies.  If  no  day  of  commencement  is  named, 
it  begiaa  from  the  delivery  of  the  lease.  A  lease  for  so 
many  years  as  A  shall  live,  is  void  from  the  beginning, 
for  it  can  never  be  reduced  to  a  certainty,  but  a  lease  for 
twenty  years,  if  A  shall  live  so  long,  is  good,  A  lease 
for  years  may  commence  infuturo,  though  a  lease  for  life 
cannot ;'  if  A  grants  lauds  to  B  to  hold  from  April  next, 
for  twenty  years,  it  is  good,  but  to  hold  from  April  next, 
for  hislife,  was  formerly  treatedas  bad.  For  livery  can- 
not be  given  now,  of  an  estate  to  commence  infuturo. 
But  livery  is  not  necessary  to  a  lease  for  years  ;  therefore 
such  lessee  is  not  said  to  be  seized ;  nor  does  the  lease 
give  him  any  more  than  the  right  of  entry,  which  right 
is  called  his  interest  in  the  term  ;  but  when  he  enters, 
and  not  before,  he  is  possessed,  not  of  the  land,  but  of  a 
term  of  years  ;  the  possession  or  seizin  still  remaining  in 
him  who  has  the  freehold.  The  term  does  not  merely 
signify  the  time  specified  in  the  lease ;  it  means  that 
and  more  ;  it  means  the  time  in  the  lease,  and  the  inter- 
est conveyed  by  the  lease,  and  the  estate  vested  in  the 
lessee  by  the  possession.  In  fact  the  word  term  means 
the  estate,  and  the  word  termor  its  owner. 

Sec,  62.  Term  may  expire  before  the  time.— The  term  may 
expire  before  the  time.  If  a  lease  is  granted  to  A  for  the 
term  of  three  years,  and  after  the  expiration  of  said  term 
to  B  for  six  years,  and  A  surrenders  or  forfeits  his  lease 
at  the  end  of  one  year,  B's  interest immediatelytakesef- 
fect ;  but  if  the  remainder  had  been  to  B  after  the  expir- 
ation of  the  said  three  years,  or  from  and  after  the  ex- 
piration of  "  "  " 
commence 


no  possess 
fore  until 
vested  in  1 


CHAP,  vm.]  Lease  fob  Ybars.  145 

an  action  of  trespass  before  entry.  A  man  makes  alease 
to  J.  S.,  to  commence  at  the  feast  of  Saint  Michael ;  lessee 
may  gi-ant,  but  he  cannot  have  an  action  of  treapasa  be- 
fore entry." 

Sec.  64.  Lease  for  years  a  contract  for  possession  in  oon- 
sideFation  of  rent.— Mr,  Pinlay,  in  his  excellent  treatise 
upon  the  law  of  Landlord  and  Tenant,  p.  336,  thus  de- 
fines a  lease  for  years:  "A  lease  for  years  then  is  a  con- 
tract between  the  lessor  and  lessee  for  the  possession  and 
profits  of  lands  or  tenements,  &c.,  on  the  one  side,  and 
a  recomi)ense  for  rent,  or  other  income,  on  the  other. 
More  particularly  :  a  lease  is  a  species  of  conveyance,  and 
properly  signifies  a  demise,  or  letting  of  lands  or  tene- 
ments, rent,  common,  or  any  hereditament,  whether  cor- 
poreal or  incorporeal,  onto  another,  for  a  lesser  time  than 
he  that  lets  it  has  in  it ;  for  if  it  be  for  the  whole  interest, 
it  is  more  properly  an  assignment  than  alease." 

The  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  may  be  created  by 
assignment  or  lease. 

Sec.  65.  Lease  or  tmder  lease.— When  the  alienor  con- 
veys his  whole  estate  to  the  the  alienee,  leaving  no  re- 
version in  himself,  the  conveyance  amounts  to  an  assign- 
ment. When  he  grants  only  a  portion  of  his  estate,  re- 
serving to  himself  a  reversion,  the  conveyance  is  a  lease. 
AVhen  a  lessee  for  years  dispossesses  himself  of  his  term, 
reserving  a  reversion,  however  small,  as  only  one  day, 
the  transfer  is  called,  with  reference  to  the  original  lease, 
an  under-le^ise.' 

'  Browninff  v.  Bestoo,  Plow.  Ii3 ;     an  undertcaee,  and  not  an  assign- 
Smith  V.  Milla,  1  T.  R.  4S0.  ment  of  his  whole  term  in  a  portion 
'RUncn   v.  Bnirhv.  St  W\\k  SM.      fif  tlip  Ipajwhold  premiBee.     McNeil 
i  Mass.  245 ;  85  Am. 

nding  alone  that  the 
leaise  continued  in 
the  premises  aft«r 
saignment  does  not 
the  same  was  fraud- 
)der  him  liable  for 
r  accruing.  Tate  v. 
I  Hun.  (N.  Y.)  218. 

10 


146  Estates  for  Ye 

If  a  termor  for  years  make  a  leaf 
ing  his  terra,  it  will  operate  as  an  i 
see  for  three  years  demise  the  pr 
he  will  not  thereby  gain  any  tortii 
demise  will  amount  to  an  assignmi 

But  if  a  lessee /or  ?zwes  grants  all 
to  A  and  his  executors,  this  will  r 
because  a  grant  to  a  man  and  his  ex 
a  freehold.' 

The  distinction  between  an  assig 
pends  solely  upon  the  quantity  of 
and  not  upon  the  extent  of  the 
Where,  therefore,  the  lessee  of  a 
demises  ^ari  of  it  to  another  fort 
this  is  not  an  under-lease,  but  an  i 
and  so,  on  the  other  hand,  when  th 
seven  years  demises  the  whole  oi 
years  all  but  one  day,  this  is  an  u 
assignment.' 

An  assignment,  therefore,  creat" 
transfers  an  existing  estate  into  n 
under-lease,  creates  a  perfectly  nei 

Sec.  QQ,  Conourrent  lease.  Lease 
lease  is  made  to  commence  before  t 
sisting  lease,  it  is  called  a  concurT< 
to  commence  after  the  determinal 
it  is  a  lease  in  reversion.' 

Sec.  67.  The  distinction  of  livery 
There  are  two  main  divisions,  corpo 
of  things  substantial,  as  land  ;  orni 
or  tithe  ;  that  is,  of  things  lying  as 
ery  or  in  grant.  The  first  being 
common  law  alienated  by  livery  of  e 
of  mouth  before  witnesses  ;  and  i 
visible  nature  it  admitted  of  such 

'  Hicks  T.  Dowmng,  Ld.  Baym,  •  Cm 
89.  *WL 

'  Derby  v.  Taylor,  1  East,  503. 


CHAP,  vm.]  Leases  by  Deed.  147 

but  as  to  things  lying  in  grant,  these,  from  their  abstract 
nature,  were  not  in  facts  transferable ;  and  a  deed  was 
always  necessary  for  their  alienation,  the  delivery  of 
which  passed  the  property,  and  the  operative  words  of 
which  deed  were  dedi  et  concessit  *'I  have  given  and 
granted."  Therefore  land  at  common  law  might  pass  by 
word  of  month,  and  livery  of  seizin,  which  was  a  gift  by 
parol  before  witnesses,  was  the  usual  means  of  passing 
the  freehold,  except  where  it  passed  by  matter  of  record, 
or  under  the  statute  of  uses,  or  by  surrender,  release,  or 
confirmation,  in  which  cases  the  livery  was  unnecessary. 
But  leases  for  years  required  no  livery ;  they  were,  and 
still  are,  considered  mere  chattel  interests,  arising  from 
the  contract  between  the  parties,  and  passing  only  an 
interest  in  the  land,  and  not  the  freehold. 

Leases  for  years,  or  assignments  thereof,  might,  there- 
fore, by  the  common  law,  have  been  made  by  deed  or 
parol.  To  remedy  the  evils  arising  from  parol  demises, 
the  Statute  of  Frauds  was  enacted. 

Sec.  68.  Leases  must  be  by  deed  and  assignment  in  writ- 
ing.—All  leases  for  lives  or  for  a  longer  period  than  three 
years,  and  aU  assignments  and  surrenders,  must  be  by 
deed,  or  by  note  in  writing  signed  by  the  parties  or  their 
authorized  agents.  *  When  the  term  to  be  created  does 
not  exceed  three  years,  and  the  rent  amounts  to  two- 
thirdsof  the  annual  value,  a  parol  demise  is  still  sufficient. 
But  though  the  statute  does  not  require  that  an  assign- 
ment should  be  by  deed,  it  absolutely  requires  that  in  all 
cases  it  should  be  in  writing ;  and  therefore  where  a  parol 
assignment  was  made  of  a  lease  from  year  to  year  which 
had  been  granted  by  parol,  it  was  held  to  be  void  under 
the  statute,' 

Sec.  69.  And  leases  by  the  State,  corporations,  and  hus- 
band and  wife,  must  be  by  deed.—It  is  to  be  obperved,  that 
the  State  cannot  demise  by  parol  for  any  term,  however 
short ;  for  it  can  only  grant  leases  by  patent  under  the 

»  Shep.  Touch.  210.  •  Warner  v.  Browne,  8  East,  167. 


148  Estates  for  Tears.  [§  70. 

seal  of  the  State.  '  And  in  like  manner  a  corporation  ag- 
gregate can  only  make  leases  under  the  corporate  seal/ 
And  it  has  been  always  held  necessary,  that  a  lease  by 
husband  and  wife,  of  the  wife's  lands  should  be  hy  deedj 
or  it  will  be  absolutely  void,  and  cannot  be  confirmed  by 
the  wife  after  her  husband's  death  ;  because  her  assent 
is  necessary,  ab  initio,  and  that  assent  ought  to  be  by  deed.  * 

Sec.  70.  a  deed,  what  ?- A  deed  factum  is  a  written  in- 
strument comprehending  a  contract  betwixt  party  and 
party.  There  are  many  kinds  of  deeds,  but  for  the  pur- 
poses of  this  treatise,  it  is  only  necessary  to  notice  the 
four  following  :  first,  a  feoffment ;  secondly,  a  gift ;  third- 
ly, a  grant ;  fourthly,  a  lease. 

Sec.  71.     FeofEhient,  gift,  grant,  lease.— A  feoffment  is  a 
gift  of  any  corporeal  hereditament  to  another  in  fee.    A 
gift  or  donatian  is  applied  to  the  creation  of  an  estate  in 
tail,  as  feoffment  is  to  that  of  an  estate  in  fee:  and  lease 
to  that  of  an  estate  for  life  or  years ;  it  differs  in  nothing 
from  a  feoffment,  but  in  the  nature  of  the  estate  passing 
by  it.    A  grant.is  the  instrument  of  transferring  the  prop- 
erty of  incorporeal  hereditaments,  or  such  things  where- 
of no  livery,  that  is  de-livery,  can  be  had,  from  their  un- 
substantial and  abstract  nature,  and  for  this  reason  all 
corporeal  hereditaments  are  said  to  lie  in  livery,  and  all 
incorporeal  to  lie  in  grant :  in  the  first  case  the  property 
is  transferred  by  the  livery,  that  is  the  cfo-livery,  of  the 
land  ;  in  the  last  case,  the  property  is  transferred  and 
always  was,  by  the  delivery  of  the  deed.    A  lease  is  prop- 
erly a  conveyance  of  any  lands  or  tenements,  in  consid- 
eration of  rent  or  other  annual  recompense  made  for  life, 
for  years,  or  at  will,  but  always  for  a  less  time  than  the 
lessor  has  in  the  premises. 

Sec.  72.  The  components  of  a  lease.— Begularly  these 
things  must  concur  in  the  making  of  every  lease.  1. 
There  must  be  a  lessor,  and  he  must  be  a  person  able,  and 

»  Botting  V.  Martin,  1  Camp.  880.      Tumey  v.  Stnrgess,  Dy.  91 ;  Wal- 
«  Lane's  Caae,  2  Coke,  17.  sal  v.  Heath,  Cro.  El.  056. 

"Patrick  v.  Balls,  Carth.  390; 


CHAP,  vin.]  Qualities  of  Tenabcibs.  U9 

not  restrained,  to  make  the  lease.  2.  There  must  be  a  les- 
see, and  he  must  be  capable  of  taking  the  thing  demised, 
and  not  disabled  to  receive  it.  3.  There  must  be  a  thing 
demised,  andsuchathingasisdemisable.  4.  Ifthe thing 
demised  is  not  grantable  without  a  deed,  or  the  party  de- 
mising is  not  able  to  grant  without  a  deed,  the  lease  must 
be  made  by  deed  ;  and  if  eo,  then  there  must  be  a  suffi- 
cient description  and  setting  forth  of  the  person  of  the 
lessor,  lessee,  and  the  thing  leased ;  and  all  necessary  cir- 
cumstances, as  sealing,  delivery,  &c.,  required  in  other 
grants,  must  be  observed.  5.  If  it  is  a  lease  for  years,  it 
must  have  a  certain  commencement,  at  least  when 
it  comes  to  take  effect  in  interest  or  possession,  and  a 
certain  determination,  either  by  an  express  enumeration 
of  years  or  by  reference  to  a  certainty  that  is  expressed, 
or  by  reducing  it  to  a  certainty  upon  some  contingent, 
precedent  by  matter  ex  post  facto,  and  then  the  contin- 
gent must  happen  before  the  death  of  the  lessor 
or  lessee.  6.  There  must  be  all  needful  ceremonies,  as 
livery  of  seizin,  attornment,  and  the  like,  in  all  cases, 
where  they  are  requisite.  7.  There  must  be  an  accept- 
ance of  the  thing  demised  and  of  the  estate,  by  the  les- 
see. But  whether  any  part  is  reserved  upon  a  lease  for 
life,  years,  or  at  will,  or  not,  is  immaterial ;  except  only 
in  the  cases  of  leases  made  by  tenant  in  tail,  husband 
and  wife,  and  ecclesiastical  persons.' 

Sec.  73.  Qualities  of  this  species  of  teDaaoies.— A  lease 
for  a  terra  of  years,  whether  for  a  long  or  short  period, 
confers  only  a  chattel  interest.'  Formerly,  the  tenant 
was  regarded  as  the  servant  or  bailiff  of  the  lord,  and  ac- 
countable to  him  for  the  nrofits  of  the  land,  and  had  no 
iually  his  legal  posi- 
ing  treated  as  a  ser- 

dh'b  Abr.  tit.  Leafiefi(A.)i 
on  Tenurea,  SO ;  Case  of 
■nsbuiy  Lease,  1  Bligh, 
>S;   3  Biackstime'a  Com. 


150  Estates  for  Teaks.  [§  74:. 

vant  or  bailiff  of  the  lord,  and  bound  to  account  for  the 
profits  of  the  land,  he  acquired  a  definite  or  limited  in- 
terest therein,  for  which  he  rendered  a  specific  rent,  gen- 
erally consisting  of  grain,  provisions  and  other  products 
of  the  lands.  This  species  of  estate '  *  has  always  retained 
the  bound  of  its  original  inferiority,"  says  Mr.  Platt,* 
but,  he  adds,  "time,  and  a  more  just  appreciation  of  his 
position  in  the  community  have  concurred  in  levelling 
many  of  the  distinctions  formerly  existing  between  him 
and  the  freeholder." 

Formerly,  leases  for  a  long  time,  as  for  more  than  for- 
ty years,  were  held  to  be  void,  *  but  at  the  present  day  no 
restraint  is  imposed  upon  their  duration, '  and  leases  for 
99  and  999  years  are  of  common  occurrence,  and  in  some 
instances  we  find  leases  for  ten  thousand  years.  *  A  lease 
from  hour  to  hour,  or  from  month  to  month,  or  from 
year  to  year,  during  forty  years,  is  a  good  lease  for  forty 
years,*  and  a  lease  for  "  a  year,  and  so  from  year  to  year, 
until  six  years  expire,"  is  a  lease  for  six  years  certain, 
and  so  is  a  lease  for  **  a  year,  and  so  from  year  to  year, 
as  long  as  both  parties  agree,  till  six  years  expire,"  but, 
in  the  latter  case  the  lease  is  for  six  years,  with  power 
on  the  part  of  either  party  to  determine  it  at  the  end  of 
any  year.  * 

Sec.  74.  How  created.— This  species  of  tenancy  is  al- 
ways created  by  express  contract,  and,  as  previously  stat- 
ed, no  limit  is  imposed  by  law  as  to  the  number  of  years 
for  which  leases  may  be  made.  The  lease,  however, 
must  be  certain  in  its  commencement^  in  its  continuance^ 
and  in  its  termination,  and  if  it  fails  in  either  of  these 
respects  it  lacks  certainty,  and  is  not  a  good  lease  for  a 
term.  ^    Such  leases,  however,  may  be  made  to  commence 

"  1  Piatt  on  Leasee,  5.  *  Dod  v.  Monyer,  6  Mod.  215. 

«  Co.  litt.  45  6 ;  1  Vent.  58  ;  Ris-  '  Plowden's  Com.  272.    In  New 

den  V.  Tuflln,  Toth.  187.  York  agricultural  leases  for  more 

*  Browne  v.  Tlghe,  8  Bli.  P.  C,  than  twelve  years,  in  which  any 
N.  S.  272.  rent  or  service  of  any  kind  is  re- 

*  Cadwallder  v.  App.,  81  Penn.  served,  are  declared  invalid  by  the 
St.  78.  Constitution.    Art.  1,  Sec.  14,  Con- 

*  Plowden,  273,  522.  stitution  of  New  York. 


CHAP,  vin.]       Detekmdjable  at  Option.  151 

in  presente,  or  from  a  past  or  a  future  day,'  or  may  be 
made  to  depend  upon  a  contingency,  provided  a  definite 
term  of  a  certain  number  of  years  is  fixed  upon  for  which 
the  lease  is  to  continue  in  force,  unless  such  contingency 
happens.  Thus  a  lease  for  twenty  one  yeare,  if  A  shall 
live  60  long,  is  a  good  lease  for  twenty-one  years  if  A 
Uves,  or  as  long  as  A  lives  if  he  dies  within  the  term.' 
So  a  lease  for  twenty  years  if  the  coverture  between  certain 
persons  shall  continue, '  or  for  twenty-one  years  if  the 
tenant  shall  continue  to  occupy,  *  or  if  the  lessee  shall 
pay  a  certain  rent,  or  furnish  food,  lodging  and  clothing 
for  a  certain  person.  In  all  these  cases,  as  well  as  in  all 
cases  where  the  duration  of  the  term  is  fixed,  but  is  de- 
pendent upon  a  condition  or  a  contingency,  it  is  a  good 
lease  for  the  whole  term  if  the  condition  is  complied  with, 
or  if  the  contingency  does  not  occur,  but  if  the  condition 
is  not  comphed  with,  or  if  the  contingency  does  occur, 
the  term  is  ended. ' 

Sec.  79,  May  be  determinable  at  option  of  either  party-— 
So  a  lease  for  years  may  be  made  determinable  at  speci- 
fied periods  at  the  option  of  either  party  thereto,'  but  if 
any  condition  is  imposed  as  a  condition  precedent  to  the 
exercise  of  such  option,  it  must  be  complied  with.  Thus, 
where  a  lease  of  a  mine  was  made  for  forty  years,  but 
with  a  provision  that  the  lessee  might  put  an  end  to  the 
lease  at  any  time  within  the  first  eight  years,  "  and  of 
such  desire,  should  give  the  lessors  notice  in  writing 
eighteen  calendar  months  before  the  expiration  of  said 
eighth  year,  then,  alt  arrears  of  rent  being  paid,  and  all 
and  singular  the  cotrenants  and  agreements  on  the  pari  of 
the  lessee  having  been  performed,  the  lease  at  the  expira- 
B  void,"  it  was  held  that, 
plied  with  as  a  condition 
1  option  by  the  lessee,  in- 

Lockwood  T.Clarke,  8  EastISS, 
Doe  V.  Carter,  8  T.  R.  57 ;     Doe 

lawke,  2  East,  181 ;    Lockwood 
!;iarke,  ante. 

Friar  v.  Gray,  5  Eichg.  584  ; 
ton  T.  Lingham,  1  Starkie,  39. 


152  Estates  foe  Teaes.  [§  76. 

eluding  the  payment  of  all  arrears  of  rent.'  So  where 
the  lease  provides  that  either  party  may  terminate  the 
term  at  the  end  of  the  first  three  or  five  years  by  giving 
*'  six  months'  previous  notice  in  writing,"  the  giving  of 
such  notice  in  the  manner  specified,  is  a  condition  prece- 
dent to  the  exercise  of  such  option,  and  must  be  strictly 
complied  with.*  A  lease  for  "three,  six  or  nine  years," 
is  a  lease  for  nine  years,  determinable  at  the  end  of  three 
or  six  years.'  If  a  lease  for  a  terra  is  made  determin- 
able at  certain  specified  periods,  and  nothing  is  said  as  to 
the  person  by  whom  the  option  is  to  be  exercised,  tlte 
lessee  only  can  exercise  it,  every  doubtful  grant  being 
construed  in  favor  of  the  grantee,*  but,  a  lease  made  de- 
terminable before  the  expiration  of  the  term,  "if  the 
parties  see  fit,"  *  can  only  be  determined  by  the  consent 
of  both  parties.' 

Sec.  76.  when  opUon  is  paTfloiial.-~If  the  option  is  con- 
fined to  the  parties  to  the  lease,  as,  "either  party  may, 
by  six  months'  notice  in  writing,  determine  this  lease  at 
the  end  of  the  first  or  any  subsequent  year, "  the  option  is 
personal  and  confined  to  the  lessor  and  lessee,  and  can  be 
exercised  by  no  other  person  ;  but  where  the  option  is  giv- 
en to  either  party,  "  his  executors,  administrators,  &c. ,"  it 
is  held  to  extend  to  a  devisee  of  the  lessor,  who  is  enti- 
tled to  the  rent  and  reversion.* 

Sec.  11.  Leases  for  fixed  term,  and  then  ftom  year  to 
year.— Leases  may  be  granted  for  a  certain  number  of 
years,  and  then  from  year  to  year.'     Thus  a  demise  for 

1  Friar  v.  Grey,  imte  ;  Porter  t.  pose  to  end  the  tenancT  atacertain 
Shepard,  6  T.  R.  665.  time  is  sufficient,  although  given 

'Fort^Tv.Shepard,  ante,  and  the  in  the  form  of  a  notice  to  quit, 
notice  will  be  iuop 
in  any  other  mannc 
ified  in  the  lease, 
nez,  11  Ad.  dt  El.  T 
requires  the  node* 
wrnfinsr,  verbal  noti' 
but  if  no  other  cone 
except  that  it  shall 
a  certain  number 
form  of  notice  is  i 
any  notiie  in  writli 
quaints  the  other  {i 


CHAP.  Tin.]       Detekminatios  of  Term.  153 

'  a  term  of  three  years,  determinable  on  a  six  months' 
previous  notice  to  quit,  othervnse  to  continue  from  year 
to  year  until  the  term  shall  cease  by  notice  to  quit  at  the 
usual  times,"  is  held  to  be  a  lease  for  three  years  certain, 
determinable  only  at  the  end  of  that  period  by  sis  months' 
previous  notice  ;  and  if  not  so  determined  is  a  subsistii^ 
tenancy  from  year  to  year. '  So  a  lease  may  be  granted 
for  a  certain  fixed  term,  with  an  option  to  the  lessee  to 
take  a  lease  for  a  further  term.' 

The  option  so  given  may  be  exercised  cU  any  time  dur- 
ing the  continvance  of  the  tenancy,  though  after  the  ex- 
piration of  the  tenn  of  years  first  specified,  and  passes  to 
his  assignee  in  bankruptcy,'  as  such  option  is  treated  as  a 
personal  chattel,  presei^t  and  future.'  The  fact  that  the 
tenant,  who  remains  in  possession,  has  done  that  which 
is  inconsistent  with  the  exercise  of  such  option  in  his 
favor  will  not  deprive  him  in  all  cases  of  its  benefits. 
Thus,  where  an  agreement  was  entered  into  by  which  A 
agreed  to  let  a  house  to  B  for  three  years  at  a  yearly  rent, 
and  also  agreed  at  the  request  of  B  to  grant  him  a  lease 
for  a  term  of  five,  seven,  fourteen  or  twenty-one  years 
from  the  expiration  of  such  three  years,  at  the  same  rent, 
the  tenant  undertaking  to  keep  the  house  in  repair,  it 
was  held  that  the  tenant  was  entitled  four  years  after 
the  expiration  of  the  three  years  occupancy,  to  have  the 
agreement  for  the  lease  specifically  performed,  and  that, 
neither  an  application  made  by  him  two  years  previously 
for  a  lease  at  reduced  rent,  nor  an  application  to  the  land- 
lord for  payment  of  an  amount  expended  in  repairs 
(which  had  been  allowed  to  the  tenant  by  the  landlord), 
amounted  to  a  waiver  of  his  rights,  although  the  court 
i._ij  j.v-4. 1 X  ^-t.-a  iu ^j.  jj£  jjjg  repairs.' 

.  A  lease  for  a  fixed  term 
ITS,  expires  by  efflux  of 

Ackland  v.  Luttey.  9  Ad.  &  El 
A  lease  for  one  year  from 
ril  iBt,  expires  March  Blst,  suc- 
tinff.  Mary's  v.  Andereon, 
3 :  Biddle  V.  Vandeventer,  26 
500. 


164 


Estates  for  Tears. 


[§79. 


time  upon  the  last  moment  of  the  last  day  of  the  term,  the 
rule  being  that  a  lease  for  years  lasts  during  the  anni- 
versary of  the  day  from  which  they  are  granted,^  and  a 
lease  made  from  the  25th  of  March,  1878,  for  one  year, 
does  not  expire  until  twelve  o'clock  at  night  of  the  25th 
of  March,  1879,  and  an  entry  made  by  the  landlord  before 
that  time  without  the  assent  of  the  tenant  is  unlawful,' 
and  a  lease  made  for  the  month  of  August  does  not  expire 
until  twelve  o'clock  at  night  of  the  last  day  of  August." 

Sec.  79.  Il'otioe  to  quit.— -A  tenant  for  a  term  is  not  en* 
titled  to  any  notice  to  quit.  His  term  expires  by  elBBlux 
of  time  on  the  last  day  thereof,  and  he  is  bound  to  quit 
at  that  time,^  and  the  landlord  may  take  possession  of 
the  premises  by  any  means  short  of  personal  violence,*  or 
he  may  treat  the  tenant  as  a  trespasser,'  or  as  a  tenant 
for  another  year  upon  the  terms  of  the  former  lease/  A 
disclaimer  of  the  tenancy  by  a  tenant  for  a  deSnite  term, 
does  not  cause  a  forfeiture  of  his  estate,"  nor  does  pay- 
ment of  rent  to  a  person  not  entitled  to  it ;  *  but  fraud- 
ulently  delivering  up  possession  of  the  premises  to  a  per- 
son claiming  under  a  title  hostile  to  the  landlord  does 
have  that  effect." 


*  Moss  V.  Baxton,  L.  R,  1  Eq.  Cas. 
474. 

«Pugh  V.  The  Duke  of  Leeds,  2 
Camp.  714;  Mary's  v.  Anderson, 
2  Grant's  (Penn.)  Cas.  446. 

'People  V.  Gk)elet,  64Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
476. 

*  Young  V.  Smith,  28  Mo.  65; 
Hendrick  v.  Cannon,  5  Tex.  248; 
Mosher  v.  Reding,  12  Me.  478; 
Lithgow  V.  Mood,  35  Me.  214;  Mc- 
Clain  V.  Doe,  5  Ind.  287 ;  Pierson 
V.  Turner,  2  id.  128. 

•Todd  V.  Jackson,  26  N.  J.  L. 
565. 

•Rowan  v.  Little,  11  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  616;  Webber  v.  Shearman,  8 


HiU  (N.  Y.)  647;  HemphiU  v 
Flynn,  2  Penn.  St.  144 ;  Brown  v 
Keller,  32  111.  151 ;  Den.  v.  Adams* 
12  N.  J.  L.  99. 

'  Hoof  T.  Ladd,  1  Cr.  (U.  S.  C. 
C.)  167 ;  Quinette  v.  Carpenter,  85 
Mo.  522 ;  Hemphill  v.  Flynn,  ante ; 
Hunt  V.  Bailey,  34  Mo.  257 ;  Brew- 
er V.  Knapp,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  832 ; 
Harkins  v.  Pope,  10  Ala.  493. 

« Powell  V.  King,  Forrest,  19; 
Graves  v.  Wells,  10  Ad.  &  EL  427. 

•Dillon  V.  Parker,  Gow.  180; 
Williams  v.  Pasquelli,  Peake,  196. 

loEUenbrockv.  Flynn,  1  C.  M.  & 
R.  187. 


ra 


CHAP.  IX.] 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Generally, 

Leaaebyteii&iit:  valid  when.   How  far  bmdiagnpoti  himself. 
By  tenant  at  will. 
By  tenant  by  BuSerance. 
By  tenants  by  curtesy,  dower,  life,  &o. 
8kc  86.    Lease  by  tenant  per  autre  vie. 

Sec.  80.  OeneraUy.— Any  person,  who  by  law  may 
hold  real  estate,  and  who  is  under  no  legal  disability,  may 
make  a  lease  of  lands  that  accords  with  his  estate  or  in- 
terest therein  ;  and  it  seems  that,  even  though  the  estate 
demised  is  in  excess  of  his  interest  therein,  it  will  be 
operated  to  the  extent  of  his  actual  estate,  but  will  not 
confer  any  right  or  interest  that  the  lessor  did  not  him- 
self possess,  as  the  maxim  nevw  plus  juris,  in  alium  trans- 
ferre  potest  quam  ipse  hahet  applies. '  But,  while  a  lease 
in  excess  of  the  lessor's  estate,  ia  void  as  to  those  whose 
estate  it  infringes  upon,  yet,  as  between  the  lessor  and  the 
lessee,  it  is  good  by  way  of  estoppel,  as  to  such  estate  as 
the  lessor  has,  and  either  party  may  maintain  an  action 
upon  the  lease  for  a  breach  of  its  conditions."  Such  leases 

'Sutton's  Casoi  13  Mod.  CST;  by  proof  of  parol  agreemeDte, 
Bragg  T.  Wiaemen,  Br.  &  G.  22 ;     prior  or  contemporaneous.     Kent 

11 n — u   o  Ti   ff.^   om      T_     : — :j — '  to  tM  reversion,  and 

ircbaeer  or  aeeigiiee, 
,  but  a  note  given  for 
ssignable,  and  being 
re  a  BOie  and  convey- 
rremiies  to  the  lessee 
ait  is  thereby  severed 
'eralDn,  and  the  as- 
led  to  recover  it. 
T.  Qower,  11  Ezchq, 


156 


Who  may  be  Lessors. 


[§80. 


confer  no  interest  in  the  land^  but  are  operative  only  by 
way  of  estoppel  between  the  parties.*  The  lease,  if  for  a 
longer  term  than  the  lessor  possessed,  operates  as  an 
assignment  of  such  an  estate  as  the  lessor  has.  Thus,  if 
a  tenant  for  years  grants  a  lease  for  a  greater  number  of 
years  than  his  estate  endures,  while  the  lease  is  void  as  to 
Ihe  person  who  leased  to  him,  or  who  is  entitled  to  the 
estate  upon  the  termination  of  his  interest,  yet  the  lease 
takes  effect  as  an  assignment  of  his  original  term,  and 
cuts  off  his  reversionary  interest  therein,  and  consequently 
his  right  to  distrain  for  the  rent."  But,  a  lease  executed 
by  a  person,  conveying  a  greater  interest  than  he  pos- 
sessed, only  operates  by  way  of  estoppel  as  to  such  estate 
as  he  had  at  the  time  of  its  execution^  and  does  not  pre- 
vent him  from  setting  up,  as  against  his  tenant,  an  after- 
acquired  estate  therein,  after  the  termination  of  the  estate 
which  he  had  at  the  time  when  the  lease  was  executed.  * 
But  the  rule  is  otherwise  when  the  lessor  at  the  time  of 
the  demise  had  no  estate  whatever  in  the  premises  demised, 
as  in  that  case,  a  tenancy  by  estoppel,  and  also  a  reversion 
in  fee  by  estoppel,  is  created,  and  if  the  lessor  subsequent- 
ly acquires  an  estate  in  the  premises,  it  inures  to  the  bene- 
fit of  his  tenant,  who  has  entered  under  the  lease.* 
Where,  however,  a  lease  is  executed  by  one  who  has  no 
estate  in  the  premises  demised,  the  tenant  who  enters  in- 
to possession  under  it  is  a  trespasser  as  to  the  real  own- 
er.' And  if  he  has  given  notes  or  other  obligations  for 
the  rent,  a  court  of  equity  will  rescind  the  contract  and 
enjoin  the  collection  of  the  notes."  This  much,  in  refer- 
ence to  leases  by  estoppel,  has  been  referred  to,  to  illus- 


>Pabke,  B.,  in  Yellowly  v.  Gow- 
er,  ante. 

*Pascoe  V.  Pascoe,  8  Bing.  N.  C. 
898;  Hicks  v.  Downing,  1  Ld. 
Kayd.  99 ;  Preece  v.  Bame,  5  Bine. 
24;  Wallaston  v.  Hukewill,  3  M. 
&  G.  297 ;  Palmer  v.  Edwards,  1 
Doug.  187  n;  Baker  v.  Gosling,  4 
Moore  &  S.  589 ;  Pluck  v.  Digges, 
5  Bligh.  N.  S.  81. 

•Cuthbertson  v.  Irving,  4  H.  & 
N.  742,  aflfd.  6  id.  186 ;  Leicester  v. 
Behoboth,  4  Mass.  180 ;  4  Bacon's 


Abr.  (O.)  192.  See  Leases  bt  Es- 
toppel, post. 

*Ck).  lltt.  47,  227  a;  2  RoUe's 
Abr.  871 ;  4  Bacon's  Abr.  189  (O.); 
Jolly  V,  Arbuthnot,  4  De.  G.  A;  J. 
224 ;  Morton  v.  Woods,  L.  R.  4  Q. 
B.  293.  It  is  good  against  the  les- 
sor by  conclusion,  Rawlyn's  Case, 
4  Coke,  58  a. 

*WoodfaD'sL.  AT.  8. 

*  Sunderson  v.  Lighe,  10  Hursk, 
(Tenn.)  299. 


CHAP.  IX.]  Lease  by  Tenant.  167 

trate  the  proposition  first  stated  in  this  section.  From 
what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  seen,  that  any  person  legal- 
ly competent  to  make  a  contract  obligatory  upon  himself, 
may  part  with  any  interest  that  he  possesses  in  an  estate, 
by  lease  executed  by  him,  and  that  this  is  so,  however 
small  an  estate  or  interest  therein  he  may  possess. 

Sec.  81.  Lease  by  tenant;  valid  when.  How  flBur  binding 
upon  himBelf.— When  a  lease  contains  no  covenant  or  stip- 
ulation against  the  sub-letting  of  the  premises,  a  ten- 
ant in  possession  under  it  may  sub-let  the  entire  premises, 
or  a  part  thereof,  to  another,  to  be  used  for  any  purpose 
not  inconsistent  with  the  demise  to  him,*  or  may  assign 
the  lease  or  his  interest  in  the  premises.*  But  the  sub- 
tenant is  the  tenant  of  his  lessor,  and  not  of  the  original 
landlord.*  But,  if  a  lessee  sub-lets  a  part  of  the  premises, 
or  the  whole  of  them,  for  an  unlawful  purpose,  or  for  a 
purpose  inconsistent  with  his  lease,  his  lease  is  not  there- 
by avoided,*  but  the  landlord  may  apply  to  a  court  of 
equity  to  restrain  him  and  his  sub-tenant  from  occupy- 
ing the  premises  in  a  manner,  or  for  a  purpose  inconsist- 
ent with  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  let  to  the  original 
tenant,*  unless  the  lease  expressly  provides  that  upon 
such  use  it  shall  be  void,  in  which  case  he  may  treat  the 
tenancy  as  at  an  end,  and,  being  entitled  to  the  immedi- 
ate possession  of  the  premises,  may  maintain  trespass 
against  any  person  who  interferes  with  the  property  after 
the  tenancy  is  ended.*     In  Louisiana  it  is  held  that  a 

*  Bromlin  v.  Theiss,  81  Ala.  412 ;  •  In  Parkman  t.  Aicardi,  84  Ala. 
Bedford  v.  Terhune,  8  N.  Y.  458 ;.  898,  the  premises  were  leased  to 
Wheeler  v  Hill,  16  Me.  829 ;  Healey  the  defendant,  who  was  a  druggist, 
▼.  Trout,  16  Gray  (Mass.)    812.  and  who  occupied  them  for  a  drug 

•Cooney  v.  Hayes,  40  Vt.  478;  store.    Knowmg  that  the  landlord 

Bobinson  v.  Perry,  21  Ga.'  188.    As  would  not  lease  them  to  be  used  as 

to  the  distinction  between  an  un-  a   bar-room,  he  entered   into   an 

der-lease   and  an  assignment,  see  agreement  to  sub-let  them  for  that 

Chapter  on  * 'Assignment  of  Leas-  purpose,  and  also  agreed  with  his 

l'  ee,"  post.  sub-tenant  to  obtain  a  renewal  of 

•Cumey  v.  Mclntyre,  88  Ga.  261,  the  lease  in  his  own  name  for  that 

*  Healey  v.  Trout,  15  Gray  purpose.  The  court  restrained  him 
(Mass.)  812,  nor  is  the  lease  forfeit-  and  his  sub-tenant  from  using  the 

^1.                   ed  if  the  defendant,  without  the  premises  for  a  bar-room. 

knowledge  of  the  lessee,  uees  the  •  Shepard  v.  Briggs,  26  Vt.  149. 

premises   for  an    illegal   purpose,  But  this  is  only  the  case  when  such 

O'Connell    v.  McGratn,    14  Allen  use  is  in  violation  of  the  express 

'    '■            (Mass.)  289.  terms  of  the  lease.    Id. 


153 


Who  mat  bb  Lbssobs. 


[§82. 


sub-letting,  in  violation  of  the  terms  of  the  lease,  entitles 
the  landlord  to  have  the  lease  dissolved, '  but  the  lease  is 
not  thereby  ipso  facto  dissolved,  unless  there  is  an  express 
provision  in  the  lease  to  the  effect  that  a  breach  of  this 
condition  shall  avoid  the  lease,  or  that,  upon  such  breach 
the  landlord  may  re-enter,  in  which  latter  case,  he  may 
elect  to  treat  the  lease  as  terminated,  or  he  may  waive 
the  breach."  A  mere  provision  or  agreement  that  the 
lessee  shall  not  sub-let,  without  any  reservation  of  aright 
of  re-entry,  or  provision  that  the  lease  shall  therefore  be- 
come void,  is  treated  as  a  covenant  merely,  that  leaves 
the  lessor  to  seek  relief  either  in  an  action  at  law,  or  by 
bill  in  equity.* 

Sec.  82.  By  tenant  at  wiU.— Strictly  speaking,  a  tenant 
at  will  has  no  demisable  estate  in  the  premises,  as,  if  he 
leaises  the  premises  with  notice  to  his  landlord,  his  estate 
is  determined  by  the  determination  of  the  will  under 
which  ho  holds  ;*  but,  while  he  cannot  as  against  the 
landlord  constitute  another  person  tenant  at  will,  yet 
there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  but  that  he  may  make  a  per- 
son tenant  at  will  as  against  himself  *  if  such  person  un- 
der a  lease  from  him  enters  into  possession  of  the  prem- 
ises. In  such  case,  a  tenancy  by  estoppel  is  cre- 
ated between  him  and  his  lessor,*  and  is  binding 
upon  him."       The  estate  of  such  under-lessee  is  deter- 


1  Bryan  v.  French,  20  La.  An. 
868. 

*  4  Bacon's  Abr.  221,  Litt.  s.  825 ; 
Darke  v.  Bowditch,  8  Q.  B.  978. 

» Willfion  V.  Phillips,  2  Bing.  13 ;  • 
Darke  v.  Bowditch,  8  Q.   B.  973 ; 
Rudd  V.  Gelding,  6  Moo.  281 ;  Rains 
V.  Kneller.  4  C.  &  P.  3. 

*  Shaw  V.  Barber,  Cro.  Eliz.  830 ; 
Moss  V.  Gallimore,  1  Doug.  279,  1 
Inst.  57 ;  Sweeper  v.  Randall,  Cro. 
Eliz.  156 ;  Birch  v.  Wright,  1  T.  B. 
882 ;  Cole  on  Ejectment,  449,  con- 
sequently the  lease  determines  up- 
on the  death  of  the  landlord.  Pot- 
ter V.  Arden,  1  B.  A;  P.  531;  Ex. 
Parte  Smyth,  1  Swanst,  855 ;  Simp- 
son V.  Butcher,  1  Doug.  50 ;  Sym- 
t)ns  V.  Symons,  6  Modd.  207,  or  of 
the  cestui  que  vie;   Bowes  v.  K 


London W.  Co.  8Madd.  875 ;  Jordon 
V.  Ward,  1  H.  Bl.  97;  Potter  v. 
Archer,  ante ;  Wynne  v.  Humph- 
reys, 1  Doug.  52  ;  Ludford  v.  asu- 
ber,  1 T.  R.  95 ;  Hall  v.  Arrowsmith, 
Poph.  105;  Yate  v.  Church,  2 
Cowp.  482. 

*  (ioody  V.  Carter,  9  Q.  B.  865. 
Strictly  speaking,  the  tenancy  at 
will  Sa  ended  upon  a  demise  made 
by  the  tenant  at  will,  but  so  long 
as  his  tenant  occupies  the  estate 
under  him,  he  must  yield  rent  to 
him,  because  as  between  them  he 
is  estopped  from  denying  his  title. 

•  Cole  on  Ejectment,  449 ;  Blun- 
den  V.  Baugh,  Cro.  Car.  802 ;  Goody 
V.  Carter,  ante. 

^  Blunden  y.  Baugh,  *ante. 


i^ 


CHAP.  EC.]       By  Tenant  by  Sufferance.  169 

mined  by  the  determination  of  the  estate  under  which  his 
grantor  holds,  as  no  person  can  confer  on  another  a  greater 
estate  than  he  himself  has/  therefore,  if  the  lessor  dies,' 
or  the  cestui  que  vie^^  the  estate  is  ended.  But  an  under 
lease  or  an  assignment  of  the  premises  or  lease  without 
the  knowledge  of,  or  notice  to,  the  landlord,  does  not  per 
se  determine  the  estate.  The  rule  is,  that  a  tenant  at  will 
cannot  determine  the  tenancy  at  will  without  either  giving 
notice  to  the  landlord,  or  by  transferring  it  with  notice  to 
himj"  and  in  a  later  English  case,  decided  in  Exchequer 
in  1853,  the  court  expressly  decided  that  a  sub-demise  by 
a  tenant  at  will  does  not  determine  the  tenancy,  and  ful- 
ly sustained  the  doctrine  of  the  case  last  cited .'  The  land- 
lord may,  by  accepting  rent  from  the  lessee  of  a  tenant 
at  will,  constitute  such  lessee  a  tenant  at  will,  under  him.' 

Sec.  83.  By  tenant  by  sufferance.— The  same  rule  is  ap- 
plicable in  the  case  of  a  tenant  by  sufferance.  He  has  no 
demisable  estate  or  interest  whatever,  and  cannot,  as 
against  the  landlord,  make  another  tenant  by  sufferance," 
but  as  against  himself,  by  such  a  demise  a  tenancy  by  es- 
toppel is  created.'  The  tenant  holding  under  him  acquires 
no  right  to  the  possession  of  the  premises  as  against  any 
one  except  the  tenant  under  whom  he  holds.  As  to  the 
landlord,  he  is  a  mere  trespasser,  and  is  liable  to  be  put 
out  of  possession  forcibly,  without  previous  notice.' 

Sec  .  84.  By  tenants  by  curtesy,  dower,  life,  4to.— Tenants 
by  curtesy,  in  dower,  or  for  life,  may  grant  leases  of  the 
estate,  by  the  common  law,  that  will  be  valid  and  opera- 
tive, 8o  long  as  their  estate  endures,  and  no  longer,  as  all 
such  leases  become  absolutely  void  upon  the  death  of  the 
tenant  in  whom  the  estate  vested. "  As  to  leases  by  ten- 

»  Ex  Parte  Smyth,  1  Swanst,  855.  «  Yellowly  v.  Gower,  11  Eschq. 

« Jordan  v.  Ward,  1  H.  Bl.  97 ;  274 ;  Cuthbertson  v.   Irving,  4  H. 

Hall    V.  Arrowsmith,   Poph.   105.  &  N.  742. 

»Co.  Litt.47  6.  •  Steadman  v.  Gassett,  18  Vt. 

^Carpenter  t.  Golins,  Yelv.  73.  846;  Fitzgerald  y.  Beebe,  7  Ark. 

*  Pinhom   v.  SouBter,  22  L.  J.  810. 

Exchq.  266 ;  20  Eng.  L.  &  Eg.  501.         i')  Miller  v.  Mainwaring,  Cro.  Car. 

*  Cnnningham  t.  Holton,  55  Me.      899. 
38. 

^  Lord  ELLENBOROUaH  in  Thun- 
der T.  Belcher,  3  East,  451. 


160  Who  may  be  Lessors.  [§  84. 

ants  by  curtesy  and  dower  it  is  said  by  a  learned  writer  * 
that,  if  they  lease  for  years,  reserving  rent  to  themselves, 
and  die,  the  lease  is  thereupon  absolutely  determined  so 
that  no  acceptance  of  rent  by  the  heir  or  reversioner  can 
make  it  good."  ''  For,  though  their  estate  is  qiwdammo- 
do,  a  continuance  of  the  estate  of  the  husband  or  wife, 
yet,  it  is  a  continuance  of  it  only  for  life,  and  they  have 
no  power  to  contract  for,  or  intermeddle  with,  the  inherit- 
ance, and  consequently  their  leases  fall  off,  with  the  es- 
tate whereout  they  were  derived,  and  from  that  time  their 
lessee  is  a  mere  tenant  by  sufferance. ''  But,  if  the  heir  or 
reversioner  expressly  or  impliedly  assents  to  the  contin- 
uance of  the  occupancy  by  the  lessee,  as  by  accepting 
rent  from  the  lessee,  acciniing  after  the  death  of  the  lessor, 
a  new  tenancy,  either  at  will  or  from  year  to  year,  springs 
up,  but,  except  by  express  contract,  there  can  be  no  con- 
firmation of  the  original  lease  for  the  term  granted  there- 
in.' The  rent  accruing  prior  to  the  death  of  the  tenant 
in  dower  or  by  the  curtesy,  belongs  to  their  executors, 
except  in  the  case  of  a  tenant  in  dower,  who  marries 
again,  in  which  case  the  rent  belongs  to  her  husband  or  to 
his  executors  if  he  dies  before  it  is  paid.*  A  lease  made 
by  tenant  for  life  for  a  term,  is  void  as  to  the  reversion- 
er, upon  the  death  of  the  lessor,  and  is  not  confirmed  by 
an  acceptance  of  rent  from  the  tenant  by  the  reversioner, 
after  the  estate  is  determined,  and  this  is  so  at  law,  even 
though  the  reversioner  has  suffered  the  lessee  to  go  on 
and  make  improvements  upon  the  property,  after  his  in- 
terest vests  in  possession.  *  A  distinction  is  taken  at  law 
between  a  lease  that  is  merely  voidable,  and  one  that  is 
absolutely  void,  as  against  the  party  against  whom  it  is 
sought  to  set  it  up.  As  to  the  former,  it  may  be  con- 
firmed, but  as  to  the  latter  it  is  incapable  of  confirm- 
ation." But  in  equity,  if  the  reversioner  accepts  rent  from 

*  4  Bac.    Abr.    126,  Tit.   Leases  »  Woodf aU's  L.  &  T.  7 ;  Yates  v. 
(I.)f  1.                                                        Church,  Cowp.  482. 

*  Miller   v.    Mainwaring,    Cro.         •  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Yates  t. 
Car.  899.  Church,    Cowp.    482 ;    Mayhem's 

^  Bac.  Arb.   Tit.   Leases  (O.),  1.      Case,  1  Coke  147 ;  Ludford  v.  Bar- 

*  Anonymous,  Moor.  25.  ber,  1  T.  R.  86 ;  Collins  t.  Weller, 


CHAP.  IX.]       By  Tenaott  by  Sufferance. 


161 


the  lessee  after  the  estate  is  determined,  and  knowing,  or 
it  being  presumed  that  he  knew,  that  the  tenant  relied 
upon  a  continuance  of  the  lease  for  the  term  named  there- 
in, permits  him  to  go  on  and  make  extensive  permanent 
improvements  upon  the  premises,  he  will  be  prevented 
from  terminating  the  lease.*  But  while  at  law,  an  ac- 
ceptance of  rent  by  the  reversioner  does  not  operate  as 
a  confirmation  of  the  lease  by  him,  yet,  such  act,  or  in- 
deed any  act  upon  his  part  that  operates  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  tenancy,  is  evidence  of  a  new  demise  by 
him  from  year  to  year.*  Where,  however,  the  reversion- 
er joins  with  the  tenant  for  life  in  a  lease  for  a  term  of 
years,  the  lease  does  not  lapse  by  the  death  of  the  tenant 
for  life,  but  during  his  life,  is  treated  as  his  lease,  and 
afterwards  as  the  lease  of  the  reversioner.'  So,  too,  the 
reversioner  may  by  acts  done  by  him  after  the  lease  is 
made  by  the  tenant  for  life,  and  before  the  estate  is  de- 


h^  ■ 


7  id.  478 ;  Simpson  v.  Butcher,  1 
Doug.  50 ;  Aubray  v.  Jenkins,  Bull 
N.  P.  96;  Cowper  v.  Vemey,  Wil- 
les,  1G9.     Where  a  lease  is  ipso 
facto  void,  by    the  condition  or 
limitation,  an  acceptance  of  rent 
by  the  reversioner  can  be  regarded 
as  a  confirmation  of  the  lease,  or 
as  continuing  it  for  the  term  named 
therein,  but  the  rule  is  otherwise 
where  the  estate  or  lease  is  merely 
voidable  by     entry.       Finch    v. 
Throckmorton,  Bro.  Eliz.  221 ;  Co. 
Latt.  295  &. ;  Rickman  v.  Garth,  Bro. 
Jac.  176 ;  Martin  v.  Watts,  7  T.  B. 
83 ;  Wynn  v.  Humphrey,  1  Doug. 
50  n;  Jones  v.    CJowper,  Willes, 
169.    In  the  last  case  Willes,  C. 
J. ,  says :  "It  is  undoubted  law  that 
though  an  acceptance  of  rent  may 
make  a  voidable  lease  good,  it  can- 
not make  valid  a    lease  or  deed 
which  was  actuidly  void  at  first. 
>  Stiles  V.  Cowper,  8  Atk.  692 ;  4 
Bacon's  Abr.  126,  Tit.  Leases  (I.)  2, 
note  a;  Anonymous,  Bimb.    52; 
East  India  Co.  v.  Vincent,  2  Atk. 
83 ;  Blore  v.  Sutton,  8  Meriv.  237 ; 
Jackson  v.  Caton,  5  Ves.  688 ;  Pil- 
ling V.  Armita^,  12  Vis.  78 ;  Dunn 
V.  Spurrier,  7  id.  78,  and  even  at 
law  acceptance  of  rent  or  other 
acknowledgment    of     a   tenancy 
xnay  amount  to  a  new  demise  by 

11 


the  reversioner  from  year  to  year. 
Martin  v.  Watts,  2  T.  R.  83  ;Tucker 
V.  Morse,  1  C.  &  Ad.  865;  Jordan 
V.  Ward,  1  H.  CI.  97;  Crune  v. 
Prideaux,  10  East,  187;  Collins  v. 
WeUer,  7  T.  R.  478,  the  lessee  in 
the  interval  being  a  mere  tenant 
at  sufferance.  Preston  v.  Love, 
Noy.  120. 

*  Pennington  v.  Taniere,  12  Q.  B. 
998;  Crune  v.  Prideaux,  10  East, 
187 ;  Tucker  v.  Morse,  1  C.  &  Ad. 
865;  Martin  v.  Watts,  2  T.  R.  83; 
Jordan  v.  Ward,  1  H.  CI.  96. 

» In  4  Bacon's  Abr.  127,  Tit. 
Leases  (I.),  2,  the  author  says: 
''The  lessors  having  several  estates 
in  them,  in  several  degrees,  the 
lease  shall  be  construed  to  move 
out  of  each  one's  respective  estate 
or  interest,  as  they  become  capable 
of  supporting  thereof,  which  is  the 
most  natural  and  useful  construc- 
tion of  the  lease,  especially  as 
there  can  be  no  estoppel  in  this 
case,  by  reason  of  the  several  in- 
terests which  passed  from  each. 
And  therefore  during  the  life  of 
tenant  for  life,  if  the  lessee,  being 
evicted,  should  declare  of  a  lease 
by  both,  this  would  be  against  him, 
as  was  adjudged,  because^  for  that 
time,  it  was  only  the  lease  of  the 
tenant  for  life,^^ 


162  Who  May  be  Lessobs.  [§  85. 

termined  thereunder,  confirm  it^  so  that  upon  the  death 
of  the  tenant  for  life,  it  will  stand  as  his  lease  for  the 
balance  of  the  term,  a  distinction  being  taken  between 
the  confirmation  of  a  lease  while  it  is  valid,  and  a  con- 
firmation after  it  has  become  void."  But,  even  where 
the  reversioner  is  named  in  the  lease  as  one  of  the  lessors, 
if  at  the  time  of  its  execution  he  was  laboring  under  a 
legal  disability,  as,  if  he  was  an  infant,  or  under  guard- 
ianship, or,  in  the  case  of  a  woman,  if  she  was  married, 
it  is  nevertheless  void  upon  the  death  of  the  tenant  for 
life,  and  unless  they  actually  joined  in  the  execution  of 
the  lease  originally,  it  is  not  confirmed  by  an  execution  by 
them,  after  the  death  of  the  tenant  for  life,  and  after  the 
disabiUties  are  removed,  so  as  to  be  obligatory  upon  the 
tenant,  because  it  is  not  his  covenant/ 

Sec.  86.  Leaseby  tenant  per  autre  vie.— Where  a  person 
holds  an  estate  jper  autre  vicy  a  lease  made  by*  him  is  de- 
termined by  the  death  of  the  cestui  que  vte,*  but  is  not 
determined  by  his  own  death,*  §nd  may  be  made  so  as  to 
take  effect  even  after  his  death,  •  for  the  land  is  bound 
with  this  interest  of  the  lessee,  and  is  entitled  to  it  against 
everybody  until  the  death  of  the  cestui  qv£  vie*  because 
the  estate  is  vested  in  the  tenant  jper  autre  vze  during  the 
life  of  the  cestui  que  vie,*  and  may  be  attained  by  him 
dming  his  life,  or  by  his  executors  or  heirs  after  his 
death.  ^ 

^  Simpson  v.  Butcher,  1  Doug.  50 ;  516 ;  Hill  y.  Saunders,  2  Bing.  112. 

4  Bacon's  Abr.  126,  Tit.  Leases  (I.),  ^  Blackstone's  Com.  186. 

2.  «  Utty  Dale's  Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  182. 

•  Ludford  v.  Barber,  1  T.  R,  86.  'Co.  Litt.  41  6;Ro88 v.  Aldwick, 

*  Strade  v.  Seaton,  26  M.  &  R.  Cro.  Eliz.  491. 

728;  Blake  V.  Foster,  8  T.  C.  487;         '  Rosse's  Case,  5    Coke,  18  a; 
Fenner  v.  Duplock,  2  Bing.   10 ;      Brudnel's  Case,  5  id.  9  a, 
Jackson  y.  Ramsbottom,  8  M.  &  S. 


TT-r 


CHAP.  X]  Bt  Joint  Tenaitcs.  163 


CHAPTER  X. 

BY  TENANTS  IN  COMMON  0&  JOINT  TENANTS. 

■ 

Sec  86.  By  joint  tenants. 
8ec.  87.  By  co-parceners. 
Sec.  88.    By  tenants  in  common. 

Section  86.  By  joint  tenants.— Tenants  in  common,  or 
joint  tenants,  may  join  or  sever  in  the  making  of 
leases  or  other  conveyances,  of  their  interest  in  the 
estate,  and  whether  the  lease  is  to  take  effect  in  pnz- 
senti  or  infuturoy  it  will  be  operative  as  against  those 
executing  it. '  But  a  broad  distinction  exists  between 
leases  made  by  joint  tenants,  and  those  made  by  tenants 
in  common.  If  the  former  join  in  a  lease,  it  is  treated 
as  but  one  lease  made  by  one  lessor,  for  they  have  but 
one  estate;  but  if  tenants  in  common  join  in  a  lease,  it  is 
treated  as  several  leases  of  their  several  and  respective 
interests. '  During  their  joint  ownership,  joint  tenants 
constitute  but  one  tenant  of  the  whole  land,  and  are  then 
said  to  be  seized  per  tout,  but  for  the  purposes  of  aliena- 
tion, they  are  seized  or  possessed  per  my. '  Therefore  it 
follows  that  each  of  them  is  seized  per  my  et  per  tout^ 
and  while  either  may  make  a  lease  of  the  whole  estate, 
yet,  no  more  than  his  interest  therein  will  be  affected  by 
it.  The  lease,  although  joint  in  point  of  duration,  is  nev- 
ertheless several  and  distinct  as  to  the  terms  granted,  be- 
cause they  arise  from  the  several  interests  of  several  per- 
sons.^   When  joint  tenants  join  in  a  lease  it  endures,  and 

«  Co.  litt.  168  h ;  RoUes'  Abr.  »  Co.  litt.  186  a. 
488;  id.  447;  8  Beacon's  Abr.  688,  ^Morris  v.  Barry,l  Wils  1 ;  Bel- 
Tit.  Joint  Tenants  (G.),  1.  lingham  v.  Alsop,  Cro.  Jac.  53 ; 

« Comyn's  Dig.  Tit.  Estates  (G.},  Roach    v.    Williams,   2   Treadw. 

Jtr   ■               6;  Jourdain  v.  Steere,  Cro.  Jac.  88.  (8.  C.)  202. 


164     By  Tenants  m  Common,  ob  Joint  Tenants.  [§  86. 

the  term  and  estate  continues,  although  only  a  tenancy 
at  will  is  created,  even  though  one  of  the  lessors  dies,  and 
the  rent  inures  to  the  survivors.'  Yet  either  may  put  an 
end  to  the  tenancy  as  to  the  whole  estate,  even  against  the 
express  wish  of  his  co-tenant,  *  and  a  notice  to  quit  giv- 
en hy  one,  is  a  notice  hy  all,  in  legal  effect .  *  In  the  case 
last  cited,  Lord  Tenteeden,  C.  J.,  said:  "  Upon  a  joint  de- 
mise by  joint  tenents,  upon  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year 
the  true  character  of  the  tenancy  is  this,  not  that  the  ten- 
ant holds  of  each,  the  share  of  each  so  long  as  he  and  each 
shall  please,  but  that  he  holds  the  whole  of  aU  so  long  as 
he  and  ail  shall  please ;  and  as  soon  as  any  one  of  the 
joint  tenants  gives  a  notice  to  quit,  he  effectually  puts  an 
end  to  that  tenancy ;  the  tenant  has  a  right,  upon  such  a 
notice,  to  give  up  the  whole,  and  unless  he  comes  to  a  new 
arrangement  with  the  other  joint  tenants  as  to  their  shares 
he  is  compellable  to  do  50."  But,  where  a  specific  mode 
is  provided  in  the  lease  for  putting  an  end  to  the  tenancy 
and  that  mode  contemplates  that  ail  the  lessors  shall 
join  in  giving  notice  to  quit,  a  notice  by  one  or  more 
of  them,  but  not  by  all,  will  be  ineffectual.  *  If  joint  ten- 
ants join  in  a  lease,  either  by  parol  or  by  deed  full,  reserv- 
ing rent  to  one  only,  the  reservation  inures  to  both  in 
respect  of  the  joint  reversion,*  but,  if  the  lease  is  by  in- 


1  In  Henstead's  Case,  5  Coke,  10 
b,  the  rule  is  stated  thus:  **  If  two 
joint  tenants  make  a  lease  at  will, 
rendering  rent,  and  one  dies,  aU 
suryives  to  the  other;  and  if  the 
lessee  continues  his  possession,  the 
survivor  shall  have  an  action  for 
the  whole  rent  for  the  privity,  and 
it  shaU  not  be  a  countermand  for 
one  moiety  for  the  mischief  that 
mi^ht  ensue  to  lessors,  and  the 
rather,  because  no  mischief  can 
come  to  the  lessees  in  such  case. '' 
See  also  8  Yin.  Abr.  Estate  (Z.),  b ; 
Comyn's  Dig.  Estate  byGradt,  H., 
4  Piatt  on  Xeases,  125;  Co.  litt. 
17  a,  192  a,  214  a. 

*  Co.  Litt.  186  a ;  Whayman  v. 
Chaplin,  8  Taunt.  120. 

'  Aslin  V,  Summersett,  1 B.  &  Ad. 
141. 

*  In  Right  V.  Cuthell,  5  Esp.  149 
affd.  5  East,  491,  the  premises  were 


demised  to  the  defendant  for  21 
^ears,  subject  to  a  provision  that 
in  case  the  landlord  or  tenant,  their 
heirs,  executors,  &c.,  should  elect 
to  do  so,  either  might  put  an  end 
to  the  lease  at  the  end  of  seven  or 
fourteen  years  of  the  term,  by  giv- 
ing six  months*  notice  in  writmf 
under  his  or  their  respective  hand 
or  seal  to  or  for  the  other  or  others, 
&c.  The  lessor  died,  and  three  per- 
sons were  appointed  executors. 
Tivo  of  the  executors — the  thircl  be- 
ing absent  from  the  country — ^join- 
ed in  a  notice  in  writing  to  the  de- 
fendant, to  quit  the  premises  at  the 
end  of  the  first  fourteen  of  the 
term.  The  court  held  that  this  no- 
tice was  not  sufficient,  as  aU  the 
executors  should  have  joined  in  the 
notice  to  quit. 

*  Sacheverel  v.  Frogate,  1  Vent 
161 ;  Co.  litt.  47  a,  192  a,  214  a. 


f 
..%»- 


CHAP.  X.]  By  Joiht  Tehabts.  165 

denture,  it  is  held  that  the  other  is  estopped  from  denying 
the  reeervation.'  When  joint  tenants  join  in  a  lease,  re- 
serving an  entire  rent,  one  of  them  cannot  sue  in  debtfor 
it,  in  his  own  name.'  He  may  distrain  for  the  rent,  but 
he  mast  avow  in  his  own  right,  and  as  a  bailiff  of  his  co- 
tenants.'  But,  whDe  he  cannot  maintain  an  action  of 
debt  for  the  rent  in  his  own  name  accruing  under  a  joint 
demise,  yet  payment  of  the  rent  to  one  joint  tenant  is  pay- 
ment to  all,  and  a  bar  to  a  recovery  thereof  by  suit  in  the 
name  of  all.*  One  joint  tenant  may  lease  his  shar^  of 
the  estate  in  opposition  to  the  ezpre^  wish  of  his  co-ten- 
ant, and  ' '  as  each  of  them  hath  an  estate  for  his  own  life 
and  for  the  life  of  his  co-tenant,  If  one  of  them  makes  a 
lease,  it  shall  continue  not  only  during  the  life  of  the  les- 
BOr,  bnt  also  after  his  death,  during  the  life  of  his  co-ten- 
ant; for  the  lease,  which  is  only  derivative,  shall  continue 
as  long  as  the  original  estate  out  of  which  it  was  deriv- 
ed,"* and  he  may  make  a  lease  to  commence  in  futuro, 
even  after  his  death,  and  it  will  bind  his  co-tenants,'  and 
this  is  held  to  be  the  case  where  they  are  joint  tenants  for 
the  lives  of  each;  as,  if  one  -makes  a  lease  of  his  moiety  of 
the  estate,  reserving  rent  to  himself  and  his  heirs,  and 
diee,  the  term  continues,  but  the  lessee  holds  it  discharged 
of  rent,  because  the  heirs  of  the  I^sor  have  no  reversion,' 
and  the  survivor  cannot  have  it,  because  he  comes  in  by 
title  paramount  to  the  lease.'  One  joint  tenant  cannot, 
in-the  absence  of  authority  from  his  co-tenants,  make  a 
lease  of  more  than  his  share  of,  the  estate,*  and,  even 
though  the  lease  purports  to  be  by  all,  yet  if  it  was  only 
executed  by  one,  it  is  operative  only  upon  his  share,  and, 

»  Sacheverel  v.  Frogate,  1  Vent.      HortOB,  Cre,  Jac.  91;  SmaUmaa 
181-  T.  Agborow,  id.  417. 

'  AnooymouB,  S  Dyer,  187  a.  But 
'1  ■      8ee4  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leaaee.p.  181, 
where  he  adds  a  ^lere  whether  the 
executors  or  adnnnistrators  cannot 
maintaia  an  action  of  debt  or  cov- 
enant, either  upon  the  covenant  in 
law  ot  express  covenant  for  pay- 
ment of  money,  if  there  be  any. 
'  4  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases,  181. 
•   Bond  T,  Cartwrigbt,  1  Yent. 
186, 162. 


166     By  Tenants  in  Common,  ob  Joint  Tenants.  [§  86, 


although  the  rent  is  reserved  to  ail,  he  may  maintaixi  an 
action  for  the  payment  of  his  share  of  the  rent,  reserved 
to  all,'  or  may  distrain  for  it  upon  any  part  of  the  land/ 
A  distinction  exists  between  a  lease  made  by  a  joint  ten- 
ant for  a  term,  and  a  devise  of  the  same  by  him.  The 
former,  says  Bacon,'  "is  good,  and  shall  bind  the  other 
if  he  survives  because  this  is  a  present  disposition  and 
binds  the  land  from  the  time  of  the  lease  made 
so  that  he  cannot  avoid  it.  But  a  devise  for  years  *  * 
would  not  bind  the  other,  because  that  is  no  present  dis- 
position^ nor  binding  upon  the  devisor  himself  inasmuch 
as  he  may  revoke  or  cancel  his  will,  and  so  destroy  that  de- 
vise. So," he  adds,  "all  grants  or  charges  by  one  joint 
tenant  out  of  the  land,  fall  off  with  his  life^  and  cannot 
affect  the  survivors,  because  there  being  no  immediate 
disposition  of  the  land  itself,  that  comes  whole  and  entire 
to  the  survivor  under  the  first  title,  and,  by  consequence, 
overreaches  all  intermediate  charges  or  grants  thereouti 
by  other  joint  tenant,  who  is  dead."  *  Where  two  per- 
sons  are  joint  tenants  for  th^ir  lives,  and  one  of  them 
makes  a  lease  for  a  specific  term,  if  he  and  his  co-tenant 
shall  live  so  long,  the  lease  is  determined  by  the  death  of 
either,  and  this  is  so,  even  though  after  the  death  of  his 
lessor,  the  lessee  surrenders  his  lease  and  takes  back  a  new 
estate.  *  ' '  One  of  the  peculiarities  attending  the  relation  of 
joint  tenants, "  says  Mr.  Platt,  *  * '  for  life,  renders  it  neces- 
sary  to  guard  against  a  severance,  the  effect  of  which  is  to 
create  a  tenancy  in  common,  and  thus  destroy  the  interest 
which  each  co-tenant  previously  had  in  the  other's  life,  as 
well  as  his  own."  Thus,  where  a  lease  was  made  to  two 
joint  tenants  for  years,  with  a  proviso  that  if  the  lessees 


1  Co.  litt.  193  a,  and  even  where 
joint  tenant  sues  for  the  whole  rent 
or  for  the  whole  land,  he  shall  not 
upon  that  ground  be  non-suited, 
but  is  entitled  to  have  judgment 
for  his  share.  M oFadden  v.  Haw- 
ley.  3  Bay.  (S.  C  )  457,  but  if  the 
non- joinder  of  hisco-tenants  is  plead 
in  abatement,  the  action  will  fail. 
Frazier  v.  Spear,  3  Bibb  ( Ky.),  885, 
but  the  rule  is  otherwise  in  South- 
Carolina,  Watson  V.  Hill,  1  McCord 


(S.  C. )  161.  See  also  Rube  v.  Fyler, 
14  Miss.  440. 

*  8  Bulstr.  133. 

*  4  Bacon's  Abr.  181,  Tit.  Leafles 
(I.)5. 

*  See  also  as  to  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  conveyance  of  an  imme- 
diate interest  in  the  land  and  a  de- 
vise, Co.  litt.  186. 

*  Daniel  v.  Waddington,  CrOi 
Jac.  377. 

*  1  Platt  on  Leases,  138. 


CHAP.  X.]  By  Joiht  Tenants.  t67 

die  within  the  term,  it  shall  cease,  and  the  lessees 
make  partition  and  one  of  them  aliens  his  part 
and  disB,  the  lessor  cannot  enter  upon  the  part 
of  the  deceased  lessee,  but  the  grantee,  or  if  he 
has  not  aliened,  the  executors  of  the  lessee,  are 
entitled  to  hold  the  same  during  the  life  of  the  survivor.' 
But  where  the  lease  is  to  two,  "  for  the  term  of  their  lives, 
and  they  make  partition,  and  one  dies,  hispart  reverts  to 
the  lessor  ; '  and  if  the  lease  is  to  them  for  a  specific  term, 
if  they  shall  hveso  long,  the  estate  is  determined  by  the 
death  of  either. '  A  joint  tenancy  is  severed  by  a  con- 
veyance made  of  the  reversion  by  one  joint  tenant  to  his 
co-tenant,'  or  by  adescent  of  the  reversion  to  one  of  them,* 
or  by  an  act  of  any  of  them  that  cuts  off  his  reversion,' 
or  by  any  orderof  court  directing  division  of  the  estate.  * 
So,  too,  there  may  be  a  suspension  of  the  joint  tenancy  for 
a  period,  and  a  tenancy  in  common  created  in  the  in- 
terim, and  the  joint  tenancy  will  spring  up  again  upon 
the  determination  of  the  intervening  estate. '  Thus,  if 
one  joint  tenant  leases  to  his  co-tenant  for  a  term,  the 
jointure  is  suspended  during  the  term  ;  and  if  there  be 
ibieo  or  more,  the  lessee  of  one  would  hold  the  share 
demised  to  him  as  tenant  in  common  with  the  others ;  * 
and  where  one  tenant  leases  his  share  to  a  stranger,  the 
jointure  is  severe  during  the  term  demised ; "  but  if  a 
chattel  interest  only  is  demised,  the  jointure  is  neither  sev- 
ered nor  suspended.'    But  no  conveyance  made  by  one 

'  Farrinrtoti's  Case,  IBjer,  67  a.  producer  severance  under  the  pro- 

*  Bnidnel's  Case,   6   Coke,   9  a.  visioDs  of  the  Act  of  1700  in  Penn- 

8ee  also    Daniel  v.   Waddiiigton,  ^ivaiiia.      Duncan    v.    Faorer,  S 

Cro.  Jac,  877.  Binn.    (Penn,)    198.     A    jiartitioa 

'  Hill     V.   Bolton,    Lutw.     477  ;  fence  run  through  tlie  middle  of 


:    ItoU.   478.  land  held   in  joint  tenancy,  doee 

The  peculiar  propertiee  of  an   ee-  not  create  a  spverance,  althouKh' 

tat«  d;  joint  tenancy  are,  Ixt,   a  the  tenants  occupied  on  either  Ride 

a  uni^  of  interest ;  'M,  a  unity  of  only  to  the  fenc<;.     HauKhalaugh 

.  T.  Honald,  1  Treadw.  (8.  C.)  80. 

I,  »  HiU  V.  Bolton,  ante. 

,  *  Paetell  v.  SkirrinK.  1  Dessau 

.  (S.  C.)  108. 

'  Ljtt.  S.  802,  Co.  Litt.  193  a,  108 

-  a,  314  a. 

s  >  Jurdain    t.   Steere,    Cro.   Jac 

88 ;  Blackspeer's  Case,  Noy.  18. 

t  >  Co.  Litt.  180  a. 


168     By  Tenants  in  Common,  or  Joint  Tenants.  [§  87. 


joint  tenant  can  divest  his  co-tenant  of  his  moiety  of 
the  estate.'  The  common  law  rules  in  reference  to  a 
joint  tenancy  have  been  essentially  modified  in  most  of 
the  States  by  statute,"  while  in  others  this  species  of  ten- 
ancy has  been  abolished,*  and  in  others,  conveyances  that 
at  common  law  create  a  joint  tenancy,  except  in  certain 
special  cases,  where  the  intent  of  the  grantor  to  create 
such  an  estate  is  clearly  expressed,  are  by  statute  con- 
strued as  creating  a  tenancy  in  common  only.* 

Sec.  87.  By  Co-parceners.— Estates  by  co-parcenary 
arise  under  the  common  law,  or  by  particular  custom 
where  lands  of  inheritance  descend  to  two  or  more  persons, 
as  where  a  tenant  in  fee  or  in  tail  dies,  leaving  several 
daughters  and  no  sons,  or  several  sisters,  and  no  issue, 
father  or  brother  ;  or  several  aunts  and  no  issue,  the  lands 
descend  among  all  the  daughters,  sisters,  aunts,  &c., 
equally,  and  they  all  make  but  one  heir,  and  are  called 
co-parceners.*  This  species  of  estate  is  in  many  respects 
similar  to  that  of  joint  tenants.  That  is,  they  have  the 
same  unities  of  interest,  title  and  possession,  but  there  is 
no  unity  of  time,  nor  entirety  of  interest,  nor  is  there  any 
survivorship  among  them,'  and  each  part  descends  to 
their  respective  heirs,  though  the  unity  of  possession  con- 
tinues ;  and,  as  long  as  the  lands  continue  in  a  course  of 
descent  and  united  in  possession,  they  remain  co-parcen- 
ers, whether  the  lands  have  descended  to  males  or  fe- 
males,^ but  whenever  one  of  them  ahens,  or  whenever  a 
partition  is  made,  the  lands  cease  to  be  held  by  them  as 
co-parceners,  but  as  tenants  in  common,'  and  the  same 


1  Bieelow  v.  Topliff ,  25  Vt.  278  ; 
Carme  v.  Patterson,  SBibb.  (Ky.) 
98;  White  v.  Brooks,  48  N.  H. 
402 ;  People  v.  Marshall,  8  Cal.  61. 

« In  Nortti  Carolina  in  1874,  the' 
right  of  survivorship  was  abolished 
by  statute,  and  the  share  of  each 
tenant  made  to  descend  to  his 
heirs.  So  in  Virginia  by  Act  of 
1786,  which  went  into  operation 
July  1st,  1877.  In  Alabama,  Clay's 
Dig.  169. 

^  This  is  the  case  in  California. 

*  MiUer  v.  Miller,  16  Mass.  59 ; 


Haughabaugy.  Honald,  1  Treadw. 
(S.  C.)90;  Thornton  v.  Thornton, 
8  Rand.  (Va.)  188;  Cambaugh,  v. 
Bambaugh  11  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  190 ; 
Boston,  &c.  Co.  V.  Condit,  19  N. 
J.  Eq.  894. 

•  Comyn's  Digest,  Tit.  Parceners 
(A.),  1 ;  2  Blackstone's  Com.  187. 

«  Blackstone's  Com.  188 ;  Buller  a 
N.  P.  107 ;  Co.  Litt.  164  a ;  Wood- 
fall's  L.  &  T.  13. 

^  litt.  8  309. 

« 2  Blacks  Com.  189. 


CHAP.  X.]  By  Co-parcenees.  169 

result  ensues,  when  the  lands  descend  to  and  Test  in  a 
single  heiTj  or  indeed  whenever  either  of  the  three  ele- 
ments reqoisite  to  create  this  estate  are  destroyed. '  Co- 
parcenei'S  may,  so  long  as  the  estate  continues,  join  in  a 
lease,  or  each  may  make  a  lease  of  her  own  share,  and, 
even  though  they  join,  it  operates  as  the  separate  demise 
of  each,  and  must  be  so  plead,'  and  they  hold  the  rent  in 
common.'  So  long  as  they  remain  co-parceners  the  lease 
of  one,  of  her  share,  is  good ;  but  if  the  estate  is  partitioned 
and  the  share  leased  is  allotted  to  a  co-parcener,  the  lease 
is  thereby  invalidated. '  They  may  sue  and  be  sued  joint- 
ly as  to  any  matter  pertaining  to  the  estate,  but  neither 
can  sue  separately  for  her  share  of  the  rent  accruing  to 
her  and  her  co-parceners.' 

They  cannot  sever  in  an  avowry  for  rent, '  but  each  must 
avow  in  her  own  right,  and  as  plaintiff  for  her  co  parceners 
for  the  entire  rent.'  The  co-parceny  is  not  severed  by 
the  execution  by  one  of  a  lease  for  life, '  but  such  a  lease 
prevents  a  partition  between  them,'  but  a  lease  fo^  years 
does  not.  " 

Sec.  SS.  Bytenantsincommdh.— a  tenancy  in  common 
differs  from  a  joint  tenancy,  in  that,  in  the  former,  there 
is  no  unity,  except  of  possession.  The  tenants  hold  by 
several  and  distinct  titles  and  aU  occupy  promiscuously. 
Blackstonb  says:"  "T\us  tenancy  therefore  happens 
where  there  is  a  unity  of  possession  merely,  and,  perhaps, 
an  entire  disunion  of  interest,  of  title  and  of  time."  One 
tenant  may  hold  in  fee,  another  for  life,  or  even  for  a 

>  3  Ibid.  191.  "  SBl&ckstone'sCom.  192,  There 

•  Uillner  v.  Robinaon,  Moor,  need  not  be  unitj  of  tenure,  in  the 
939;  WoodfaU'sL.  &T.  13.  different   parte  of  the   land,  nor 

•  2  Preston's  Abstract,  74.  unity  of  eetat«  in  the  several  own- 

•  Co.  Utt.  46,  n  5,  era  tiiereof ;  unity  of  right  of  pos- 
.Ti_._L IT J  jnTu__       session    is  all  that  is    neceasory. 

Putnam  v.  Ritchie,  6  Paige  Ch.  {N. 
Y.)  890.  Neither  tenant  can  take 
exclusive  po^esaion  of  the  premises 
as  against  hia  co-t«nant.  McGar- 
rell  v.  Murphy,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P> 
133,  and  if  one  co-tenant,  or  any 
person  under  him,  cntera  and  ouete 
the  other,  he  is  liable  in  treapaea 
miare  lUausum  f  regit.  EryriD  v. 
Olustead,  T  Cow.  327. 


'  Duch&rme  v.  Harwood,10  Bing. 


170     By  Tenants  in  Common,  or  Joint  Tenants.  [§  88. 


term  ;  and  one  may  hold  one-half,  and  another  a  third,  and 
another  the  balance,  so  that  none  of  the  elements  requisite 
to  create  or  uphold  a  joint  tenancy  except  unity  of  pos- 
session concur  in  this  species  of  tenancy.  Indeed,  in  most 
of  the  States,  it  is  now  provided  by  statute,  that  all  con- 
veyances shall  be  so  construed  as  to  create  a  tenancy  in 
common,  instead  of  a  joint  tenancy,  except  where  the 
grantor  expressly  evinces  an  intention  to  create  the  lat- 
ter species  of  estate,  so  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  say 
anything  as  to  the  methods  by  which  this  species  of  ten- 
ancy or  estate  is  created. 

One  tenant  in  common,  like  a  joint  tenant,  may  make  a 
]ease  of  his  moiety  of  the  estate,  but,  unless  clothed  with 
express  authority  to  that  end,  by  his  co-tenant,  he  cannot 
make  a  binding  lease  of  the  whole/  nor  can  he  by  any 
sale  or  conveyance  divest  his  co-tenant  of  his  interest  in 
the  property,'  and  a  mortgage  made  by  him  upon  his  undi- 
vided interest,  has  no  vahdity  as  against  his  co-tenant.' 
He  cannot  convey  a  distinct  part  of  the  estate  by  metes 
and  bounds,  so  as  to  bind  his  co-tenant,  *  but  he  may  do 


»  Muflsey  v.  Holt,  34  N.  H.  34*; 
Taintor  v.  CJole,  130  Mass.  174. 

»  White  V.  Brooks,  43  N.  H.  403; 
Biglow  V.  Topliff .  36  Vt.  373.  He 
has  no  more  power  to  convey  his 
co-tenant's  interest  in  the  estate, 
thim  a  stranger.  Blood  v.  Grood- 
•  rich,  9  Wend.  (N.  Y.)68. 

>  Marks  v.  Sewell,  130  Mftss.  174. 

*  Mattox  V.  Hightshur,  89  Ind. 
95;  Shepardson  v.  Kowland,  38  Wis. 
108;  Gk)odv.  Coombs,  38  Tex.  34;  Mc- 
Key  V.Welch,  33  id.  390;  Whittunv. 
Whitton,  38  N.  H.  137;  Gates  v.  Sol- 
mon,  85  Cal.  576;  Oris  wold  v.  John- 
son, 5  CJonn.  363 ;  Jewttt  v.  Stock- 
ton, 8  Yerg.  (Tenn.)  493  ;  Callow  v. 
Hale,  47  N.  H.  847 ;  Blossom  v. 
Brightman,  31  Pick.  (Mass.)  385; 
Peabody  v.  Minat,  34  id.  389,  be- 
cause he  cannot  partition  the  es- 
tate without  the  assent  of  his 
co-tenant.  His  title  is  to  an  txndi- 
t/^icKed  interest,  and  one  of  the  pecul- 
iarities of  the  estate  is,  that  they  oc- 
cupy promiscuously,  and  neither 
knows  which  part  of  the  estate  is 
his.  Duncan  v.  Sylvester,  34  Me.  482 
Holcombv.  Coryell,  11  N.J.  Eq.  394; 
Boston,  &c.  Co.  V.  Condit;  16  N.  J. 


Ea.  894;  but  in  Missouri  it  has  been 
held  that  the  conveyance  of  his  in- 
terest by  one  tenant,  by  metes  and 
bounds  is  valid,  even  as  against  his 
co-tenant,  Bamhartv.  Campbell,  50 
Mo.  597.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but 
that  it  is  binding  where  a  division 
has  been  agreed  upon  by  the  ten- 
ants even  by  parol,  followed  by  an 
occupancy  by  each,  of  their  respect- 
ive shares.  Wood  v.  Fleet,  86  N. Y. 
499;  or,  but  that  it  would  bind  him- 
self. Crocker  v.  Tiffany,  9  Rl.  505; 
and  every  one  except  his  co-tenants, 
Nichols  V.  Smith,  33  Pick.  (Mass.) 
816;  and  where  he  has  acceptea 
and  improved  a  certain  part  of  the 
estate,  ne  is  entitled,  upon  a  par- 
tition of  the  land,  to  have  the  part 
so  improved  by  him  set  off  as  his 
share  (Pope  v.  Whitehead,  68  N.  C. 
101),  and  upon  this  ground  he  may 
convey  this  distinctive  part,  and 
the  right  passes  to  his  grantee,  so 
that  he  can  insist,  in  case  of  a  pai> 
tition,  to  have  so  much  of  the  im- 
proved estate  set  off  to  him  as  is 
covered  by  his  grantor's  title  or 
share.  Bamhart  v.  Campbell,  50 
Mo.  597.  As  his  deed  is  valid  as 


CHAP.  X.]         Bt  Tenakts  in  Couuon.  171 

so  when  a  parol  division,  followed  by-  occupancy  of  tbeir 
respective  shares,  has  been  made, '  or,  as  he  is  entitled  upon 
a  partition  to  have  a  portion  of  the  estate  occupied  and 
improved  by  him,  set  off  upon  his  share,  he  may  convey 
this  right  to  another.'  So  where  a  conveyance  has  been 
made  by  metes  and  bounds,  if  the  co-tenants  have  acqui- 
esced therein,  or  have  in  any  manner  confirmed  it,  they 
will  be  bound.'  When  there  are  mines,  quarries  or  other 
valuable  deposits  upon  or  in  the  land,  they  belong  to  the 
tenants  in  common  according  to  their  respective  interests, 
and  one  of  them  cannot  convey,  either  by  deed  or  lease, 
an  undivided  interest  in  the  ores,  quarries,  &c.,  in  a  par- 
ticular part  of  the  estate,  without  the  assent  of  his  co-ten- 
ants, but  only  an  undivided  interest  in  them,  in  the  whole 
estate.  *  One  tenant  cannot  create  an  easement  against 
the  premises. '  Thei-e  may  be  a  partition  of  the  land,  and 
a  tenancy  in  common  of  the  ores  and  quarries  in  or  upon 
it,  when   the  parties  so  agree,*  and  the  mixed  estate 


against  his  co-tenants,  to  the  extent 
of  the  iutereet  he  had  in  the  estate 
(Primm  v.  Walker,  38  Mo.  94),  and 
while  a  conveyance  of  the  whole 
est&te  is  invaJid  as  to  his  co-ten- 
ants, yet  if  the  grantee  entere  under  . 
the  conveyance,  he  may  set  up  the 
Statnte  of  Lmutatioii  agamst  the 
other  tenants.  Bogardus  v.  Trinity 
Caiurch,  4  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  178 ; 
Home  T.  Howell.  46  Oa.  B;  but 
-when  the  tenant  himself  seeks  to 
set  up  the  statute,  he  must  not  only 
show  an  undisturbed  possession 
for  the  statutory  period,  but  also  a 
poseeesion  under  a  claim  of  right 
tothewhole.andofsuchacharactoi 
as  to  operate  as  an  ouster  of  his  co- 
tenant,  Beed  v.  West,  16  Gray 
(Mass.)  273. 

'  Wood  V.  Fleet,  86  N.  Y.  499; 
Conkling  v.  Blown,  67  Barb,  (N. 
T.)265. 


such  an  equitable  partition  that  he 
knew  that  an  undivided  share  in 
the  estate  was  outstanding.  Hall  v. 
Piddock,  21  N.  J.  Eq.  311. 

"  Hartford  &  Salisbuir  Ore  Co.  v. 
Miller,  41  Com.  113. 

*  Marsh  V.  Holley,  42  Conn.  438. 

'  Crippen  t,  Morse,  49  N.  Y.  68. 
Thus  the  owner  of  one  third,  one 
half,  or  any  other  portion  of  prem- 
ises as  tenant  in  common,  cannot 
set  apart  a  portion  of  the  lot  for  a 
private  way  for  himself,  as  if  he 
were  6ole  owner.  He  cannot  bur- 
den the  common  estate  with  any 
easement  or  exclusive  benefit  for 
himself,  nor  can  he  Rive  such  right 
to  a  strangir.  Reed  v.  West,  16 
Gray  (Mass.)  273.  Nor  can  he,  up- 
on asale  of  hia  interest  in  the  prem- 
isea,  reserve  a  right  of  way  over 
aoy  other  easement  in  the  estate, 
because  the  reservation  atb^npts 
to  create  a  several,  limited  interest 
in  the  lands  held  in  common. 
Marshall  v.  Trumbull,  38  Conn. 
188.  So  a  reservation  of  mines, 
made  in  a  conveyance  of  the  land, 
has  been  held  void.  Adams  v. 
BriMa Co.  7  Bush.  (Maa8.)861. 

'Coleman's  Appeal, 62  Pean. St, 


172      By  Tenants  in  Common,  oe  Joint  Tenants.  [§  88. 


thus  created  will  be  upheld  by  the  courts/  As  one  ten- 
ant in  common  is  not  entitled  to  exclusive  possession  of 
the  estate,  it  follows  that  he  cannot  confer  such  right  up- 
on a  stranger,  either  by  lease  or  deed,  and  in  either  case, 
if  it  is  attempted  to  hold  the  occupancy  of  the  whole  es- 
tate, the  other  co-tenant  has  a  right  to  take  peaceable 
possession  thereof,  although  such  possession  is  acquired 
by  stealth,  provided  nothing  is  done  by  him  in  making 
such  entry  to  create  a  breach  of  the  peace ;  and,  after  he 
is  in  peaceable  possession  he  may  maintain  it  by  force, 
and  if  his  co-tenant,  or  any  person  holding  under  him, 
regains  possession,  and  forcibly  ejects  him,  he  is  liable  for 
an  assault  and  battery.*  But  if  the  whole  estate  is  leased 
by  one  co-tenant  and  his  lessee  is  permitted  to  occupy  it, 
the  lessee  is  not  liable  to  the  other  co-tenant  for  the  rent 
of  his  share  of  the  premises,  unless  there  is  an  express 
agreement  by  him  to  pay  the  co-tenant  his  share  of  the 
rent,'  nor  can  the  other  co-tenant  take  or  claim  for  his 
own  use  any  part  of  the  products  of  the  estate,  as  against 
the  lessee,  whether  the  same  consist  of  vegetables  or 
grains,  or  ores  or  stones  quarried  or  dug  from  the  land,^ 
or  lumber  cut  therefrom.'  From  what  has  been  pre- 
viously stated,  it  follows  that  one  tenant  in  common  by 
a  lease  can  give  his  lessee  no  greater  right  than  he  pos- 
sesses in  the  estate,  *  and  that  the  lessee  cannot  lawfully 
oust  his  lessor's  co-tenants  ;  but  while  this  is  the  strict 
legal  and  equitable  rule,  yet,  if  the  lease  covers  the  en- 
tire estate,  and  the  co-tenants  do  not  interfere  with  the 
lessee's  possession,  he  is  bound  to  pay  the  whole  rent  to  his 
lessor,  and  cannot,  be  compelled,  nor  has  he  the  right  to 
pay  any  part  of  it  to  his  lessor's  co-tenants,"  nor  can  such 


>Ibid. 

« Wood  V.  Phillips,  43  N.  Y.  73. 

» In  Wilcox  V.  Wilcox,  48  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  327,  the  husband  of  one  ten- 
ant in  common  occupied  the  whole 
estate,  and  it  was  neld  that  he 
was  not  liable  to  account  to  her  co- 
tenants  either  for  rents  or  profits, 
unless  he  had  expressly  agreed  to 
do  so.  The  contract  between  the 
co-tenant  and  his  tenant  is  person- 
al, and  cannot  be  made  available 


by  another.  The  remedy  of  the 
other  tenant  in  common  is  against 
his  co-tenant  who  has  leceiTed  the 
rent.  Hannan  v.  Osbom,  4  I^uge, 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  886. 

*  Blewett  V.  Coleman,  40  Penn. 
St.  45. 

» Baker    v.  Wheeler,  7    Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  505. 

•  Procter  v.  Newhall,  17  Mass.  81. 
V  Hannan  v.  Osbom,  ante ;  Gross- 
man T.  Lauber,  28  Ind.  618,  and 


CHAP.  X] 


By  Tenants  in  Common. 


173 


co-tenants  claim  or  take  anything  produced  by  him  from 
the  common  estate,  but  must  look  to  their  co-tenant 
alone  for  redress.*  They  may  join  in  a  lease,  and,  be- 
fore suit  brought  therefor,  either  of  them  may  receive 
the  whole  rent  and  give  a  valid  discharge  therefor,'  but 
not  afterwards  except  to  the  extent  of  his  interest.  * 
The  tenant  of  one  tenant  in  common  is  entitled  to  the 
possession  of  the  whole  estate  as  to  everybody  except 
his  lessor's  co-tenants,  and  may  maintain  such  possession 
by  force  or  by  proper  action,*  but  if  the  co-tenant  takes 
peaceable  possession  of  the  land,  he  is  not  hable  to  the 
lessee  for  such  possession ;  *  but  if  he  enters  forcibly  he  is 
a  trespasser.*  When  tenants  in  common  have  joined  in 
a  lease  of  the  common  estate,  they  may  maintain  a  joint 
action  of  debt  for  the  rent,  or  may  join  in  a  distress  there- 
for/ and  it  has  been  held  that  one  tenant  cannot  proceed 
upon  such  joint  demise  to  recover  for  his  share  of  the 
rent,  in  an  action  in  his  own  name  ; '  but,  whatever  may 
formerly  have  been  the  rule,  it  is  now  held  in  England 
that  co-tenants  who  join  in  a  demise  of  the  common  es- 
tate with  an  entire  rent  reserved,  may  join  or  sever  in 
an  action  of  debt  therefor,  at  their  election,*  and  if  the 
lease  be  for  life,  they  must  sever."  But  if  under  a  joint 
demise  each  of  the  co-tenants  has  received  from  the  ten- 


payment  to  the  leasing  tenant  is  a 
oar  to  an  action  for  the  rent  by  the 
others.    Id. 

>  Blewett  y.  Coleman,  40  Penn. 
St.  45. 

•  Decker  v,  Livingston,  15  John, 
(N.  Y.)479  ;  Massie  v.  Long,  2  Ohio 
287. 

"Wilson  V.  Gamble,  9  N.  H.  74 ; 
Oask  V  Keneda,  29  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
120. 

^Collier  v.  CJorbett,  15  CaU.  183; 
Hart  T.  Robinson,  21  id.  846. 

•Hooper  v.  Meyer,  1  Nev.  488. 

•McG&urell  v.  Murphy,  1  Hilt. 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  182;  Bradbume  v. 
Batfield,  14  M..  &  W.  567 ;  Bume  v. 
Cambridge,  1  Moo.  &  Rob.  589; 
Midgeley  v.  Lovelace,  Carth.  289 ; 
Mu&i  V.  Crompe,  1  Ld.  Rayd. 
841 :  Anonymous,  Cadb.  288. 

^  Jones  V.  Gundrim,  3  W.  &  S. 
(Penn.)  681. 


^Gaines  v.  Buford,  1  Dana  (Ky.) 
481;  Kitchinv.  Buckley,  7  Rayd. 
80;  Greenwood's  Case,  Clayt.  28; 
Kitchen  v.  Compton  (probably 
same  case  cited  ante),  1  id.  157; 
Cole  V.  Banbury.  1  Sid.  49 :  Lit- 
tleton, in  Lit  %  316,  says:  "If 
two  tenants  in  common  make  a 
lease  of  their  tenements  to  another 
for  a  term  of  years,  rendering  them 
a  certain  rent  yearly  during  the 
term,  if  the  rent  be  behind,  &c., 
the  tenants  in  common  sludl  have 
an  action  of  debt  against  the  lessee, 
and  not  divers  acttonst  for  that  the 
action  is  in  the  personality." 

•Bradbume  v.  Botfield,  14  M.  & 
W.  567 ;  Himtley's  Case,  3  Dyer, 
326  a ;  Powis  v.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid. 
851 ;  Bume  v.  Cambridge,  1  Moo. 
&Rob.  589. 

o»  Anonymous,  (Jadb.  283,  pL  404. 


r.  V, 


J  f-: 


174     By  Tenants  in  Common,  ob  Joint  Tenants.  [§  88. 


ant,  his  share  of  the  rent,  or  if  notice  has  been  given  the 
tenant  he  must  pay  each  of  the  lessors  his  share  of  the 
rent,  which  he  does,  the  co-tenants  should  not  join  in  an. 
action  of  debt  for  the  rent,  as  from  these  facts  the  jury 
may  find  a  new  contract  of  demise,  with  a  separate  res- 
ervation of  rent  to  each,  and  in  such  case,  the  joint  ac- 
tion could  not  be  maintained. ' 

While  co-tenants  may  join  in  an  action  upon  a  jonit  de- 
mise, yet,  as  a  joint  demise  by  them  is,  in  legal  effect,  a 
separate  demise  by  each  of  their  respective  shares,  if  one 
of  them  dies,  pending  the  lease,  the  surviving  tenants 
canhot  maintain  an  action  of  debt  for  the  whole  rent,  de- 
claring on  a  joint  demise,^  and  a  declaration  in  debt  by 
the  surviving  tenant,  alleging  that  he  and  the  deceased 
tenant  were  seized  of  the  entirety  of  the  premises,  cannot 


'In  Powis  V.  Smith,  ante,  the 
premises  were  demised  by  two 
tenants  in  common,  and  the  rent 
was  for  a  time  paid  to  an  agent  of 
both ;  but  after  a  time  notice  was 
given  to  the  tenant  to  pay  the  rent 
to  each  of  the  two,  and  the  rent 
was  so  paid  and  separate  receipts 
given.  Subsequently,  the  rent  not 
being  paid,  they  brought  a  joint 
action  for  the  use  and  occujiation 
of  the  premises.  The  court  held, 
that  it  was  a  question  of  fact  for 
the  jury,  whether  it  was  the  inten- 
tion of  the  parties  to  enter  into  a 
new  contract  of  demise  with  a  sep- 
arate reservation  of  rent  to  each, 
and  the  court  below,  not  having 
submitted  this  question  to  the  ju- 
ry, but  having  held  as  a  matter  of 
law  that  only  separate  actions 
could  be  brought,  a  new  trial  was 
ordered,  Abbott,  C,  J.,  saying:  "It 
is  clear  that  if  there  be  a  joint  lease 
by  two  tenants  in  common,  the  two 
may  join  in  an  action  brought  to 
recover  the  rent ;  but  if  there  be  a 
separate  reservation  to  each,  then 
there  must  be  separate  actions. 
Here,  by  the  original  contrast, 
there  was  a  letting  of  the  whole 
premises  by  the  two  tenants  in  com- 
mon, at  an  entire  rent ;  afterwards, 
the  rent  was  severed.  It  became  a 
^uastionof  fact  upon  the  whole  ev- 
idence, whether  tne  parties  there- 
by meant  to  enter  into  a  new  con- 
tract with  a  separate  reservation 


of  rent  to  each,  or  whether  they 
meant  to  continue  the  old  reserva- 
tion of  rent,  each  of  the  plaintiffs 
receiving  his  own  moiety. 

See  Nixon  v.  Potts,  1  Hawks  (N. 
C.>  469 ;  Hoyle  v.  Stone,  2  Dev.  (N. 
C.)  L.  818.  On  the  several  demise 
of  one  tenant  in  common,  the 
plaintiff  in  ejectment  may  recover 
nis  term  in  the  imdivided  share  of 
that  tenant,  but  the  lessors  of  the 
plaintiff  must  at  their  peril  take 
out  a  vmt  of  possession  only  for 
land  to  which  they  have  title.  God- 
frey V.  Cartwright,  4  Dev.  (N.  C.) 
487.  Where  two  tenants  in  com- 
mon recover  land  in  ejectment,  of 
their  co-tenant  by  a  joint  action, 
they  may  also  maintain  a  joint  ac- 
tion for  mesne  profits.  Osunp.  v. 
Hamesley,  11  Ired  (N.  C.)  L.  211. 
In  Harrison  v.  Barnabv,  5T.  R. 
249^  it  was  held  that,  where,  after 
notice  not  to  do  so,  a  lessee  pays 
all  the  rent  to  one  tenant,  the  otn- 
er  tenant  may  distrain  for  his  share 
of  the  rent,  and  payment  to  his  co- 
tenant  is  no  bar  or  defence  thereto. 

1  Bums  V.  Cambridge,  1  Moor 
Bob.  539.  Where  co-tenants  all  con- 
cur in  a  lease,  it  operates  as  tibe  sep- 
arate demise  of  each  tenant  of  his 
part  of  the  estate,  and  not  as  the 
joint  demise  of  all.  and  should  be 
sostated  in  the  pleadings :  ChaUoner 
V.  Dawes,  1  Ld.  Rayd.  400.  Mantle 
V.  Wallington,  Cro.  Jac.  166 ;  Ba- 
con's Abr.  lit.  Joint  Tenants  (H),l, 


CHAP.  X.]  By  Tenants  m  Common.  178 

be  supported.'  Tenants  in  common  camiot  bring  a  joint 
action  of  accoTint  rendered  to  recover  the  proceeds  of  it 
from  one  who  is  liable  on  an  implied  contract  to  account 
■with  them.  Each  must  bring  his  separate  action,'  nor 
can  they  join  in  a  real  action,  as  ejectment,  trespass,  &c. 
to  try  title  against  a  stranger,  because  thetitle  being  ser- 
eraJ,  the  action  follows  its  nature,  and  must  be  several 
also.'  So  where  they  take  their  estates  derivatively  by 
devise*or  purchase,  they  must  sever  *  as,  for  double  rent 
■for  holding  over,  where  there  was  no  joint  devise.*  In 
an  action  of  debt  by  one  tenant  for  his  share  of  rent,  doe 
from  a  lessee,  he  must  not  declare  for  a  specific  sum,  but 
for  his  moiety  of  the  whole  ; '  but  this  rule  does  not  pre- 
Tail  where  covenant  is  brought.  In  the  latter  case,  the 
tenant  may  declare  either  way.'  In  aU  cases  when  ten- 
ants in  common  make  a  separate  demise,  whether  by  dis- 
tinct leases  or  by  one  they  must  sever  because  they  can 
join  only  when  the  demise  is  joint  upon  its  face.'  In  all 
cases  where  the  cause  of  action  is  entire,  they  must  join, 
although  the  covenant  is  entered  into  "  with  them  and 
each  and  every  of  them,"  "  *  The  rule  as  stated  by  Lord 
Denuan,  C.  J.,"  is  that  "where  the  legal  interest  and 
cause  of  action  ot  the  covenanters  are  several,  they  should 
sue  separately,  though  the  covenant  be  joint  in  them; 
"  but  the  several  interest  and  the  several  ground  of  action 
mtiat  distinctly  appear,  as  in  the  case  of  the  covenants 
to  pay  separate  rents  to  tenimtsin  common,  upon  demise 

'  Co.  Litt.  197  a.  and  that  the  omisaion  of  one  or 

*    McCreav7    v.  Robs,   7  Watts     more  of  them  as  a  party  plaintiff 
(Penn.)  488.  maj  be  taken  advantage  of  upon 

■  Qrassmeyer  v.  Beeeon,  18  Tex.  the  triat  without  pleading  it  in 
T5S ;  Bryant  v.  Wippel,  1  Eap.  860 ;  abatement  Newton  v.  Reardon, 
Worthington  v.  WeBton,  2  Wilis.  2  Cr.  C.  C.  (U.  8.)4fl. 
283;  Moore  v.  Fureden,  1  Shaw,  342;  ^  Henniker  t.  Turner,  ante. 
Mantle  v.  Wallington,  Cro.  Jac,  '  Wilkinson  v.  Hall,  1  Bing.  N. 
166 :  Puilen  v.  Palmer.  8  Salt.  897 :  C.  713 ;  Powis  T.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid. 
351  ;  Foley  v.  Addenbrooke,  4  Q. 
B.  lOT. 

'  Foley  V.  Addenbrooke,  4  Q.  B. 
1ST;  Slingsby'B  Case,  6  Coke,  18  b ; 
Elccleeton  v.  Clipehatn,  1  Sauud. 
158 ;  Withers  v.  Ercham,  8  B.  &  C. 
S04 ;  Windham's  Case,  0  Coke,  8  a. 
"  Foley  T.  Addenbrooke,  4  Q.  B. 
887-8. 


176     By  Tenaots  in  Common,  or  Joint  Tenants.  [§  88. 

by  them.  "  If^  however,  the  cause  of  action  is  joints  the 
action  must  be  joint,  though  the  interest  is  several,*  and 
in  all  cases,  if  the  covenanters  can  sue  jointly,  *they  are 
bound  to  do  so.*  But  it  is  held  in  Maine  that  where 
they  all  take  their  title  under  the  same  deed,  they  may 
or  may  not  join  in  an  action  for  a  breach  of  the  covenant 
of  warranty  at  their  election,"  so  one  or  more  may  join 
in  an  action  against  a  stranger  for  trespass,  and  recover 
against  one  who  has  no  title.*  So  they  may  joiA  in  an 
action  for  waste,*  and  must  join  in  replevin,*  or  in  any 
action,  ex-contractu,  when  the  contract  was  ma^e  with 
all  of  them."  So  they  may  all  join  for  injuries  to  per- 
sonal property  owned  by  them  in  common.'  So  in  ac- 
tion against  an  agent  of  all  of  them,  to  recover  a  balance 
in  his  hands,  stated  as  due  to  the  owners.*  So  in  trover 
for  common  property,"  or  in  trespass  for  injuries  to  per- 
sonal property,  or  in' a  personal  action  of  trespass  to 
lands."  They  cannot  join  in  a  qui-tam  action  unless  ex- 
pressly so  provided  by  statute,"  nor  for  injury  from  a 
vexatious  suit."    They  cannot  be  joined  as  defendants, 


'  CJoryton  v.  lithebye,  2  Saund* 
115.  In  2  Viner's  Abr.  55,  pi.  46, 
it  is  said  "  If  two  persons  have  an 
entire  joint  damage,  they  may 
bring  a  joint  action  though  their 
interests  are  several/'  and  this 
rule  has  been  adopted  in  mmierous 
cases.  Wilkinson  v.  Hall,  1  New. 
Cas.  713 ;  Martin  v.  Crompe,  1  Ld. 
Eayd.  340  ;  Foley  v.  Addenbrooke, 
ante ;  Withers  v.  Birtham,  8  B.  & 
C.  255 ;  Eccleston  v.  Clipsham,  1 
Saund.  153;  SUngsby's  Case,  5 
Coke,  18  a;  James  v.  Emery,  5 
Price,  633 ;  Southcote  v.  Hoare,  8 
Taimt.  89;  Matthewson's  Case,  5 
Coke,  23  a  :  Collins  v.  'Prosser,  1 
B.  &  C.  682.  The  word  separate 
makes  a  covenant  several.  Mat- 
thewson's  Case,  ante. 

«  Petrel  v.  Bury,  3  B.  &  C.  353. 
Lord  Denman,  C.  J.,  in  Foley  v. 
Addenbrooke,  4  Q.  B.  208. 

«  Swett  V.  Patrick,  11  Me.  179 ; 
Paul  V.  Whitman,  3  Watts  (Penn.) 
407. 

*  Clarke  v.  Vaughn,  3  Conn.  191. 
In  Kentucky  it  is  held  that  per- 
sons owning  distinct  parcels  of 
land  under  the  same  entry  may 


join  againfit  the  holders  of  an  ad- 
verse title.    Smith  v.  Harrow,  1 
Bibb.  (Ky.)  97. 
»  Greenly  v.  Hall,  3  Han.  (DeL)  9. 

•  Smart  v.  Wathen,  8  Mo.  622 ; 
McArthur  v.  Lowe,  15  M.  245. 

'  White  V.  Curtis,  35  Me.  584 ; 
As  for  goods  sold  b^  them  jointly, 
so  where  insurance  is  procured  by 
them  upon  the  common  property 
in  the  names  of  all,  they  must  au 

i'oin  to  recover  the  amount  of  the 
OSS.  Blanchard  v.  Dyer,  21  Me. 
111.  So  they  must  all  join  in  as- 
sumpsit for  a  tort  waived.  Gil- 
more  V.  Wilber,  12  Pick.  (Mass.) 
120. 

®  Pickering  v.  Pickering,  11  N. 
H.  141 ;  Glover  v.  Austin,  6  Pick. 
Mass.)  571. 

*  Jellison  v.  LaFonta,  19  Pick. 
(Mass.)  244. 

»o  Parker  v.  Parker,  1  Allen 
(Mass.)  245. 

"Gtent  V.  Lynch,  28    Md.    58. 

»  HiU  V.  Davi8,4Mass.  137 ;  Vin- 
ton V.  Walsh,  9  Pick.  (Mass.)  87. 

"Ainsworth  v.  Allen,  Kirl^ 
(Conn.)  145.  ^ 


CHAP.  X.] 


By  Tenants  in  Common. 


177 


except  for  their  joint  acts.  If  there  are  several  tenants 
claiming  under  distinct  titles,  they  cannot  be  joined  in 
one  action  as  defendants,  and  if  they  are,  they  may  plead 
the  misjoinder  in  abatement.  *  But  the  inile  is  otherwise 
by  statute  in  Kentucky  as  to  matters  relating  to  the 
common  estate.  *  One  tenant  in  common  cannot  be  joint 
as  defendant  with  his  co-tenant  who  has  erected  or  cre- 
ated a  nuisance  upon  the  estate  unless  he  has  actually  par- 
ticipated therein.'  But  tenants  in  possession  may  be 
jointly  sued  for  injuries  committed  by  cattle  kept  by  them 
in  common  upon  the  premises,  although  the  cattle  are 
owned  by  them  separately/ 


'  Green  v.  Liter,  8  Cr.  (U.  S.) 
229 ;  Mastem  v.  Gibbe,  Sprague 
(U.  S.  C.  C.)  158. 

*  Lewis  T.  Marshall,  8  Pet.  (U. 
S.)  474. 

*  Simpson  v.  Seavey,  8  Me.  188, 

*  In  Gavle  v.  Johnston,  80  Ala. 
895  it  was  held  that  at  common  law 
a  tenant  in  common  is  not  liable 
to  his  co-tenant  for  use  and  occu- 
pation, unless  there  is  an  actual 
eviction,  or  an  agreement  to  pay 
rent ;  and  the  English  statute  (4th 
&  5th  Anne)  cbangiDf:  the   rule, 


having  been  enacted  after  the  set- 
tlement of  this  country,  is  not  of 
force  with  us. 

For  rents  actuall:^  received  one 
tenant  in  common  is  liable  to  ac- 
coimt  to  his  co-tenant ;  but  when 
the  rents  were  received  from  a  ten- 
ant to  whom  necessary  advances 
to  make  a  crop  were  supplied,  such 
advances  and  other  necessary  costs 
and  expenses  incurred,  must  be 
deducted  from  the  gross  amount 
received.  Jack  v.  Hudnall,  ^ 
Ohio  St.  255. 


12 


Sec.  89.  Oeneral 
Sec.  90.    DistiDcl 

liabili 
Sec.  91.    Vnder-i 

cept 
Sec.  93.    Undet-1 

betwi 
Sec.  S3.  Sale  of 
Sec.  94.  Liabilit 
Sec.  90.    B^teiu 

Section  98. 
restrained  from 
whole  or  part  o 
less  than  that  f 
conditions,  not 
sees  fit  to  impi 
there  is  no  que 
the  premises  fc 
reversionary  ir 
riod,  and  in  son 
self  so  as  to  pre 
ment,  and  the  i 
even  less,  woul 

I  Rex  y.  Wilson,  ■ 
n:  1  Duer  (N.  Y. 
B85;  SI  Vt.  52;  11 
B03;  Pike  v.  Eyre 
Oxley  T.  Jamea,   11 

» In  Collamer  v.  I 
317,  itwaaheldtha 
under  which  a  1< 
the  estate,    bm     ' 


CHAP.  XI.]       Sub-Lease  and  Assignment. 


179 


In  an  excellent  English  work  '  the  author  says,"  By  an 
under-lease  a  new  and  partial  estate  only  is  vested  in  the 
under  lessee,  a  reversion  being  left  in  the  lessor,  the  du- 
ration of  which  was  immaterial,  for  it  may  be  a  year, 
or  day,  or  an  hour.  If  rent  is  reserved  in  the  under- 
lease, it  need  not  contain  a  power  of  distress,  for 
such  power  is  incident  to  every  demise  at  common  law. ' 
But  as  no  privity  exists  between  the  under-lessee  and  the 
original  lessor  the  covenants  entered  into  between  the 
latter  and  original  lessee,  though  they  be  covenants 
which  run  with  the  land,  as  to  pay  rent,  repair, 
&c. ,  cannot  affect  either  by  way  or  right  or  lia- 
bility,   the  under-lessee  personally. "     The   land,  how- 


of  ihe  term,  and  the  intermediate 
possession  in  case  the  buildings 
were  destroyed  by  fire,  and  it  was 
h^d  that  such  demise  was  a  sub- 
lease and  not  an  assignment ;  so 
nv^here  a  lessee  sub-let  for  the 
whole  term,  except  one  daj,  it 
was  held  a  sub-lease.  Davis  v. 
Morris,  35  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  227.  So 
when  a  right  of  re-entry  for  a 
breach  of  any  condition  is  reserved, 
the  person  taking  under  the  sub- 
lease is  held  in  New  York  to  be  a 
sub-lessee  and  not  an  assignee,  and 
the  party  given  the  sub-lease  can 
re-enter  for  a  breach  of  condition, 
although  there  is  no  reversion  re- 
maining in  him.  People  v.  Robert- 
son, 89  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  9 ;  Linden  v. 
Hepburn,  3  Sandf.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  668.  In  a  Pennsylvania  case 
it  was  held  that  when  a  lessee 
transfers  the  whole  term,  reserving 
the  rent  to  himself,  such  transfer  is 
an  under-lease  as  between  the 
parties,  so  far,  at  least,  as  to  ^ive 
the  lessee  an  action  of  debt  a^inst 
the  under-lessee  or  his  a&signee, 
for  rent  Adams  v.  Beach,  1  Phila. 
(Penn.)  99  ;  and  such  is  the  rule  in 
England.  In  Price  v.  Corrie,  5 
Bing.  24;  Poultney  v.  Holmes,  1 
Str.  405  ;  Smith  v.  Mapleback,  1  T. 
R.  44.5,  and  numerous  other  English 
cases  which  wiU  be  referred  to  un- 
der the  head  of  assignment,  it 
operates  as  a  lease  and  not  as  an 
assignment,  at  least  for  some  pur- 
poses. This  doctrine,  however,  is 
by  no  means  admitted,  and  there 
is  a  long  Une  of  opposing  cases  that 


will  be  referred  to  under  the  head 
of  assignments.  Tlie  weight  of 
authority  supports  the  rule  that, 
in  order  to  create  a  lease  instead  of 
an  assignment,  there  must  be  a 
reservation  of  a  reversion  in  the 
lessor,  and  that  no  form  of  in- 
strument can  dispense  with  this 
requisite.  A  mere  reservation  of 
rent,  or  a  reservation  of  a  right 
of  re-entry  for  a  breach  of  any  of 
the  conditions  of  the  lease,  will  not 
change  the  legal  relation  of  the 
parties.  Tlie  cases  cited  from  the 
New  York  reports,  Post  v.  Kear- 
ney, 2N.  Y.  394,  and  Martin  v. 
O'Connor,  43  Barb.  52*2,  are  in  con- 
flict with  the  doctrine  of  Bedf (frd 
V.  Terhune,  30  N.  Y.  454,  and  are 
directly  questioned  and  practically 
overrulea  by  WoodhuU  v.  Rosen- 
thal, 61  N.  Y.  382,  and  the  doctrine 
previously  stated,  that  where  the 
whole  term  is  made  over  by  the 
lessee,  although  in  the  deed  by 
which  that  is  done  the  rent  and 
power  of  the  entry  for  non-pay- 
ment are  reserved  to  him,  and  not 
to  the  original  lessor,  this  is  an 
assignment  and  not  an  under-lease, 
and  that  the  introduction  of  new 
covenants  into  the  instrument  does 
not  change  the  legal  effect  'of  giv- 
ing up  the  reversion.  See  Bacon's 
Abr.  Title  Leases  (I.),  3. 

'  Piatt  on  Leases,  p  101   et  acq. 

•  Lit.  §  213  Go.  Litt.;  141  6; 
Curtis  V.  wheeler ;  1  Moo.  &  Malk, 
463. 

«  Halford  v.  Hatch,  1  Doug.  133 ; 
Bremner  v.    Hill,  2  Anstr.    413; 


180  Bt  Tenants  for  Years.  [§  90. 

ever,  is  not  discharged  by  t!ie  under-lease  from  the 
claims  of  the  original  lessor,  who,  DOlwithstandiog 
the  sub-demise,  may  proceed  to  distress  or  eviction, 
if  the  rent  be  in  arrears,  or  a  forfeiture  is  incurred  by  his 
lessee.'  An  assignment,  on  the  other  hand,  transfers 
the  whole  interest  of  the  lessee  to  the  assignee,  for,  if  the 
lessee  retain  the  smallest  reversionary  intei'est,  the 
instrument,  though  professing  to  be  an  assign- 
raeut,  will  not  operate  otherwise  than  as  an  under- 
lease,' nor  provided  the  whole  interest  be  con- 
veyed, will  the  essence  of  the  deed  as  an  as- 
signment be  destroyed ;  by  its  reserving  a  rent  to  the 
assignor,  and  a  power  of  re-entry  for  non-payment,"  or 
by  its  assuming,  by  use  of  the  word  demise,  or  in  any 
other  respect,  the  character  of  a  lease.'" 

Sec.  00.  Distinction  between  ossigninent  and  Bub-Iease, 
as  regards  liability  of  tdQant  or  assignee.— There  is  a  wide 
distinction  between  an  assignee  of  a  lease,  and  a  sub-ten- 
ant. The  former  becomes  personally  liable  to  the  land- 
lord for  all  the  covenants  and  conditions   imposed  up- 

AnoDymouB,  Mo.  S3,  pi.  330;  Earl  9B  ;  I  Salk.  13;  Freeman  v.  Bate- 
of  Derby  v.  Taylor,  1  East,  502 ;  man,  2  Br.  Aid,  168 ;  Smith  y.  Ma- 
Sparks  T.  Smith,  2  Vem.  275;  pleback,  I  T.  R.  441.  Even  where 
Pilkington  v.  Shaller,  2  id.  374  ;  an  under-lease  amounts  to  an  aa- 
Wyatt  V.  Byron,  1  M.  G.  &  Sc.  aignmentastothirdpersoiuit may, 
623.  an  between  the  parties,  be  treated 

>  Amsly  V.  Woodard  6  B.  &  C.  as  an  under-lease,  where  that  ia 

610.  necessary  to  carry  into  effect  their 

'  Earl  of  Derby  v.  Tajlor,  1  East,  obvious  mtentiona.    In  re  Tiimer, 

602.  11  Ir.  Ch.  B04.    In  Pollock  v.  Stacy, 

)  Freeman  V.   Bateman,   2   B.  &  9  Q.  B.  1083,  it  was  held  that  where 

Aid.    ItiS;   Palmer   v.  Edwards,  1  a  party  entitled  to  a  term  in  land, 

Doug.  187  n;  Fitzgerald  v.  demises  the  land  to  another  at  & 
O'Connell,  1  Jo.  &  La.  Tou 
134;  Pluck  V.  Digges,  5 
S.  31 ;  Walluston  v.  Hah 
M,  &  G.  297 ;  Fawcett  v.  K 
&  Nap,  248 :  Rankin  v,  Ni 
Huds.   &   Cro.     70;    cont 


assignment,  Poultney  v.  E 
Stra.  405;  Hogan  v.  Fitz 
Huds.  ifeB.  77  n;  Price  v. 
Bing.  34;  Coyne  v.  Smith 
11 ;  Pearson  v.  Reis,  8  B 
Walsh  V.  Feely,  Jo.  413; 
V.  Terhuue,  30  N.  Y.  563. 
*  Hicks  V.  Downing,  1  L 


CHAP.  XI.] 


Sub-Lease  and  Assignment. 


181 


on  the  lessee  by  the  lease  which  runs  with  the  land/ 
while  the  latter  is  liable  only  to  the  lessee,  who  is  alone 
responsible  to  the  landlord  for  the  performance  of  the 
cx)nditions  of  the  lease,  unless,  by  mutual  agreement,  the 
landlord  has  accepted  the  sub-tenant  as  his  tenant  is  place 
of  the  lessee." 

Sec.  91.  TThder -tenant  not  liable  for  breaoh  of  lessee's 
oonvenants,  expect.— An  under  tenant  is  not  liable  for  the 
breach  of  any  condition  of  the  lease  under  which  his  les- 
sor holds,  unless  express  stipulations  to  that  effect  are  in- 
corporated into  the  lease  from  the  original  tenant  to  him.* 


^  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke,  16  a ; 
Cally  V.  Wells,  3  Wils.  25,  and  this 
is  so  although  the  word  "  assigns" 
is  not  used  in  the  lease.  Bonner  v. 
Smith,  15  N.  J.  Eq.  51.  A  cove- 
nant for  the  renewal  of  a  lease, 
Roe  V.  Hayley,  12  East,  469 ;  for 
further  assurance  or  quiet  enjoy- 
ment. Middle  more  v.  Goodale,  Bro. 
Car.  508 ;  Heath  v.  Whidden,  24 
Me.  883 ;  Campbell  v.  Lewis,  5  B. 
&  Aid.  392 ;  Markland  v.  Cnmip, 
1  Dev.  &  B.  CN.C.)L.9;  Martin; 
V.  Baker,  5  Blackf.  (Ind.)  23'^; 
Spencer  v.  Bayes,  8  Ves.  370,  to  sup- 
ply houses  with  water,  Guardian  v. 
Wilson,  4  B.  &  Aid.  267;  to  insure 
houses  affainst  fire,  when  the  mon- 
ey is  to  be  laid  out  in  rebuilding, 
vemon  v.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid.  1, 
are  all  covenants  running  with  the 
land  for  the  breach  of  which  the 
assignee  may  sue  or  be  sued,  as  the 
case  may  be.  It  is  not  sufficient, 
however,  that  a  covenant  concerns 
land,  but  in  order  to  annex  it  to,  so 
as  to  make  it  run  with  the  land, 
tfiere  must  be  a  privity  of  estate  be- 
tween the  contracting  parties^ 
Webb  V.  Russell,  3  T.  R.  402,  per 
Lord  Kenyon,  C.  J.,  and  if  they 
are  merely  collateral  to  the  grant- 
or's interest  ir.  the  land,  they  do 
not  run  with  it.  Mitchell  v.  War- 
ner, 5  Conn.  497;  Wheelock  v. 
Thayer,  16  Pick.  (Mass.)  68;  Cremer 
V.  Marshall,  18  N.  L  Eq.  837;  Swas- 
ey  V.  Crooks,  30  Vt.  692;  Hasker  v. 
Storer,  8  Me.  228;  Brady  v.  Spurch, 
27  lU.  478.  A  covenant  not  to  sell 
marl  from  adjoining  land,  Bremer 
V.Marshall,  ante  :  to  grade  and  im- 
p  rove  lands  sold  or  leased  for  a  pub- 


lic square,  the  work  to  be  done  in 
a  reasonable  time,  Stuyvesant  v. 
Mayor,  &c., 11  Paige Ch.  (N.  Y.)414, 
or  covenants  for  rent  repau*s,  that 
are  only  with  the  landlord  or  his 
assigns,  will  not  bind  the  assignee 
of  a  mortgagee,  Webb  v.  Russell, 
3  T.  R.  393 ;  upon  the  same  princi- 
ple where  an  estate  was  conveyed 
to  a  trustee  in  fee  to  the  use  of  such 
persons  as  A  should  appoint,  and 
m  default  of  appointment,  to  A, 
in  fee,  and  A  covenanted  in  the 
same  conveyance  for  himself,  his 
heirs,  cmd  assigns  to  pay  a  certain 
fee  from  rent  reserved  out  of  the 
estate,  to  the  vendors,  their  heirs 
and  assigns,  it  was  held  that  the 
lands  were  not  bound  in  the  hands 
of  A's  appointee,  by  the  covenant 
of  A,  for  the  appointee  did  not 
take  tlie  estate  of  A,  to  which  his 
covenant  was  annexed^  but  took  as 
if  the  original  conveyance  had  been 
made  to  him.  Roach  v.  Wadham, 
6  East,  289.  A  covenent  cannot 
run  with  a  rent.  Milnes  v.  Branch, 
5  M.  &  S.  411. 

«  Halford  v.  Hatch,  1  Doug.  183 ; 
Wvatt  V.  Byron,  1  M.  G.  &  Sc. 
623;  Sparkes  v.  Smith,  2  Vim. 
275 ;  Pilkington  v.  Shaller,  2  id. 
374 ;  Austin  v.  Thomas,  45  N.  H. 
113;  Fulton  v.  Stewart,  2  Ohio 
215. 

'  Berney  v.  Moore,  2  Ridg.  P.  C. 
323 ;  but  ne  may  be  evictea  by  the 
landlord,  and  in  the  absence  of 
fraud,  he  has  no  remedy  against 
his  lessor.  Spencer  v.  Murreatt,  4 
B.  &  C.  457 ;  Hayward  v.  Parks,  16 
B.  C.  217.  So  the  original  lessor 
may  have  him  restrained,  by  in- 


1S2  By  Tenants  fob  Yeabs.  [$  91. 

It  is  simply  obligatory  upon  him  to  perform  the  condi- 
tions of  the  lease  under  which  he  holds,  leaving  his  les- 
sor to  perform  the  conditions  of  his  lease ;  consequently 
a  lessee  granting  an  under-lease,  if  he  desires  to  have  his 
tenant  liable  for  the  non- performance  of  the  convenants 
of  his  lease  from  the  landlord,  should  incorporate  similar 
covenants  in  the  under-lease,  or  provide  for  indemnity 
against  any  breach,  otherwise  he  wDl  be  remediless. '  But, 
if  the  under-tenant  assumes  performance  of  the  lessee's 
covenants,  or  if  he  binds  himself  to  indemnify  the  lessee 
against  any  breach,  he  will  be  liable  to  the  lessee  not  only 
for  the  principal  recovered  of  him  by  his  landlord,  but 
also  for  his  reasonable  costs  and  expenses  incurred  in  a 
suit  brought  against  him  for  the  recovery  of  damages 
for  such  breach,*  and  such  is  also  the  rule  where  there  is 
an  implied  contract  to  indemnify.'  If  the  covenants  of 
the  under-tenant  are  not  identical  with  those  contained 
in  the  lease  to  the  lessee,  he  cannot  be  made  chargeable 
for  the  amount  that  the  landlord  recovered  of  the  lessee 
but  only  for  the  actual  damage  resulting  from  hisbreach. 
In  an  English  case'  this  doctrine  was  well  illustrated.  In 
that  case  A  leased  premises  to  B  from  25th  of 
March,  1823,  for  sixteen  years  wanting  ten  days, 
and  he  covenanted  with  A  to  keep  the  premises 
in  repair,  and  to  paint  once  in  every  five  years  of 
his  term,  and  to  leave  the  premises  in  repair.  B 
under -leased  the  premises  to  C  from  the  24th  of  June, 
1834,  for  four  years  and  three  quarters,  wanting  eleven 
days,  and  C  covenanted  with  B  to  keep  the  premises  in 
repair  (the  covenant  so  far  being  the  same  as  in  the  oiig- 
inal  lease)  ond  to  paint  once  during  the  term,  andleavethe 
junction,  from  violating  the  con-     sub-leaae  ia  to  perform  the  cove- 

ditioUS  of  the  Origir"'l  Iohm         (■■lom.        non*  m  hio  tn,h.fa^^^  " 

ent  V.  WeUea.  L.  i 
Parkman  v.  Aicar 
I  Walker  v.  Hat 
249;  Penley  v.  ■« 
By  the  forM:oinK 
Wylie.  8  B.  a  C! 
different  doctrine 
declared  not  to  1 
B..  in  Penley  v.  V 
OJTiiavB:  '-fheor 


CHAP.  XI.]        Undeb  Lease,  Effect  of. 


183 


premises  in  repair.  A  sued  B  for  breaches  of  this  covenant, 
and  the  damages  were  assessed  at  £64  10^.,  being  the 
amount  of  dilapidations  established  upon  the  hearing. 
B  afterwards  sued  C  for  the  amount  of  the  dilapidations 
and  the  costs  of  the  action  brought  against  him  by  A,  and 
and  claimed  to  recover  in  all  the  sum  of  £76,  being  the 
amount  of  the  judgment  recovered  against  him  and  his 
reasonable  expenses  incurred  therein.  The  jury  found 
the  amount  of  the  dilapidations  to  be  57  pounds  IO5., 
and  the  court  held  the  plaintiff  was  not  entitled  to  recover 
also  the  costs  of  the  former  action,  because  the  covenant 
of  the  defendant  to  the  plaintiff  and  of  the  plaintiff  to 
landlord  were  not  ad  idem  either  in  substance 
or  term.*  The  under-lessee  cannot  resist  the  pay- 
ment of  the  rent  to  the  lessee  upon  the  ground 
that  the  latter  has  not  paid  his  rent  to  the  land- 
lord, unless  there  is  an  express  stipulation  in  the 
under-lease  that  payment  of  the  rent  shall  be  conditional 
upon  payment  having  been  fii-st  made  to  the  landlord,  or 
that  he  may  pay  it  to  the  landlord,  and  the  rule  is  the 
same,  even  though  non-paymetit  of  the  rent  to  theland- 
lord  works  a  forfeiture  of  the  term.  * 

Sec.  92.  Under-lease  amounting  to  assignment,  treated  as 
Bub-lease  between  the  parties,  when. — An  under-lease  for 
years  made  by  a  lessee  for  years,  to  commence  immediately 
after  his  death,  is  valid  provided  he  dies  before  his  term 
has  expired.  Thus,  a  lessee  for  a  term  of  ten  years,  may 
grant  an  under-lease  for  nine  years  to  commence  after 
his  death,  and  the  lease  wiU  be  good  for  so  many  of  the 
nine  years  as  are  unexpired  at  the  time  of  his  death. 
Where  a  lessee  has  power  to  renew  his  term  upon  giving 
six  months'  notice  of  his  intention  before  its  expiration, 


*  See  opinion  of  Paree,  B.  at  p. 
600.  It  18  not  sufficient  that  the 
under-tenant  enters  into  similar 
covenants  copied  verbatim  from 
the  original  lease  ^except  as  to 
nancies),  although  this  is  frequent- 
ly done  by  those  who  know  no 
better.  Logan  v.  Hall,  4  C.  B. 
598 ;  Clow  v.  Brogden,  2  M.  &  G. 
89;  but  it  should  contain  an  ex- 


press covenant  by  the  under-lessee 
TO  observe  and  perform  all  the 
covenants  and  conditions  in  the 
original  lease,  except  those  which 
he  is  not  to  perform.  Woodfall's 
L.  &  T.  216. 

^  Gregson  v.  Harrison,  2  T.  R. 
425  ;  Haycroft  v.  Griddle,  82  Beav. 
477. 


r«" 


184 

and  upon  his 
merely  giving 
to  another  p 
firet  term ;  hi 
it  executed,  o 

Sec.  93.  Be 
is  not  satisfiei 
the  under-lea 
conditionB  in 
But  on  the  pu 
jection  to  th© 
feited  by  the 
original  lease 
for  an  under- 
inal  lease,'  ai 
for  an  under- 
of  the  origina 
covenants  in  t 
affected  with 
or  not  is  doufc 
of  entering  in 
intends  to  de^ 
him  that  tfaei 
silence  of  the 
ance  that  th< 
also  a  purcha 
himself  of  th 

"Woodfall'a  L. 
ay  y.  Mackretb,  i 

'Blake  V.  Phi 
Darlington  v.  Ha 
Modeley  v.  BootI 
718. 

'  Mustcn  T,  G 
9S8 :  Lof(an  t.  Hi 

*  Hayford  T.  < 
477. 

'  Caeaer  v.  Col 
S88. 

'  Flieht  T,  Bar 
282;  Ciemente  » 
Eq.  Car.  800. 

'  Flight  V.  Bart 
Van  v.  Corpe,  : 


CHAP.  XI.]  UnDEB  TeNAOT',  LIABILITY  OF.  185 

specific  performance  on  the  ground  that  the  covenants 
are  unusual,  and  were  not  mentioned  in  the  particulars 
of  sale.* 

Sec.  94«  Liability  of  under-tenant  to  his  lessor.— An  un- 
der-tenant may  deduct  from  the  rent  due  to  his  lessor, 
compulsory  payments  made  to  the  original  landlord  due 
from  the  original  lessor  for  which  his  goods  are  liable  to 
be  distrained,'  and  it  is  not  necessary  that  he  should  wait 
until  his  goods  are  actually  distrained,  nor  is  it  any  the 
less  compulsory,  because  the  landlord  has  given  him  time 
in  which  to  pay,*  nor  is  it  necessary  that  the  original 
landlord  should  have  threatened  to  distrain.  It  is  enough 
that  payment  has  been  demanded  and  that  the  right  to 
distrain  exists.*  The  principle  upon  which  the  doctrine 
of  these  cases  rests  is,  that  the  immediate  landlord  is 
bound  to  protect  his  tenant  from  all  paramount  claims  ; 
and  when,  therefore,  the  tenant  is  compelled,  in  order  to 
protect  himself  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  land  in  respect  of 
which  his  rent  is  payable,  to  make  payments  which  ought, 
as  between  himself  and  the  landlord,  to  have  been  made 
by  the  latter,  he  is  considered  as  having  been  authorized 
by  the  landlord  so  to  apply  his  rent,  already  due  or  accru- 
ing due.*  All  such  payments,  even  if  incapable  of 
being  treated  as  payments  of  I'ent,  would  clearly  give 
the  tenant  a  right  of  action  against  his  landlord  as  for 
money  paid  for  his  use,  and  so  form  a  legitimate 
subject  of  set-oflf  in  an  action  of  debt  for  the  rent, 
and,  in  actions  where  a  set-oflf  is  not.  alio  wed,  the  courts 
have  given  the  tenant  the  benefit  of  a  set-oflf  as  to 
payments  of  this  description,  by  holding  them  to  be, 
in  fact,  payments  of  the  rent   itself,  or  part  of  it.* 

Sec.  95.     By  tenants  for  less  than  years.— All  tenants,  ex- 

>  Grosvener  v.  Green,  28.   L.  J.  *  Smith's  L.  &  T.   171.    Best,  C. 

Ch.  178 ;  Wilson  v.  Hart,  L.  R.  1  J.,  in  Carter  v.  Carter,  ante,  said : 

Ch.  App.  463.  "A  payment    made    under  such 

^Carter  v.   Carter,  5Bing.406;  circumstances  is  no  more  voluntary 

Sturpess  v.   Farrington,  4  Taunt,  than  a  donation  to  a  beggar  who 

«14 ;  Sapsford  v.  Fletcher,  4  T.  R.  presents  a  pistol." 

511.  *  Carter  v.   Carter,  ante ;  Taylor 

*  Carter  v.  Carter,  ante.  v.  Zamina,  6  Taunt.  529. 


186 


By  Tenants  fob  Teaks. 


[^93. 


cept  tenants  at  will  or  by  sufferance,  have  a  right,  unless 
restrained  by  the  provisions  of  the  lease  under  which 
they  hold,  to  create  a  sub-tenancy  as  incident  to  his  ten- 
ancy, and  his  landlord's  consent  thereto  is  not  necessary 
unless  the  lease  so  provides.*  A  tenant  for  a  half  year,  a 
quarter,  a  month,  or  a  week,  any  time  however  brief, 
may  grant  his  interest  or  any  pmi;  of  it  to  another.  A 
tenant  from  month  to  month  or  for  a  year,  may  assiga 
his  term,  or  any  part  of  it,  for  any  period  less  than  the 
duration  of  his  own  term,  but  he  cannot  grant  an  inter- 
est exceeding  his  own  either  in  point  of  duration  or  model 
of  occupancy.  If,  however,  he  grants  a  term  in  excess 
of  his  own,  oi-  for  a  use  other  than  that  authorized,  it  will 
be  valid  for  such  unexpired  term  as  he  has,  and  for  a  use 
consistent  with  the  terms  of  his  lease.'  If  he  underlets 
from  year  to  year,  the  sub-tenancy  will  take  effect  during 
his  own  term,  and  he  has  a  sufficient  reversion  to  enable 
him  to  distrain  for  rent  in  those  States  where  a  distress 
is  permitted.' 


'  Carter  t.  Carter,  ante ;  Dyer  t. 
Bowley,  3  Bing.  »4 ;  Saprf ord  t. 
Fletclier.  47  E.  511  Taylor  t. 
Zamina,  6  Taunt.  n34;  Whitmora 
V.  Walker,  211  &  K.  61S ;  Johnaon 
T.  Jonea,  9  Ad.  &  El.  800;  Stubba 
V.  ParsonB,  3  B.  &  Aid.  520. 
Honey  paid  by  a  tenant  for  the 
landlord's  share  of  property  tax, 
GabeU  v.  SlievUl,  ft  Taunt.  81  ; 
Fuller  V.  Abbott,  4  id.  105;  Tinck- 
ler  T.  Prentice,  4  id.  648,  may  be 
deducted  from  the  rent  next  ac- 
cruing, Denbyv.  Moore.  1  B.  &  Aid. 
ISO;  and  must  be  so  deducted  or 
the  ri^bt  tJj  recover  it  is  lost. 
Oumnimc  V.  Bedborough,  15  M.  & 
W,  438;  Denby  v.  Moore.  1  B.  <S£ 
Aid.  139;  BramstoD  v.  Robins,  4 

Bing.  11:  StubbF  "    ^ "  " 

&  Aid.  520;  And 
IB.  AB.  ST;  Wi 
8  M.  A  W.  312 
Hauson,  3  C.  & 
rates,  water  taxei 
T,  Humble,  15  ( 
made  a  lien  upoi 
right  of  distress 
by  Statute  (id.); 
annuity  or  legacy 


of  distreaa,  Taylor  v.  Zamina,  6 
Taunt.  524;  Wbitmore  t.  Walker, 
3  C.  &  K.  615 ;  interest  due  on  a 
mortgage  made  before  the  t«nancT 
began,  Johnson  v.  Jones,  9  Ad.  & 
El.  S09 ;  Dyer  v,  Bowley,  3  Bing, 
94,  are  treated  as  payments  of  rent, 
but  the  payment  of  interest  on  a 
mortgage  or  other  claims  that  can- 
not be  enforced  by  distress,  are 
only  treated  as  payments  of  bo  much 
rent,  when  made  with  the  assent 
of  thelandlord,  express  or  implied. 
Dyer  v.  Bowley.  ante. 

'  In  Rex  V.  Aldborough.  1  East, 
598.  a  residence  under  a  sub-lease, 
without  the  consent  of  the  original 
landlord,  was  held  auffldent  to 
create  the  occupant  a  tenant  so  aa 


CHAP,  xn.] 


LXASES  BY. 


isr 


CHAPTER  XII. 


BY  COBPORATIONS. 


Sfic.  96.    By  Corporations  generally. 

Section  96.  By  Corporations  generally.—  All  corpora- 
itons,  capable  of  taking  and  holding  real  estate  by  the 
common  law,  possess  the  power  of  making  leases  there- 
of, '  and  this  applies  to  ecclesiastical,  *  eleemosynary,  * 


'Smith  V.  Barrett,  1  Sid.  161. 
By  the  common  law  a  corporation 
may  take  and  hold  propeii;y,  real 
or  personal,  80  far  as  may  be  neces- 
sary to  carry  into  execution  the 
powera  conferred  upon  it,  Blanch- 
ard's,  &c.  Co.  v.  Warner,  1  Blatch. 
(U.  S.  C.  C.)  258;  and  the  same 
power  to  grant  propcprty  as  an  in- 
dividual, and  in  the  same  capacity. 
Barry  v.  Merchants*  Ex.  Bank,  1 
Sanford  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  28,  it  may  pur- 
chase and  hold  lands,  and  as  a  nec- 
essary incident  may  convey  the 
same  by  lease  or  in  fee.  Nicoll  v'. 
N.  Y.  &c.  R.  R.  Co.  12  N.  Y.  121 ; 
Rives  V.  Dudley,  8  Jones  (N.  C.) 
L.*  126.  So  it  may  take  by  devise, 
Downing  v.  Marshall,  28  N.  Y. 
366;  American  Bible  Society  v. 
Marshall,  15  Ohio  St.  537,  or  by 
disseizin,  Rehoboth  v.  Rehoboth, 
28  Pick.  (Mass.)  189;  Robin  v. 
Sedgwick,  85  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  815; 
and  a  religious  or  charitable  cor- 
poration may  hold  lands  in  trust 
for  pious  or  charitable  uses, 
Philip^s  Academy  v.  King,  12  Mass. 
546,  but  not  for  purposes  foreign 
to  the  object  of  its  formation. 
Jackson  v.  Hartwell,  8  John.  (N. 
Y.)  422. 

•Co.  Litt.  44  a;  Attv.  Genl.  v. 
Moses,  2  Madd.  808 ;  2  Blackstone's 
Com.  818;  Spendlomes  v.  Burkit, 
Hob.  7 ;  Anonymous,  1  Dyer,  69  a. 

SI,  80 ;  Bunny  v.  Wright.  1  Leon, 
9.    The  statute,  3^  Hen.  8,  c.  :^8, 


empowered  all  persons  seized  of 
any  estate  of  inheritance  in  right 
of  their  churches  (parsons  and  vic- 
ars excepted),  to  grant  leases  of 
their  church  lands,  for  a  term  not 
exceeding  21  years,  or  three  lives, 
at  the  most.  This  statute  did  not 
change  the  common-law  right  of 
the  persons  enabled  or  abridge 
their  capacity  to  lease.  Bunny  v. 
Wright,  ante ;  and  as  these  powers 
were  mischievouslv  exercised,  and 
were  productive  of  much  hardsliip, 
several  restraining  statutes  were 
passed,  the  most  notable  of  which, 
and  the  only  one  necessary  for  us 
to  notice,  was  that  of  1  Eliz.  c.  19,  s. 
5,  subsequently  extended  by  13 
Eliz.  c.  10,  s.  8 ;  14  Eliz.  c.  14,  and 
18  Eliz.  c.  11,  the  last  three  of 
which  are  to  be  read  together  as 
forming  one  statute,  Vivian  v. 
Blomberg,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  311,  and 
43  Ehz.  c.  9,  s.  8,  which  provided 
that  aU  judgments  should  be  void, 
the  intent  of  which  was  to  enjoy 
any  lease  contrary  to  the  provis- 
ions of  the  previous  statutes  where 
a  land  or  covenant  for  the  same 
purpose  would  be  void.  These  re- 
straining acts  have  been  followed 
in  this  country,  and  in  some  of  the 
States  provision  is  made  by  statute 
for  the  mode  in  which  such  cor- 
porations shall  sell  their  lands  in 
fee. 

«Co.  Litt.  47  a;  1  Piatt  on  Leas- 
es, 238. 


1SS 

municipal,' 


disposition  ol 
agent  or  attoi 
But  the  incon 
increase  in  c( 
business  in  v 
rogation  of  i 
is  held  that 
writing  in  tl: 
all  matters  w 
too,  whether 
real  estate,' 
agents  withi 
the  scope  of 
pointed  byd 
implied  assut 

'Smith  V.  Be 
Bush  T.  Whitne; 
Taylor  v.  Caron 
St.  Louis  V.  M 
Poole  V.  Bentl 
Grant  on  Corpo 
Ear  T.  Oranthi 
Atty.  Oenl.  v.  < 
261;  Graham  T. 
263;  MattheifB 
Abb.  Pr.  (N.  Y. 
MiUer,  11  Iowa. 
T.  Guillotte,  14 
cionati  v.  Bucl 
£57;  Peck  v.  A 
In  New  York  ci 
ten,  the  commoi 
thority  to  take  ■ 
for  the  benefit 
determine  what 
leased,  and  for ' 
is  held  that  this 
ed  to  such  leasi 
for  by  apprqpr 
Green,  64  S.  T. 

'Co.  Litt.  47  I 
Cambridge,  3  B 
son's  Case,  Cart 

•The  Mayor. 
Ves.  &B.  3S6;  I 
Co.  15  John.  883 
85  MiBB.  618,  am 
it  through  ite  pi 
id.  although  no 
was  taken.    Ba 


CHAP,  xn.] 


Leases  by. 


189 


"be,  under  the  same  contracts,  and/  even  though  an  officer 
or  agent  acts  in  excess  of  his  powers,  yet  the  corporation 
is  Uable  for  his  acts  if  it  expressly  or  imphedly  ratifies 
them,"  but,  in  order  to  bring  a  contract  made  by  an  offi- 
cer or  agent  within  this  rule,  it  must  be  one  which,  in  the 
first  instance,  could  have  been  legally  entered  into  by  the 
corporate  authorities,  and  the  proper  parties  to  ratify  such 
acts,  are  those  only  who  could,  in  the  first  instance,  have 
lawfully  made  the  contract.  But,  if  authority  to  do  the 
particular  act  rests  in  a  board  of  three  or  more  persons, 
the  ratification  must  be  by  a  majority  of  the  board,  and 
individual  members  thereof,  constituting  less  than  a  ma- 
jority, is  not  sufficient.  The  *  power  to  acquire  real  estate 
necessarily  carries  with  it  the  power  to  lease  or  mortgage 
it.  These  powers  are  implied,  as  necessary  incidents  of 
the  right  to  acquire  real  estate,  unless  there  ai-e 
statutory  restrictions  thereon .  The  estate  and  interest 
of  a  corporation  in  real  property,  whether  a  mere 
easement,  or  a  right  of  possession  or  title  in  fee, 
is  the  subject  of  mortgage  lease  or  sale  as  property, 
and  is  ^  distinguishable  from  the  incorporeal  franchise 
of  the  corporation,*  and  may  be  used  by  the  lessee  or 
grantee  for  any  of  the  purposes  to  which  the  cor- 
poration itself  could  devote  it.*  A  lease  by  parol,  made 
by  a  corporation  through  its  proper  officers  or  agents,  is 
valid  whenever  a  parol  lease  would  be  vahd  if  made  by  an 
individual ; '  and  a  written  lease  under  its  corporate  seal  is 
not  necessary  to  give  validity  to  a  lease,  except  in  those 
cases  where  it  would  be  required  to  be  under  seal  if  made 
by  a  natural  person,"  and  even  where  an  officer  or  agent 


•The  Board  of  Education  v. 
Greenham,  89  BL  609;  Boss  v. 
Madison,  1  Ind.  281;  Petrie  v. 
Wright,  14  Miss.  647 ;  Pittsburgh, 
&c.  Co.  V.  Woolley,  12  Bush.  (Ky.) 
451. 

•Aurora,  &c.  Society  v.  Paddock, 
80  m.  263 ;  Pittsburgh,  &c.  R.  R. 
Co.  V.  Woolley,  12  Bush.  (Ky.)461. 

"Taymouth  v.  Kochler,  34  Mich. 
22. 

*  Aurora,  &c.  Co.  v.  Paddock,  80 
m.  269;  Evangelical,  &c.  Home  v. 


Buffalo  Hydraulic  Assn.,  64  N.  Y. 
563. 

*  Evangelical,  &c.  Home  v.  Buf- 
falo Hy£:aulic  Association,  64  N. 
Y.  563;  Goodrich  V.  Burbank,  13 
Allen  (Mass.)  459 ;  Griflan  v.  Spen- 
cer, 6  HiU  (N.  Y.)    525. 

*  Evangelical,  &c.  Hem  v.  Buf- 
falo Hydraulic  Association,  ante. 

*  Jackson  v.  Campbell,  5  Wend, 
(N.  Y.)  572  ;  Lowe  v.  L.  &  N.  R.  R. 
Co.,  11  Q.  B.  633. 

B  United  States   Bank  v.  Dand- 


IflO  Corporations.  [§96. 

signs  his  own  name  and  affixes  his  own  seal  to  a.contract 
or  lease  entered  into  by  him  on  behalf  of  the  corporation, 
yet  the  seal  will  be  treated  as  simply  nugatory,  and  the 
contract  wlU  be  binding  upon  the  corporation  as  a  simple 
contract,'  and  where  a  lease  is  executed  by  the  president 
of  a  corporation,  and  he  is  described  therein  as  the  party 
of  the  second  part,  and  recites  that  the  parties  thereto 
have  Bet  their  hands  and  seal,  and  the  name  of  the  corpora- 
tion is  signed  against  the  seal  and  the  words"  by  G.  A.  B., 
president,"  are  signed  underneath,  it  may  be  shown  that 
the  company  intended  to  make  the  lease,  and  upon  such 
proof  it  will  be  treated  as  its  lease.'  And  even  where  a 
lease  entered  into  by  a  corporation  is  voidable  merely, 
and  not  void,  it  may  be  set  up  as  a  l^ase  by  proof  that  it 
has  accepted  rent  under  it,  without  proving  that  any 
lease  executed  in  writing  or  under  seal  was  made  by  it, 
as  payment  and  receipt  of  rent  is  as  much  evidence  of  a 
demise,  from  year  to  year  or  otherwise,  against  a  cor- 
poration, as  it  is  against  an  individual,  and  the  pre- 
sumption arising  from  such  payment  and  acceptance, 

ridge,  12   Wheat.  (U.  8.)  103.    A  ment  for  a  torporation  to  use  the 

private  corporation,  unless  other-  corporate  seal.    Porter  v.  Androa- 

v/ise  proviaed  in  its  charter  or  by  cogein  R.  R.  Co.,  37  Me,  34B ;  and 

general  law,  in  the  useand  dispo-  iuKentucky,it  isheldUmtascrawI 

sition  of  ita  property,  the  exercise  afHxed  to  the  name  of  a  person  ei- 


s  and  the  transaction  ecutingacontract foracorporation 

ot  Its   Dustness,   stands   upon   the  must  be  taken  as  the  seat  of  the 

same  footing  aaan  iudividual,  and  corporation.     Reynolds  v.  Glasgon- 

ismib^ecttothesamecoDtrolandli-  Academv,  6  Dana  (Ky.)   37.    Bat 

abilities,   and  possesses  the   same  in  Florida  a  contrary  rule  is  held, 

rights,  powers  and  privileges  that  and  seals  employed  by  agents,  not 

an  individual  possesses,  within  the  in  fact  a  corporate  seal,   are  not 

scope  of  its  express  or  incidental  sufficient  to  make  the  instrument 


CHAP.  XTI.] 


Leases  by. 


191 


is  not  inconsistent  with  the  rule  that,  generally,  a 
corporation  can  contract  by  deed  only.  It  is  merely 
a  presumption  raised  against  a  corporation  from  its 
acts,  that  it  has  contracted  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  be  binding  upon  it,  whether  a  deed  is  required  or  not, 
and  the  burden  is  upon  it  to  show  that  no  lease,  binding 
upon  it,  or  which  it  could  ratify  by  its  acts,  was  made/ 
Thus,  in  an  action  of  ejectment  upon  a  demise  by  a  cor- 
poration, it  appeared  from  the  defendant's  admissions 
that  the  defendant  had  taken  the  land  by  permission  of 
a  servant  of  the  corporation,  and  that  another  servant  of 
it  had  given  him  notice  to  deliver  up  possession.  No  lease 
was  produced,  nor  was  it  shown  that  any  had  been  made, 
nor  was  it  shown  that  the  servant  giving  the  plaintiff  per- 
mission to  occupy  the  premises  had  ever  been  appointed 
as  agent  of  the  corporation  by  instrument  under  seal. 
The  judge  instructed  the  jury  that  they  were  at  liberty  to 
find  for  the  plaintiff  if  they  thought  the  servants  were 
authorized  by  the  corporation  to  act  for  it,  and  Lord 
Denman,  C.  J.,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in 
Queen's  Bench,  said  :  "  The  jury  were  at  liberty  to  infer 
any  possible  valid  authority,  and  we  cannot  assume  that 
a  canal  company  may  not  be  incorporated  by  private  act 
of  parliament  and  may  not  be  empowered  thereby  to  ap- 
point an  agent  without  an  instrument  under  seal.  *  Not 
only  may  a  corporation  recover  for  the  occupany  of  lands 
leased  by  it  by  parol,*  but  it  is  also  liable  on  a  parol  lease 
made  to  it,  whenever  such  parol  lease  would  be  valid 
against  an  individual,  at  least,  where  it  has  entered  into 


*  Pennington  v.  Taniere,  18  L.  J. 
Q.  B.  49. 

'  Birmingham  Canal  Co.  v.  Bold, 
11  Q.  B.  129;  Rex  v.  Bigg,  8  P. 
Wms.  419. 

»  Rochester  v.  Pierce,  1  Camp. 
466 ;  The  Mayor  of  StaflFord  v.  Till, 
4  Bing.  75.  "If,"  said  Best,  C.  J., 
in  the  case  last  cited,  "  a  promise 
could  not  be  implied,  an  action  for 
use  and  occupation  could  never  be 
brought  by  a  corporation.  But  the 
law  will  not  only  imply  a  promise, 
but  an  existing  tenancy  in  those 
who  hold  the  lands  of  a  corpora- 


tion." In  Wood  V.  Tate,  2  N.  R. 
247,  the  court  said  that  the  plaintiff 
having  enjoyed  the  premises,  they 
would  consider  him  as  tenant  from 
j^ear  to  year.  See  also  Vinen's  Abr. 
tit.  Corporations  (K.)  11,  41.  If  a 
lease  under  seal  has  been  made,  an 
implied  promise  cannot  be  raised, 
for  a  contract  or  authority  tnip/ted 
by  law,  cannot  be  under  seal.  See 
a  very  important  case  upon  the 
effect  of  an  occupancy  under  a  pa- 
rol lease  by  a  corporation.  Fm- 
lay  V.  Bristol,  &c.  R.  R.  Co.,  7 
Exchq.  409. 


I-  ^1 


193  Corpora 

possession  under  it.'  It  may 
and  occupation,'  and  a  recove: 
that  form  of  action,'  and  the  r 
to  sustain  the  action  is  impUe 
cases  previously  cited,  the  c 
doubt  whether  a  corporation 
parol  lease,  except  to  the  ej;tt 
under  it,  but,  as  the  questio: 
tions  for  use  and  occupation,  ■ 
Geo.  2,  c.  19,  authorizing  sucl 
person  who  has  ' '  held  or  occt 
of  which  the  action  is  brougl 
as  to  whether  a  corporation  ] 
lease  does  not  become  a  ten; 
therefore  liable  for  a  full  year 
fore  the  year  has  expired,  is  let 
as  the  only  ground  intimated 
opposite  doctrine  can  be  predi 
cannot  contract  except  by  dt 
by  statute,  these  cases,  upo: 
gai'ded  as  authority  in  this 
courts,  it  is  held  that  a  corp 
contracts  relating  either  to  p 
parol  or  simple  contracts,  un 
ute  otherwise  provides,'  so  th 
the  conceded  rule  in  this  cour 
make  a  lease  by  parol,  whene 
or  may  become  liable  upon  a 
tent  as  an  individual  would 
may  become  a  tenant  from  j 
ring  all  the  liabilities,  and  enj' 
to  that  relation.'    And,  even 

'  fHnlay  v.  Bristol  &  Exeter  Rail- 
way Co.  1  Exchq.  409 ;  Beverly  v. 
The  LincolD  Gas  Co.  6  M.&W.  815. 

'Mayor,  &c.v.  Till,  4  BiDg.  75; 
Rochester  v.  Pierc«  1   Camp,  460. 

"  Lowe  v.  L.  &  N.  R.  R.  Co.  11 Q. 
B.  936 ;  Finlay  t.  Bristol  &c.  R.  R. 
Co.  f    ■ 


CHAP,  xn.] 


Leases  by. 


193 


no  authority  to  make  a  lease  of  its  lands,  a  person  who 
has  occupied  under  a  lease  from  it,  and  has  had  the  ben- 
efits thereof,  will  not,  in  an  action  upon  it,  be  permitted 
to  question  the  vaUdity  of  the  lease  or  the  authority  of 
the  corporation  to  make  it.*  A  corporation  can  neither 
taken  or  grant  lands  except  by  its  corporate  name,  but  a 
minute,  or  immaterial  variation,  when  the  identity  of 
the  grantor  or  grantee  may  be  fixed  from  the  name  used, 
either  from  the  instrument  itself  or  from  the  savements 
or  proofs,  is  not  material  and  will  not  avoid  a  grant.' 


f  > 

It 


afdon  has  power  to  make,  may  he 
made  in  the  same  manner  that  a 
natural  x>er8on  could  make  them, 
in  the  afoeence  of  any  restrictions.** 
Smith  V.  Morse,  2  Cal.  524.  It  is 
true  that  they  possess  only  mra 
minorum,  and  have  not  in  au  re- 
spects and  on  all  subjects,  the 
power  of  contracting  like  persons 
of  full  age  and  sui  juris.  But,  ex- 
cept to  the  extent  that  they  are  re- 
stricted by  their  charter,  either  ex- 
pressly or  by  necessary  implication, 
or  by  statute,  they  may  contract  in 
the  same  manner  as  an  individual 
might,  and  are  subject  to  the  same 
liabilities  and  possess  the  same 
rights.  Seibrecht  v.  New  Orleans, 
12  La.  An.  496.  But  where  the 
charter  designates  the  mode  in 
w^hich  it  shall  act,  it  must  conform 
to  that  mode.  Talmage  v.  N.  A. 
Coal  Co.,  3  Head.  (Tenn.)  837. 
But  it  may,  by  usage,  render  them- 
selves liable  on  instrument  execut- 
ed in  a  different  mode.  Witte  v, 
Derby  Pishing  Co.,  2  Conn.  260. 
But  a  party  dealing  with  a  corpora- 
tion, has  a  right  to  presume  in  the 
absence  of  notice  to  the  contrary, 
that  it  is  acting  within  the  scope  of 
its  corporate  power.  Aiken  v. 
Blanchard,  32  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  527 ; 
Conn.  &c.  Ins.  Co,  v.  Cleaveland, 
41  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  9.  But  see  Merritt 
V.  Lambert,  1  Hoflf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  166, 
-where  it  was  held  that  one  dealing 
directly  with  a  corporation  for  the 
purchase  of  real  estate,  to  be  con- 
veyed by  it,  is  taken  to  have  con- 
structive notice  of  the  extent  of 
its  corporate  powers  as  to  such  es- 
tate. 

*  Argenti  v.  San  Francisco,  16 
Cal.  255. 


'  Mayor,  &c.  v.  Blamire,  8  East, 
487 ;  1  Kyd  on  Corporations,  234 ; 
People  V.  Runkle,  9  John.  (N.  Y.) 
147  ;  St.  Louis  Hospital  v.  Williams, 
19  Mo.  609  ;  Pendleton  v.  Bank  of 
Kentucky,  1  Mon.  (Ky.)  177;  In- 
habitants V.  String,  9  N.  J.  L.  323 ; 
People  V.  Love,  19  Cal.  676 ;  Doug- 
lass V.  Branch  Bank,  19  Ala.  659 ; 
Medway,  &c.  Co.  v.  Adams,  10 
Mass.  360 ;  Woolrich  v.  Forrest,  1 
Penn.  St.  115 ;  Pierce  v.  Somer- 
worth,  10  N.  H.  879;  Bowen  v. 
State  Bank,  5  Ark.  234;  African 
Society  v.  Varick,  13  John.  (N.  Y.) 
38;  President,  &c.  v.  Myers,  6  S. 
&  K.  (Penn.)  12  ;  Milford,  &c.  Co. 
V.  Brush,  10  Ohio,  111 ;  Preachers* 
Aid  Society,  45  Me.  552 ;  Romeo  v. 
Chapman,  2  Mich.  179 ;  Insane 
Asylum  v,  Higgens,  15  HI.  185 ; 
Trustees  v.  Peaselee,  15  N.  H.  317 ; 
Vansant  v.  Roberts,  3  Md.  119; 
Porter  v,  Blakeley,  1  Root  (Conn.) 
440;  Bodman  v.  American  Tract 
Society,  9  Allen  Qilass.)  447 ;  Clia- 
pin  V.  School  Dis.,  45  Me.  552; 
Brittain  v.  Newland,  2  D.  &  B. 
rN.  C.)  363.  In  Oxford's  Case,  10 
Coke,  53  b,  it  was  held  that  the 
misnomer  of  a  corporation  in  an 
act  of  parliament,  when  the  express 
intention  appears  shall  not  avoid 
the  act,  and  generally  it  may  be 
said  that  the  name  of  a  corporation 
in  grants  or  conveyances,  need 
not  be  idem  syllabus  sen  verbis, 
but  that  it  is  enough  if  it  is  idem 
re  et  sensu.  See  Burgess  of  Lynne, 
10  Coke,  121  a,  where  numerous 
instances  are  given  in  which  at  a 
very  early  day  this  rule  was  ap- 
plied. If  the  description  in  a  stat- 
ute or  a  will  be  certain,  it  is  suffi- 
cient, although  the  name  is  not 

13 


194 


Corporations. 


[§96. 


Oorporation  aggregates  "as  dean  and  chapter,"  "  mayor 
and  common  council,"  &c.,  &c.,  may  make  or  confirm 
leases  without  expressing  either  the  christian,  or  surname 
of  the  dean,  mayor,  &c.,  because  in  their  poUtical  capac- 
ity as  a  corporation  aggregate,  they  always  remain  the- 
same  and  are  said  to  never  die ;  but  in  leases  or  confir- 
mations by  a  bishop,  dean  or  other  sole  corporation,  both 
the  christian  and  surname  should  be  given.' 


obeeiTcd.  Oxford's  Case,  ante; 
Ayroy's  Case,  11  Coke,  21  h.  In 
a  wUl,  if  it  sufficiently  appears  to 
be  the  intent  of  the  testator  to 
leave  his  land  to  a  pKarticular  cor- 

S oration,  it  is  sufficient.  Thus,  a 
evise  to  the  mayor,  jurats  and 
commonalty  of  Rye.  by  the  name 
of  The  Worshipful,  the  Mayor, 
Jurats,  and  Council  of  the  ancient 
town  of  Rye,  was  held  good.  Atty. 
Genl.  V.  The  Mayor  of  Rye,  7 
Taimt.  546 ;  Yin.  Arb.  Corporations 
(G.) ;  4  Bacon's  Abr.  Corporations 
(C.)  2;  Comyn's  Digest,  Capacity 
^B.)  5.  If  the  name  is  expressed 
in  synonymous  terms,  it  is  enough. 
Thus  a  lease  made  by  the  name  of 
Minister  Pauperi's  Domus  Die, 
when  the  true  name  is  Minister 
Die  Pauperis,  it  is  good  because  the 
same  deei^  is  specified  by  both 
names,  ^tt  v.  James,  Hob.  124. 
An  immaterial  addition  to  the 
name  does  not  destroy  the  lease  or 
ffrant.  In  Dr.  Ayrag's  Case,  11 
Coke,  18  b,  it  was  held  that  if  a 
person  be  otherwise  described  with 
certainty  in  a  grant,  the  misprision 
of  his  baptismal  name  is  im- 
materiaL  As,  if  in  grant  by  The 
Master,  &c.  of  the  Mystery  of 
Cooks,  they  are  namea  **oi  the 
craft  or  mystery. "  Croft  v.  Howel, 


Plowd.  637  &.  So  if  the  president 
and  scholars  of  Corpus  Christi 
College  in  Oxford  make  a  lease  by 
their  name,  with  the  addition  "in 
the  County  of  Oxford, "  the  lease 
is^ood.  Dumper  v.  Syms,  Cro. 
Ebz.  816.  So  a  lease  made  by 
**  The  Dean  and  Chapter  ecdesiac 
cathedralis  Christi  de  Oxonia, "  by 
the  name  of  **  Dean  and  Chapt^ 
ecclesiac,  &c.  academiA  de  Oxon,  ** 
is  good.  Lord  North*s  Case,  Moore, 
861.  See  also  Doe  ▼.  Miller,  1  B. 
&  Aid.  699 ;  Marriatt  v.  Paschal's 
Case,  1  Leon,  159.  As  to  imma- 
terial variances,  see  Willis  v. 
Jermaine*s  Case,  2  Leon,  97 ;  Che- 
ney's Case;  1  id.  159 ;  Cloydon  Hos- 
Sital  V.  Farley,  6  Taunt.  467; 
[aster,  &c.  of  Sussex,  &c.  College 
V.  Davenport,  1  Wils.  284  ;  &^yor, 
&c.  of  CaurUsle  v.  Blamire,  8  Eaat^ 
587.  There  is  a  distinction  between 
a  misnomer  in  a  grant  and  a  mis- 
nomer in  a  writ  or  declaration,  but 
it  is  not  expedient  to  pursue  this 
matter  furuier.  As  to  tJie  dis- 
tinction intimated,  see  Tiplingv. 
Pexal,  2  Bulst.  288:  Mayor  of 
Stafford  v.  Bolton,  1  B.  &  P.  40 ; 
Heading  v.  Mayor  of  London,  Cro. 
Car.  574. 

1  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (G.) 
8 ;  2  Inst.  666. 


— (  •- 


CHAP.  3an.] 


Gekerally. 


196 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


BY  INFANTS. 

Sec.    07.  Generally. 

Sec.    98.  Lease  mufit  be  personal  act  of  the  infant. 

Sec.    99.  Leases  to  infants. 

-    Sec.  100.  When  infancy  does  not  avoid  lease  or  deed. 

Sec.  101.  Bight  of  disa^nnance,  and  bow  exercised* 

Sec.  102.  How  leases  may  be  afitaned^ 

Section.  97.  GeAeraiiy.— leases  mado  by  infants  are 
not  void,  but  voidable  only,  whether  they  contain  a  res* 
ervation  of  rent  or  not,  or,  in  fiact,  whether  they  are  ad- 
\rantageous  or  disadvantageous  to  him,'  and  the  lessee, 
being  an  adult,  cannot  avoid  the  lease  upon  the  ground 
of  the  lessee's  infancy.'  In  some  of  the  English  cases  the 
doctrine  has  been  advanced,  that  a  lease  made  by  an  in- 
fant, that  is  advantageous  to  him  is  not  voidable  even 
but  is  absolutely  binding  upon  him  and  cannot  be  dis- 
affirmed by  him  upon  attaining  majority/  and  this  doc 


^  -      i^ 


>  Abbot  V.  Parsons,  3  Burr.  1808 ; 
Lane  v.  Oowper,  Mo.  105 ;  Slator  ▼. 
Brady,  14  It.  C.  L.  61 ;  Ketsey s 
Case,  Cro.  Jac.  820 ;  Ashfield  y. 
Ashfield,  Plowd.  418;  Slator  v. 
Trimble,  14  Ir.  C.  L.  342 ;  Dixon  v. 
Merritt,  21  Minn.  196 ;  Scranton  v. 
Stewart,  52  Ind.  69 ;  Ulinois  L.  &  L. 
Co.  v.  Bonner,  75  Dl.  315. 

*  Abbot  V.  Parsons,  8  Burr.  1806 ; 
Haw  V,  Ogle,  4  Taunt.  10 ;  Forest- 
er's Case,  1  Sid.  42  :  Fameham  v. 
Atkins«  1  Sid.  446 ;  Davies  v.  Man- 
nington,  2  Sid.  109 ;  Abbot  ▼.  Par- 
sons, ante;  Shannon  v.  Brad- 
street,  1  Sch.  &  Lef .  58.  In  Smith 
T.  Bowin,  1  Mod.  25,  the  plaintiff 
brought  an  action  to  recover  for 
grass  which  he  had  sold  to  the  de- 
fendant and  for  six  pounds  due  him 
for  other  matters,  and  which  the 
defendant  a^eed  to  pay  him  for  at 
a  certain  price,  and  also  to  pay  him 
six  pounds  that  he  owed  him.  The 
defendant  cut  the  grass,  but  he  set 
up  in  defence  to  the  action  that  the 
puiintiff  was  an  infant,  and  so  not 


bound  by  the  contract,  and,  because 
the  contract  was  not  reciprocal,  in- 
sisted that  he  ought  not  to  oe  bound. 
Keltnqe  said :  '*  If  an  infant  let 
you  a  house,  shall  he  not  have  an 
action  against  you  for  the  rent?" 
and  TwiSDEN  said ;  *  *  I  have  known 
an  action  upon  the  case  brought  by 
an  infant  upon  a  promise  to  pay  so 
much  money  in  consideration  that 
he  permit  the  defendant  to  enjoy 
such  a  house.  It  was  long  insisted 
upon,  that  this  was  not  a  good  con- 
sideration, because  not  reciprocal  { 
for  the  infant  might  avoid  his  prom- 
ise If  an  action  were  grounded  upon 
it  against  him;  but  it  was  ad- 
judged to  be  a  good  consideration, 
and  that  the  action  was  maintain- 
able," and  in  the  principal  case  the 
plaintiff  had  judgment.  Soe2Dan- 
ler's  Abr.  770;  Beeson  v.  Carlton, 
13  Ind.  854. 

» Baker  v.  White,  2  T.  R.  159 ; 
Drury  v.  Drury ,  5  Bro.  P.  C.  570 ; 
Ketsey*s  Cas^  Cro.  Jac.  820. 


196 


Infants. 


[§97. 


trine  is  also  advanced  by  very  able  text  writers,*  but  this 
does  not  seem  to  be  the  English  doctrine,  and  its  validity 
is  denied  by  high  authority '  and  is  not  sustained  by  the 
better  class  of  authorities,*  and  Mr.  Platt  says:*  ''But 
notwithstanding  Mr.  Justice  Buller's  remarks*  it 
seems  to  be  the  prevailing  opinion  of  the  profession  that 
an  infant  is  never  pi'ecluded from  disputing  a  lease  upon 
attaining  the  age  of  twenty  one. "^  An  opinion,"  he  adds, 
*'that  is  fortified  by  the  fact  of  the  lessee's  inability  to 
avoid  the  lease  in  any  ease  on  account  of  the  infancy  of 
the  lessor  and  the  inadmissibility  of  the  infant's  plea  of 
non  est  factum.  Notwithstanding  a  passage  to  the  con- 
trary in  Coke,"  it  appears  that  an  infant's  lease  for  life 
or  lives,  made  by  feoffment  and  personal  livery  of  seizin, 
whether  containing  a  reservation  of  rent  or  not,  or  bene- 
ficial or  disadvantageous  to  him,  is  voidable  only."  *  But, 
whatever  may  be  the  rule  in  England,  there  seems  to  be 
no  question  that,  in  this  country  an  infant  may,  upon  at- 
taining the  age  of  majority,  disaflBrm  any  conveyance  of 
his  own  lands,  whether  by  deed  or  lease,  and  whether 
beneficial  or  otherwise,  and  that  he  cannot  during  his 
infancy  make  any  conveyance  that  will  be  binding  upon 
him  when  he  becomes  of  age.*    The  rule  established  by 


'  WoodfaU*8  L.  &  T.  (9  English 
Edn.)  p.  41.  See  also  Addison  on 
C)ontracts,  83. 

•  2  Preston  on  Conveyancing,  248 ; 
1  Platt  on  Leases,  31.  Co.  Litt.  380 
h  ;  2  Inst.  678  ;  Abbot  v.  Parsons, 
8  Burr.  1801. 

•  Abbot  V.  Parsons,  ante. 

•  1  Platt  on  Leases,  31. 

•  Referring  to  the  latter's  remarks 
in  White  v.  Maddon,  2T.  R.  161. 

•  And  he  cites  2  Preston  on  Con- 
veyancing, 249. 

'  Co.  Litt.  278  a ;  but  see  Lit.  § 
647  ;  Co.  Litt.  45  6,  808  a. 

•  Lane  v.  Cowper,  Mo.  105  ;  Ab- 
bot V.  Parsons,  8  Burr.  1801. 

•  Dearborn  v.  Eastman,  4  N.  H. 
441 ;  Roof  V.  Stafford,  7  Cow.  (N. 
Y.)  179 ;  Gillet  v.  Stanley,  1  HiU 
(N.  Y.)  121  ;  Bool  v.  Mix,  17  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  119;  Harrod  v.  Myers,  21 
Ark.  592 ;  Roberts  v.Wiggin,  1  N. 
H.  73 ;  Irvine  v.  Irvine,  9  Wall.  (U. 
S.)  917  ;  Bozeman  v.  Browning,  31 


Ark.  864 ;  ^ummings  v.  Powell,  8 
Tex.  80.  The  consent  of  an  infant 
heir  cannot  be  made  the  ^ound  of 
any  order  which  may  prejudice  his 
rights.  Thus,  the  consent  of  an  in- 
fant beir  that  an  outstanding  mort- 
gage on  a  farm  devised  by  the  tes- 
tator to  his  wife  might  be  paid  out 
of  the  personal  estate,  or  that  the 
widow  should  have  the  use  of  a 
certain  sum  of  money  during  her 
pleasure,  is  not  binding,  nor  does 
it  reheve  the  executor  from  ac- 
counting for  the  money.  Scott  v. 
MoneU,  1  Redf .  (N.  Y.)  Surrogate 
431.  See  also  Rojgers  v.  Conger,  7 
John.  (N.  Y.)  557.  Nor  are  they 
bound  by  acts  of  their  guardian  that 
are  illegal,  not  even  if  he  acted  un- 
der a  special  act  of  the  Legislature, 
if  it  had  no  power  to  authorize  him 
to  do  the  act.  DeWitt  v.  Lock- 
wood,  3  Blatch,  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  56  ; 
Tillinghast  v.  Holbrook,  7  R.  I.  230. 


A 


CEAP.  xm.] 


Leases  by. 


197 


our  courts  is  that  a  deed,  lease,  or  other  conveyance  made 
by  an  infant  that  takes  effect  upon  deUvery  is  not  void, 
but  merely  voidable,  without  reference  to  the  question  of 
benefit'  and  mortgages,*  and  even  bonds  for  a  title  to 
lands  come  within  the  rule/  The  words  ''takes  effect" 
are  a  material  part  of  the  definition,  because  unless  the 
instrument  conveys  a  present  interest  it  is  void*  and 
excludes  a  letter  of  attorney,  or  a  deed  or  lease  that  del- 
egates a  mere  power  or  naked  authority.*  But  the  deed 
of  an  infant /erne  covert^  is  held  to  be  void,'  but  this  rule 
would  probably  be  ignored  in  those  States  where  the  dis- 
abilities of  feme  coverts  as  to  lands  held  by  them  to  their 
own  use  have  been  removed/ 


'  Chapman  v.  Chapman,  13  Ind. 
896 ;  Jenkins  v.  Jenkins,  12  Iowa, 
15 ;  Wallace  v.  Lewis,  4  Har. 
(Del.)  75  ;  Love  v.  Gest,  5  Har.  &  J. 
^d.)  106 ;  Kendall  v.  Lawrence,  22 
Pick.  (Mass.)  540;  Bool  v.  Mix,  17 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  119 ;  Whitney  v. 
Dutch,  14  Mass.  462 ;  Ferguson  v. 
Bell,  17  Mo.  347;  Cummings  v. 
Powell,  8  Tex.  80 ;  Bigelow  v.  Kin- 
ney, 3  Vt.  863  ;  W^heaton  v.  East,  5 
Yerg.  (Tenn.)  41 ;  Cook  v.  Toombs, 
36  Miss.  686 ;  Phillips  v.  Green,  5 
T.  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  344 ;  Oliver  v. 
Handlett,  13  Mass.  457 ;  Jackson  v. 
Ladd,  6  John.  (N.  Y.)267 ;  Jackson 
V.  VHiitock,  1  John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.) 
513 ;  and  Abbot  v.  Parsons,  8  Burr. 
1801,  and  Slator  v.  Brady,  14  Ir.  C. 
L.  Ex.  61,  and  Slator  v.  Trimble, 
14  lb.  O.  B.  are  to  the  same  effect. 
The  rule  as  held  by  our  courts  is, 
that  all  deeds  or  mstruments  un- 
der the  seal  executed  by  an  infant, 
are  voidable  only,  except  those 
wMch  delegate  a  naked  authority, 
and  that  they  are  void.  That  is, 
that  all  instruments  which  do  not 
take  effect  by  delivery  of  his  hand 
are  void,  and  such  as  take  effect 
by  delivery,  are  simply  voidable. 
Roof  V.  Stafford,  7  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
179 ;  Conrac  v.  Birdsall,  1  John. 
Cas.  (N.  Y.)  127  ;  Roberts  v.  Wiggin, 
1  N.  H.  73 ;  Whitney  v.  Dutch,  14 
Mass.  462 ;  Lawrence  v.  McArter, 
10  Ohio,  37 :  4  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit. 
Leases  (JB.) ;  Baylis  v.  Dinely,  3  M. 
&  S.  477  ;  2  Preston  on  Conveyanc- 
ing, 248  ;  Abbot  V.  Parsons,  3  JBurr. 
1^ 


» Palmer  v.  MiUer,  25  Barb.  (N. Y.) 
899;  Roberts  V.  Wiggin,  1  N.  H.  73; 
State  V.  Plaisted,  45  N.  H.  412. 

•Mustard  v.  Walilford,  ISGratt. 
(Va.)  329 ;  Weaver  v.  Jones,  24  Ala. 
420;  Parsons  v.  Hill,  8  Mo.  135. 

*  Abbot  V.  Parsons,  3  Burr.  1801 ; 
GiUett V.Stanley,  1  Hm(N.  Y.)121 ; 
Bool  V.  Mix,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y.)119; 
Worcester  Bank  v.  Eaton,  15  Mass. 
871;  Phillips  V.  Green,  5T.  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)344. 

'^Lawrence  v.  McArter,  10  Ohio 
87;  Colcock  v.  Ferguson,  3  Dessau 
(S.  C.)  482. 

•  Mackey  v.  Proctor,  12  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  483  ;  Chandler  v.  McKinney, 
6  Mich.  217;  Mageev.  Welsh,  18 
Col.  155 ;  Cronise  v.  Clark,  4  Md. 
Ch.  408;  Sclirader  v.  Decker,  9 
Penn.  St.  14.  And  it  seems  that  an 
infant  husband  who  joins  with  his 
wife  in  the  conveyance  of  her  land, 
may  disafBrm  tne  deed  when  he 
becomes  of  age.  Barker  v.  Wil- 
son, 4  Heisk.  (Tenn.)  268. 

'  See  Scott  v.  Buchanan,  11 
Humph.  (Tenn.)  468;  Francis  v. 
Wiggell,!  Modd.  261 ;  Sanf  ord  v.  Mc- 
Lean, 8  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  117 ;  Bool 
V.  Mix,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y. )  119  ;  Doe 
V.  Dyre,  3  C.  B.  557.  In  Miles  v.  Lin- 
german,  24  Ind.  885,  the  court  pro- 
ceeded upon  the  ground  that  her 
deed  was  merely  voidable  when  she 
joined  with  her  husband  in  mak- 
mg  it  and  where  an  inf  ant/eme  cov- 
eri  joined  w^ith  her  husband  in  a 
deed  to  a  railroad  company  of  land 
belonging  to  her,and  ten  years  after, 
wards,  and  after  improvements  ha^ 


>■  • 


198  INPANTS.  [§  98. 

Sec.  98.  Lease  must  he  perflosal  act  of  the  In&nt.— The 
mere. receipt  of  rent  by  an  executor  of  an  infant  does  not 
bind  him.  An  infant  cannot  apjx)int  an  agent,  and 
therefoi'o  his  next  friend,  although  his  natural  guardian, 
cannot  bind  him.'  In  order  to  be  good,  the  lease  of  an  in- 
fant must  be  his  own  personal  act,  and  a  lease  made  by 
an  agent  is  not  binding  upon  him,'  because  an  infant's 
appointment  of  an  agent  or  attorney  is  wholly  void.* 
"  If,"  said  Parke,  B.,  in  the  case  in  note  2,  "an  infant 
appoints  a  person  to  make  a  lease  for  him  it  does  not  bind 
the  infant,  neither  does  his  ratification  bind  him,  *  * 
The  lease  of  en  infant,  to  be  good,  must  be  his  own  per- 
sonal act." 

Sec.  9d.  Leaaes  to  in&nts.— Leases  made  to  an  in- 
fant ai-e  not  void,  but  merely  voidable,  *  and  if  upon  at- 
taining majority  he  disaffirms  the  lease,  he  is  not  liable 
for  rent, '  but  if,  upon  attaining  majority,  he  continues  to 
occupy  the  premises,  and  does  not  signify  his  dissent  to 
the  case,  within  a  reasonable  time,  he  becomes  liable  for 
all  the  rent  remaining  unpaid  up  to  the  time  of  action 
brought,  including  that  which  accrued  during  his  majori- 
ty, and  debt  will  lie  against  him  therefor,  *  and  he  becomes 

been  made  Upon  the  land,  and  it  T78;TniebloodT.  Trueblood,  SInd. 

had  been  convejed  to  a  third  pet-  195. 

eon,  it  was  held  that  she  might  diB>  '  Bennett  v.  Davis,  6  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 

afQrm  the  deed,  and  that  in  order  893 ;  Roof  v.  Stafford,    7  id.   ITO ; 

todow, ahewasnot  obhged  toten-  Whitnej  v.  Dutch,  14  Maas.  457; 

der  back  the  purchase  monev  re-  Fonda  v.  Van  Home,    15  Wend. 

ceived  therefor.     See  post.    InAr-  (N.  Y.)  631  ;  Waples  t.  HastingB,  8 

kansae  it  ie  held  that  the  provision  Harr.  (Del. )  408 ;  Cool  v.    Mix,  17 

of  the  statute  that  a  mamed  worn-  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  12. 

an  may  convey  real  estate  by  deed  *  Baxter    v.   Bush,   29  Vt.   466; 

executed  by  herself  and  husband,  Griffith  v.  Schwendennan,  27  Mo. 

does  not  prevent  her  from  disability  412. 

to  convey  teal  estate  when  under  '  Ketsey's  Case,  Cto.  Jac.  820. 

ace  ;  ana  a  deed  executed  under  *  Ketsey'e  Case,  ante ;  Henry  v. 

tnoae  circumstances  may  be  can-  Root,  XS  N.  Y.  52fl.    In  Bacon's 

celled  upon  apphcation  by  her  to  Ai)r.  (F.>  S86.  the  author  hbvs  : 
the  Court  ofCha 
affects  her  intere 
convey  the  husba 
as  the  right  of  ren 
the  tenancy  bv  c 
"    >Bhet.    Hi 


CHAP,  xm.] 


When  BmDma 


199 


liable  to  perform  all  the  other  obligations  attached  to  the 
estate. '  An  infant,  even  in  the  case  of  a  lease  that  is  dis- 
advantageous to  him,  cannot  protect  himself  under  the 
plea  of  infancy  if  he  has  taken  possession  and  not  dis- 
claimed upon  attaining  his  majority,  unless  he  is  still  a 
minor.  He  cannot  retain  the  estate  and  keen  the  owner 
from  deaUng  with  it  as  his  own,  without  being  Uable  to 
bear  all  the  buixlens  attached  to  it. "  Possibly  such  would 
be  the  rule  if  the  lease  can  be  said  to  come  under  the  head 
of  necessaries^  *  but  this  latter  point  may  be  doubtful, 
and  possibly  no  state  of  circumstances  could  exist  which 
would  be  said  to  bring  it  under  that  head,  so  as  to  make 
him  liable  upon  the  lease  during  his  njinority.* 

Sec.  100.  When  inflBuioy  does  not  avoid  lease  or  deed. — 
An  infant  is  bound  by  leases  made  by  him  in  a  corporate 
capacity,  *  or  when  the  lease  or  deed  does  not  affect  his 
interest,  but  from  an  authority  which  he  is  tnisted  to  ex- 
ercise for  another,  as  a  lease  made  by  him  as  trustee, 
executor,  or  in  any  other  representative  capacity,'  or 


avoid  it.*^  But  this  is  not  the  rule 
as  now  held,  and  there  is  no  doubt 
but  that  infancy  would  be  a  com- 
plete bar  to  an  action  of  debt  or 
covenant  for  rent,  whether  the 
lease  was  beneficial  to  the  infant 
or  not,  unless  after  becoming  of 
age,  he  ratified  the  lease.  See 
cases  cited  in  previous  note,  also 
Ketaey^s  Case,  ante. 

1  Holmes  v.  Blogg,  8  Taunt.  35. 

'  Parke,  B.,  in  Railway  CJo.  v. 
H'Michael,  5  Ezchq.  128. 

»  Lowe  V.  Griffith,  1  Scott,  458. 
The  Supreme  Court  of  Connecti- 
cut, in  a  case  before  it,  Munson  v. 
Washband,  81  Conn.  808,  took  a 
very  sensible  view  of  the  question 
as  to  what  may  be  regarded  as 
necessaries.  In  that  case  the  wife, 
who  was  an  infant,  employed  the 
plaintiff  to  bring  an  action  for  her 
against  the  defendant  for  a  breach 
of  promise  of  marriage,  which  was 
finally  compromised  bv  their  mar- 
ria^.  The  plaintiff  brought  his 
action  against  the  defendant  for 
counsel  fees,  costs,  &c.,  in  that 
suit,  and  the  action  was  resisted 
upon  the  ground  that  the  wife  was 
an  infant  when  she  employed  the 


plaintiff,  and,  his  services  not  be- 
mg  necessaries,  within  the  rule, 
no  recovery  could  be  had.  But 
the  court  repudiated  the  idea  that 
the  liability  of  an  infant  for  neces^ 
saries  only^  extends  to  board,  lodg- 
ing, clothmg,  &o.,  and  said :  **  Si 
cases  where,  under  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances a  civil  suit  is  the  only 
means  by  which  an  infant  can  pro- 
cure the  absolute  necessaries  which 
lie  requires^  it  would  be  a  reproach 
to  the  law  to  deny  him  the  power 
to  make  the  necessary  contracts 
for  its  commencement  and  prose- 
cution." So  it  would  seem  reason- 
able to  hold  in  certain  cases,  that 
a  lease  of  lands  which  supply  a 
home  or  the  necessaries  of  hie  for 
an  infant,  might  be  treated  as 
coming  under  the  head  of  neces- 
saries when  the  fruits  of  the  lease 
are  the  infantas  main  reliance  for 
support. 

*  In  Tunper  v.  Caldwell,  12  Met. 
(Mass.)  559. 

*  Case  of  Duchy  of  Lancaster, 
Dyer  207  h ;  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Agr.  pL 
80 ;  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  41. 

*  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Abbot  v. 
Parsons,  8  Burr.  1802.    ''  Apower, 


Ihtaitts. 


[§  101. 


■when  tho  act  is  one  which  the  law  would  have  compelled 
him  to  do, '  or  where  he,  having  it  in  his  power  to  do  so, 
refuses  to  restore  the  benefits  he  derived  from  his  con- 
tract.' 

Sec.  101.  Bight  of  diBafflrmasoe,  and  how  exercised, —As 
previously  stated,  an  infant  may  disaffirm  his  deed,  lease 
or  bond  for  title  after  he  becomes  of  age,  but  he  cannot 
do  it  before,'  but  if  he  dies  before  he  becomes  of  age,  his 
heirs  or  executors  may  disaffirm  it.  * 


taya  the  court,  In  Sheldon  \.  New- 
ion,  8  Ohio  8t.  49a,  "may  be 
rr  evocablr  executed  by  an  ituant, 
as  by  an  a^ult."  In  Prouty  v.  Ed- 
gar, 6  Iowa,  S58,  a  minor  held 
unds  in  trust  for  a  person  who 
had  given  bonds  for  its  convey- 
ance, and  the  infant  conveyed  the 
E  remises  accordingly.  It  was 
eld  by  the  court  that  he  could 
not  set  up  infancy  to  defeat  the 
deed,  because,  althou;^h  an  infant, 
he  might  have  been  compelled  to 
convey,  and  therefore  his  convey- 
ance Kithout  legal  compulsion  waa 
good. 

'  Abbot  V.  Parsons,  ante ;  Pigot 
V.  BusBcll,  Cro.  Eliz.  124 ;  Kilcrease 
v.  Shelby,  S3  Miss.  161  ;  Barring- 
ton  V.  Clarke.  2  Penn.  116  ;  Jones 
V.  Brewer,  1  Pick.  (Maas.)  314. 

'Weed  V.  Beebe,  21  Vt.  495; 
Young  V.  McKee,  13  Mich.  552; 
Thompson  v.  linscott,  2  Me.  186  ; 
Dana  v.  Coooibe,  6  id.  89 ;  Rob- 
bins  V.  Eaton.  10  N.  H.  561; 
Jones  V.  Phcenii  Bank,  8  N.  Y. 
228. 

'  Slator  V,  Trimble,  14  Ir.  C.  L. 
842  ;  Woodfall'B  L.  &  T.  41  ;  Faw- 
cett's  I*    &  T.   4 ;  8  Bacon's  Abt. 
tit.     Infancy  (A.);  Pitcher  v.  Ly- 
cock,  7  Ind.  888  ;  Tucker  v.  More- 
land,  10  Pet.  <U.   S.)  58;  Peterson 
V.   Laik,   24    Ma   541  ;  McGan  v. 
Marshal,  7   Humph.   (Tenn.)   121 ; 
Jackson  V.  Carpenter,  11  Jolm.  (N. 
Y.)  639  ;  Cressinger  v.   Welch.  15 
Ohio,  166;  Hoyle  v.  Stow  ■>  f^" 
ft  B.  {N.  C.)  L  330.    In 
V.  Horton,  17  Conn.    41 
LIAUS.  C.   J.,   says:   "In 
deed  of  land  bv  an  infant 
to  be  settled  that   the  co 
cannot  be  avoided  until  t 
becomes  of  age."    But  tl 
different  as  to  personal  pro 


be  may  disaffirm,  either  before  or 
after  he  becomes  of  age.  Shipman 
V.  Horton,  ante;  Heath  v.  Weat, 
26  N.  H.  191 ;  Carr  v.  Clough.  26 
id.  280;  Walker  v.  Ellis,  12  lU. 
470.  A  contrary  rule  as  to  di»- 
afflrmance  of  personal  contracts 
was  held  in  Roof  v.  Stafford,  7 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  179,  but  it  waa 
reversed  on  appeal.  See  9  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  626.  P4BKK  B.,  intimated 
in  Railway  Co.  v.  McMichael,  5 
Eichq.  124,  that  an  infant  might 
posaibly  give  notice  of  disaflinn- 
ance  before  he  became  of  age,  that 
would  be  operative,  but  the  ques- 
tion was  not  before  the  court,  and 
no  decision  exists  to  that  effect. 
Mr.  Txvlor,  in  his  work  on  Land- 
lord Sl  Tenant,  lays  down  the 
doctrine  that  "  he  may  disavow  or 
annul  them,  either  before  his 
majoritv,  or  within  a  reasonable 
time  after  it"  (p.  60,  sec.  83),  but 
hia  statement  is  not  sustained  by 
any  of  the  cases  referred  to  by  him, 
and  the  rule  seems  to  be  well 
establielied  that  an  infant  cannot 
make  a  deed  or  other  conveyance 
of  land,  or  any  interest  therein, 
void  or  valid  by  any  act  of  hia 
while  under  age.  SIcCormic  v, 
Leggett,  8  JonestN.  C.)L.  426.  In 
Dunton  v.  Brown.  81  Mich.  182, 
the  court  held  that  veither  an  tn- 
fant  nor  hig  guardian  have 
avthority  whUe  the  infancy  con- 
tinues, to    determine    wbeUier  a 


CHAP,  xin.] 


How  Affirmed. 


201 


The  deed  or  lease  of  an  infant  conveying  real  estate 
may  be  avoided  by  an  entry,  suit  or  action,  a  subsequent 
conveyance,  an  effort  to  restore  parties  to  their  original 
condition,  or  any  act  unequivocally  manifesting  the  in- 
tention. The  institution  oi^  an  action  of  ejectment  to  re- 
cover the  possession  of  the  land^  is  an  act  fully  possessing 
this  character.  * 

An  entry  is  not  in  all  cases  necessary,  particularly 


498,  it  was  held  that  the  contract 
of  an  infant  may  be  avoided  by 
those  only,  besides  himself,  who 
are  privy  in  blood  or  estate."  It 
being  understood  of  course  that  the 
latter  can  avoid  it  only  after  the  in- 
fant's decease,  and  as  to  the  expres- 
sion privies  in  estate^  it  must  be  con* 
fined  wholly  to  those  who  inherit 
from  him,  or  take  under  a  title  from 
his  executor,  and  it  cannot  relate 
to  a  co-tenant,  as  privies  in  estate, 
as  joint  tenants,  or  privies  in  law, 
as  lords  bv  escheat  cannot  take  the 
benefit  of  the  infancy  of  another, 
'Whittingham's  Case,' 8  Coke,  43  6. 
It  is^omy  those  who  stand  in  his 
place^  who  can  set  up  infancy  to 
avoid  his  deed,  and  they  cannot  do 
this  under  a  plea  non  est  factum^ 
but  must  plead  his  infancy  spec- 
ially, and  that  plea  avoids  by  rela- 
tion back  to  the  delivery.  Lord 
Mansfield  in  Abbot  v.  Parsons,  3 
Burr.  1805.  Privies  in  blood,  as 
used  in  this  connection,  relates 
only  to  privies  in  a  land  inheritable, 
and  privies  in  estate  are  joint  ten- 
ants, husband  and  wife,  aonor  and 
donee,  lessor  and  lessee,  &c.,  and 
privies  in  law  are  those  upon  whom, 
"Without  blood  or  privity  of  estate, 
the  law  casts  the  land  or  makes  his 
entry  lawful.  Of  these,  privies  in 
blood  ma^r  take  advantage  of  infan- 
cy. Privies  in  estate  can  only  do 
so  except  possibly  in  some  special 
cases,  and  privies  inlaw  can  iiever 
do  so,  Whittingham's  Case,  ante. 
In  Person  v.  Chase,  87  Vt.  647,  as 
to  personal  property,  it  was  held 
that  a  gift  by  the  infant  could  be 
levoked  or  avoided  by  his  adminis- 
trator. See  also  Tillinghastv.  Hol- 
brook,  7  R.  1. 280,  where  it  was  held 
that  the  administrator  of  an  infant 
might  avoid  the  act  of  the  infant 
in  parting  with  a  noto  to  the  maker, 


upon  payment  of  it  to  him.  See 
also  Vaughan  v  Parr,  20  Ark.  600, 
where  it  was  held  that  an  adminis- 
trator might  disaffirm  a  sale  made 
bv  the  infant  before  her  death.  An 
objection  to  a  marriage  settlement 
upon  the  ground  that  the  parties 
were  infants,  can  be  made  only  by 
the  parties  themselves,  Jones  v. 
Butler,  80  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  641.    The 

Elea  of  the  infancy  of  his  testator 
y  his  executor  to  a  note  made  by 
the  testator,  is  good.  Hussey  v. 
Jewett,  9  Mass.  100;  Martin  v. 
Mayo,  10  id.  137.  They  may  affirm 
or  disaffirm  the  testator's  contracts, 
deeds,  leases,  &c.  Jeff ord  v. Ring- 
gold, 6  Ala.  544. 

*  Drake  v.  Ramsey,  5  Ohio,  251. 
He  may  disavow,  in  various  ways, 
his  intention  of  carrying  into  effect 
a  contract  made  during  infancy. 
He  may  enter  upon  lands  leased, 
sold,  or  conveyed  bv  him  when  un- 
der age,  or  may,  when  he  comes  of 
age,  convey  the  same  lands  to  an- 
other, McGill  v.  Woodward,  3Brev. 
(S.  C.)  401 ;  by  entry,  Worcester  v. 
Eaton,  18  Mass.  871,  or  by  convey- 
ing to  another.  Hoyle  v.  Stowe, 
2  Dev.  &  Bat.  (N.  C.)  820 ;  Tucker 
V.  Moreland,  10  Pet.  (U.  S.)  58; 
Jackson  v.  Todd,  6  John.  (N.  Y.) 
657 ;  Pitcher  v.  Lycock,  7  Ind.  898 ; 
Peterson  v.  Laik,  24  Mo.  541 ;  White 
V.  Flora,  2  Overt.  (Tenn.)426  ;  Jack- 
son V.  Carpenter,  11  John.  (N.  Y.) 
589 ;  Cressmger  v.  Welch,  15  Ohio, 
159 ;  Hoyle  v.  Stowe,  2  Dev.  &  B. 
(N.  C.)  L.  820.  But  a  conveyance 
made  by  an  infant  which  the  law 
would  have  coinpelled  him  to  make 
cannot  be  disaffirmed  after  he  be- 
comes of  age,  and  if  he  conveys 
the  land  to  another  after  he  becomes 
of  age,  the  second  deed  will  confer 
no  title,  Elliott  v.  Horn,  10  Ala. 
848. 


fioa 

when  the  land 
occupied  unde 
the  conveyanc 
act  of  equal  m 
sequent  lease 
disaffirmance  ] 
Sec.  102.  I 
recognized  dis 
are  necessary  ' 
which  are  suf 
avoided  except 
struments  tht 
may  amount  t 
a  lease  made  d 
on  after  he  bf 
same  lands  fo 
mortgaging  tl 
son,  and  refer 
distinct  and  p< 
nizes  the  least 
give  the  validi 
ing  majority  I 
your  lease,"  it 
and  any  verbi 
afiirmance, '  b 
came  of  age  c 
or  lease  made 
an  infant's  de< 
age,  by  some ; 

'  Jackson  v.  Cai 

(N.  Y.)  575;  Bool  1 
(N.  Y.)11B;  Jacks 
John.  (N.  Y.)  124. 

•  Dominick  v.  ] 
(N.  Y.  Superior  a 
Wiggin,  1  N.  H.  7t 
an  entay,  ejectm 
poSBesBioD,  or  the 
notice  that  he  disE 
Slator  V.  Bradr, 

» Prout  V.  Wile; 

*  Scranton  t.  8t« 
See  Slator  t.  Brad 

'  Smith  V.  Low, 


CHAP,  xm.] 


How  Affirmed. 


203 


course  of  conduct  as  necessarily  excludes  a  contrary  sup- 
position.' It  has  been  held  that  if  a  person  while  under 
age  sells  lands  and  conveys  them  by  deed,  a  demand 
made  by  him  upon  the  grantee,  for  the  purchase-money, 
after  he  attains  majority,  is  an  aflBrmance  of  his  deed, 
and  he  cannot  afterwards  disafiii*m  it.*  So  where  he  pur- 
chases real  estate  during  his  infancy,  and  gives  a  mort- 
gage for  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  purchase-money,  if, 
after  becoming  of  age,  he  retains  possession  of  the  land 
or  conveys  it  to  another,  this  amounts  to  a  ratification  of 
the  mortgage,'  as  an  infant  will  not  be  permitted  to  keep 
the  property,  and  at  the  same  time,  repudiate  the  con- 
tract of  purchase.*  But  if  the  infant  hcts  parted  with  the 
property,  the  retention  of  the  fruits  of  it  after  he  becomes 
of  age  will  'not  amount  to  an  affirmance  of  the  contract.* 


»  WiUiams  v.  Mabee,  7  N.  J.  Eq. 
500 ;  Brady  V.  McKeimey»  23  Me. 
517  ;  Emmons  v.  Murray,  IB  N.  H. 
885;  Levering  v.   Heighe^   3   Md. 
Ch.   81;  Kline  v.  Beebe,  6  Conn. 
494;  Wheaton  v.   East,    6   Yerg. 
(Tenn.)  41 ;  Wimberly  v.  Jones,  1 
Gku  Dec.  91 ;  Haitman  v.  Kendall, 
4  Ind.  403.    Slight  acts  may    or 
may  not  operate  as  an  affirmance, 
but  it  would  seem  that  the  act  must 
be  such  as  would  operate  as  a  fraud 
upon  the  other  party,  unless  it  was 
intended  as  a  confirmation.    Rains^ 
ford  V.  Rhinsford,  1  Spears  Ch.  (Si 
C.)  385,  and  his  act  must  have  been 
done  with  full  knowledge  that  it 
would  be  void  except  for  such  con- 
firmation.   Curtis  y.  Patton,  11  S. 
&  R.  (Penn.)  805 ;  Baker  v.  Kennett, 
54  Mo.  88;  Grallatin  v.   Cumming> 
ham,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  861 ;  Norris  v. 
Vance,  3  Rich.  (S.  C.)  164  J  Hinley 
v.  Margaritz,  8  Penn.  St.  428.    Thus 
when  an  administrator  sold  lands 
belonging  to  an  infant,  but  the  deed 
was  not  made  imtil  she  became  of 
age,  and  she  was  present  when  the 
deed  was  executeo,  but  took  no  part 
in  the  transaction,  and  did  not  siffn 
the  deed,  nor  in  fact  know  that  the 
administrator  had  not  authority  to 
bind  her  thereby,  it  was  held  that 
she  was  not  thereby  estopped  from 
setting  up  her  title  to  the  land,  and 
that  her  acts  could  not  be  said  to 
amount  to  a  ratification.    Davison 
T»  Young,  88  HI.  145.    Where  an 


infant  borrowed  money  and  gave 
a  mortgage  upon  liis  land  for  se- 
curity, and,  after  attaining  major- 
ity, made  a  will  by  whicn  he  di- 
rected that  all  his  just  debts  should 
be  paid,  it  was  held  that  this  was 
sufficient  to  enable  the  court  to 
infer  an  affirmance  of  the  mortgage. 
Merchants'  F.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Grant,  2 
Edw.  Ch,  (N.  Y.)  644. 

*  Bank  of  Louisiana  ▼.  Dilery,  3 
La.  An.  648. 

'  Boston  Bank  V.  Chamberlain, 
15  Mass.  230;  Lynde  v.  Budd,  3 
Paige  Ch»  (N.  Y.j  191 ;  Hubbard  v. 
Cummings,  1  Me.  11;  Young  v. 
McKee,  13  Mich.  552;  Weed  v. 
Beebe,  21  Vt.  495 ;  Curtis  v.  Mc- 
Dougal,  26  Ohio  St.  66 ;  Wood  v. 
Gosling,  1  N.  Y.  Leg.  Obs.  74 ;  Rob- 
bins  V.  Eaton,  10  N.  H.  561;  Dana 
T.  Coombs,  6  Me*  89. 

*  Kitchen  v.  Lee,  11  Paige  Ch. 
^.  Y.)  707 ;  CecU  v,  Salisbury,  3 
V  em.  324 ;  Elline  v.  Beebe,  6  Conn. 
494. 

» In  Walsh  v.  Powers,  43  N.  Y. 
23;  3  Am.  Rep.  654,  the  defendant, 
while  an  infant,  purchased  certain 
mortgaged  real  estate,  and  in  the 
deed  to  ner  covenanted  to  pay  the 
mortgage.  She  sold  the  property 
at  an  advanced  price.  Several 
years  after  she  became  of- age  the 
mortgage  was  foreclosed,  and  she 
was  made  a  party  therein,  and  a 
judgment  for  a  deficiency  was  ob- 
tained against  her  grantor.    In  an 


So  keeping  pos: 
majority,  will  1 
lease  or  contrac 
the  property,  ar 
holds  it."  Buti 
for  a  long  term, 
is  not  obliged  tc 
of  the  rent  for 
cedent  to  his  ri{ 
'  possession  of  th< 
possession.  Th 
■with  the  money 

Lapse  of  timt 
and  thus  confii 
away  the  right 
takes  effect,'  £ 
those  who  have 
the  same  rule 
action  against  her  : 
her  covenant  to  jiaj 
she  set  up  her  infan 
when  the  coveDiuit 
to  in  defence,  and 
that  the  covenant 
and  that  neither  t) 
the  fruits  of  her  ee 
pearance  in  the  ft 
could  be  regarded  i 
to  ratify  her  obligat 
ever,  Flynn  v.  Pc 
(N.  Y.)  550,  where  i 
der  similar  circuiu: 
neglect  of  an  infat 
tained  majority,  wJ 
party  to  loreclosui 
to  set  up  his  infan 
when  the  plea  wo 
efficacious,  operate 
mance  of  the  con 
which  he  assiuned  j 
mortgage. 

'  Henry  v.  Root, 
Stern  v.  Freeman. 4 
Lynde  \.  Budd,  3  P 
161 ;  Bryden  v.  Bi 
(Mass.)i;i». 

'Stout  V.  Merill 
Bozeman  v.  Browni 

'Dittv.  Bowen,r> 
inger  v.  Wharton, 
857;  Walsh  v.Powi 
Uiles  T.  lingermar 


CHAP,  xm.] 


How  Affibmed. 


205 


I 


There  are  a  class  of  cases  in  which  it  has  been  held  that 
an  infant  must  disaffirm  within  a  reasonable  time  after 
attaining  majority,  but  it  will  be  found  that  this  rule 
applies  only  in  the  case  of  personal  estate,  or  in  those 
cases  where  the  infant,  after  attaining  majority,  has 
stood  by  and  seen  the  grantee  or  lessee  making  valuable 
improvements  upon  the  property  without  intimating  a 
purpose  to  disaffirm,  *  or  that  the  term  '*  reasonable  time  " 
is  construed  as  embracing  the  whole  period  before  the 
Statute  of  Limitations  applies,"  and  mere  acquiescence,  or 
'  a  bare  recognitioh  of  it,  on  his  part,  without  any  inter- 
mediate or  continued  benefit,  such  as  the  possession  of 
the  property,  or  receiving  rent  for  any  period  short  of 
that  limited  by  statute  for  acquiring  possession,  will  not 
preclude  him,*  nor  will  an  admission  of  the  fact  that  he 
made  the  deed  or  lease,  after  he  becomes  of  age,  amount 
to  a  recognition  of  it  as  a  vaUd  instrument  so  as  to  con- 
stitute an  affirmance,  *  nor  will  a  declaration  of  affirm- 
ance signed  by  a  person  who  claims  to  act  as  his  solicitor 
prima  facie  bind  him.  It  must  be  shown  that  the  person 
so  signing  the  declai-ation  was  in  fact  his  solicitor,  and 
had  authority  to  bind  him  in  that  respect.  *  In  Iowa  it 
was  held  that  an  infant  who  induces  a  person  to  buy 
lands  of  him  upon  representations  made  by  him  that  he 
is  of  age,  cannot,  upon  attaining  majority,  disaffirm  the 
sale, "  but  this  doctrine  is  not  generally  held,  nor  is  it  con- 
sistent with  principle.  The  party  defrauded,  in  such  a 
case,  has  his  remedy  in  an  action  for  the  fraud,  if  any 


>  Vaugban  v.  Parr,  20  Ark.  600 ; 
Thompson  t.  Strickland,  52  Miss. 
574.  Where,  after  coming  of  age, 
with  a  knowledge  of  the  mcts,  an 
infant  manifests  a  clear  intention 
to  affirm  a  deed  or  lease,  and  for 
years  stands  by  and  sees  the  same 
greatly  enhanced  in  \alue  by  im- 
provements made  thereon  by  oth- 
ers, be  is  therehr  estopped  from 
disavowing  his  affirmance.  High- 
ley  v.  Barrow,  49  Me.  108.  Where, 
however,  the  person  is  ignorant  of 
his  rights,  he  cannot  b^  estopped 
from  setting  up  his  title,  although 


he  has  seen  the  grantee  or  lessee 
making  large  improvements  upon 
tlie  premises.  Spencer  v.  Carr,  45 
N.  I.  406. 

*«  Jones  V.  Butler,  80  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
641 ;  Urban  v.  Grimes,  2  Grant's 
Cas.  (Penn.)  96 ;  Huth  v.  Caronde- 
letR.  R.  Co.,  54  Mo.  202. 

*  Voorhies  v.  Voorhies,  24  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  124. 

*  Jackson  v.  Burchin,  14  John. 
(N.  Y.)  124. 

*  Carroll  v.  Potter,  28  Mich.  877. 

*  Prouty  V.  Edgar,  6  Iowa,  353. 


exists,  othem 
ing  to  aacerta 
In  the  case 
taining  the  ag 
ingordisaCBn 


the  deed  or  le 
has  no  title,  t 
ises  or  not,  at 
bound  to  ma 
Thus,  in  a  ca 
premises  to  tt 
a  yearly  rent, 
lessor's  son  mi 
came  of  age,  i 
in  signifying 
unreasonable, 
"that he  was  1 
but  he  should 
wise  one  part; 
at  any  time,  i 
year  be  not  tc 
within  a  weeh 
But  without  d 
able  time,  it  is 
npt  given  in  r€ 
will  seldom  ai 
because  the  as 
fied  either  by 
Where  an  i 
affirm  or  disai 

'ConrarT,  Bird 
(N.  y.)l27:  Calc. 
8  Deesau  (8.  C.)  ' 
Foster.  laC.  B.  (J 
cation  "  on  euui 
to  B  plea  of  infan 
fendant  fraudak 
the  debt  by  met 
fiauduleot  repreai 
wae  of  full  age,  v 
closed  no  answer  ii 


CHAP,  xm.]  HowAffibmed.  207 

but  he  is  bound  to  do  the  one  or  the  other  within  a  rea- 
sonable time^  and  the  rule  adopted  in  the  case  last  re- 
ferred to,  would  apply  in  such  a  case.  "  If,"  says  Bacon,* 
^'an  infant  takes  a  lease  for  years  of  lands,  rendering 
rent  which  is  in  arrears  for  several  years,  then  the  infant 
comes  of  age,  and  still  continues  the  occupation  of  the 
land;  this  makes  the  lease  good  and  unavoidable,  and,  by 
consequence  makes  him  chargeable  with  all  the  arrears 
incurred  during  his  minority ;  for  though  at  full  age  he 
might  have  departed  from  his  bargain,  and  thereby  have 
avoided  payment  of  the  arrears  which  the  lessor  suffered 
to  accrue  during  his  majority  yet,  his  amtinvxince  in 
jpossession  after  his /ullage,  ratifies  and  affirms  the  con- 
tract ab  initio,  and  so  gives  a  remedy  for  the  arrears  of 
rent  incurred  from  the  time  of  the  contract  made."  ' 

*    "  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Infancy  (I.)  8.  Western  R.  R.  Co.  v.  McMichael, 

*  Kittley  v.  Elliott,  RoUe^s  Ahr.  5  Exchq.  114 ;  KeUy  v.  Coote,  5  Ir. 

72  ;  8.  C.  Cro.  Jac.  320 ;  Co.   Litt.  C.  L.  *59 ;   Holmes  v,    Blogg,    8 

2, 172,  808 ;  8  Comyn's  Dig.  167 ;  N.  Taunt.  85. 


if 


208 


Guardians. 


[§  103. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

BY  QTJARDIANS. 

Sec.  108.  Kinds  of  guardianship. 

Sec.  104.  Guardian  by  nature — powers  of. 

Sec.  105.  By  guardian  by  nurture. 

Sec.  106.  By  guardians  in  socage. 

Sec.  107.  By  a  testamentary  guardian. 

Sec.  108.  By  guardian  by  appointment. 

Sec.  109.  Intruder  treated  as  guardian. 

Section  .103.  Kinds  of  guardianship.— There  are  sever- 
al species  or  kinds  of  guardians,  known  to  and  recognized 
by  the  law,  whose  rights,  powers  and  duties  vary,  ac- 
cording to  the  class  to  which  they  belong.  These  are  : 
1st,  guardians  by  nature  ;  2d,  by  nurture  ;  3d,  by  socage  ; 
4th,  testamentary  guardians ;  5th,  by  appointment,  or 
confirmation  of  a  competent  tribunal. 

Sec.  104.  Guardian  by  nature— powers  of.— Tlie  father 
of  a  child  is  its  natural  guardian  until  it  arrives  at  the 
age  of  twenty-one  years,  and  unless  the  father  appoints 
a  testamentary  guardian,  upon  his  death,  the  mother  be- 
comes guardian  by  nature  until  it  becomes  of  suitable 
age  to  choose  a  guardian  for  itself,'  and  the  mother  of  a 
bastard  child  is  its  natural  guardian  until  it  becomes  of 
full  age."    This  species  of  guardianship  extends  no  fur- 


'  Fields  V.  Low,  3  Root  (Conn.) 
820 ;  Jarrett  v.  State,  2  Gill  &  J. 
(Md.)  27 ;  Curtis  v.  Curtis,  5  Gray 
(Mass.)  535 ;  Osborn  v,  Allen,  26  N. 
J   Li  388 

'-'  Wrigiit  V.  Wright,  2  Mass.  109 ; 
Robalina  v.  Armstrong,  15  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  247 ;  Com.  v.  Fee,  6  S.  & 


R.  (Penn.)  255 ;  Matter  of'Dodge,  1 
Clark's  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  184 ;  Hudson  v. 
Hills,  8  N.  H.  417;  Carpenter  v. 
Whitman,  15  John.  (N.  Y.)  208; 
People  V.  Landt,  2  id.  375;  upon 
the  death  of  the  mother,  the  puta- 
tive father,  if  there  be  one,  becomes 
entitled  to  its   custody,   Com.   v. 


hr.^ 


CHAP,  xrv.] 


By  Nurture. 


209 


ther  than  to  the  custody  and  control  of  the  infant's  per- 
son. *  They  have  no  binding  control  over  his  property, 
and  cannot  make  a  valid  lease  of  his  lands '  unless  it  may 
be  that  possibly  a  lease  at  will  would  be  good,*  and  a 
court  of  equity  will  in  some  cases  confirm  a  lease  made 
by  him  for  a  long  time,  if  the  wards,  upon  attaining  ma- 
jority, have  been  guilty  of  such  laches  or  acts  as  would 
make  it  inequitable  for  them  to  repudiate  it.^ 

Sec.  105.  By  guardians  by  nurture.— The  father,  or  m 
case  of  his  death  without  having  appointed  a  testament- 
ary  guardian,  the  mother,  is  guardian  by  nurture,  of 
minor  children,  whether  male  or  female,  until  they  are 
fourteen  years  of  age,  and  is  confined  within  the  same 
limits,  and  possesses  the  same  powers,  as  exist  in  the 
case  of  guardianship  by  nature,  and,  while  it  does  not 
give  the  guardian  control  over  the  infant's  property  to 
the  extent  that  they  may  dispose  of  it,  yet  it  has  been 
held  that  they  may  make  a  lease  at  will,  of  the  infant's 


Anderson,  1  Ashm.  (Penn.)  55 ; 
Matter  of  Celina,  7  La.  An.  162 ;  and 
if  he  marries  the  mother,  and  rec- 
ognizes the  child  as  his  own,  he, 
by  virtue  of  the  marriage,  becomes 
entitled  to  its  custody  and  control, 
Adams  v.  Adams,  36  Oa.  336  ;  and 
in  some  of  the  States,  provision  is 
made  by  statute,  by  which  the  pu- 
tative father  is  ^ven  the  custody 
of  the  child,  Wnght  v.  Burnett.  7 
m.  587.  , 

>  Rex  V.  Thorpe,  5  Mod.  221 ;  Rex 
T.  Inhabitants,  8  B.  &  Ad.  714; 
Kendall  v.  MiUer,  9  Cal.  591. 

*May  V.  Caldin,  2  Mass.  65; 
Anderson  v.  Darby,  1  N.  &  M.  (S. 
C.)  869;  Rep.  v.  Cobb,  9  Yerg. 
(Tenn.)  463;  Magruder  v.  Peter,  4 
a.  &  J.  (Md.)  828;  Keeler  v. 
Fassett,  21  Vt.  539. 

»  Pigot  V.  Garnish,  Cro.  Eliz.  678, 
784. 

*  in  Smith  v.  Low,  1  Atk.  489; 
the  mother  acting  as  guardian  of 
her  minor  children,  entered  into 
a  building  lease  for  f orty-one  years, 
her  eldest  child,  being  about  nine- 
teen years  old,  joining  with  her  in 
the  lease,  and  they  covenanted 
that  the  lessee  should  have  auiet 
enjoyment,  and  that  the  rest  of  the 


children,  when  of  age,  should  con- 
firm the  lease.  The  children  all 
arrived  of  age,  and  for  about  ton 
years  after  the  youngest  attained 
maioritv,  they  accepted  the  rents 
under  the  lease  without  intimating 
any  objections  thereto.  They  then 
brought  ejectment  sigainst  the  les- 
see, who  at  once  tiled  a  bill  in  equity 
to  have  the  lease  established.  The 
lease,  under  the  circumstances  de- 
tailed, was  established, Lord  Hard- 
wick  saying :  **It  appears  to  be  for 
a  valuable  consioeration,  rent 
reserved,  and  covenants  for  the  les^ 
see  to  leave  it  in  good  repair,  and 
it  is  mentioned  by  ihe  mother  who 
acts  as  guardian,  to  be  for  the 
benefit  of  the  infants ;  there  is  no 
fraud  or  collusion  proved  on  the 

gart  of  the  lessee;  and  the  bus* 
and  of  the  lessor  and  the  father  of 
the  children  died  in  bad  circum- 
stances, unable  to  repair  the 
premises,  which  were  houses  and 
a  mill ;  therefore,  the  consideration 
of  the  lessee's  repairing  them  is  a 
beneficial  one  for  the  infants ;  and 
that  is  shown  to  be  done ;  here  is 
the  great  point,  the  acceptance  of 
rent  for  so  long  a  continuance,  the 
youngest  child  having  been  of  age 

14 


210  GUAEDIAHS.  [§  106. 

lands,'  but  the  lease  is  void  as  to  the  infant  when  he  be- 
comes of  age,'  and  the  infant  is  not  stopped  from  a  recov- 
ery of  the  rent  of  the  premises  before  he  came  of  age,  by 
its  receipt  by  the  father,'  and  this  is  the  case  whether 
the  father  acts  as  guardian  by  nature  or  by  nurture. 

Sec.  106.  By  guardianB  in  Booage.—"  Guardianship  in 
Socage,"  says  Mr.  Platt,  in  his  work  on  Leases,*  is  a 
consequence  of  tenure  occurring  only  when  a  minor  is  en- 
titled to  a  legal  estate  by  descent,  in  lands  holdeu  by  soc- 
age,* and  devolves,  by  the  common  law,  upon  the  next 
of  kin  to  whom  the  inheritance  cannot  descend."'  The 
■  relation  conveys  more  than  a  bare  authority ;  it  is  also 
coupled  with  an  interest  in  the  land,  and  gives  to  the 
guardian,  until  the  minor  arrives  at  the  age  of  fourteen,' 
imless  previously  removed  by  the  death  of  the  father, 
who  has  appointed  a  testamentary  guardian,  full  control 
over  the  land'  and  they  may  lease,  avow,  or  bring  tres- 
pass in  their  own  name.*  As  previously  stated,  this 
guardianship  so  far  ceases  when  the  infant  attains  the  age 
if  fourteen,  as  to  enable  the  infant  to  enter  and  take  the 
land  to  himself ;  yet,  if  no  other  guardianship  succeeds 
to,  it  continues  until  another  guardian  is  appointed,  or 
the  minor  becomes  of  full  age.'*  Where  there  is  no 
guardian  in  socage,  the  father  is  guardian  by  nature  un- 

ten  years,  aod  notice  of  the  lease  '  Rigga  t.  Bell,  6  T.  R.  471. 

mustbepresumed.    Inthiscountiy  *Kei  t.  Oakley,  10  E^aat,  4M ; 

it  has  beeo  held  that,  even  while  a  Res  v.  Sherriu^n,  8  B.  &  Ad. 

Bale  of  premisea  by  the  father  of  a  714  ;  Rex  v.  Manners,  8  Ad.  &  EL 

minor,  the  father  »^i""- *'"■'"'* '^''  rMi  r^  «t,.f  ii  t'-^^  a  ^h-„ 
curtesy,   is   not 

attaining  majorit 
ing  upon  the  fall 
Hall  V.  Jonea,  SI 

'Pigot.  V  Ga 
678. 

■  PoPHAH  J.  in 

•Jackson  V.  C 
T.)  36  AfTd.  2  V 
Fonda  v.  Home, 

'Plan  on  Lease 

'Quadrine  v. 
176. 


CHAP.  XVI.] 


Testamentary. 


211 


til  the  minor  becomes  of  age,  but  he  has  no  control  over 
the  real  or  personal  estates  of  the  child/  and  he  cannot 
be  guardian  in  socage  at  the  common  law,  as  such 
guardian  must  be  one  who  cannot  inherit  from  his  ward.* 
The  guardian  in  socage  has  the  entire  custody  of,  and 
control  over,  the  land,  and  is  entitled  to  have  the  rents 
and  profits  for  the  benefit  of  the  heirs.'  But  bis  author- 
ity continues  only  while  his  guardianship  exists ;  conse- 
quently, a  lease  made  by  him  for  a  term  extending  be- 
yond the  period  when  the  infant  attains  the  age  of  four- 
teen, is  voidable  by  the  infant  when  he  arrives  at  that 
age."  The  death  of  the  infant  determines  the  lease  and 
so  does  the  removal  or  death  of  the  guardian  in  socage,' 
and  a  Court  of  Chancery  having  control  over  the  infant 
and  the  guardian  in  socage  may  set  aside  a  lease  made 
by  him,  if  it  appears  to  be  improvident,  coUusive,  or 
fraudulent.* 

Sec.  107.  By  a  testamentary  guardian.— Under  the  Stat- 
ute of  12  Car.  2c.  24,  guardianship  in  chivalry  was  abol- 
ished, and  nearly  all  tenures  were  converted  into  tenures 
in  socage,  and  empowered  the  father  of  any  child  under 
the  age  of  twenty -one  years,  and  not  married  at  the  time 
of  his  death,  to  appoint  by  deed  or  will,  executed  in  the 
presence  of  two  or  more  persons,  a  guardian  of  such  mi- 
nor child  or  children,  to  have  the  custody  and  tuition  of 
them  until  they  respectively  arrived  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
one  years.  The  same  act  also  empowered  such  guardians 
to  take  the  custody  and  control  of  all  the  property,  real 
and  personal,  belonging  to  his  wards,  and  to  manage  the 
same  for  their  use  and  benefit  during  their  minority,  and 


•  Combs  T.  Jackson,  3  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  158;  Genet  v.  Tallmadge,  1 
John.  (N.  Y.)  8 ;  Fonda  v.  Van 
Borne,  15  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  681. 

•  Graham  v.  Honghtaling,  80  N. 
J.  L.  552 ;  Jackson  y.  Comra,  ante. 
Bat  by  statute  in  N.  Y.  the  father 
maj  now  be  guardian  in  socage ; 
Holmes  v.  Seeley,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
71. 

•  Bryne  v.  Van  HoeseU;  ante; 
Beecher  v.  Grouse,  19  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  306 ;  Osbom  v.  Garden,  Plowd. 


298 ;  Willis  v.  Whitewood,  1  Leon. 
822  ;  Hod.  105 ;  Brisden  v.  Hussey, 
Roll.  Abr.  Garde  (Q.)  pi.  4. 

*  Osbom  V.  Garden,  Plowd.  293 ; 
Bedell  v.  Gonstable,  Vaughn,  182; 
Wade  V.  Baker,  1  Ld.  Raym.  180 ; 
Rex  V.  Sutton,   8  Ad.  &  El.   597. 

^  Balder  v.  Blackbom,  BrowL 
79. 

•  People  V.  Wilcox,  22  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  178 ;  Matter  of  Andrews,  1  John« 
Gh.  (N.  y.)  99. 


212  GUAEDIABB.  [§  108. 

to  briog  all  Buch  actions  relating  thereto  as  by  law  a 
guardian  in  Boca^  might  do.  This  statute  enabled  the 
father,  who  could  not  himself  be  guardian  in  socage,  to 
Bupersedesuch  guardian's  powers,  byappointinga  guard- 
ian for  them  by  deed  or  will. 

A  testamentary  guardian  possesses  the  same  powers  as 
a  guardian  in  socage,  and  may  lease  the  lands  of  his  wards 
in  the  same  manner  and  subject  to  the  same  limitations 
as  a  guardian  in  socage  might.' 

Sec.  108.  By  guardian  by  appointment— By  the  common 
law,  guardianship  by  socage  ceased  when  the  infant  at- 
tained the  age  of  fourteen,  when,  in  the  absence  of  a  tes- 
tamentary guardian,  he  might  elect  some  person  to  act 
as  guardian  for  him  during  the  remainder  of  his  minor- 
ity," and  such  guardian  possessed  the  same  powers,  in  all 
respects,  as  a  guardian  in  socage.'  In  most,  if  not  in  all 
the  States,  this  right  of  election  on  the  part  of  an  infant 
upon  attaining  the  age  of  fourteen,  is  given  by  statute, 
and  the  tribunal  having  authority  under  the  statute  to  ap- 
point guardians,  is  required  to  confirm  such  elections,  by 
appointing  the  person  elected  by  the  infant  as  guardian, 
unless  the  person  chosen  is,  for  some  cause,  incapable  of 
acting.  It  is  not,  however,  practicable  to  enter  into  details 
as  to  the  mode  of  appointing  guardians,  as  that  matter, 
as  well  as  their  powers  and  duties  is  largely  regulated  by 
statute  in  the  sevei^  States.  It  is  sufticient  to  say  that 
a  general  guardian  possesses  no  greater  control  over  the 
lands  of  his  wards  than  a  guardian  in  socage,  and  he 
cannot  make  a  lease  of  his  ward's  lands  that  will  be  effect- 
ual beyond  the  period  during  which  his  guardianship 
exists.*  But  a  guardian  appointed  by  a  Court  of  Chancery 
occupying  virtually  the  position  of  a  receiver,  has  no 
power  to  lease  without  the  sanction  of  the  court.'  nor  can 

■  BedeU  v.  ' 
179;  Pany  v. 
189  ;  Shaw  v.  g 
606. 

'Co.Litt.87. 

463 ;  1  Piatt  on 

'Bacon  on  I 


CHAP.  XVI.]  By  Appointment.  213 

the  court  at  common  law  authorize  a  lease  to  he  made 
extending  beyond  the  period  of  that  infancy,  which  will 
be  binding  upon  him  when  he  attains  majority ;  and  in 
case  such  a  lease  is  made,  it  will  be  voidable  as  to  the 
infant  when  he  becomes  of  age,*  but,  if  upon  attaining 
majority,  he  accepts  rents  accruing  under  the  lease  after 
he  becomes  of  age,  he  will  be  estopped  from  denying  the 
validity  of  the  lease,*  as  he  must  either  ratify  the  lease 
in  toto,or  abandon  all  rights  under  it.*  Where,  however, 
an  estate  is  vested  in  trustees  for  the  use  of  an  infant,  a 
court  of  equity  may  authorize  them  to  lease  it  for  a  term 
of  years.*  In  Illinois,  by  statute,  a  guardian  cannot  him- 
self occupy  the  lands  of  his  ward,  but  nmst  lease  them 
upon  such  terms  and  for  such  length  of  time  as  the 
county  court  directs.*  If  a  lease  is  made  by  a  guardian 
in  the  name  of  his  ward,  as  if  the  authority  was  derived 
from  him,  it  has  been  held  that  it  will  be  absolutely  void 
as  to  the  infant,  because  he  cannot  appoint  an  agent,  and 
he  cannot  affirm  it  when  he  comes  of  age,'  although  a 
lease  made  by  a  guardian,  as  such,  extending  beyond  the 
term  of  infancy,  may  be  ratified  by  the  ward  when  he 
attains  majority,  yet  in  such  a  case,  in  order  to  solve  all 
questions  in  this  respect,  it  is  better  to  have  the  infant 
join  with  hii^ardian  in  the  lease.  ^  All  guardians,  except 
guardians  in  socage,  are  mere  tenants  at  will  of  the 
infant's  estate,  and  consequently  cannot  make  a  valid 
lease  for  a  term  ;  yet,  if  such  a  lease  is  made,  the  lessee 
cannot  avoid  it  by  setting  up  want  of  authority  in  the 
guardian  to  make  it.' 

»  Bacon  on  Leases,  133 ;  Bacon's  *  MuUer  v.  Brumer,  69  111.  108. 

Abr.  Leases  (I.)  9.    In  England  un-  •  Bacon  on  Leases,  138 ;  Bacon's 

der  the  Stat.  11  Geo.  4  &  1  W.  4  c.  Abr.  tit.   Leases  (I.)  9  ;   Ck)mbe's 

65,  power  was  given  to  the  court  to  Case,  9  Coke,  76  h ;   Trueblood  v. 

autnorize  the  making  of  leases  of  Trueblood,  8  Ind.  195 ;  Bennett  v. 

the  estate  of    infants,  extending  Davis,  6  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  393 ;  Thomas 

beyond  their  infancy,  and  similar  v.  Roberts,  16  M.  &  W.  778 ;  Bool 

authority  is  conferred  by  statute  in  v.  Mix,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  120 ;  Wa- 

some  of  the  States  of  this  country,  pies  v.  Hastings,  3  Harr.  (Del.)  403  ; 

•Smith  V.  Low,  1  Atk.  489.  Whitney  v.  Dutch,  15  Mass.  457. 

»  Overbach  v.  Heermance,  Hopk.  ^  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  381. 

Ch.  (N.  Y.)  337;    Kitchen  v.  Lee,  « Shipworth  v.  Green,  8  Mod.  312 ; 

11  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  107  ;  Lynde  v.  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (C.)  9. 
Budd,  2  id.  191. 

^Hedges  v.  Ricker,  5  John  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  163. 


214 

Sec.  109, 
intrudes  up 
thereof,  he 
to  the  inf  ai 
profits,  and 
as  a  bar.' 


CHAP.  XV.] 


CHAPTER  XV. 

rxuBst 


Sbc.  110.  Br  feme  sole. 

Sec.  111.  Bj  feme  covert. 

Sec.  lia.  B7  hnabaud  and  wife. 

Sec.  118.  As  to  leasehold  estates  of  the  wife. 

Seo.  114.  Sightsof  h\iEband,in  chattelsreal  held  b7  the  wlfeorezec- 
ntruc 

Sec.  110.  ByfemeBole.— A/enie  sole  may  make  a  valid 
lease  of  her  lands,  and  a  lease  at  will  made  by  her  while 
sole  is  not  determined  by  her  marriage,  but  the  husband 
may  put  an  end  to  it  ad  libitum,  but  in  order  to  do  so,  he 
must  do  some  express  act  to  that  end,'  and  the  same  rule 
pi'evails  as  to  a  lease  at  will  made  to  a  feme  sole,  and  the 
vfiU  is  not  determined  by  her  marriage.'  But  in  the  case 
of  the  marriage  of  a  feme  sole  lessor,  by  the  common  law, 
the  rent  is  payable  to  the  husband,  and  ignorance  of  the 
marriage  will  not  at  law  protect  a  lessee  from  a  suit  in 
the  husband's  favor  therefor,  although  the  rent  has  pre- 
viously been  demanded  by  and  paid  to  the  wife.'  But 
in  most  of  the  States  of  this  country,  the  common-law 
rule  as  to  lands  owned  by  the  wife,  and  her  rights  there- 


_ B  Case,  6  Coke,  10     1   BoU's    Abr.    861;   Blunden    v 

a,  the  cwurt  resolved  that  the  tnar-     Baugh,  Cro.  Car.  804 ;  Co.  Litt.  55 

Baugh,  Cro.  Car. 

,"  Where  a/eme 
husband,  •  •al- 
ath  put  her  will 
it  it  BhaU  not  be 
loD  utitlwut  the 
gor  or  hatband 
o.  Utt.  55,  Dyer. 

a,  Cra  ;jac  617. 


to  and  thet 
permitted  1 
whether  th 
determinin 
of  a  given  1 
When  a. 
the  whole 
husband,  a 
must  be  thi 
such  execu 
currence  tl 
liable  for  a] 
they  may  1 
of  a  femt 
right  to  ] 
and  a  payn 
unless  ma< 
marriage  oi 
the  lease  d< 
all  arrears 
having  aa 
fendant  nei 
of  any  of  tl 

Sec.  111. 
of  her  own 
and  canno 
band  is  ent 
cannot,  by 
strict  is  thi 

'  Levick  v.  ( 
Arnold  v.  Bid 

'  Guardian,  < 
&  R.  (Penn.) 
Cox,3Itedf.  p 
Maine  v.  Quia 
mundson  t.  Ri 

'  Holmes  v. 

'Roll's  Abr. 
(G.)pl-l;  Ano 
Fane  v.  Him 
Vane  t.  Marsh 

^  Anonymou 

•  Manby  v. 


CHAP.  XV.]  Feme  Coveet.  21T 

engagement  even,  the  husband  acquires  such  inchoate 
rightps  in  her  estate,  that  upon  the  consummation  of  the 
engagement  by  marriage,  he  may  invoke  the  aid  of  a 
court  of  equity  to  set  aside  conveyancea  made  by  her 
after  such  engagement  without  his  knowledge,  upon  the 
ground  that  they  are  in  fraud  of  hia  marital  rights,'  but 
not  where  the  conveyance  is  made  with  his  knowledge,' 
or  in  obedience  to  a  mortal  duty,  as  to  provide  for  the 
support  of  her  children  by  a  former  marriage.'  Thus  it 
will  be  seen  that  by  the  common  law,  the  husband  be- 
comes, by  marriage,  vested  with  such  an  interest  in  his 
wife's  lands,  that  he  can  lease  them  or  dispose  of  them  £is 
be  pleases  during  his  life,  if  he  survives  her,  and  during 
his  own,  if  he  becomes  tenant  by  curtesy,  and,  as  a  con- 
sequence, any  conveyance  by  her  for  however  brief  a 
term,  or  of  however  email  an  interest,  is  utterly  void,* 
as  the  rents  and  profits  of  her  estate  belong,  by  the  com- 
mon law,  absolutely  to  him,  so  long  as  the  cover- 
ture exists,*  and  if  her  estate  is  sold  and  con- 
verted into  money,  the  money  becomes  the  prop- 
erty of  the  husband,*  and  the  same  is  true  as  tomort> 


BoTnton  v.  Hnnall,  12  MIbs,  19 
Clarke's  Appeal,  70  Peno.  St  8'; 

■  Preemaa  v.  Hortman,  45  111. 
67 ;  Logan  t.  Simmons,  8  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  Eq.  477;  Williamson  - 
Cule,  11  N.  J.  Eq.  S43  ;  Crane 


claim  upon  the  estate  for  improve- 
menta  made  by  him  upon  it. 
Marable  v.  Jordan,  9  Humph. 
(Teim.}  577 ;  and  in  case  of  his 
death,  she  may  elect  whether  to 
defeat  a  lease  made  by  him  of  her 


Morris,  6  Pet,  (U.  S.)  598;     Dun-     lands,  or  to  affirm   it.     Brown  i 
can's  Appeal,  49  Penn.  St.  67 ;  Mc-      Lindsay,  2  HiU  (S.  C.)  Ch.  M2. 
Afee  V.  Ferguson,  9  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)        '  Shaw  v.  Partridge.  17  Vt.  626 ; 
473.  Clapp  V.  Stoughton.lO  Pick.  (Mass.) 

»  Cheshire  v.  Payne,  16  B.  Mon.  463 ;  Burleigh  v.  Cofan,  23  N.  H. 
(Ky.)  618;  Fletcher  v.  Ashley,  6  118;  Dald  v.  Geiffer.  3  Gratt.  (Va.) 
Gratt.  (Va.)  833;  Terry  v,  Hop-  68;  Haralson  t.  BridKes,^  m.  87; 
kinB,  1  Hill  (S.  C.)  Ch.  1 ;  Cole  t.  Chancey  v.  Strong,  3  Root  (Conn.) 
O'Niell,  8  Ma.  Ch.  174.  86B.     But  the  husband  may  yield 

■  Wilson  V.  Daniell,  18  B.  Mon.  his  marital  rights,  as  between  him 
fKv.)  848;  Green  t.  Ooodall,  1  and  his  wife,  and  permit  her  to 
rviliiB  iTawrn  \  Alu .  1  nim-nn  mi  a  coUpct  and  have  the  rents  of  her 
eetal«,  and  if  he  has  permitted  ber 
to  do  so,  he  is  estopped  from  re- 
covering the  rents  paid  to  her  by 
the  tenant,  and  upon  his  decease 
the  estate  from  which  the  rent  ac- 
crued would  go  to  her.  Cheney  t. 
Pierce,  88  Vt.  615. 

<  Hamlin  t.  Jones,  20  Wis.  686 ; 
Martm  t.  Martin,  1  N.  Y.  478; 
Crosby  v.  Otis,  83  Me.  356 :  Ward 


21S 


Lease  bt. 


[§m. 


gages  and  notes  given  to  the  husbantt  for  the  purchase- 
money  of  her  lands  Bold  during  coverture.'  Where  the 
wife  has  a  dower  interest  in  the  estate  of  her  former  hns- 
hand,  the  same  rule  prevails  as  to  the  rents  and  proQts 
arising  therefrom,  or  as  to  the  proceeds  of  its  sale.'  But, 
as  to  her  real  estate  remaining  unsold  at  the  time  of  her 
husband's  death,  she  is  remanded  to  her  or^nal  rights 
as  a  /erne  sole,'  and  the  same  is  also  true  when  the  mar- 
riage is  dissolved  by  a  divorce,  a  vinculo,*  unless  by  stat- 
ute the  court  is  authorized  to,  and  does,  by  the  decree, 
give  the  lands  to  the  husband.  A.  feme  covert  is  not  bound 
by  estoppel,'  nor  can  a  bill  for  specific  performance  of  a 
contract  made  by  her  to  lease  her  lands,  be  maintained, 
as  she  can  make  no  contract  by  which  a  remedy  against 
her  personally  is  given  ;  *  nor,  although  in  such  cases,  the 
court  acts  in  rem,  and  although  she  has  power,  and  the 
court  has  jurisdiction  over  the  rents  and  profits,  is  it  be- 
lieved that  the  court  would  give  effect  to  her  contracts  up- 
on the  corpus  of  her  property,'  but  the  rule  is  otherwise 

feme  covert  having  a  separate  es- 
tate will  be  bound  to  a  specific  per- 
fonnance  of  her  contract  for  the 
leaaing  or  sale  of  the  same,  if  there 
is  an  entire  absence  of  fraud,  or 
undue  influence  or  advantage. 
WagBtaffv.  Smith,  11  Ves.  Jr.2(fe; 
PybuB  v.  Smith,  S  B.  &  Ch.  840; 
Paries  v.  White,  13  YetL  Jr.  601 ; 
Witte  V.  Dawkina,  4  Ves.  Jr.  129; 
Whistler  v.  Newman,  5  Ves.  Jr. 
6S2,  and  in  equity,  her  separate  es- 
tate may  be  applied  to  the  pay- 
ment of  a  bond  executed  bj  her 
before  marriage.  Briscoe  v.  Ken- 
nedy, 1  B.  &  Ch.  118,  or  to  the 
payment  of  a  bond  executed  by 
her  jointly  with  her  husband. 
Peacock  v.  Monk,  2  Vee.  190 ;  Nor- 
ton V.  Turvil,  3  P.  Wms.  114,  but 
when  she  thus  applies  her  separate 


V.  Morrill,  1  D,  Chip.  (Vt.)  822  ; 
Chester  v.  Greer,  3  Humph.  (Tenn.) 
20;  BUBWorthv.HindB,S  Wis.618; 
Mann's  Appeal,  60  Penn.  St.  875. 
But  where  the  land  is  sold  for  the 
purpose  of  a  partition,  it  is  gener- 
ally held  that  the  money  received 
therefor  is  to  be  treated  in  equity 
as  land,  and  the  husband  is  not  en- 
titled to  it  without  her  assent. 
Stoner  v.  Cam.  18  Penn.  St.  387; 
Mebane  v.  Yansey,  8  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
Eq.  88  ;  Kempe  v.  Pittard,  83  Mias. 
834 ;  Eherts  v.  Eherte,  55  Penn.  St. 
110;  Wardlaw  v.  Gray.  3  Hill  (S. 
C.)  Gh.  644 ;  Davie  v.  Davis,  46 
Penn.  St.  843.  But  contra,  see 
Jones  V.  Plununer,  20  Md.  416; 
Bank  of  the  State  v.  MitcheU,  Rice 
(S.  C.)  Ch.  889. 

'  Hawley  v.  Burgess,  28  Conn. 
384 ;  Talbot  v.  E>ennis,  i  ^"^  'I'l  ■ 
McCrary  v.  Foster,  1  It 

'  Ellsworth  V.  Hinds, 

*  Daniels  v.  Richards 
(Mass.)  565. 


*Doe  1 
809. 

Greton  v.  E 
•  Aylett  V 


,  5  1 


CHAP.  XV.] 


Husband  and  Wife. 


219 


if  she  joins  with  her  husband  in  a  contract '  as  to  land 
that  is  held  by  her  *'to  her  separate  use"  by  devise  or 
otherwise,*  as  in  equity  a  feme  covert  is  treated  as  a,  feme 
sole  with  respect  to  a  separate  estate^  and  may  dispose  of 
it  without  the  consent  or  concurrence  of  her  trustee,  un- 
less restrained  by  the  instrument  under  which  she  holds.* 
And,  though  a  particular  mode  of  disposition  is  provided 
in  the  instrument  under  which  she  holds,  it  wiU  not  pre- 
clude her  from  adopting  another  mode,  unless  there  are 
negative  words  restraining  her  power  of  disposition, 
except  in  the  identical  mode  provided.  Therefore,  if  she 
enters  into  any  agreement,  clearly  indicating  her  inten- 
tion to  affect  by  it  her  separate  property,  a  court  of  equity, 
if  there  be  no  fraud,  or  unfair  advantage  taken  of  her, 
win  apply  her  separate  property  to  satisfy  such  agree- 
ment,^ and,  if  she  contracts  to  lease,  mortgage,  or  sell  her 
estate,  under  the  conditions  last  stated,  she  will  be  com- 
I)elled  to  specifically  perform.*  The  statutory  changes  in 
reference  to  the  rights  and  powers  of  the  wife  over  her 
estate,  are  such  that  the  statute  must  be  consulted  to 
ascertain  how  far  these  principles  apply  in  a  given  case, 
as  it  would  be  impracticable  to  note  all  of  them  in  this 
work.  A  ferns  covert  may  take  a  lease  of  lands,  and  the 
estate  vests  until  her  husband  dissents  thereto,*  but  she 
may  avoid  the  lease  upon  the  death  of  the  husband,  or 
after  the  marriage  is  dissolved  by  a  divorce  a  vinculo.^ 


Sec.  112.  By  hasbaiid  and  wife.— We  briefly  stated  in  the 
preceding  section  the  rights  acquired  by  the  husband  in 


1  Stead  V.  Nelson,  2  Beav.  245. 

•  Tullett  V.  Armstrong,  1  Beav. 
1 ;  Johnson  v.  Johnson,  1  Keen, 
948;  Acton  v.  White,  1  Sim.  & 
Stn.  429 ;  Newlands  v.  Paynter,  4 
MyL  &  Cr.  408 ;  Vizoneau  v.  Pe- 
gram,  5  Leigh  (Va.)  188. 

'  Jaques  v.  Methodist,  &c. 
Church,  17  John.  (N.  Y.)  848. 

*  Jaques  v.  Methodist,  Sec. 
Church,  ante ;  Mones  v.  Huish,  9 
Ves.  Jr,  369. 

'  Stead  V.  Nelson,  ante. 
•Co.  Litt.  3  a;  Swain  v.  Dol- 
man, Hob.  204.    In  New  York  un- 


der the  statute  giving  married 
women  the  right  to  contract  in  ref- 
erence to  their  own  separate  es- 
tate, it  is  held  that  she  is  liable  for 
a  leasehold  acquired  by  her  sepa- 
rately, it  being  treated  as  her  sep- 
arate property,  and  she  is  liable 
for  the  rent  agreed  upon.  Wester- 
velt  V.  Ackley,  62  NT  Y.  508 ;  Pre- 
vot  V,  Lawrence,  51  id.  219 ;  Mox- 
on  V.  Scott,  55  id.  247 ;  Freeking 
V.  Holland,  58  id.  422. 

'  Co.  Litt,  8  a ;  Doe  v.  Brown,  2 
Black  (Ind.),  809 ;  Dyer  13  a ;  Legg 
v.  Legg,  8  Mass.  99. 


220 


Lease  by. 


[§  112. 


the  real  estate  of  the  wife  by  marriage,  and  it  is  unnec- 
essary to  repeat  them  here/  From  what  was  there  said, 
it  will  be  understood  that,  by  the  common  law,  and  in 
the  absence  of  any  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  husband 
may  demise  the  lands  of  his  wife  during  their  joint  lives 
without  her  consent  or  concurrence,*  and  a  lease  made  by 
him  for  a  term  that  exceeds  beyond  his  own  life,  is  not 
void  as  to  the  wife,  but  upon  his  decease  she  may  elect 
whether  to  affirm  or  defeat  it,*  and  if  she  accepts  rent  ac- 
cruing thereon  after  her  husband's  decease,  she  will  there- 
by be  estopped  from  denying  the  validity  of  the  lease  for 
the  balance  of  the  term,^  and  in  any  event,  though  she 


>  The  husband  takes  an  estate  for 
the  life  of  the  wife,  in  her  lands,  if 
he  survives  her,  and  he  may  lease, 
sell  or  assign  this  interest  therein, 
and  it  inaj  be  levied  upon  under 
an  execution  against  hun.  Cheek 
V.  Waldron,  25  Ala.  152.  Boynton 
V.  Finnall,  12  Miss.  198,  except 
where  it  is  exempted  from  levy  by 
statute.  Coleman  v.  Sutterfield,  2 
Head.  (Tenn.)  209 ;  Den  v.  Quim- 
by,  3  N.  J.  L.  985.     He  may,  as 

greviously  stated,  convey  this  free- 
old  estate  as  he  pleases,  without 
her  concurrence  and  against  her 

Srotest.  Trask  v.  Patterson,  29 
[e.  499:  Lynde  v.  McCrezon,  18 
AUen  (Mass.)  182 ;  Junction  R.  R. 
Co.  V.  Harris,  9  Ind.  184 ;  Gonsa- 
lis  V.  Douchauquette,  1  Mo.  666. 
But  he  has  no  ri^ht  to  commit 
waste  upon  her  lands,  therefore  he 
connot  sell  the  growing  trees  there- 
on, except  so  far  as  good  husbandry 
permits  to  reduce  a  due  proportion 
of  the  land  to  cultivation.  He  can 
clear  no  more  of  it  than  a  prudent 
owner  of  the  fee  would,  having 
proper  regard  to  the  nature  and 
situation  of  the  land,  and  the  fu- 
ture wants  of  the  reversioners. 
Strache  v.  Fehl,  22  Wis.  887. 

'Hill  V.  Saunders,  2  Bing.  112; 
Eaton  V.  Whitaker,  18  Conn.  222  ; 
Lvnde  v.  McGregor,  18  Allen 
(Sass.)  182;  Wiscott's  Case,  2 
Coke,  61  6.  By  the  statute  82  H. 
8,  Chap.  28,  husbands  seized  of 
lands  in  the  right  of  the  wife,  or 
jointly  with  the  wife,  might  make 
a  lease  thereof,  for  a  term  not  ex- 
ceeding twenty-one  years,  or  three 


lives,  reserving  a  yearly  rent,  and 
is  subject  to  certain  restrictions 
that  it  is  not  necessary  to  enimi- 
erate.  This  statute  was  repealed 
by  19  &  20   Vic.  chap.  120.  sec. 


K 


•  Brown  v.  Lindsay,  2  Hill  (S.  C.) 
Ch.  542  ;  Co.  Litt.  45 ;  Bro.  Leases 
24 ;  Shipwith  v.  Steed,  Cro.  Eliz. 
769 ;  Jordan  v.  Wilkes,  Cro.  Jac. 
882;  Greenwood  v.  Tyber^  Cro. 
Jac.  663. 

♦  Greenwood  v.  Tyber,  ante.    If 
a  lease  is  made  by  the  husband,  or 
by  the  husband  and  wife,  for  a 
term,  without  any  reservation  of 
rent,  she  may  affirm  it  by  bringing 
waste  or  acceptingfealty,  Jackson 
V.  Mordant,  Cro.  Eliz,  112,  and  if 
rent  is  reserved  and  the  lessee  en- 
ters, and  the  husband  dies  before 
rent  becomes  due  and  the  widow 
marries  again,  and  her  second  hus- 
band accepts  the  rent  under  the 
lease,  and  dies,  she  cannot  avoid 
the  lease,  for  by  her  second  mar- 
riage she  transferred  the  power  of 
avoiding  the  lease  to  her  second 
husband,  and  she  is  bound  by  his 
ratification  thereof.      Dyer  159  a  ; 
RoUe's  Abr.  475 ;  Rollers  Rep.  821 ; 
1,  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Baron  and  Feme 
(C. )  498.   But  SERQEAin*  Williams, 
in  a  note  to  Watton  v.  Hill,  Saun- 
ders, 188  &,  doubts  whether  the 
law  is  well  settled  that  a  wife  may 
affirm  a  lease  made  by  the  husband 
alone.    He  says :  "  It  is  said  to  be 
clearly  agreed  in  all  the  books,  that 
if  the  husband  cdone  makes  a  lease 
of  his  wife's  lands  for  years  by  in- 
denture, reserving  rent,  it  is  a 


CHAP.  XV.] 


Husband  and  Wife. 


221 


joined  with  the  husband  in  making  the  lease,  and  the  ex- 
ecution thereof  upon  her  part  is  void,  it  will  be  a  good 


good  lease  for  the  whole  term,  un- 
less the  wife  by  some  act  shews 
her  dissent  to  it ;  for  if  she  accepts 
rent  which  accrues  due  after  his 
death,  the  lease  is  thereby  become 
absolute  and  unavoidable.    1  Bac. 
Abr.  392,  3  Id.  805 ;  Bro.  Accept- 
ance 10 ;  Leases  24.  Cro.  Jac.  892 ; 
Jordan  v.  Wilkes,  Co.  Litt.  45  6; 
Plow.  187.    Browning  v.  Beston, 
are  cited  as  authorities  in  support 
of  it.    But  it  seems,  notwithstand- 
ing, to  be  doubtful  whether  this  is 
well  warranted,  though  it  is  un- 
doubtedly a  good  lease  during  the 
coverture ;   it  is,  however,  certain 
that    all    the    above    mentioned 
authorities  do  not  prove  the  posi- 
tion, as  will  be  best  seen  on  the 
following   examination  of   them. 
Oo.  Acceptance,  10,  is  an  abridg- 
ment of  the  year-book  21  H.  7,  38, 
in  which  Conesby  says,  that  if  a 
lease  is  made  by  husband  and  wife 
of  the  wife's  lands  rendering  rent, 
and  the  wife  accepts  rent  after  her 
husband's  death,  she  has  made  the 
lease  good.    There  is  no  doubt  of 
this,  but  the  material  consideration 
is,  that  it  does  not  support  what  it 
is  cited  to  prove.    So  in  Cro.  Leases, 
24,  it  is  laid  down,  tliat  if  a  hus- 
band seized  in  right  of  his  wife 
leases  her  lands  for  years,  and  dies 
within  the  term,  the  lease  by  his 
death  is  void ;  so  that  this  author- 
ity is  directly  contrary  to  the  posi- 
tion it  is  cited  to  support.    In  Co. 
litt.  45  &,  it  is  observed  that  a 
man,  seized  in  right  of  his  wife, 
together  unth  his  vrife,  may  by  deed 
indented  make  leases  for  21  years, 
or  three   lives,  agreeable   to  the 
statute  82  H.  8,  all  which  were 
voidable  at  the  common  law.    It  is 
true  indeed  that  in  Plow.  187  it  is 
'said  by  Gawdy,  Sergeant   argu- 
eTido,  that  if  a  man  makes  a  lease 
for  years  of  his  wife's  lands,  and 
dies,  the  lease  is  not  void  before 
entry  made  by  the  wife ;  and  this 
dictum  is  cited  by  counsel  in  argu- 
ment in  1  Roll.  Rep,  402,  Smalman 
V.  Agburrough.     In  the  case  in 
Cro.  Jac.  382,  the  husband  made  a 
lease  of  his  wife's  lands  for  five 
years  in  an  ejectment  for  trial  of 
the  title,  and  died  before  the  action 
was  brought,  and  it  was  adjudged 


that,  inasmuch  as  the  wife  had 
not  entered  after  her  husband's 
death,  the  lease  was  not  deter- 
mined or  void  after  her  husband's 
death,  but  voidable  only.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  said  in  Bro.  Qui 
in  vita  1,  Acceptance,  1  S.  C.  that 
if  a  lease  be  made  by  the  husband 
only,  and  he  dies,  and  the  wife 
accepts  rent,  the  acceptance  does 
not  bind  her,  for  she  was  not 
privy.  And  in  Bro.  Barre,  27,  it 
IS  said,  that  if  the  husband  alone 
leases  for  life,  and  dies,  the  wife 
cannot  bring  an  action  of  waste, 
because  she  is  not  privy  to  the 
lease;  and  hence  it  follows,  that 
the  wife  by  acceptance  of  rent, 
where  she  was  not  party  to  the 
lease,  shall  not  be  bound,  if  it  was 
a  lease  for  years,  but  may  enter ; 
but  if  it  be  a  lease  for  life,  she  is 
put  to  her  cui  in  vita,  F.  N.  B. 
446, 7th  edit.  But  there  her  accept- 
ance of  rent,  where  she  was  not 
a  party  to  the  lease,  is  no  bar  to 
the  writ,  and  note  the  diversity. 
And  in  Bro.  Acceptance,  6,  it  is 
observed,  that  if  hiishand  and  wife 
join  in  a  lease  of  the  wife's  land, 
rendering  rent,  and  the  husband 
dies,  and  the  wife  accepts  rent,  she 
is  boimd ;  but  it  is  otherwise  where 
the  husband  alone  makes  a 
or  lease,  reserving  rent,  and 
and  the  wife  accepts  rent,  this  will 
not  bind  her;  note  a  diversity, 
quod  nuUus  contradixit,  How- 
.  ever,  it  may  be  urged  in  support  of 
the  position  in  Bacon,  that  the 
proviso  in  the  statute  82  H.  8,  c. 
28,  s.  8,  seems  rather  to  prove  that 
before  the  statute  the  law  was  as 
there  stated.  Perhaps  the  cases 
may  be  reconciled  by  distinguish- 
ing between  leases  for  life  and 
yearSf  that  in  the  former  case,  as 
the  estate  commenced  by  livery, 
it  can  only  be  avoided  by  entry; 
but  that  in  the  latter,  the  lease  is 
absolutely  void  and  determined  by 
his  death.  Upon  the  whole,  how- 
ever, it  appears  that  the  law  is  not 
so  clearly  agreed  as  it  is  said  to  be 
in  the  passage  cited  out  of  Bacon's 
Abridgment. "  But,  whatever  may 
have  been  the  diversity  of  opinion 
formerly,  it  is  now  universal^  con- 
ceded ^t  the  wife  may  afiElrm 


S23  Lease  bt.  [§  112. 

lease  during  the  hosband'e  life,  if  the  wife  lives  so  long, 
01*  if  thej  had  a  child  born  alive,  so  that  he  became  ten- 
ant by  curtesy."  But,  where  a  lease  is  void  as  to  her,  as 
when  it  is  not  by  deed,  it  cannot  be  aflBrmed  by  her,  up- 
on the  death  of  her  husband,  by  an  acceptance  of  rent, 
because  her  assent  is  necessary  at  the  commencement  of 
the  lease.*  But  where,  by  law,  the  husband  and  wife 
should  join  in  a  lease,  or  where  they  attempt  'to  execute 
the  instrument  under  the  provisions  of  some  statute,  even 
though  the  lease  does  not  follow  the  statute,  it  will  be 
good  so  long  as  the  coverture  exists,  if  the  husband  has 
any  interest  in  the  estate,'  and  it  has  always  been  held 
unnecessary  in  pleading  a  demise  by  husband  and  wife  to 
set  it  up  as  being  by  deed,  because  in  any  event  it  would 
be  good  during  the  husband's  life.*  But  if  the  lease  is  by 
parol,  it  is  not  good  except  for  such  a  term  as,  under  the 
Statute  of  Frauds,  may  be  granted  by  parol,  and  in  case 
of  the  husband's  death,  it  is  absolutely  void  as  to  the 
wife,  and  is  not  and  cannot  be  affirmed  by  an  acceptance 
of  rent  by  her,  after  her  husband's  death,  so  as  to  estop  her 
from  evicting  the  tenant,*  and  this  rule  applies  also  in  favor 

eucb  a  lease.    Brown  t.  Lindeaj,  Cro.  Eliz.  656 ;  Oreonwood  v.  Tr- 

2  HUl,  (B.  B.)  542 ;  WoodfaU'a  L.  &  ber.  Cro.  Jac.  564. 

T.  47;  Doev.  Weller,  7  T.  R.  478;  '  Wiscofa   Caae,   2  Coke,   61   b. 

Toler  T.  Slator,  34  L.  J.  Q.  B.  88 ;  When  the  rente,  income  and  profits 

L.  R.  8  Q.  B.  42.  of  the  wife's  statutaiy  estate  are 

'  Bat«man   v.   Alleo,  Cro.   Eliz.  the  mere  incident  of  a  suit  for  tite 

438,  as  where  the  lease  is  by  parol,  recovery  of  the  corpu*,  the  action 

it  cannot  be  eaid  to  be  the  wife'i  la  properly   brought  in  her  name 

lease.     Greenwood  v,  Tyber,  Cro.  as  sole  plaintilf,  but,   when   they 

Jac.   568;  Walaal  v.   Heath,   Cro.  are  the  aubject  of  a  separate  suit, 

Eliz.   656.      If  she   disafllrms   the  and    accrue  after    marriage,   the 

lease  after  her  husband's  death,  it  husband  may  recover  them  by  ao- 

has   been  held  to  make  the  lease  tion  in  bis  own  name;   and  the 

void  ab  initio,  and  tliat  ahe  may  fact  that  the  lease  was  made  by 

¥lead  non  demieeret.     Thetford  v.  the  wife  dmn  sola  does  not  affect 

hetford,     1    Iieon.    192;    Cited  3  hia  right  of  action.     Williamson  v. 

Coke,  28  a.     If  the  husband  does  Baker,  78    Ala.   GOO.      Overruling 

not  become  tenant  by  the  curtesy,  Bogga  v.  Price,  64  Ala.  514. 

his  sole  lease  of  her  lands  becomes,  'Bateman    v.   Allen,  Cro.   Eliz. 

at  her  death,  vojd  a=  *"  •""■  !"■'"»  iss  ■  rrhiWo  i-  ^Viwduit  Crr.  Tjii» 
and  all  other  pen 
under,  by  or  throu^l 
husband  cannot  disi 
after  her  death,  tho 
was  the  joint  deed  ot 
V.  Scarmtt,  4  H.  & 
Saunders,  2  Bing.  11 
«  Dyer  91  b;  Wal 


CHAP.  XV.] 


Husband  and  Wife. 


228 


f 


of  all  persons  claiming  under  her.*  A  mere  contract 
by  the  husband  for  a  lease  of  his  wife's  freehold,  cannot 
be  enforced  against  her  after  his  decease,  even  though  by 
statute  he  has  power  to  make  a  lease  for  a  term  extend- 
ing beyond  his  own  life." 

Sec.  113.  As  to  leasehold  estates  of  the  wife.— The  chattels 
real  of  the  wife  vest  absolutely  in  the  husband,  and  he 
may  dispose  of  them  by  gi'ant  or  demise.*  He  takes  them 
as  a  gift  by  the  marriage,  and  not  as  by  purchase.  The 
jus  disponendi  exists  in  him  alone,  and  he  may  dispose  of 
them  absolutely  by  grant,  demise  or  mortgage,  and  they 
may  be  taken  upon  execution  against  him.  If  he  does 
not  dispose  of  them,  and  she  dies,  they  become  his  ab- 
solutely, but  so  long  as  she  lives  and  he  does  not  dispose 
of  them,  he  holds  them  in  her  right,  and  cannot,  as 
against  her,  dispose  of  them  by  will,*  because,  the  jits 
disponendi  not  having  been  exercised  by  him,  they  revert 
to  her  upon  his  death. *  But  a  conveyance  upon  conditions 
is  a  conveyance  of  the  whole,  and  even  though  the  con- 
ditions are  broken  after  the  husband's  death,  the  estate 


Shep.  Touch.   280;  Greenwood  v. 
Tyber,  Cro.  Jac.  564. 

'Harvey  v.  Thomas,  Cro,  Eliz, 
216 ;  1  Rollers  Abr.  889. 

*  Darlington  v.  Pultney,  Camp. 
260;  Anonymous,  Freem.  Ch.  224. 

*  In  Yong  V.  Radford,  Hob.  8,  a 
mortgage  of  the  wife's  term  by 
her  and  her  husband  upon  her 
death,  was  held  to  vest  the  condi- 
tion in  the  husband,  the  court 
holding  that  by  the  marriage  the 
husband  acquired  full  power  to 
alien  the  term,  and  that  if  she 
died  first  the  term  would  survive 
to  him.  In  Ellsworth  v.  Hines,  6 
Wis.  618,  the  widow  having  mar- 
ried again,  sold  her  dower  interest 
in  her  Qrst  husband's  estate,  and 
the  court  held  that  the  second  hus- 
band was  entitled  to  the  money 
realized  therefrom,  although  he 
had  loaned  it  upon  securities  in 
her  name.  See  also  Mann's  Ap- 
peal, 50  Penn.  St.  375.  This  rule 
applies  equally  to  the  wife's  legal 
estate  in  chattels  real,  in  action,  of 
which  she  was  dispossessed  when 
married.    By    reducing  them  to 


possession  during  coverture,  he 
possesses  the  same  interest  in  them 
that  he  has  in  her  chattels  real  in 
possession,  but  if  he  does  not  re- 
duce them  to  possession  and  dies, 
they  survive  to  the  wife.  Co.  Litt. 
851  a. 

*  Harcourt  v.  Wyman,  8  Exchq. 
817. 

*  In  Daniels  v.  Richardson,  22 
Pick.  (Mass.)  565,  Sk  feme  sole,  being 
seissed  of  an  estate  for  her  life 
in  land,  demised  it  for  her  life,  re- 
serving an  annual  rent  without  any 
clause  of  re-entry,  and  was  subse- 
auently  married.  The  court  held 
tnat  the  husband  did  not  become 
seized  of  the  estate  in  right  of  his 
wife,  so  as  to  make  the  rents  and 
profits  his  own  ;'  that  nothing  re- 
mained to  the  lessor  but  the  rentj 
which  was  a  chose  in  action,  and, 
not  being  reduced  to  possession  by 
the  husband,  survived  to  the  wife. 
See  also  Bolder  v.  Blackbom,  Hob. 
285;  Hastings  v.  Douglass,  Cro. 
Car.  844 ;  Co.  Litt.  851  a,  46  b ;  Doc- 
tor and  Student,  Dia.  1  Ch.  7 
Plowd.  418. 


does  not 
such  a  di 
the  husbf 
his  own  I 
he  does  a 
the  term 
purpose.' 
must  be] 
of  it,  the 


make  a  It 
and  it  wi 
although 
ment  to  i 
wife.'  T 
husband 
The  lesso 
band.  A 
term,  bu< 


must  be 
ihey  held 

'  Co.  Litt. 

•Comyn'B 
{E.)8. 

•Sym'a  C 
Loftus'  Com 
being  posse 
years,  and  t 
same  land 
years,  died : 
administrat 
tnanied.  an 
leaaed  the 
years,  and  c 
whetlier  thi 
should  have 
said :  "For 
the  execntoi 
husband  hs 
term,  and  n 
the/em€,  ar 
denture  sha 
but  for  the 
twenty-one 
out  of  the  U 
wife  shall  1 
the  leveisk 


CHAP.  XV.] 


Husband  and  Wife. 


225 


conveyance  had  been  by  bargain  and  sale  enrolled,  or  by 
fine.  If  a  man  makes  a  lease  to  Sifeme  sole^  for  a  term, 
of  land  in  which  he  has  the  fee,  and  afterwards  marries 
her,  her  term  is  not  merged  in  his  estate,  because  he  has 
the  inheritance  in  his  own  right,  and  the  term,  in  the 
right  of  his  wife,  and,  unless  he  disposes  of  the  term 
during  his  life,  the  law  will  preserve  it  for  the  wife,  and 
it  will  survive  to  her  upon  his  death.*  Where  the  wife 
is  possessed  of  a  contingent  interest  in  a  term  for  years, 
the  husband  may  dispose  of  it,  and  if  he  makes  no  dis- 
position thereof,  and  dies,  it  belongs  to  the  wife.*  But 
when  the  contingency  is  one  that  cannot  happen  while 
the  husband  lives,  he  has  no  interest  therein,  and  even 
though  he  conveys  it,  bis  conveyance  will  not  defeat  the 
the  rights  of  the  wife.  * 

Sec.  114.  Bights  of  husband  in  chattels  real  held  by  the 
wife  or  executrix.— It  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  husband, 
by  marriage,  takes  an  absolute  interest  in  chattels  real, 
held  by  her  as  executrix,  and  the  rule  is,  that  upon  her 
death  they  go  to  the  administrator  de  bonis  non  of  the 
testator  or  intestate/  The  law  makes  no  gift  to  him  of 
chattels  real,  held  by  her  en  autre  droits  But  there 
would  seem  to  be  no  question  but  that,  by  the  common 
law,  where  the  husband  is  possessed  of  a  term  for  years, 
held  by  his  wife  as  executrix  of  another,  he  has  power 
to  grant,  demise  or  convey  the  same.  It  is  weU  settled 
that  he  may  administer  in  right  of  his  wife  without  her 
consent,  but  she  cannot  administer  without  his  consent, 
and  if  he  can  administer  jure  iixoris  without  her  consent, 
t  is  incident  to  the  power  of  administration  to  sell  or 
dispose  of  a  term  for  years,  and  he  may  do  whatever  his 
wife  could  have  done  as  executrix,  if  sole.*    '*  In  case  of 


'  Bracebridge  v.  Cook,  Plowd. 
418 ;  Grev  v.   Actor,   1  Salk.  326. 

« Co.  lib.  351  a  46, 6. 

» In  Grey  v.  Acton,  1  Salk.  862, 
Holt,  C.  J.,  says,  "  Where  the  wife 
hath  an^  right  or  duty  which  by  any 
possSbility  viay  happen  to  accrue 
during  coverture,  the  nusband  may, 
by  release,  discharge  it ;  but  where 


the  wife  hath  a  right  or  duty,  which 
by  no  possibility  can  accrue  to  her 
duHng  coverture,  the  husband  can- 
not release  it. 

*  Ck).  litt.  351  a. 
»n)id. 

•  Loftus'  Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  279 ;  Le- 
vick  V.  Conpin,  3  Wils.  277 ;  Wank- 
ford  r.  Wankford,  1  Salk.  806. 

15 


a  /eine  cc 
husband  1 
her,  thoui 
testator," 
in  trust  f< 
entitled  t< 
erty,  the 
the  incon: 
ference  o 
settled  up 
band  to  h 
therefor  i 
trusts  of 
right  to  d 
which  an 
the  rents 
rule  does 
"wife  bef  o 
ment,  go 
any  meai 
the  husba 
words  to 
not  be  ex 
warrant,' 
by  fair  cc 


>  Wankfo 

'  In  Levic 
tion  was  w 
seB9ed  otatt 

iiusbaod,  lia 

the  court  we 
ion  that  he 
n  37 ;  Fer^ 
241;  Undsa 
(S.  C.)  150. 
acterwillse' 


of  aa  execi 
BhaU  termi 
Alabama,   i 

executrix  i 
berhusbant 


CHAP.  XV.] 


HUSBAITD  AND   WiFE. 


227 


attaches/  and  his  interest  therein  may  he  seized  upon 
his  debts/  and  he  may  dispose  of  it  by  grant  or  demise. 

1  Barrett  v.  Barrett,  4  Dessau  (S.         ^RiversT.  Thayer,  7  Rich.  (S.  C) 
C.)  447.  Eq.  186. 


K 


228 


By  Lunatics. 


[§  115. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


BY  LUNATICS,  IDIOTS,  INTOXICATED  PERSONS,  *C. 


SEC.  115.  Generally. 

Sec.  116.  By  intoxicated  persons,  or  persons  under  duress. 

Sec.  117.  By  persons  under  duress. 

Sec.  118.  By  persons  under  the  influence  of  fraud. 

Section  115.  Generally. — Prima  facie  leases  made  by  a 
lunatic,  idiot,  or  other  person  non  compos  mentis j  are  valid, 
but  it  may  be  avoided,  if  not  by  himself,  by  his  privies 
in  blood,  or  by  his  representatives.*  Formerly  it  was 
held  that  such  persons  could  not  avail  themselves  of  their 
infirmity  in  avoidance  of  a  lease  or  other  conveyance 
made  by  them,  because  they  could  not  be  permitted  to 
stultify  themselves,  but  that  their  legal  representatives, 
or  privies  in  blood,  alone  possessed  the  right  to  set  up 
such  matters  in  avoidance  thereon.'  But  this  rule,  never 
having  any  foundation  in  reason,  is  not  now  recognized, 
and  a  conveyance  of  any  kind,  whether  by  lease  or  deed,  ex- 
ecuted by  persons  in  either  of  the  conditions  named,  while 
not  absolutely  void,  is  voidable,  as  well  by  the  lessor  or 
grantor  himself  *  as  by  his  privies  in  blood  or  legal  rep- 
resentatives,* and  the  lessor  or  grantor,  or  any  pereon 


'  Beverley's  Case,  4  Coke,  134  a ; 
Yates  V.  Been,  2  Stra.  1104. 

*  Beverley's  Case,  ante  ;  Addison 
V.  Dawson,  2  Vern.  678. 

^Arnold  v. Richmond  Ironworks, 
1  Gray  (Mass.)  434 ;  Summers  v. 
Pumphrey,  24  Ind.  281;  Cotes  v. 
Woodson,  2  Dana  (Ky.)  452;  Allis 
V.  Billing,  6  Met.  (Mass.) 415;  Mad- 
dox  V.  Simmons,  81  Ga.  512 ;  Crow- 
therv.  Rowlandson,  27  Cal.  376; 
and  this  is  so  whether  the  mental 
incapacity  arose  from  drunkenness 
or  any  other  cause,  and  whether 


the  contract  be  by  deed  or  paroL 
Jenners  v.  Howard,  6 Blackf.  (Ind.) 
240 ;  Lang  v.  Whidden,  2  N.  H. 
435 ;  Rice  v.  Peet,  15  John.  (N.  Y.) 
503;  Seaver  v.  Phelps,  11  Pick. 
(Mass.)  304 ;  Thornton  v.  Appleton, 
29  Me.  298 ;  Mitcliell  v.  Kingman,  5 
Pick.  (Mass.)  481 ;  Talson  v.  Gar- 
ner, 15  Mo.  494 ;  Webster  v.  Wood- 
ford, 3  Day  (Conn.)  90. 

*  Keeble  v.  Cummins,  5  Hayw. 
(Tenn.)  43 ;  Parris  v.  (Jobb,  5  Rich. 
(S.  C.)  Eq.  450. 


iL 


CHAP-  XVI.] 


Generally. 


229 


claiming  under  him,  may,  in  order  to  avoid  his  convey- 
ance, show  his  own  lunacy,  idiocy,  or  drunkenness  at 
the  time  it  was  made.*  A  want  of  absolute  and  perfect 
mental  soundness,  does  not  necessarily  affect  his  capacity 
to  make  a  lease,  provided  the  mind  is  capable  of  compre- 
hending the  full  import  of  the  act ;  *  and  a  contract  made 
by  a  lunatic  even,  may  be  binding  upon  him,  unless  the 
other  party  knew,  or  ought  to  have  known  of  his  mental 
infirmity,  and  took  some  unfair  advantage  of  him. "  But  if 
there  is  any  imposition  shown,  as,  if  the  consideration  is 
very  inadequate,  either  a  court  of  equity  or  a  jmy  in  a  court 
of  law,  will  give  weight  to  slight  evidence  calculated 
to  establish  imposition  or  circumvention.*  A  deed  or 
lease  made  by  a  person  non  compoSy  while  under  guard- 
ianship, is  absolutely  void,*  but  if  not  under  guardianship, 
a  lease  or  other  conveyance  made  during  a  lucid  interval, 
cannot  be  impeached  upon  the  ground  of  prior  or  subse- 
quent insanity.*  As  to  leases  made  by  the  guardian  of 
a  person  non  compos,  it  may  be  said  that,  unless  the 
statute  expressly  specifies  their  powers,  they  are  subject 
to  the  same  rules  as  guardians  for  infants.  ^  As  to  the 
power  of  a  committee  over  such  persons  and  their  prop- 


m 


1  Bellew  V.  Clark,  2  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
L.  23;  Morris  v.  Clay,  8  Jones 
(N.  C.)  L.  216 ;  Bensell  v.  Chancel- 
lor, 5  Whart.  (Penn.)  371 ;  Ingra- 
ham  V.  Baldwin.  9  N.  Y.  45 ;  Cook 
V.  Parker,  5  Phila.  (Penn.)  265; 
Bliss  V.  Conn.  R.  R.  Co., 24  Vt.  424. 

«Hovey  v.  Hobson,  56  Me.  250; 
Dennett  v.  Dennett,  44  N.  H.  581 ; 
Odell  V.  Buck,  21  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
142;  Miller  v.  Craig,  36  111.  109; 
Sneers  v.  Lewell,  4  Bush.  (Ky.) 
239 ;  Rippy  v.  Gaunt,  6  Ired.  (N. 
C.)  Bq.  443. 

'Richardson  v.  Strong,  18  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  106;  Sims  v.  McLure,  8 
Rich.  (S.  C.)  Eq.  286 ;  Lincoln  v. 
Buckmaster,  82  Vt.  652;  Skidmore 
V.  Ramline,  2  Bradf .  (N.  Y.  Surro- 

fate)  122;  Bennan  v.  McDonnell, 
Ezchq.  309 ;  Molton  v.  Camroux, 
2  Ezchq.  487.  Dane  v.  Kirkwall, 
8  C.  &  P.  679 ;  ElHott  v.  Ince,  7  De 
G.  M.  &  G.  475;  Brown  v.  Jad- 
drell.  1  Moo.  &  M.  105. 
4  Wilson  V.  Oldham^  1^  B.  Mon. 


(Ky.)  55 ;  McFadden  v.  Vincent,  21 
Tex.  47 ;  Hale  v.  Bowen,  11  Ala.  87. 

»Mohr  V.  Tulip,  40  Wis.  66 ;  Els- 
ton  V.  Jasper,  46  Tex.  409 ;  Nichols 
V.  Thomas,  53  Ind.  42. 

•Hardin  v.  Hays,  14  Penn.  St. 
19 ;  Wilkinson  v.  Pearson,  23  id. 
117.  But  in  order  to  establish  in- 
sanity at  the  time  when  the  con- 
tract was  made,  evidence  of  the 
state  of  his  mind  just  before,  at, 
and  after  such  time,  is  advisable. 
Peaslev  v.  Robbins,  8  Met.  (Mass.) 
164 ;  Grant  v.  Thompson,  4  Conn. 
203  ;  Negro  Jerry  v.  Thompson,  9 
Md.  145 ;  Watson  v.  Anderson,  11 
Ala.  43 ;  Hendrix  v.  Money,  1  Bush. 
(Ky.)  806 ;  Dickenson  v.  Barber,  9 
Mass.  225 ;  but  proof  of  insanity  at 
remote  periods  before  or  after  the 
conveyance  was  made,  is  not  ad- 
missible. Harden  v.  Hays,  14 
Penn.  St.  91. 

^See  Sec.  91  et  seq.,  Thompson 
V.   Boardman,  1  Vt.  370. 


230 


By  Lunatics. 


§116. 


erty,  the  statute  authorizing  their  appointment  must  be 
consulted,  and  in  the  absence  of  power  given  by  statute, 
they  have  no  power  to  lease.* 

Sec.  116.  By  Intozioated  persons,  or  persons  under  duress' 
— A  deed,  lease,  or  other  conveyance,  executed  by  a  person 
in  such  a  state  of  intoxication  as  to  destroy  his  capacity  to 
contract,  may  be  avoided  by  him,  and  he  will  be  per- 
mitted to  show  his  intoxication  either  in  an  action  against 
him,  predicated  upon  such  instruments,  or  in  an  action 
in  his  favor  to  avoid  them,'  and  the  rule  is  the  same,  both 
at  law  and  in  equity,'  and  that  too  whether  the  grantee 
connived  at  the  intoxication  or  not.^  If  connivance  at 
his  intoxication  is  shown  on  the  part  of  the  grantee,  the 
grantor  would  not  be  bound,  if  any  imduid  advantage  was 
shown  to  have  been  taken  of  his  condition,  although  he 
was  not  wholly  deprived  of  his  senses,  as  in  such  a  case, 
the  contract  would  be  tainted  with  fraud.'  In  order, 
however,  to  operate  as  a  defence  to  an  action  at  law  pred- 
icated upon  a  lease  or  other  contract,  or  to  secure  the 
interposition  of  a  court  of  equity  and  set  it  aside,  ho  must 
show  that  such  a  state  of  intoxication  existed  as  seriously 
impaired  his  reasoning  faculties,  or  deprived  him  of  the 
exercise  of  his  understanding  at  the  time  when  it  was 
entered  into,*  or  that  his  mind  had  become   so  impaired 


»Knipev.  Palmer,  2WilB.  180. 

•In  Pitt  V.  Smith,  8  Camp.  84, 
Lord  Ellenborouoh  said:  *' In- 
toxication is  good  evidence  upon  a 
plea  of  nan  est  factum  to  a  deed  of 
non  consaeist  to  a  grant>  and  of 
non  asgumpsit  to  a  piromise."  See 
also  Butler  v.  MulvihiU,  1  Bligh. 
160. 

•In  Cook  V.  Clayworth,  IBVes. 
Jr.  16,  Sm.  W.  Grant,  M.  R.,  said : 
'*  As  to  that  extreme  state  of  intoxi- 
cation that  deprives  a  man  of  his 
reason,  I  apprehend  that  even  at 
law,  it  would  invalidate  a  deed 
obtained  from  him  while  in  that 
condition."  Jennersv.  Howard,  6 
Blackf .  (Ind.)  240.  In  Gore  v.  Gib- 
son, IBM.  &  W.  623,  the  court  were 
unanimously  of  the  opinion  that 
intoxication  was  a  good  defence  to 
aft  action  upon  a  lease,  deed,  grant 


or  simple  contract,  provided  the 
person  making  it  was  so  far  de- 
prived of  his  senses  as  not  to  know 
what  he  was  doing.  Butler  v. 
MulvihiU,  1  BUeh.  187. 

^Gore  V.  Gibson,  ante;  Drum- 
mond  V.  Hopper,  4  Harr.  (DeL) 
827 ;  Barrett  v.  Buxton,  1  Aik.  (Vt.) 
167 ;  Foot  V.  Tewksbury,  2  Vt.  97 ; 
Burroughs  v.  Richman,  18  N.  J. 
L.  238 ;  Wiggleston  v.  Steers,  1  H. 
&  M.  (Va.)  70. 

» Say  V.  Barwick,  1  V.  &  B.  1»5 ; 
Butler  V.  MulvihiU,  ante;  Cooke 
V.  aayworth,  18  Ves.  12 ;  Pitt  v. 
Smith,  8  Camp.  aS. 

•  Pickett  V.  Sutter,  5  Cal.  412 ; 
Barrett  v.  Buxton,  2  Aik.  (Vt.)  167 ; 
Wade  V.  Culvert,  2  MUl.  (S.  C.)27 ; 
Taylor  v.  Patrick,  1  Bibb.  (Ky.) 
16c.  Burroughs  v.  Richman,  18 
N.  J.  L.  283 ;  Foot  v.  Tewksbury, 


■  ■ 


CHAP.  XVI.]        Persons  under  Duress. 


231 


by  previous  intoxication  as  to  render  him  incompetent 
to  contract,  even  thoiigh  at  the  time  he  was  not  intoxi- 
cated.' Thus,  in  a  Pennsylvania  case,*  the  court  held 
that  a  person  who  had  been  reduced  to  such  a  state  of 
debility  by  intoxication  as  to  be  unable  to  rise  or  sit  up  in 
bed  unless  supported,  or  to  hold  a  pen  and  make  a  mark, 
unless  the  pen  and  hand  were  held  by  another,  is  no  more 
fit  to  make  a  conveyance  than  a  person  in  an  actual  state 
of  intoxication  ;  and  by  reference  to  the  preceding  cases, 
it  will  be  seen  that  if  the  previous  intoxication  of  the 
lessor,  grantor  or  contractor,  has  impaired  his  mental 
faculties  to  such  an  extent  that  he  is  not  in  the  exercise 
of  his  reasoning  powers,  his  contract  is  voidable,  al- 
though he  is  not  physically  debilitated.  The  personal 
representatives  of  a  party,  or  any  person  claiming  under, 
by,  or  through  him,  may  avail  themselves  of  his  intoxi- 
cation as  a  defence,  or  to  set  aside  an  instrument  executed 
by  him/ 

Sec.  117.  By  persons  under  dture8s.--A  person  who  exe- 
cutes a  lease  or  other  contract  by  duress,  may  avail  him- 
self thereof,  when  freed  therefrom,  either  in  defence  to 
an  action  thereon,  or  as  a  ground  for  setting  it  aside,* 
but  the  privilege  is  personal,  and  neither  his  creditors 
nor  a  stranger  to  the  contract,  can  avail  themselves  of  it, 
as  a  ground  for  setting  aside  a  contract  to  which  he  him- 


2  Vt.  97 ;  Lee  v.  Ware,  1  HiU  (S. 
C.)  313 ;  White  v.  Cox,  8  Hayw. 
(Tenn.)  82 ;  Broadwater  v.  Dome, 
10  Mo.  277 :  Birdsong  v.  Birdsong, 
2  Head.  (Tenn.)  289 ;  Drummond 
V.  Hopper,  4  Harr.  (Del.)  827.  In 
a  case  heard  and  decided  in 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States,  the  court  held  that,  wheiv- 
ever  there  is  great  weakness  of 
mindy  though  not  amounting  to 
absolute  disqualification,  arising 
from  age,  sicimess,  or  any  other 
cause,  in  a  person  executing  a  con- 
veyance and  the  consideration  is 
grossly  inadequate,  a  court  of  e(}ui- 
t^  will,  upon  seasonable  apphca- 
tion  of  his  representatives  or  neirs, 
set  it  aside,  and  the  same  rules 
prevail  where  it  is  shown  that  the 
party  executing   the   conveyance 


is  likely  to  be  easily  influenced, 
AUore  v.  Jewett,  94  U.  S.  506 ;  see 
also  Yard  v.  Yard,  27  N.  J.  Eq. 
114.  But  where  there  is  no  evi- 
dence of  fraud  or  undue  influence, 
the  mere  fact  that  a  person  is  aged 
and  infirm,  affords  no  ground  for 
interference.  Crow  v.  Peters,  63 
Mo.  429. 

*  White  V.  Cox,  Hayw.  (Tenn.) 
79 ;  Birdsong  V.  Birdsong.  2  Head. 
(Tenn);  Mansfield  v.  Watson,  2 
Iowa  111. 

« Wilson  V.  Bigger,  7  W.  &  S. 
(Penn.)  111. 

» Wigglesworth  v.  Steers,  1  H. 
&  M.  (Va.)  70. 

*  Kelsey  v.  Haply,  16  Pet.  (U.  S.) 
269;  Knight's  Case,  3  Leon.  289; 
Hackett  v.  King,  6  Allen  (Mass.) 
565 ;  Fobs  v.  Hildreth,  10  id.  76. 


233  By  Lunatics.  [§  117. 

self  makes  no  objection.'  Duress  by  threats  must,  in 
order  to  be  available  as  a  defence  to,  or  a  ground  for,  set- 
ting aside  a  lease,  be  of  such  a  character  as  to  excite  a 
fear  of  some  grievous  wrong,  or  of  great  bodily  harm  or 
unlawful  punishment,'  and  such  as  would  be  likely  to 
ovei-come  the  will  of  a  person  of  ordinary  courage  and 
firmness.'  Threatening  to  do  a  legal  act,  as  to  sue  a  person 
and  attach  his  property,  or  to  arrest  him  upon  the  writ, 
when  the  same  may  legally  be  done,  and  the  party  has  a 
probable  ground  of  action  against  him,  does  not  amount 
to  duress.'  But,  where  a  person  threatens  to  do  an  unlaw- 
ful act  under  the  color  of  legal  process,  as  to  imprison  the 
persons  threatened,  and  the  party  threatened  is  ignorant 
of  his  rights,  and  through  fear  of  such  unlawful  imprison- 
ment executes  a  lease,  or  enters  into  any  contract,  it  is 
avoidable  upon  the  ground  of  duress,'  as  where  a  person 
threatens  to  arrest  a  person  in  an  action,  in  which  an 
arrest  cannot  lawfully  be  made,  if  the  threat  is  of  such  a 
character  as  is  sufiicient  to  overcome  the  mind  and  will 
of  a  person  of  ordinary  firmness,  it  is  such  duress  as  will 
avoid  a  contract  made  under  its  influence.'  So,  even 
though  a  person  is  arrested  upon  a  l^al  warrant,  and  by 
a  proper  officer,  yet,  if  the  object  of  the  process  was  to 
extort  money  from  the  defendant,  and  to  enforce  the 
settlement  of  a  civil  claim  against  his  will,  it  is  an  abuse 
of  the  process,  and  such  duress  as  will  operate  as  a  defence 
to  any  conveyance  made  under  its  influence,  and  as  will 
induce  a  court  of  equity  to  set  it  aside.'    The  rule  may 

'  Lewis   T.  Bannister,  16  Qra^     Sheppard  v,  Watrous,  S  CoL  K.  Y. 

(Mass.)  500;    McClintock   v.  Cum-      166, 

minH,  8  McLean  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  158.        'Whitfield    v.    LongfeUow,    IS 

•Butt  t.  Burton,  18  Ark.  214;     Me.  146. 
Hazlerigg   v.  Donaldson,  3    Met.        *  Foss    v.    Hildreth,    10    Allen 
(Ky.)  4©.  (Mass.)  76 ;  Wade  v.  Simoa,  3  C. 

•  Barman    v.  Harman,  61    Me.     B.  548. 

327,  14    Am.  Rep.   558:    State    v,         ^  Hackett  v.  Kinic.  6  AUen  (Mass.) 

Sluder,  70   N.  C, 

Shauner,  36  Ark.  i 

Friable,  83   Vt.  { 

Griswold.  10    Ho 

Durr  V.  Howard,  < 

*  Davis  T,  Susl 
Greeham  v.  Lande 
3,149;  EddyT.H. 


CHAP.  XVI.]        Persons  under  Duress. 


233 


be  said  to  be  that,  to  constitute  duress,  under  the  influence 
of  fear  or  restraint  by  an  arrest  under  a  legal  process,  the 
arrest  must  either  have  been  illegal  in  its  inception^  or 
must  have  become  so  by  a  subsequent  abuse  of  the  process.' 
And  it  seems  that  duress  may  be  predicated  of  convey- 
ances made,  or  contracts  entered  into,  when  a  person  is 
illegally  restrained  of  his  liberty,  even  though  such  con- 
veyances were  made  or  agreements  entered  into  by  the 
advice  or  through  the  instrumentality  of  his  counsel,  as 
a  means  of  securing  the  removal  of  such  illegal  restraint. 
Thus,  in  an  English  case,"  the  plaintiff  was  confined  in 
a  lunatic  asylum,  and  an  inquisition  under  a  commission 
of  lunacy  being  held  upon  her,  and  attended  by  her 
counsel,  before  any  verdict  was  given,  an  agreement  was 
signed  by  her  counsel  and  the  counsel  for  the  promoters 
of  the  commission,  that  the  plaintiff  should  be  released 
from  confinement,  that  certain  arrangements  should  be 
made  as  to  property  which  she  claimed ;  that  the 
title  deeds  relating  thereto,  which  had  been  taken  from 
her  when  she  was  confined,  and  now  were  in  the  hands 
of  the  promoters,  should  be  given  up  and  placed  in  the 


is  an  arrest  for  just  cause  without 
laWul  authority,  or  where  there  is 
an  arrest  for  just  cause  and  with 
lawful    authority,    for    improper 

Surposes,  it  constitutes  duress, 
trong  V.  Grannis,  26  Barb.  C.  (N. 
Y.)  122 ;  Watkins  v.  Baird,  6  Mass. 
511 ;  Richardson  v.  Duncan,  8  N. 
H.  508;  Thompson  v.  Lockwpod, 
15  John.  (N.  Y.)  266.  So  if  one 
arrets  another  under  pretence 
that  he  has  a  warrant,  when  he 
has  not,  or  when  he  has  a  warrant, 
but  it  was  illegally  issued,  or  is 
illegal  for  a  failure  to  comply  with 
certain  statutory  requirements, 
any  conveyance  or  contract  pro- 
cured by  such  means  is  void.  In- 
deed mere  fear  of  imprisonment 
is  sufficient  to  constitute  duress. 
Foeheyv.  Ferguson,  5  Hill  (N.  Y.) 
154;  Whitfield  v.  Longfellow,  13 
Me.  146;  Eddy  v.  Herrin,  17  Me. 
888.  Chitty  on  Ck>ntracts,  168, 
Co.  Inst.  488,  CJo.  litt.  253  b.  Ba- 
con's Abr.  tit.  Duress,  Comjn's 
Dig.  tit.  Pleader  (W)  20.  So  where 
an  airest  is  lawful  and  regular  in 


form,  yet,  if  it  was  procured  by 
perjury,  it  is  such  duress  as  vitiates 
any  contract  made  under  its  influ- 
ence.   Strong  y.  Grannis,  ante. 

'  Richardson  v.  Duncan,  3  N.  H. 
508 ;  Stouflfer  v.  Latshaw,  2  Watts. 
(Penn.)  167 ;  Meek  v.  Atkinson,  1 
Bailey  (S.  C.)  84 ;  Watkins  v.  Baird, 
6  Mass.  511 ;  Sheppard  v.  Watrous, 
3  Cai.  (N.  Y.)  166 ;  Richards  v. 
Vanderpool,  1  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.} 
71.  In  Fay  v.  Outley  it  was  held 
that,  where  a  creditor  procures  a 
requisition  for  an  arrest  of  a  debtor, 
whom  he  has  procured  to  be  indict- 
ed in  another  State  for  a  criminal 
offence,  and  he  abuses  the  process 
by  holding  it  over  the  debtor  as  a 
means  of  making  him  pay  or  secure 
the  debt,  intending  then  to  let  him 
escape,  all  contracts  growing  out 
of  this  abuse  of  the  process  are 
utterly  void.  See  also  Gardner  v. 
Williams,  Dudley  (Ga.)  424 ;  Whit- 
field V.  Longfellow,  13  Me.  1461, 
Breck  v.  Blanchard,  22  N.  H.  303. 

s  Cummings  v.  Iver,  11 Q.  B.  112. 


234  By  Lunatics.  [§  118. 

hands  of  one  of  the  defendants,  and  that  the  commission 
should  be  superseded.    All  of  which  was  done.     The 
plaintiff  then  brought  detinue   against   the  defendant 
therefor,  to  whom,  under  the  agreement,  the  title  deeds 
had  been  delivered,  for  the  deeds.     An  issue  was  made, 
and  the  court  held  that  the  plaintiff  was  not  bound  to 
prove  her  title  to  the  deeds,  the  only  question  being 
whether  the  agreement  prevented  her  from  insisting  on 
her  title ;  also,  that  it  was  rightly  left  to  the  jury  to  say, 
on  evidence  of  the  state  of  plaintiff's  mind  and  health  at 
the  time  the  agreement  was  made,  whether  the  consent  of 
her  counsel  was  obtained  by  constraint  and  without  her 
free  will ;  and  the  jury  having  so  found,  that  the  plaintiff 
was  entitled  to  the  verdict ;  and  that  the  legaUty  of  the 
restraint  (assuming  it  to  have  been  legal),  and  the  con- 
sent of  counsel,  furnished  no  conclusive  proof  that  the 
agreement  was  not  void  by  duress.  Lord  Denman,  C.  J., 
said :  *'  That  her  counsel  exercised  a  sound  discretion, 
and  did  the  best  for  their  client's  interest,  we  do  not  for 
a  moment  doubt.    But  they  are  not  invested  with  any 
superior  power,  with  the  power  and  duty  of  guardian- 
ship over  the  lunatic.    Their  right  to  act  for  her  is 
derived  from  herself  alone.    As  long  as  she  was  at  liberty, 
she  might  authorize  them  to  appear  in  her  behalf  and 
disprove  the  imputed  insanity ;  but  as  she  was  incom- 
petent (by  the  hypothesis)  from  making  any  contract, 
she  was  incompetent  to  appoint  any  one  to  deal  for 
her  in  relation  to  her  liberty  or  her  property.    If,  on  the 
other  hand,  her  counsel  acted  for  her,  believing  her  of 
sound  mind,  from  the  same  fear  of  inconvenience  and 
disease,  as  Ukely  to  arise  from  her  confinement,  which 
affected  the  mind  of  their  principal,    their  proceeding 
ought  to  he  considered  as  enforced  by  the  same  duress. 

Sec.  lis.  By  person  under  influence  of  fraud.  A  lease  or 
other  conveyance  that  is  entered  into  through  fraud  on 
the  part  of  the  lessor  or  lessee,  may  be  avoided  upon  that 
ground,  and  upon  the  principle  that  fraud  vitiates  all  con- 
tracts. But  mere  misrepresentations,  which  are  false, 
do  not  necessarily  amount  to  fraud,  as  they  may  have 


CHAP.  XVI.] 


Under  Fraud. 


235 


been  innocently  mada    In  order  to  hare  that  effect,  there 
must  have  been  an  intent  to  deceive,  in  reference  to  a 
materia]  matter,*  or  if  not  wilfully  made,  it  must  have 
related  to  a  matter  about  which  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
party  making  it  to  have  known  the  truth,'  and  in  the  lat- 
ter case,  even  though  the  misrepresentation  was  inno- 
cently made,  if  it  related  to  a  material  matter,  the  party 
injured  may  recover  the  damages  he  sustains  therefrom, 
in  a  court  of  law,*  or  may  resort  to'  a  court  of  equity  to 
have  the  lease  or  conveyance  set  aside/    Fraud  may  con- 
sist in  the  suppression  of  the  facts,  and  when  it  is  the 
duty  of  a  party  to  state  the  facts,  and  he  omits  to  do  so, 
it  furnishes  a  good  ground  for  an  action  at  law  for  dam- 
ages, or  for  the  intervention  of  a  court  of  equity  to  set 
the  lease  or  deed  aside.*    But,  ordinarily,  a  court  of  equity 
will  not   interfere  in  a  case  of  fraud,  where  there  is 
a  clear,  plain  and  adequate  remedy  at  law,*  nor  where  the 
fraud  alleged  is  the  result  of  false  reasoning  from  facts 
truly  stated,"  or  relates  to  a  mere  matter  of  judgment,* 
nor  where  the  alleged  fraud  was  perpetrated  after  the 
contract  was  made,*  or  did  not  influence  the  party  seeking 
relief,"  or  the  party  was  not  injured  thereby,"  or  where  he 
had  equal  opportunities  with  the  other  party  for  ascer- 
taining the  truth,"  or  where  he  has  been  guilty  of  unrea- 
sonable delay  in  applying  for  relief."    In  all  cases,  the 
party  alleging,  must  prove  the  fraud,  as  it  will  never  be 
inferred  from  facts  which  may  be  consistent  with  honest 


» Taylor  v.  Leith,  26;  Ohio  St.  428; 
Stitt  V.  Uttle,  68  N.  Y.  426 ;  Dunn 
V.  White,  63  Mo.  181 ;  Dulancy  v. 
Rogers,  64  id.  201 ;  Morehouse  v. 
Te^er,  41  N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.  136. 

•Foard  v.  McCk>mb,  12  Bush. 
(Ky.)  723 ;  Craig  v.  Ward,  1  Abb. 
(N.  Y.)  App.  Dec.  454. 

*  Goodwin  V.  Robinson,  80  Ark. 
535 ;  Frenzel  y.  Miller,  87  Ind.  1 ; 
Elder  v.  Allison,  45  Ga.  18. 

♦Griffin  v.  Sketoe,  30  Ga.  300; 
Marghy  v.  Haner,  7  John.  (N.  Y.) 
341 ;  Hoitt  v.  Holcomb,  23  N.  H. 
536 ;  Relf  v.  Eberley,  23  Iowa,  467 ; 
TnmbnU  v.  Gadsden,  2  Strobh.  (S. 
C.)  Eq.  14 ;  Martin  v.  Blyth,  4  J.  J. 
Mar.  (Ky.)  491. 

*  Gre^  V.  Woodruflf ,  14  Ark.  9 ; 


Smith  V.  Richards,  13  Pet.  (U.  S.) 
36 ;  State  v.  Halloway,  8  Blackf . 
and.)  45 ;  Torrey  v.  Buck,  2  N.  J. 
Eq.  366. 

•Miller  v.  Scammon,  62  N.  H. 
609. 

i  Bowman  v.  Bates,  2  Bibb.  (Ky.) 
47. 

^  Halls  Y.  Thompson,  9  Miss.  443. 

•  Fulton  V.  Loftus,  63  N.  C.  893. 

»®  Stephens  v.  Orman,  10  Fla.  9 ; 
Boyce  v.  Watson,  29  Ga.  517. 

»^Jewitt  V.  Davis,  10  Allen 
(Mass.)  68;  Davidson  v.  Moss,  6 
Miss.  673. 

"  Grantland  v.  Wight,  7  Munf . 
(Va.)  179. 

"  Munn  V.  Worrell,  16  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  221 ;  Cox  v.  Montgomery,  86 


236 


By  Lunatics. 


[§  118. 


intentions.'  When  the  fraud  appears  upon  the  face  of  a 
lease  or  deed,  it  may  be  invalidated  in  a  court  of  law,'  but 
where  the  fraud  consists  in  matter  dehors  the  lease,  it  is 
voidable  only  in  equity.'  The  subject  of  fraud,  and  the 
rights  and  remedies  of  the  landlord  or  tenant  theref  or, 
will  be  treated  fully,  post. 


ni.  896 ;  McLean  v.  Barton,  Harv. 
(Mich.)  279;  McDowell  v.  Gold- 
smith, 2  Md.  Ch.  870;  Kern  v. 
Bumham,  28  Ala.  428 ;  Gifford  v. 
Thorn,  9  N.  J.  Eq.  702. 

^Stute  V.  Kinkh,  8  Ala.  852; 
Harris  v.  Ransom,  64  Miss.  504; 
Pratt  V.  Phiilbrook,  89  Me.  17. 

*  Arnold   v.  Grimes,  2   Greene 


(Iowa)  77 ;   Obert  v.  HammeU,  18 
N.  J.  L.  78. 

*  Arnold  v.  Grimes,  ante ;  Hoi- 
ley  V.  Younge,  27  Ala.  203 ;  Res- 
ervoir Ck).  T.  Chase,  14  Conn.  123 ; 
Pocock  V.  Hendricks,  8  G.  &  J. 
(Md.)  441 ;  Anderson  v.  Hill,  30 
Miss.  679 ;  White  v.  Jones,  4  CalL 
(Va.)  258. 


■!'^- 


CHAP,  xvn.] 


CoMHON  Law. 


237 


CHAPTEKXVII. 


BT  EZECUTOBS  OB  AD3CINISTBAT0BS. 


Sec.  119.    Common  law,  powers  of. 

8ec.  120.    Leasesbyexecutors,  voidable  in  equity,  though  good  at  law 

Sbc.  121.    When  executor  is  an  infant. 

Sec.  1 19.  Common  law,  powers  of.— At  the  common  law^ 
executors  and  administrators  may  dispose  absolutely  of 
terms  for  years  vested  in  them  in  right  of  their  testators  or 
intestates,  and  may  lease  the  same  for  any  fewer  number 
of  years,  and  the  rents  reserved  on  such  leases  are  assets 
in  their  hands,  and  go  in  course   of  administration  ;^ 


>  4  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (I.^ 
7 ;  Sir  Moyle  Finch's  Case,  6  Coke, 
67  b;  Keating  v.  Keating,  Slayd. 
&  G.  temp.  Sugd.  C.   183.    In  So. 
Carolina  by  an  early  statute  (1791), 
leasehold  estates  go  to  the  executor 
and  are  distributable  by  him  under 
the  provisions  of  that  act.    Payne 
V.  Harris,  3  Strobh.  (S.  C.)  Eq.  89. 
An  administrator  or  executor  of  a 
lessee,  who  does  not  quit  and  sur- 
render the  demised  premises  im- 
mediately after  his  appointment, 
or  upon  a  notice  to  quit,  until  a 
iadgment  for  the  possession  thereof 
has  been  obtained  against  him,  but 
keeps  the  property  of  his  intestate 
there  for  several  weeks,  and  sells 
it  by  auction  upon  the  premises, 
and  claims  of  an  under-tenant  of 
a  portion  of  the   premises,    rent 
^which  accrued  after  his  intestate's 
death,  must  be  held  to  have  entered 
and  taken  possession  of  the  prem- 
ises, and  is  personally  liable  to  the 
lessor,  for  rent  thereof,  until  his 
estate  therein  was  terminated  by 
the  notice  to  quit,  to  the  extent  of 
the  real  value  of  the  use  of  the 
premises.    Inches  v.  Dickinson,  2 
Allen  (Mass.)  71.    If  an  executor 
or  administrator,  or  one  who  as- 
sumes to  act  in  the  latter  capacity, 


takes  a  renewal  in  his  own  name 
of  a  lease  to  the  testator  or  intes- 
tate, although  the  lease  does  not 
provide  for  a  renewal,  he  is  never- 
theless bound  to  accoimt  to  the  es- 
tate for  the  value  of  the  new  lease. 
Zilkin  V.  Carhart,  3  Bradf .  (N.  Y. 
Surrogate)  876  ;  Engel  v.  Buricker, 
34  Mo.  93; — An  executor  or  ad- 
ministrator is  authorized  to  make 
reasonable  repairs  upon  a  leasehold 
estate.    Ames  v.  Daivany ,  1  Bradf. 
(N.  Y.  Surrogate)  821.    In  Palmer 
V.  Stenier  68  Ala.  400,  it  was  held 
that  the  rule  of  the  common  law, 
that  on  the  death  of  the  lessor,  rent 
already  accrued  passes  to  his  per- 
sonal representative  while  rent  sub- 
sequently accruing  follows  the  re- 
version, and  belongs  to  the  heir, 
has  been  modified  by  the  statutes, 
conferring  on    personal  represen- 
tatives, power  to  intercept  the  de- 
scent to  the  heir,  and  to  take  the 
rents  accruing,  and  to  rent  or  sell 
the  lands,  when  necessary  for  the 
payments  of  debts,  and  when,  in 
the  exercise  of  this  statutory  power 
he  claims  the  accruing  rents,  his 
right  and  title  to  them  are    the 
same  that  he  has  to  an  v  other  choses 
in  action  of  the  decedent. 


238 


By  Executors. 


L§  119. 


and  executors  deriving  their  authority  from  their  testa- 
tor may  make  valid  leases  of  any  premises  that  devolve 
upon  them  as  such,  by  the  will  under  which  their  power 
is  derived,  even  before  the  will  has  been  proved  ;  *  but  an 
administrator,  deriving  all  his  powers  from  an  appoint- 
ment by  a  competent  tribunal,  cannot  grant  a  lease  until 
letters  of  administration  have  been  granted  to  him,' 
A  lease  by  one  of  several  executors  *  or  administrators  * 
is  good,  as  they  are  all  regarded  as  an  individual  person, 
and  have  a  joint  and  entire  interest  in  the  property.  *  In 
New  York  and  some  other  States  this  power  is  specially 
conferred  by  statute,  and  relates  to  the  execution  of  a 
conveyance,  as  well  as  to  a  sale,  by  one ;  *  and  if  part  of 
the  executors  refuse  to  act,  the  others  may  execute  the 
power,"  and  the  fact  that  the  power  is  given  to  them  in 


'  Bendall  v.  Summerset,  2  W. 
Bl.  692 ;  RoUe's  Abr.  Executors  (A.) ; 
Hudson  V.  Hudson,  1  Atk.  460. 

«  Wankford  v.  Wankford,  1  Salk. 
801 ;  Toller's  Exrs.  95  ;  Hudson  v. 
Hudson,  ante ;  1  Piatt  on  Leases, 
807 ;  Fawcett's  L.  &  T.  80 ;  Bank 
V.  Dudley,  2  Pet.  (U.  S.)  493  ;  1 
William's  Exrs.  354. 

« Chandler  v.  Ryder,  102  Maes. 
268  ;  Doe  v.  Hayes,  7  Taunt.  222 ; 
Bunner  v.  Storm,  1  Sandf.  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  887 ;  Anonymous,  Dyer,  23 
o.  Simpson  v.  Gutteridge,!  Madd. 
609 ;  Pennel  v.  Ferm,  Cro.  Eliz. 
847;  Hayes  v.  Sturges,  7  Taunt. 
217;  Roue's  Abr.  Executors,  (C); 
Davone  v.  Fanning,  2  Johns.  Cb. 
N.  Y.)  252 ;  Ogden  v.    Smith,  2 

aige  Ch.  (N.  Y. )  195. 

*  Jacomb  v.  Harwood,  2  Ver.  Sr. 
267. 

*  Jacomb  v.  Harwood,  ante ; 
Comyn's  Dig.  tit.  Administrators 
(B.),  12.  In  Anonymous,  Dyer,  28 
o.  n.  146,  it  is  said  that  a  release, 
siurender  of  a  term,  confession  of 
judgment,  or  attornment  of  one 
executor  is  binding  upon  all,  and 
that  seems  to  be  the  case  as  to  all 
lawful  acts  done  by  one ;  but  for 
his  tortSf  as  for  waste  committed 
by  one,  the  others  are  not  bound, 
nor  are  the  others  bound  by  an  act 
of  the  other  which  could  not  lauy 
fvUy  be  done  by  all.  Kelset  v. 
Nicholson,  Cro.  Eliz.  878,  Inst.  327 ; 
Argol's  Case,  Palm.  405.  See  also 
Boudereau     v.     Montgomery,    4 


p 


Wash.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  186 ;  Winter- 
mute  V.  Redington,  1  Fish.  Pat- 
Cas.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  880.  Where  two 
executors  are  authorized  by  the 
will  to  sell  the  real  estate,  unless 
the  will  specially  provides  for  a 
joint  execution  of  the  power,  it 
survives  to  one,  upon  the  deaJl^  of 
the  other.  Peter  v.  Beverlv,  10 
Pet.  (U.  S.)  582 ;  Bank  v.  Beverly, 
1  How.  (U.  S.)  184,  So  one  execu- 
tor may  assign  the  intestate's  inter- 
est in  a  patent,  Wintermute  v. 
Redington,  ante ;  or  release  or  dis- 
pose of  an  V  of  the  assets  of  the  es- 
tate, Boudereau  v.  Montgomery, 
ante.  One  executor  may  lease  to 
another,  and  the  rent  may  be  dis- 
trained for.  Cowper  v.  Fletcher, 
84  L.  J.  C.  B.  187 ;  Black's  Estate, 
1  Tucker  (N.  Y.  Surrogate)  95 ;  9 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  84 ;  2  Barb.  Ch,  (N. 
Y.)  151 ;  8  id.  71.  In  Kincade  v. 
Coffley.  64  N.  C.  887,  where  firo 
administrators  were  charged  with 
negligence  in  investing  funds  in 
Confederate  securities  when  the 
act  was  done  by  one  of  them,  it 
was  held  that  both  were  liable,  un- 
less the  other  dissented.  See  also 
Bart  V.  Bart,  41  N.  Y.  76,  as  to  the 
rule  where  one  takes  and  withholds 
from  the  other  all  the  property  of 
the  estate.  Executors,  as  such, 
are  not  liable  for  torts.  Plimpton 
V.  Richards,  59  Me.  115. 

•  Bunner  v.  Storm,  ante. 

^  Roseboom  v.  Mosher,  2  Den. 
(N.  Y.)  61 ;    Sharp   v.    Pratt,    15 


I  .■ 


CHAP,  xvn.] 


Common  Law. 


239 


the  plural  number  does  not  defeat  the  right  of  one  or 
more  to  execute  it/  and  in  all  cases  where  the  power  is 
given  to  them  virtute  officii,  a  surviving  executor  may 
lease  or  sell  according  to  the  power  given,  and  if  one  re- 
nounces the  trust,  the  acting  executor  under  the  statute 
of  Henry  8,  chap.  4,  may  do  so  ;  *  and  the  same  is  true 
where  one  neglects  to  act,  and  such  neglect  may  be  shown 
like  any  other  matter  in  pais,  and  a  renunciation  need 
not  be  proved.'  In  the  case  of  an  executor  if  a  term  is  be- 
queathed to  him,  his  right  to  underlet  for  any  period  is 
not  abridged  by  a  limited  power  of  leasing,  given  him  by 
the  will.*  At  the  common  law,  if  a  female  executrix 
marries,  her  sole  demise  cannot  be  supported.  The  hus- 
band mu3t  be  the  granting  party  in  all  leases  made  in 
right  of  such  representative  capacity,*  and  it  is  immaterial 
whethershe  joins  with  him  in  the  deed  or  not.'  In  this  coun- 
try, the  rights,  powers  and  duties  of  executors  and  adminis- 
trators are  largely  regulated  by  statute ;  and  in  ascertain- 
ing whether  or  not  they  can  lease  the  lands  belonging  to 
the  estate  of  their  testator  or  intestate,  both  the  will  and 
and  the  statute  should  be  examined.  In  some  of  the 
States,  where  the  common-law  rule  prevails,  the  adminis- 
trator takes  neither  estate,  title  nor  interest  in  the  real 
estate  of  his  intestate,'  while  in  others,  by  statute,  he 


Wend.  (N.  Y.)  610:    Jackson  v. 
Given,  10  John.  (N.  Y,)  167. 

*  PoweU  on  Devises,  802 ;  Zebach 
V.  Smith,  8  Brew.  (Penn.)  72;  Co, 
Litt.  118  a. ;  Hargrave's  Notes  2. — 

'  Chew  V.  Evans,  1  Penn.  Leg. 
Graz.  168 ;  Zebach  v.  Smith,  ante ; 
Bartlett  v.  Sutherland,  24  Miss. 
895;  Bain  v.  Mattison,  64  N.  Y. 
663. 

*  Wood  V.  Sparks,  1  D.  &  B.  (N. 
C.)  889;  Roseboom  v.  Mosher, 
BJite;  Sharp  v.  Pratt,  ante;  Rob- 
ertson v.  Gtames,  10  Humph.  (Tenn.) 
367;  Jackson  v.  Burtis,  14  John. 
(N.  Y.)  391 ;  Anderson  v.  Turner, 
3  A.  K.  Mar.  (Ky.)  181 ;  Toylor  v. 
Galloway,  I  Ohio,  282;  Houck  v. 
Houck,  5  Penn.  St.  278 :  Bartlett  v. 
Sutherland,  ante;  Taylor  v. 
Adams,  2  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  584; 
Franklin  v.  Os^good,  14  John.  (N. 
Y.)  527 :  Jenkins  v.  Stauflfer,  8  Yates 
(Penn.)  168. 


•  Hayes  v.  Sturgess,  7  Taimt.  217. 

•  Arnold  v.  Bidgood,  Cro.  Jac. 
818 ;  Levick  v.  Ctoppin,  2  W.  BL 
801. 

•  Levick  v.  Coppin,  ante ;  Jenk. 
Cent.  79,  Case  56;  Chambers  on 
Leases,  85 ;  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  868- 
9 ;  Woodf  all's  L.  &  T.  51,  52. 

'  Phelps  V.  Frankerhouser,  89 
111.  401  ;  Vanier  v.  Fisher,  10 
Humph.  (Tenn.)  211 ;  Steams  v. 
Steams,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  157 ;  Com- 
paret  v.  Randall,  4  Ind.  55;  Le 
Foot  V.  Delafield,  3  Edw.  Ch.  (N. 
Y.)  82.  In  Michigan,  the  authori- 
ty to  take  possession,  &c.,  given 
by  statute,  was  repealed  in  1871. 
Campau  v.  Campau,  25  Mich.  127. 
At  the  common  law  an  executor 
or  administrator  has  nothing  what- 
ever to  do  with  anything  except 
the  personal  assets  of  his  testator 
or  intestate,  and  except  where  pro- 
vision is  otherwise  n^ade  by  stat- 


II 


240 


By  Executors. 


[§  119. 


holds  the  estate,  until  the  estate  is  finally  settled,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  creditors  and  payment  of  debts,  and  a  final 
distribution  is  made/  and  the  same  rules  apply  to  an  ex- 
ecutor, unless  the  will  expressly  places  the  real  estate  in 
his  control.*  The  statutory  possession  of  an  administrator 
or  executor  of  the  lands  of  the  deceased  is  not  a  personal 
chattel,  nor  a  subject  of  sale,  but  is  given  solely  to  enable 
him  to  lease  the  premises  during  the  period  of  administra- 
tion,  if  necessary,  and  receive  the  rents  and  profits  thereof 
during  the  settlement  of  the  estate.'  In  some  of  the  States 
power  to  lease  is  given  by  statute,  and  applies  to  all  lands 
owned  by  the  intestate,  and  the  particular  mode  of  leas- 
ing is  prescribed ;  and  in  such  cases  the  lessee  must  see  to 
it  that  all  the  statutory  provisions  in  this  respect  are  com- 
plied with,  or  the  lease  may  be  avoided  by  the  heirs,* 
while  in  others  it  is  held  that  this  power  relates  only  to 
lands  that  have  been  subdued,  and  does  not  include 
waste  lands,*  and  in  others  the  power  can  be  exercised  only 
by  order  of  a  particular  court.*  A  mere  power  to  sell  lands 
given  either  by  statute  or  wills,  does  not  include  a  power 
to  lease  them.    But  where  an  executor  or  administrator 


ute  he  has  no  other  or  greater  au- 
thority. An  executor  virtute  officii 
takes  by  force  of  the  probate  of 
the  will,  and  this  does  not  embrace 
naked  powers  respecting  real  es- 
tate, nor  special  trusts  or  powers 
coupled  with  an  interest.  As  to 
all  such  special  powers  he  is 
deemed  to  be  a  mere  trustee,  and 
as  trustee  under  such  powers  and 
trusts  he  neither  becomes  execu- 
tor, nor  as  executor  does  he  suc- 
ceed to  such  trusts.  The  King  v. 
Jenkins,  1  Dowl.  &  Ryl.  41 ;  there- 
fore he  may  proceed  to  execute  the 
trusts  without  proving  the  will. 
He  is,  to  that  extent,  trustee,  and 
derives  his  powers  from  the  will 
alone.  Judah  v.  Gibbons,  5  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  225;  Ck)nklin  v.  %erton, 
21  id.  430 ;  Roome  v.  Phillips,  29 
N.  Y.  357  ;  consequently,  a  person 
who  is  appointed  administrator 
cumtestamento  does  not  succeed 
to  the  special  powers  conferred  by 
the  will,  where  such  special  power 
is  a  special  trust  or  confidence  re- 
posed by  the  testator  in  the  person 


named  in  the  will.  He  stands  ux>- 
on  his  common-law  powers,  and 
such  as  the  statute  ^ives  in  addi- 
tion thereto.  Dunnmg  v.  Ocean 
Bank,  61  N.  Y.  497. 

»  Edwards  v.  Evans.  16  Wis.  181 ; 
Cox  V.  Ingleston,  80  Vt.  258; 
Kline  v.  Moulton,  11  Mich.  370; 
Lockwood  V.  Lockwood.  2  Root 
(Conn.)  409 ;  Crocker  v.  Smith.  83 
Me.  244 ;  Meeks  v.  Hahn,  20  Cal. 
620 ;  Lane  v.  Thompson,  43  N.  H. 
320 ;  Bowers  v.  Williams,  84  Miss. 
324 ;  Easterling  v.  Blvthe,  7  Tex, 
210 ;  Williams  v.  Rawlins,  10  Ga. 
491 ;  Logan  v.  Caldwell,  23  Mo. 
273 

-2  Williams'  Executors.  1235; 
Maberley  v.  Maberley,  6  C.  &  P. 

•Kline  v.  Moulton,  11  Mich.  870. 

*  Chighizoler  v.  Le  Baron.  21  Ala. 
406. 

^  Murphy  v.  Thomas,  41  Miss. 
429. 

•  Piatt  V.  Dawes.  10  Ind.  60. 

'  Rubottom  V.  Borrow,  22  Ind. 
202.    In  Seymour  v.  Bell,  3  Day 


m 


CHAP,  xvn.] 


Common  Law. 


241 


assumes  to  lease  lands  which  they  strictly  have  no  right  to 
lease,  they  are  bound  to  account  to  the  person  or  persons 
legally  entitled  to  the  lands  therefor,  and  if  they  occupy 
the  lands  themselves,  they  must  account  to  such  person 
for  the  rents  not  exceeding  the  profits  of  the  lands.  *  An 
administrator  with  the  will  annexed  cannot  execute  a 
power  conferred  upon  an  executor  either  to  sell  or  lease 
real  estate,*  and  this  was  held  to  be  the  case  in  New  York 
under  a  statute  giving  to  such  administrators  the  same 
powers  as  the  executor  had  ;  it  being  held  that  the  statute 
related  only  to  the  personalty,"  but  this  doctrine  was  sub- 
sequently disapproved,  and  the  statute  held  to  relate  to 
powers  in  reference  to  realty  as  well  as  to  personalty.* 
The  reason  why  an  administrator  with  the  will  annexed 
does  not  possess  the  power  relating  to  the  realty  conferred 
upon  the  executors,  is  that  the  executor  takes  as 
devisee  and  not  as  executor,  and  this  relation  to 
the  will  cannot,  in  the  absence  of  a  statute  to  that 
end,  be  conferred  upon  an  administrator.  *  In  California 
it  is  held,  under  the  statute,  that  theadminstrator  cum  tea- 
tamento  annexoj  possesses  the  same  power  as  the  executor 


(Conn.)  381,  jwwcrwas  given  the 
executors  to  sell  and  dispoKse  of  the 
lands  in  such  way  and  manner  as 
they  should  judge  most  beneficial 
to  tne  devises,  liie  court  held  that 
this  provision  amounted  to  a  power 
to  sell  only,  and  gave  them  no  au- 
thority to  lease  them.  See  also 
Floyd  V.  Herring,  64  N.  C.  409 ; 
Wamble  v.  George,  64  id.  759; 
Myer's  Appeal,  9  Phila.  (Penn.)  810. 

1  Smith  V.  King,  22  Ala.  558 ; 
GkxKhrich  v.  Thompson,  4  Day 
(Conn.),  215 :  Fisher  v.  Fisher,  1 
Bradf.  N.  Y.  Surrogate)  855  ;  Blount 
V.  Johnston,  C.  &  N.  (N.  C.)  551  ; 
Carlisle's  Appeal,  88  Penn.  St.  259. 

^  Dominick  v.  Michael,  4  Sandf . 
(N.  y.  Superior  Ct.)  374 ;  Matter  of 
Place.  7  N.  Y.  Leg  Obs.  217 ;  Gil- 
christ V.  Rea,  9  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
66.  Vardeman  v.  Ross,  86  Tex.  111. 
Unless  it  is  clear  that  the  testator 
intended  them  to  ps^  to  him  in 
case  his  executors  died  or  refused 
to  qualify.  Ingle  v.  Jones,  9  Wall. 
(U.  S.)  486.    In  Kentucky  it  is  held 


that  he  may  sell  as  directed  by  the 
will,  although  the  power  of  the  ex-* 
ecutor  is  di9ci*etionary.  GuUey  v. 
Prother,  7  Bush.  (Ky.)  167.  I^ 
New  York  the  administrator  does 
not  take  the  powers  of  the  execu< 
tor  when  a  personal  confidence  or 
trust  in  the  discretion  of  the  exec- 
utor is  plainly  expressed  or  implied. 
Brain  v.  Mattison,  54  N.  Y.  663  j 
Dunning  v.  Ocean  Bank,  61  N.  Y, 
497. 

*Conklin  v.  Egerton,  21  Wend, 
(N.Y.)420. 

*  Matter  of  Anderson,  5  N.  Y.  Leg. 
Obs.  802. 

^  Dominick  v.  Michael,  ante, 
McDonald  v.  King,  1  N.  J.  L.  481 ; 
Lucas  V.  Doe,  4  Ala.  676 ;  Harper 
V.  Smith,  7  Ga.  461 ;  Perry  v.  Gfill, 
2  Humph.  (Tenn.)218;  Montgomery 
V.  Mimken,  18  Miss.  151  ;  Owens 
V.  Cowan,  7  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  152 } 
Brown  v.  Hobson,  8  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  880;  Brush  v.  Young,  28  N.  J. 
L.  237. 


16 


J 


and  in  all 
istrators  tl 
expressly  ■ 
Mb.  Wool 
to  a  party 
tor,  with  1 
property  I 
if  so,  whel 
for  if  so,  \ 
interest  o: 
consequet 
lease  will 
ment,'    B 


'  Brown  i 

(Va.)  594. 

'  Hester  T, 
Eq.  330. 

*  Kuper  V 
St.  503. 

'  Dominici 
Fatwell  V.  Ji 

that  the  exi 
land  for  as  i 
meut  will  bt 
was  held  th 
an  adniinisti 
nexed,  migh 
But  in  Ker 
provided  th; 
sell  tlie  land 
was  held  a  ] 
admin  istrot': 
could  not 
Hobson,  3  J 
In  Andersoi 

testator's  pi 
equally  beti 
drcn,  and  t 
children  sht 
payment  of 
tut«d  the  exi 
out  the  moi 
takin;;  of  : 
that  the  tn 
to  each  chil 
suitable  age 
iBtrator  ciiin 
BupjioBition 


CHAP,  xvn.]  Leases  Voidable.  243 

executor,  with  power  to  dispose  of  the  same,  and  does 
not  pass  to  the  legatee."  '  Mr.  Platt  says  :'  ''As  a  prac- 
tical caution,  we  may  mention,  that  a  person  proposing 
to  take  from  an  executor  a  lease  of  premises  specifically 
bequeathed  to  another,  should  obtain  if  possible  the  con- 
currence of  the  legatee  ;  f(yr  after  the  executory  assent  to 
the  bequestj  the  legal  title  vests  in  the  legatee,  at  whose 
suit  an  action  of  ejectment  will  lie  against  the  purchaser."' 

Sec.  120.  Leases  by  executors  voidable  in  equity 
though  good  at  law.— Leases  made  by  executors  or  adminis- 
trators, although  good  at  law,  are  nevertheless  voidable 
in  equity,  unless  shown  to  be  a  due  administration  of  the 
assets,  and  will  be  set  aside  upon  proper  application,  for 
any  sufficient  cause ;  as,  that  a  sale  thereof  is  required  to 
pay  the  debts  of  the  estate,  or  for  the  advantage  of  the 
heirs  or  those  beneficially  interested  therein ;  *  or,  that  the 
lease  was  improvidently  granted  ;  *  or  where  it  is  an 
undue  execution  of  the  executor's  power,  or  is  fraudulent, 
or  tends  to  enable  the  executor  to  com  mit  a  fraud.  *  Thus, 
in  one  case,^  the  excutors  who  were  also  trustees  under  a 
Tvill  for  the  sale  of  premises,  entered  into  an  agreement  to 
grant  an  underlease  thereof,  but  the  defendant  sub- 
sequently refused  to  perform  the  agreement,  upon  the 
ground  that  the  will  gave  the  executors  authority  only  to 
sell,  and  did  not  authorize  them  to  lease.  Upon  a  bill 
brought  to  compel  the  defendant  to  specifically  perform 
the  agreement  and  take  the  lease,  the  court  refused,  in 
the  absence  of  proof  of  circumstances  justifying  the  leas- 
ing of  the  premises,  to  compel  the  defendant  to  perform. 
But  at  the  same  time,  the  Vice-Chancellor  (Sir  L.  Shad- 
i?vell)  intimated  that  circumstances  might  exist,  that 
would  justify  the  executors  in  departing  from  the  words 

'  Maberley  v.  Maberley,  6  C.  &  185 ;  Keating,  v.  Keating,  Lloyd. 

P.   126;    2  Williams'    Executors,  &Goo.  Ca.  temp.*Sugd.  613. 
1235 ;  Cole  on  Ejectment,  539.  *  Margrave  v.  Archbold,  1  Dow. 

« 1  Hatt  on  Leases,  370.  P.   C.    107 ;  See   Hatchett  v.    Mc- 

» Cb&niberlain  v.  Chamberlain,  1  Namara,     Slayd.    &    Goo.    temp. 

Ch.    Cas.  256 ;  Young  v.   Holmes,  Plunkett  C.  283. 
1  l^ra.  70 ;  Saunders'  Case,  5  Coke        •  Keating  v.  Keating,  ante. 
13  b.  '  Evans  v.  Jackson,  8  Sim.  217. 

*  Drohan  v.  Drohan,  1  Ball  &  B. 


244  By  Executors.  [§  120. 

of  the  trust,  and  that,  when  such  a  condition  was  shown 
to  exist,  and  the  cestui  que  trusts  were  also  before  the 
court,  a  contract  of  that  chai-acter  might  be  enforced 
against  the  other  party  thereto.  An  executor  or  admin- 
istrator, and  even  an  administrator  de  bonis  noriy  may 
be  compelled  to  excute  an  under-lease  or  a  renewal  there- 
of, under  a  contract  entered  into  by  them,  which  they  had 
authority  to  make.  Thus,  in  one  case,  i  an  administratiix 
underlet  a  portion  of  her  intestate's  leasehold  property, 
and  covenanted  that  '*she,  her  executors,  administrators 
and  assigns,"  would  renew  the  lease,  as  she  or  they  should 
obtain  a  renewal  from  the  superior  landlord.  After  her 
death,  and  the  appointment  of  an  administrator  de  bonis 
non  of  the  intestate,  it  was  held  that  the  lessee  might  en- 
force a  specific  performance  against  such  administrator, 
upon  the  ground  that  the  acts  of  the  administratrix  were 
both  a  legal  and  equitable  disappropriation  from  the  assets 
of  the  intestate,  and  that  the  administrator  de  bonis  who 
had  entered  .into  the  receipt  of  the  rents  reserved  by  the 
leasCj  had  no  right  to  do  so,  and  yet  claim  exemption  from 
liabiUty  upon  tiie  coventants,  and  for  the  acts  of  the  ad- 
ministratrix, and  that  the  land,  in  his  hands,  was  bound 
by  her  covenants,  if  it  was  so  bound  while  in  hers. 

Sec.  121.  Whdnexeoutorisaninfluit.— Where  the  execu- 
tor is  an  infant,  administrator  is  usually  granted  until  the 
infant  becomes  of  age,  and  a  lease  made  by  the  adminis- 
trator for  a  term  exceeding  the  duration  of  infancy,  will 
be  good  until  the  infant  executor  becomes  of  age,"  and 
it  has  been  suggested  that  it  would  be  good  until  he 
enters  to  defeat  it.' 

1  Hatchett  v.  McNamara,  ante.         718 ;  Sir  Mojle  Finches  Case,  6  id. 
«  Finch's  Case,  6  Coke.  68  a.  67  b. 

»  Prince's  Case,  5  Coke,  Cro.  Eliz. 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


CHAPTER  XVIll. 

BY  UOETOAOOB  AJfD  UOBTOAOEB. 

Sec.  133.  Relation  of  the  mortgagor  and  mortgagee  to  each  other. 

Sec.  138.  Bj  mortgagor. 

Sec.  134.  When  tenant  not  entitled  to  crops. 

Sec.  135.  Mortgagor  and  mortgagee  should  join  in  lease. 

Sec.  126.  Lease  by  mortgagee. 

Sec.  137.  Effect  of  a  covenant  to  premit  the  mortgagor  to  take  rents, 

Ac. 

SeC-  138.  Liabilities  of  a  mor^;agee  in  poasesBion. 

Sec.  123.  Belation  of  the  mortgagor  and  mortgagee  to 
each  otier.— There  is  much  confusion  in  the  cases  as  to 
the  precise  relation  of  a  mortgagor  and  mortgagee  to  the 
estate,  but  this  confusion  results  mainly  from  a  difference 
in  the  form  of  the  mortgages  under  which  the  decisions 
have  arisen,  and,  in  some  instances,  from  the  peculiar 
provisions  of  statutes  relating  to  the  matter.  The  mortga- 
gor has  sometimes  been  treated  as  a  tenant  at  will  to  the 
mortgagee,  or  as  a  mere  tenant  at  sufferance,  but,  until 
condition  broken  and  foreclosure,  a  mortgagor  is  treated, 
both  at  law  and  in  equity,  as  the  legal  owner  of  the  estate, 
the  mortgage  bemg  only  a  security,  and  the  mortgagee 
having  only  a  lien  upon  the  land,  as  a  security  for  his 
debt.' 

"Elfe  V.  Cole,  36  Oa.  197;  Cas-     v.  SaviU,  8  loWa  87.     But  in  some 

3  is  held 

Thus  in 
i.  it  was 
a  of  the 

benefits 
1  estate 


246 


MOBTOAGOE  AND  MORTGAOEE. 


[§  122. 


But  in  some  of  the  States  it  is  held  that  a  mortgage  in 
fee,  passes  both  the  legal  and  equitable  estate,  defeasible  by 
the  performance  of  the  condition  according  to  its  legal 
effect.'  The  preponderance  of  authority,  however,  is  ia 
favor  of  the  doctrine  that  the  title  remains  in  the  mortga- 
gor, at  least  until  after  condition  broken  (and  in  many  of 
the  States,  until  after  foreclosure),'  and  in  England,  while 
the  mortgagor  is  in  possession,  or  in  receipt  of  the  rents 
and  profits,  he  is  treated  as  a  freeholder,  and  as  such,  is 
entitled    to  vote  in  the  election  of  members  of  parlia- 


operate  only  as  a  mere  security  for 
the  debt,  see  also  to  same  effect, 
Clark  V.  Eaybum,  1  Kan.  381.  In 
many  of  the  States,  as  between  the 
mortpagor  and  mortgagee,  it  ia 
lielJ  that  the  title  passea,  but  not 
OS  to  third  peraona.  Terry  V.  Ho- 
sell.  n  Ark.  178. 

I  Blaney  v.  Bearce,  2  Me.  182 ; 
Briggs  V.  Fish,  2  D.  Chip,  (Vt.j 
101);  Carter  v.  Taylor,  2  Head 
(Tenn.)  30;  Erskine  v.  Townaend, 
SMasa.  495. 

'  Whitmoro  v.  Shiverick,  3  Ner. 
288  :  Jackson  v.  Lodge,  86  Cal.  28 ; 
McMillan  v.  Richarda,  9  Cal.  8fl5 ; 
Goodenow  v.  Ewer,  16  Cal.  461 ; 
Boggs  V.  Hargrave,  Id.  559 ;  Fog- 
artv  V.  Sawyer,  17  Cal.  586  :  Button 
V.  Warshauer.  21  Cal.  009;  Blud- 
worth  V.  Lake,  38  Cal.  265  :  Davis 
V.  Anderson,  1  Ga.  176  ;  Rayland  v. 
Justices,  &c.,  10  Ga.  65  ;  Elfe  v. 
Cole,  26  Ga.  197  ;  United  States  v. 
Athens  Armory,  35  Ga.  344  ;  Seals 
V.  Cashier,  2  Ga.  Dec.  76 ;  Hall  v. 
8avm,8Iowa37;  Chick  v.  WiUets, 
2  Kan.  384 ;  Caruthers  v.  Humph- 
rey, 12  Mich.  270 ;  Bnan  v.  Butts, 
37'Barb.  (N.  Y.)503 ;  iWyerv.  Cra- 
mer. 1  McCord  (S.  C.)  Ch.  395. 

In  Alabama,  a  mortgagee  is  re< 
Kardedas  tx>eseflsiiig  a  dural  nature, 
bearing  one  character  in  a  court  of 
law  and  another  in  a  court  of  equi- 

remfUn: 
conditk 


Rosell.  32  Ark.  478 ;  Collins  v.  Tor- 

ry,  7  John.  (N.  Y.)  278 ;  Blanchanl 
V.  Brooks,  12  Pick.  (Mas6.)47.  In 
Kansas,  Life  Association  v.  Book, 
20  Kan.  IB;  Michigan,  Wagarv. 
Stone,  36  Mich.  364 ;  Nebraaka,  Bar- 
ley v.  Estes,  8  Neb.  386 ;  California, 
Jackson  v.  Lodge,  ante ;  Georgia, 
Eayland  V.  Justices,  10Ga.65;Ne- 
vada.  Whitman  v.  Shiverick,  3 
Nev.  SS8;  and  indeed  inmo^  erf  the 
mortgage  is  held  to  be  a 
irity,  resting  no  estate  in 
the  mortgagee  until  after  forecla«- 
ure,  Myers  v.  White,  1  Rawle 
(Penn.)  838 :  State  v.  Laval,  4  Mc- 
Cord (S.  C.)336:  Cheever  v.  B.  E. 
Co. ,  89  Vt.  868 ;  while  in  Rhode  Isl- 
and, Connecticut.  New  Eamp- 
sliire,  Minnesota,  Indiana,  North 
Carolina.  I^Iississippi,  Missouri,  and 
Masaachusetta,  tlie  common-law 
rule  with  some  limitations  prevails. 
It  is  a  mere  incident  of  the  debt, 
and  falls  witli  it.  Morris  v.  Bacon, 
183  Mass.  08  ;  Benton  v.  Bailey,  SO 
Vt.  137. 

In  New  York,  by  statute,  an  act- 
ion of  ejectment  by  a  mortgagee  ia 
abolished,  and.  in  the  absence  of 
any  contract  for  possession,  the 
mortgagor  is  entitled  thereto,  and  to 
the  rents  and  profits  of  the  estate, 
unless,  upon  a  proper  Hfaowing  as 
to  the   inadequacy  of  the  security. 


CHAP,  xvia.] 


By  Mortgagor. 


247 


ment,'  and  is  entitled  to  retain  possession  until  the  mort- 
gagee enters  or  brings  ejectment,'  and  is  not  liable  to  the 
mortgagee  for  the  rents,  or  profits  of  the  premises.'  The 
right  of  the  mortgagor  to  retain  possession  of  the  prem- 
ises, and,  consequently  his  right  to  lease  the  same  after 
mortgage,  is  generally  upheld,  but  must  depend  largely 
upon  the  language  of  the  mortgage,  and  upon  the  statutes 
relating  thereto,  in  the  several  States.  But,  without 
stopping  to  discuss  the  relation  of  the  parties  to  the  estate, 
further,  it  may  be  said  that  the  tenant  can  acquire  no 
greater  rights  than  the  mortgagor  himself  had,  but  may 
defend  his  title  under  the  lease  to  the  same  extent  that 
the  mortgagor  could,  and  may  oven  redeem  the  estate,  to 
protect  his  term.' 

Sec.  123.  By  mortgagor.— A  lease  made  for  a  term  of 
years,  of  premises  which  are  subsequently  mortgaged  by 
the  lessor,  is  valid  and  binding  against  the  mortgagee  and 
all  persons  claiming  under  him,'  but  at  the  common  law 
the  mortgagee  may,'  after  condition  broken  and  a  right 


'  Will.  4,  c.  45,  §  23. 

'Rei  V.  EklingUin.  1  East.  393; 
Keech  T.  Hall.  I  Doug.  21 ;  Bree  v. 
Holbech,  3  id.  655;  Reading  of 
Judge  iSfowbridge,  (*  Mass.  551  ; 
Clark  V.  Bayburn.  1  Kan.  281. 

» R«nard  v.  Brown,  7  Neb.  449. 
The  mortgagor's  right  to  leaae  and 
take  the  rents,  cuntinues  until  it  ia 
divetrtcd  hy  some  positive  interfer- 
ence of  the  mortgagee.  Dunn  v. 
Tillerv,  79  N.  C.  497 ;  Chadixinru  t. 
Henderson,  53  Tenn.  460;  Gibson 
V.  Farley,  16  Masa.  280. 

'  Rogers  V.  Moore,  11  Conn.  -WS. 
As  to  tenant's  right  to  red(?em,  see 
ATeri]l  V.  Taylor,  8  N.  Y.  44. 

'  Rogers  v.  Humphreva,  4Ad.  & 
El.  290;  Moss  \.  Gallimorp,  ante; 
Burden  v.  Thayer,  3  Met.  (Mass. )  79; 


.  457 


the  tenant,  entitle  himself  to  the 
rent  and  all  the  remedies  for  tlie 
collection  thereof  that  were  pos- 
sessed by  the  mortgagor.  Mooro 
V.  Titraan,  44  Dl.  387 ;  Baldwin  v. 
Walker,  21  Conn.  198  ;  Russell  v. 
Allen,  2  AUen  (Masa.)  42  ;  Babcock 
V.  Kennedy,  1  Vt.  457  ;  and  it  has 
been  held  in  Massachusetts,  that 
this  applies  as  well  to  rent  already 
accrued  as  to  tliat  which  accrues 
after  the  mortgage,  Mirick  v.  Hop- 
pin,  116  Mass.  5K2  ;  and  in  Indiana 
It  has  been  held  that,  where  the 
tenant  has  piven  a  note  for  ad- 
vance rent,  it  may  be  defeated  by 
notice  from  the  mortgagee,  but  we 
apprehend  that  this  w-ill  depend 
entirely  upon  the  ijuestion  whether 
the  note,  at  the  time  when  notice 
was  given,  waa  in  the  hands  of  a 
bona  fide  holder  for  value.  In  the 
former  case,  the  note  cannot  bo 
said  to  operate  aa  a  payment 
of  the  rent,  while  in  the  lat- 
ter case,  it  does,  and,  as  the 
tenant  may  pay  his  rent  in  ad- 
""*  ' cannot 


218 


Mortgagor  and  Mortgagee. 


[§  123. 


of  entry  attaches  in  his  favor,  so  that  he  can  maintain 


defeat    the    note    in  the    hands 
of     an    innocent    holder,    either 
by  notice,  or  in  any  manner,  pro- 
vided the  note  was  g^iven,  or  the 
payment  made,  in  good  faith  and 
without  reference  to  defeating  the 
claim  of  the  mortgagee.    The  lead- 
ing case  upon  this  point  that  is  fol- 
lowed 'in  this  country^  is  Keech  v. 
Hall,   1   Doug.  279,  m  which  the 
doctrine  stated  in  the   text  was 
held,  except  as  to  the  clause  relat- 
ing to  the  right  of  the  second  mort- 
gagee, which  is  sustained  by  the 
case  first  cited.    In  that  case,  an 
action  of  ejectment  was  brought 
by  a  mortgagee  against  a  person 
who  went  mto  possession  under  a 
lease  after  the  mortgage  was  made. 
The  lease  was  at  ract-rent.    The 
mortgagee  had  no  notice  of  the 
lease,  nor  the  lessee  of  the  mort- 
gage.    The  defendant  offered  to 
attorn  to  the  mortgagee  before  suit 
brought.    There  was  no  notice  to 
quit.    It  was  held  that  the  plaintiff 
was    entitled    to    recover.    Lord 
Mansfield  saying  :  "  The  question 
for  the  court  to  oecide  is,  whether 
by  the  agreement  understood  be- 
tween mortgagors  and  mortgagees, 
which  is  that  the  latter  shall  receive 
interest  and  the  former  keep  pos- 
session, the  mortgagee  has  given 
the  mortgagor  implied  authority 
to  let  from  year  to  year  at  a  rack- 
rent  ;  or  whether  he  may  not  treat 
the  defendant  as  a  trespasser,  dis- 
seizor or  wrong-doer.  *  *  Where 
the  lease  is  not  a  beneficial  lease, 
it  is  for  the  interest  of  the  mortga- 
gee to  continue  the  tenant ;  and 
where  it  is,  the  tenant  may  put 
himself  in  the  place  of  the  mort- 
gagor, and  either  redeem  himself 
or  get  a  friend  to  do  it.    The  idea 
that  the    question  may  be  more 
proper  for  a  court  of  equity  goes 
upon  a  mistake.     It  emphatically 
bel6ng8  to  a  court  of  law,  in  oppo- 
sition to  a  court  of  equity ;  for  a 
lessee  at  a  rack-rent  is  a  purchaser 
for  a  valuable  consideration,  and 
in  every  case,  between  purchasers 
for    a    valuable    consideration,  a 
court  of  equity  must  follow,  not 
lead,  the  law.     On  full  consider- 
ation we  are  all  clearly  of  opinion, 
that  there  is  no  inference  of  fraud 
or  consent  against  the  mortgagee, 
to  prevent  him  from  corsi^e-ing 


the  lessee  as  a  wrong-doer.    It  is 
rightly  admitted  that  if  the  mort- 
gagee had  encouraged  the  tenant 
to  lay  out  money,  he  could  not 
maintain  this  action ;  but  here  the 
question  turns  upon  the  agreement 
betv^^een  the  mortgagor  and  mort- 
gagee :  when  the  mortgagor  is  left 
m  possession,  the  true  inference  to 
be  drawn  is  an  agreement  that  he 
phall  possess  the  premises  at  triU 
in  the  strictest  sense,  and  therefore 
no  notice  is  ever  given  him  to  quit, 
and  he  is  not  even  entitled  to  reap 
the  crop,  as  other  tenants  at  will 
are,  because  all  is  liable  to  the  debt ; 
on  payment  of  which  the  mortga- 
gee s  title  ceases.    The  mortgagor 
Has  no  power,  express  or  imphed, 
to  let  leases  not  subject  to  every 
circumstance  of  tlie  mortgage.    If, 
by  implication,  the  mortgagor  had 
such  a  power,  it  must  go  to  a  great 
extent  to  leases  where  a  fine  is  taken 
on  a  renewal  for  lives.    The  tenant 
stands  exactly  in  the  situation  of 
the  mortgagor.    Tlie  possession  of 
the  mortgagor  cannot  be  considered 
as  holding  out  a  false  appearance. 
It  does  not  induce  a  belief  that 
there  is  no  mortgage ;  for  it  is  the 
nature  of  the  transaction  that  the 
mortgagor  shall  continue  in   pos- 
session.   Whoever  wants  to  be  se- 
cure, when  betakes  a  lease,  should 
inquire  after  and  examine  tiie  title- 
deeds.    In    practice,    indeed   (es- 
pecially in  the  case  of  great  es- 
tates), that  is  not  often  done,  be- 
cause the  tenant  rehes  on  the  hon- 
or of  his  landlord ;  but,  whenever 
one  or  two  innocent  persons  must 
be  a  loser,  the  rule  is,  qui  prior  est 
tempore  potior  est  jure.    If  one 
must  suffer  it  is  he  who  has  not 
used  due  diligence  in  looking  into 
the  title.    It  was  said  at  the  bar, 
that  if  the  plaintiff,  in  a  case  like 
this,  can  recover,  he  will  also  be 
entitled  to  the  mesne  profits  from 
the  tenant,  in  an  action  of  trespass, 
which  would  be  a  manifest  hard- 
ship and  injustice,  as  the  tenant 
would  then  pay  the  rent  twice.    I 
give  no  opimon  on  that  point ;  but 
there  may  be  a  distinction,  for  the 
mortgagor  may  be  considered  as 
receiving  the  rents  in  order  to  pay 
the  interest,  by  an  implied  author- 
ity from  the  mortgagee,  till  he  de- 
termines his  will.    As  to  the  iessee^s 


wf 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


By  Mortgagor. 


249 


ejectment  against  the  mortgagor,   intercept  the  rents 


right  to  reap  the  crop  which  he 
may  have  sown  preTious  to  the  de- 
termination of  the  will  of  the 
iQortgagee,  that  point  does  not 
arise,  in  this  case,  the  ejectment 
being  for  a  warehouse ;  but  how- 
ever that  may  be,  it  could  be  no 
bar  to  the  mortgagee's  recovering 
in  ejectment,  ft  would  only  give 
the  lessee  a  right  of  ingress  and 
e^ess  to  take  the  crop ;  as  to 
i^^hich,  with  regard  to  tenants  at 
"will,  the  text  of  Littleton  is  clear. 
We  are  all  clearly  of  opinion  that 
the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  judg- 
ment. This  doctrine  has  been  held 
in  the  numerous  cases  since  Thun- 
der V.  Belcher,  ante ;  Smarth  v. 
W^illiams,  1  Salk.  245;  Doe  v. 
Giles,  5  Bing.  421 ;  Lull  v.  Mat- 
thews, 19  Vt.  322 ;  Morey  v.  Mc- 
Guire,  4  id.  327  ;  Doe  v.  Maisley,  8 
B.  &  C:  767 ;  Doe  v.  Giles,  6  Bing. 
421.  In  Latimer  v.  Moore,  4  Mc- 
I^ean  (TJ.  8.)  110,  it  was  held  that 
a  person  in  possession  must  ac- 
count to  the  mortgagee  for  the 
rents  and  profits,  but  this  is  not 
the  rule  held  by  the  com-ts,  nor  in- 
deed would  it  be  an  equitable  or 
just  rule,  at  least  except  as  to  rents 
accruing  subsequent  to  a  notice  to 
that  end  from  the  mortgagee.  The 
rule  is,  that,  so  long  as  the  mort- 
gagor remains  in  possession,  or  un- 
til actual  entry  by  the  mortgagee, 
the  mortgagor  may  receive  the 
rents  and  profits  to  his  own  use, 
and  is  not  liable  to  account  there- 
for to  the  mortgagee.  Mayo  v. 
Fletcher,  14  Pick.  (Mass.)  525; 
Crosby  v.  Hanlow,  21  Me.  499.  At 
least,  unless  the  security  is  insuffi- 
cient, and  then  only  by  an  order  of 
a  court  of  equity,  and  extends  only 
to  the  deficiency,  Astor  v.  Turner, 
11  Paige  Ch.  (K  Y.)  486,  nor  wUl  a 
receiver  of  the  rents  be  appointed 
until  the  mortgage  debt  c^comes 
due.  Bank  of  Ogdensburgh  v. 
Arnold,  5  id.  38.  But,  when  the 
nwrtgcLgee  is  entitled  to  possession, 
he  may  intercept  the  rents  by  no- 
tice to  the  tenant,  and  from  that 
time  the  tenant  must  pay  them  to 
him.  Babcock  v.  Kennedy  1  Vt. 
457;  Mansory  v.  U.  S.  Bank,  4 
Ala.  786 ;  Branch  Bank  v.  Fry,  23 
Ala.  730 ;  Clarke  v.  Abbott,  1  Md. 
Ch.  474.  And  the  mortgagee  is 
then  in    possession,  and  may  be 


compelled  to  account  to  the  mort- 
gogor  for  the  rents  and  profits  so 
received  by  him  either  by  way  of 
reduction  of  the  mortgage  debt  in. 

Proceedings  to  foreclose,  or  by  a 
ill  to  redeem  brought  by  the 
mortgagor.  Onderdonk  v.  Gray, 
19  N.  J.  Eq.  65  ;  Robinson  y.  Rob- 
inson, 1  N.  H.  161 ;  Kellogg  v. 
Rockwell,  19  Conn.  446 ;  Harrison 
V.  Wyse,  24  Conn.  1 ;  Reitanbaugh 
V.  Ludwick.  31  Penn.  St.  131; 
Thorp  V.  Feltz,  6  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  6. 
But  this  liability  continues  only  so 
long  as  the  right  of  redemption  ex- 
ists. *'A  tenant  under  a  lease 
madeprior  to  the  mortgage,"  says 
Mr.  lOiATT  in  his  excellent  work 
upon  leases,  vol.  I,  p.  168,  "cannot 
be  turned  out  of  possession  by  the 
mortgagee  otherwise  than  by  vir- 
tue of  a  proviso  for  reentry  on 
non-payment  of  rent,  or  non-per- 
formance of  covenants,  the  mort- 
gagee,  as  assignee  of  the  reversion^ 
avinj^  no  other  rights  than  those 
exercisable  by  the  mortgagor. 
Moss  V.  Gallimore,  1  Doug.  279 ; 
Birch  V.  Wright,  1  T.  R.  378 ;  Rog- 
ers V.  Humphreys,  4  Ad.  &  El.  299. 
But  to  secure  himself  the  benefits 
of  the  rents  and  covenants,  the 
mortgagee  should  give  the  tenant 
notice  of  the  mortgage,  and  require 
payment  of  the  rent,  and  he  adds, 
*'  and  he  is  entitied  a^  toeU  to  rent 
which  has  fallen  due  since  the  mart' 
gage  and  remains  unpaid  to  the 
mortgagor,  as  to  rent  accruing  due 
after  the  notice,"  and  he  cites  the 
cases  last  given  and  4  Anne,  Chap. 
16,  Sec.  10 ;  Pope  v.  Biggs,  9  B.  & 
C.  246 ;  ex  parte  Hankey  v.  Mc- 
Brindley,  1  M.  &  M.  24 ;  but  until, 
notice  of  payment  to  mortgagor  is  a 
full  defence."  Pope  v.  Brig^, 
ante.  To  the  cases  cited  by  hun 
may  be  added,  Johnson  v.  Jones, 
9  Ad.  &  El.  809 ;  Waddilove  v. 
Bamett,  2  Bing.,  N.  C.  538, 
and  where  the  mortgage  was 
made  before  the  lease,  the  mort- 
gagee cannot  claim  the  arrears, 
Alchome  v.  Gonnue,  2  Bing.  54 ; 
and  in  the  case  lai^  named,  the 
lessee  having  paid  such  arrears  to 
the  mortgagee,  prevented  his  dis- 
training ms  goods,  which  he  other- 
wise threatened  to  do,  the  lessor  dis- 
trained, and  in  replevin  brought 
by  the  lessor  to  recover  the  goods 


sso 

accrui] 


distresB 
m«nt  of 
not  aff< 
ntestaf 
11  Geo. 
miidebt 
inaidttf 
ertoeoa 
out  a  for 
vtea  liai 
lease  KO 
and  the 


themoi' 

madeb^ 
is  predi 
ttortgai 
nient  a 

kaeean 

If  he  rat 

tenant, 
when  hi 
contrar; 
remarlci 
BioRB,) 
heUthi 
to  the  t 
the  tei 
Bufceequ 

Say  the 
lereof 

hythei 

But  till 
been   t 


hfn.th 
no  oth 
remedy 
iwsigne' 
asthek 
tenant  1 
if  the  i 
vutrlgai 
treat  thi 
may  b( 
doetB.ai 
Bvt  he 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


By  Mortgagor. 


251 


mortgage,  by  giving  notice  to  the  tenant  of  his  mortgage 


events,  the  mortgagee  may  be 
entitled  to  sue  the  tenant  for  use 
and  occupation.  Higginbotham 
v.  Barton,  ante ;  Rawson  v.  Eick,  7 
Ad.  &  £1.  451.  And  where  the 
attorney  of  a  mortgagee,  who  was 
also  attorney  of  the  mortgagor,  ap- 
plied to  the  tenant  in  possession 
under  the  mortgagor  for  payment 
of  his  rent,  in  order  to  satisfy  the 
interest  on  the  mortgage,  with  a 
threat  of  distress  in  case  of  non-pay- 
ment, it  was  held  that  the  mortga- 
g^ee  could  not  maintain  an  eject- 
ment against  the  tenant  as  a 
trespasser,  laying  the  demise  at 
a  period  anterior  to  the  ap- 
plication. Whitaker  v.  Hales,  7 
Uing.  822 ;  though  the  mere  receipt 
by  the  mortgagee  from  the  mort- 
f^gor  of  interest  on  the  mort- 
gage will  not  preclude  the  mort- 
gagee from  ejecting  the  mort- 
li^agor's  tenant,  declaring  on  a  de- 
mise prior  to  the  receipt.  Rogers 
V.  Cadwallader,  2  B.  &  Ad.  478. 
In  the  case  last  cited,  IjITTLEDale, 
J.,  hinted  a  doubt  as  to  the  pro- 
priety of  the  judgment  in  Doe  aem. 
\Vhitaker  v.  Hales,  ante ;  but 
Lord  De^jthan  subsequently  de- 
clared, Evans  v.  EUiot,  9  Ad.  & 
"EL  842, 855,  that,  notwithstanding 
that  doubt,  the  case  appeared  to 
him  to  be  well  decided.  If,  after 
notice  and  demand,  the  tenant  con- 
tinue in  possession,  a  jury  may 
fairly  infer  a  new  tenancy  from 
year  to  year  between  liim  and  the 
mortgagee,  at  the  old  rent.  Brown 
V.  Storey,  1  M.  &  G.  117 ;  Hughes 
V.  Bucknoll,  8  C.  &  P.  566.  But 
if  the  judge,  not  being  required  at 
the  trial  to  leave  it  to  the  jury  to 
say  whether  the  tenant  assented  to 
the  new  tenancy,  omit  to  do  so,  the 
omission  cannot  support  a  motion 
for  a  new  trial  on  the  ground  of 
misdirection.  Brown  v.  Storey,  1 
H.  &  G.  1 1 7.  After  such  notice  and 
demand,  the  tenant  is  justified  in 
paying  to  the  mortgagee  as  well 
such  rent  as  may  have  fallen  due 
since  the  mortgage,  and  remain 
unpaid  to  the  mortgagor,  as  that 
which  may  thereafter  become  due. 
This  was  decided  in  the  case  of 
Pope  V.  Briggs,  sup.  p.  165,  the 
court  considering  the  mortgagee's 
demand  to  be  equivalent  to  an 
eviction  of  the  tenant  by  title  para- 


motmt,  which,  of  course,  would 
be  an  answer  to  the  mortgagor's 
claim.  So,  in  Higginbotham  v. 
Barton,  11  Ad.  &  El.  807,  Lord 
Denman  said  that  the  mortgagee 
was  entitled  to  the  profits  of  the 
land,  and  tliat  the  tenant  was  right 
in  paying  him  those  profits,  wheth- 
er strictly  called  rent  or  not.  That, 
as  he  might  eject  the  lessee,  and 
afterwards  let  to  him,  it  seemed 
absurd  to  require  him  to  go  through 
the  form  of  an  ejectment  in  order 
to  put  the  lessee  into  the  very  po- 
sition in  which  he  would  stand  by 
paying  his  rent  to  the  mortgagee, 
bee  also  similar  remarks  made  by 
Parke,  J.,  in  Pope  v.  Biggs,  9  B. 
&  C.  .250-1.  Though  the  tenant 
cannot  dispute  his  landlord's  (the 
mortgagor  s)  title  to  demise,  he 
may  show  that  such  title  was  de- 
feasible, and  that  it  has  been  de- 
feated. Pope  V.  Biggs,  ante.  In 
the  case  of  Johnson  v.  Jones, 8  Ad. 
&  El.  S'i9,  the  plaintiff  in  rej  levin, 
to  an  avowry  for  rent  due  in  re- 
spect of  premises  held  by  the  plaint- 
iff as  tenant  to  the  "  defendant, 
pleading,  that,  before  the  de- 
fendant had  anything  in  the  prem- 
ises, one  Ann  Griflith,  being  seized 
in  fee,  mortgaged  them  in  fee  to 
J.  Clement ;  that  default  was 
made  in  payment ;  that  the  equity 
of  redemption  descended  to  David 
Griflith,  who  leased  them  to  the 
defendant  for  twenty-one  years, 
who  made  the  demise  to  the  plaint- 
iff mentioned  in  the  avowry  ;  that 
after  the  rent  became  due  from  the 
plaintiff  as  tenant  to  the  defendant, 
the  heir  of  the  mortgagee,  to  whom 
the  premises  had  descended,  de- 
manded payment  thereof  from  the 
plaintiff  and  threatened,  in  case  of 
non-payment,  to  put  the  law  in 
force,  wherefore  the  plaintiff  did 
then  necessarily  and  unavoidably 
pay  the  said  mortgagee  the  said 
sum  of  14/.  so  in  arrear,  '*and  so 
the  plaintiff  says  that  no  part  of 
the  said  sum  of  14/.  of  the  said 
rent  was,  or  is,  in  arrear,  as  in 
avowry,"  &c.  This  plea  was  de- 
murred to,  on  the  ground  that  it 
attempted  to  deny  the  title  of  the 
defendant ;  that  it  showed  nopower 
in  the  mortgagee  to  compel  pay- 
ment, and  that  it  amountea  to 
iHena  in  arrere.    But  it  was  held 


2253 


MORTGAGOB  AJSTD  MOBTGAGEE. 


[§  123. 


and  claim  to  the  rents  under  it ;  and  in  a  late  case  in 
Alabama,  it  was  held  that  this  right  might  be  exercised 
by  the  second  mortgagee  unless  they  have  been  previously 
intercepted  by  the   first.     But  the  mortgagor  is  now 


that  the  plea  was  not  one  of  nil 
habuitf  nor  of  eviction,  but  of  pay- 
ment ;  that  the  plaintiff  did  not 
deny  his  holding  as  tenant  to  the 
defendant;  but  showed  that  the 
lease  was  made  subject  to  a  prior 
charee,  namely,  the  mortgage, 
whion  he  was  compelled  to  pay ; 
and  that  the  facts  stated  in  the  plea 
showed  an  authority  in  law  justify- 
ing payment  to  a  third  party.  And 
see  Sapsford  v.  Flecher,  4  T.  R. 
511;  Taylor  v.  Zamira,  6  Taunt. 
524.  But  where  the  lease  waa  made 
before  the  mortgage,  it  is  held  in 
Massachusetts  that  the  mortgagee, 
when  his  right  to  the  possession  of 
the  premises  attaches,  may,  by  no- 
tice to  the  tenant,  intercept  and 
claim  all  the  rents  since  the  mort- 
gage remained  unpaid,  and  that 
parol  evidence  is  not  admissible  to 
show  that  it  was  agreed  that  the 
mortgagor  should  have  them. 
Russell  V.  Allen  (Mass,)  42.  And 
the  same  rule  prevails  in  several 
States.  Babcock  v.  Kennedy,  1 
Vt.  457 ;  Mansory  v.  U.  S.  Bank,  4 
Ala.  735 ;  Clark  v.  Abbott,  1  Md. 
Ch.  474.  In  Crosby  v.  Hanlow,  21 
Me.  499,  where  an  agent  had  been 
appointed  by  the  mortgagor  to 
collect  and  receive  the  rente,  it  was 
held  that  the  mortgagee,  by  no- 
tice to  the  agent,  could  thus  inter- 
cept all  the  rents  accruing  av^se- 
quent  to  the  notice.  In  Vermont, 
m  Walker  v.  King,  44  Vt.  601,  it 
was  held  that  a  mortgagee  who  has 
never  taken  possession  under  his 
mortgage,  but  has  permitted  the 
assignee  of  the  mortgagor  to  remain 
in  possession,  has  no  greater  claim 
against  him  for  rente  and  profite, 
than  he  would  have  against  the 
mortgagor,  and  it  is  well  settled 
that  he  has  no  claim  upon  the  mort- 
gagor therefor,  either  at  law  or  in 
equity.  Ex  parte  Wilson,  2  V.  & 
B.  252 ;  HiU  v.  Bexley,  20  Beav. 
127 ;  Wahnsley  v.  Milen,  7  C.  B. 
N.  S.  115;  Moss  v.  Gallimore,  1 
Doug.  288 ;  Trent  v.  Hunt,  9  Exchq. 
14  ;  Boly  v.  Arbuthnot,  28  L.  J.  Ch. 
547 ;  Cole  on  Ejectment,  88,  473. 
In  Georgia,  the  mortgagor  is  enti- 


tled to  all  the  rente  and  profite  of  tha 
land  until  he  is  sold  out  and  dispos- 
sessed by  foreclosure  proceedings. 
Vason  V.  Ball,  56  Ga.  268.  In  Ken- 
tucky. imlesB  the  rente  and  profite 
are  specially  pledged,  the  same  rule 
prevails  and  the  mortgagee  cannot 
claim  them  as  a  legsu  incident  of 
the  estete.  But  a  court  of  equity 
may  J  after  the  debt  becomes  due^  it 
the  property  is  inadequate  to  secure 
the  debt,  in  an  action  to  foreclose 
the  mortgage,  appoint  a  receiver  of 
the  rente,  ^ut  if  there  is  no  defic- 
iency, they  go  to  the  mortgagor. 
Douglass  V.  Cline,  12  Bush.  (Ky.) 
608.  In  Mississippi,  the  mortgagor 
retains  the  legal  title  and  rigfit  of 
possession  until  condition  broken, 
and  the  mortgagee  cannot  interfere 
therewith,  nor  can  the  mortgagee 
take  the  rente  and  profite  unless  so 
agreed.  Myers  v.  £26tell,  48  Miss. 
873 ;  Black  v.  Payne,  52  Miss.  271. 
In  North  Carolina,  the  mortgagor 
is  treated  as  havii^  an  equitable 
freehold.  Stete  v.  &gland,  75  N. 
C.  12.  In  Tennessee,  the  mort- 
gagee to  the  extent  of  the  mortga^ 
debt  is  pro  tanto  a  sale,  giving  him 
all  the  righte  of  a  bona  fide  purchas- 
er. 2  Tenn.  Ch.  581.  So  m  Iowa, 
Hewitt  V.  Rankin,  41  Iowa,  35.  In 
Vermont,  after  condition  broken, 
he  may  enter  and  take  possession 
without  previous  notice,  if  he  can 
do  so  peacefully.  Fuller  v.  Eddy, 
49  Vt.  11.  So  in  Maine,  he  may  en- 
ter and  harvest  the  crops  unless  the 
mortgagor  is  occupving  by  agree- 
ment, as  tenant.  Gilman  v.  Wills, 
66  Me.  271.  In  Pennsylvania,  the 
mortgagee  is  treated  as  having  the 
title  and  right  of  possession  to  hold 
until  pa3rment,  and  may  enter  and 
hold  tne  lands  and  receive  the  rente 
and  profite  until  the  mortgage-debt 
is  paid.  Tryon  v .  Musson,  77  Penn. 
St.  250.  These  conflicting  doc- 
trines are  all  of  them,  however, 
applicable  only  to  ordinair  mort- 
gages, and  the  parties  mav,  by  spec- 
ial provision,  entirely  change  the 
respective  righte  of  the  parties  un- 
der the  mortgage. 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


By  Mortgagor. 


253 


generally  treated  as  retaining  both  the  legal  and  the  equit- 
able title,  and  the  mortgagee  as  holding  only  under  his 
mortgage,  a  lien  upon  the  land  for  the  payment  of  the 
debt  it  is  given  to  secure.*    Where  a  lease  is  made  after 


*  Carpenter  v.  Bowen,  42  Miss. 
28 ;  Tnmm  v.  Marsh,  54  N.  Y.  599 
Fletcher  v.  Holmes,  82  Ind.  497 
Buchanan  v.  Munroe,  22  Tex.  587 
Williams  v.  Beard,  1  S.  C.  809 
Johnson  v.  Houston,  47  Mo.  2'St 
White  V.  Rittemeyer,  80  Iowa,  268 
Fletcher  v.  Hobnes,  82  Ind.  497 
Elfe  T.  Cole,  26  Ga.  197 ;  Mack  t 
Witzler,  89  Cal.  247;  Priest  v 
Wheelock,  58  111.  114.  Although 
in  form  a  conveyance  in  fee  upon 
condition,  yet,  in  effect,  even  after 
condition  broken,  it  is  a  mere  secur- 
ity for  a  debt,  and  the  title  reverts 
without  a  reconveyance,  whenever 
the  debt  is  paid.  Pease  v.  Pilot 
Knob  Iron  Co,,  49  Mo.  124,  and, 
before  foreclosure,  is  not  subject  to 
levy  and  sale.  Buckley  v.  Daley, 
45  Miss.  888.  And  until  condition 
broken  he  is  entitled  to  possession, 
unless  otherwise  provided  in  the 
mortgage,  and  is  in  by  right  by 
virtue  of  his  title,  and  not  as  a  ten- 
ant at  sufferance.  Hooper  v.  Wil- 
son, 12  Vt.  695  ;  Crippen  v.  Morri- 
son, 18  Mich.  28 ;  Kidd  v.  Temple, 
22  Cal.  255.  And  if  a  mortgagee 
takes  a  lease  of  the  mortgagor  of 
the  same  lands,  he  will  be  treated 
as  holding  under  the  lease,  until 
he  has  miade  his  election  to  hold 
under  the  mortgage.  Wood  v. 
Felton,  9  Pick.  (Mass.)  171.  And 
after  condition  broken  he  may 
hold  under  his  mortgagee  without 
first  surrendering  possession  under 
the  lease.  Shields  v.  Lozear,  84  N. 
J.  L.  496.  The  mort^au^or's  inter- 
est is  an  estate  of  inheiitance  in  no 
wise  effected  by  the  mortgage  be- 
fore entry  and  foreclosure.  White 
V.  Rittemeyer,  80  Iowa,  268.  See 
Miner  v.  Beekman,  11  Abb.  Pr.  N. 
S.  (N.  Y.)  147 ;  Norcross  v.  Nor- 
cross,  105  Mass.  265 ;  O'Dougherty 
V.  Felt,  66  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  220.  And 
even  after  the  debt  is  due,  he  is 
not  entitled  to  the  rents  and  profits 
unless  the  security  is  insufficient. 
Myers  v.  Estell,  48  Miss.  878.  As 
to  the  nature  of  mortgagor's  estate, 
see  Kline  v.  McGuerkin,  24  N.  J. 
Kq.  411 ;   Hill  v.  Hewett,  86  Iowa 


568;  Trimm  v.  Marsh,  64  N.  Y- 
599 ;  Annapolis,  &c.  R.  R.  Co.  v* 
Gantt,  89  Md.  115.  The  mortgage 
is  but  a  security,  and  the  freenold 
still  remains  m  the  mortgagor. 
Jackson  v.  Willard,  4  John.  (N.  Y.J 
41.  He  is  seized  and  is  the  legal 
owner.  Orr  v.  Hadley ,  86  N.  H.  575; 
Hitchcock  V.  Harrington,  6  John. 
(N.  Y.)  290 ;  Runyan  v.  Mensereau, 
11  John.  (N.  Y.)  584.  The  mort- 
gagee, before  condition  broken  at 
least,  has  no  estate  in  the  land  dis- 
tinct from  the  debt.  Avmar  v. 
Bill,  5  John.  Ch.  670.  When  out 
of  possession  he  cannot  be  treated 
as  the  proprietor  of  the  estate. 
Norwich  v.  Hubbard,  22  Conn. 
587.  It  is  only  a  security,  and  the 
mortgagee  has  the  same  rights  to 
the  estate  that  he  ever  had,  except 
against  the  mortgagor.  Wilkins 
V.  French,  20 Me.  Ill ;  Orr  v.  Had- 
ley, 86  N.  H.  575.  And  as  against 
him,  until  he  has  legallv  entered 
for  condition  broken.  Kennett  v. 
Plummer,  28  Mo.  142.  Under 
foreclosure  proceedings,  or  as  a 
judgment  of  a  court  of  law,  or  by 
the  consent  of  the  mortgagor. 
Hooper  v.  Wilson,  12  Vt.  695; 
Crippen  v.  Morrison,  18  Mich.  28 ; 
Pierce  v.  Brown,  24  Vt.  195 ;  Hill 
V.  Robertson,  24  Miss.  868 ;  Pratt 
V.  Skolfield,  45  Me.  886.  LoBD 
MA17SFIELD,  in  the  King  t.  St. 
Michaers,  2  Doug.  681,  very  clear- 
ly de^nes  the  relations  of  the  mort- 
gagor and  mortgagee  to  the  lands. 
He  says :  ''A  mortgagor  in  posses- 
sion gains  a  settlement,  because 
the  mortgagee,  notwithstanding 
the  form,  has  but  a  chattel,  and 
the  mortgage  is  only  security.  It 
is  an  affront  to  common  sense  to 
say  that  the  mortgagor  is  not  the 
real  owner."  In  an  earlier  case, 
Martin  v.  Weston,  2  Burr.  978,  he 
thus  defines  the  interest  covered 
by  a  mortgage: — "A  mortgage," 
says  he,  *'is  a  charge  upon  the 
land.  And  whatever  would  give 
the  money,  will  carry  the  estate 
in  the  land  along  with  it,  to  any 
purpose.    The  estate  in  the  land 


S54 


Mortgagor  and  Mortgagee. 


[§  123. 


the  mortgage  becomes  a  lien  upon  the  estate,  the  mort- 
gagor cannot,  unless  the  tenant  chooses  to  attorn  to  him, 
and  does  so,  treat  him  as  his  tenant  under  the  lease  from 
the  mortgagor,  and  recover  the  rent  of  him  ;  because  there 
is,  in  such  a  case,  no  legal  privity,  *  and  no  reversionary 
interests  therein  vests  in  the  mortgagee  by  virtue  of  the 
mortgage  ;*  and,  there  being  no  privity  of  contract,  he 
cannot  proceed  against  the  lessee  either  by  action  or 
distress  for  the  rent,  as  such.'  But,  as  the  tenant  of  the 
mortgagor  can  take  no  better  title  than  his  lessor  had,* 
and,  as  after  condition  broken  in  some  States  *  and  after 
condition  broken  and  the  right  of  the  mortgagee  to  pos- 
session is  perfected  under  foreclosure  or  other  legal  pro- 
ceeding in  other  States  the  mortgagor  becomes  a  mere  ten- 
ant at  sufferance  to  the  mortgagee,  it  follows  that  the  ten- 


is  the  same  thing  as  the  money 
due  upon  it.  It  will  be  liable  to 
debta ;  it  will  go  to  the  executors ; 
it  will  pass  by  will  not  made  and 
executed  wutli  the  solemnities  re- 
quired by  the  Statute  of  Frauds. 
The  assignment  of  the  debt  or  for- 
aying it,  will  draw  the  land  after 
it  as  a  consequence.  Nay,  it  would 
do  it,  though  the  debt  was  forgiven 
only  by  parol."  Jn  Eaton  v. 
Jaques,  2  L)ou^.  455,  a  term  for 
years  was  assigned  by  way  of 
mortgage  with  a  clause  of  redemp- 
tion, and  it  was  held  by  the  court 
that  the  lessor  could  not  sue  tlie 
mortgagee  as  assi^ee  of  all  th^ 
estate,  right,  title,  mterest,  &c.,  of 
the  mortgagor  even  after  the  mort- 
gage hadoeen  forfeited^  unless  the 
mortgagee  had  taken  actual  pos- 
session. See  also,  to  same  effect, 
"Walker  v.  Reeves,  2  Doug.  461  n  1. 
In  The  King  v.  Eddington,  1  East, 
288,  it  was  held  that  the  object  of 
a  mortgage  is  merely  to  secure  a 
debt,  and  that  the  legal  estate  still 
remains  in  the  mortgagor,  and  it 
was  held  also  that  the  husband  of 
a  woman  who  had  an  estate  in  a 
term  for  ninety-nine  years,  but 
which  had  been  by  her  and  her 
first  husband  mortgaged  to  secure 
a  loan,  gained  a  settlement  by  a 
residence  upon  the  estate  for  forty 
days,  under  a  statute  which  en- 
abled a  person  owning  a  freehold- 
estate  in  a  parish,  who  resided  up- 


on it  for  the  period  of  forty  days 
to  acquire  a  settlement  therein 
and  the  court  adopted  a  rule,  as 
stated  by  Lord  Mansfield  in  The 
Kin^  V.  St.  Michaers,  ftupra.  See 
opinion  of  Orose,  J.  The  legal 
estate  of  the  mortgagor  is  not  di- 
vested by  condition  broken  or  en- 
try therefor  by  the  mortgagee, 
but  he  retains  such  an  estate  there- 
in that  it  may  be  levied  upon  and 
sold  under  execution.  Tnmm  v. 
Marsh,  54  N.  Y.  699 ;  Gorham  v. 
Arnold,  22  Mich.  247.  But  contra, 
see  Buckley  v.  Daly,  45  Miss.  888. 
In  Kennett  v.  Plummer,  58  Mo. 
142,  it  w^as  held  that  until  after 
condition  broken  and  entry  by  the 
mortgagee,  the  mortgagor  contin- 
ues owner,  and  may  lease  the  es- 
tate, and  in  every  respect  deal 
with  it  as  owner. 

*  McKircher  v.  Hawley,  16  John. 
(N.  Y.)  289;  Partington  v.  Wood- 
cock, 5  N.  &  M.  672 ;  Watts  v.  Cof- 
fin, 11  John.  (N.  Y.)  495;  Rogers 
V.  Humphreys,  4  Ad.  &  EL  299. 
Also  see  note  2,  p.  185. 

'^  Partington  v.  Woodcock,  5  N. 
&  M.  672. 

2  Peters  v.  Elkins,  14  Ohio,  344  ; 
McKircher  v.  Hawley,  16  John. 
(N.  Y.)  289. 

*  Rogers  v.  Moore,  11  (jonn.  553. 

*  Pierce  v.  Brown,  24  Vt.  1C5; 
McKinn  v.  Mason,  3  Md.  Ch.  186  ; 
Pratt  V.  Skolfield,  45  Me.  386  ;  Hill 
V.  Robertson,  24  Miss.  868. 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


By  Mortgagor. 


255 


ant  occupies  the  same  position '  and  the  mortgagee  may 
immediately  dispossess  him  without  previous  notice  to 
quit,'  unless  the  mortgagor  chooses  to  treat  him  as  a 


» Tucker  v.  Keeler,  4  Vt.  161 ; 
Hooper  v.  "Wilson,  11  id.  695 ;  Crip- 
pen  T.  Morrison,  18  Mich.  28 ;  Kiad 
V.  Temple,  22  Cal.  256. 

« Keech  v.  HaU,  1  Doug.  21  ; 
Thunder  v.  Belcher,  8  East,  449. 
These  cases  proceed  upon  the 
ground  that,  in  the  absence  of 
any  agreement  to  the  contrary  in 
the  mortgage,  the  mortgagee  at 
once  becomes  entitled  to  posses- 
sion as  against  the  mortgagor,  and 
that  the  mortgagor  instantly,  upon 
the  delivery  of  the  deed,  becomes  a 
mere  tenant  at  suif  erance,  and  con- 
sequently cannot  make  a  tenant 
under  him  as  against  anyone  ex- 
cept himself,  ana  those  having  no 
better  rights  to  the  possession,  and 
this  doctrine  has  m  effect  been 
held  in  several  of  the  States.  Shute 
V.  Grimes,  7  Blackf.  (Ind.)  1 ; 
Brown  v.  Stewart,  1  Md.  Ch.  87 ; 
.Fav  V.  Cheney,  14  Pick.  (Mass.) 
390;  Furbish  v.  Goodwin,  29  N. 
H.  821 ;  Walcap  v.  McKinney,  10 
Mo.  229 ;  Colman  v.  Packard,  16 
Mass.  89 ;  McKinn  v.  Mason,  8 
Md.  Ch.  186.  He  can  make  no 
leaae  or  contract  re8i)ecting  the 
mortgaged  premises  tnat  shall  be 
effectual  to  bind  the  mortgagee. 
Sweetzer  v.  Lowell,  33  Me.  446; 
Cotton  v.  Smith,  11  Pick.  (Mass.) 
311 ;  Judd  V.  .Woodruff,  2  Kent 
(Conn.)  298 ;  and  either  the  mort- 
gagor or  a  tenant  under  him  under 
a  lease  subsequent  to  the  mort- 
gage, may  be  treated  by  the  mort- 
gagee as  a  tenant  at  wl,  or  as  a 
trespaaser.  Pettingill  v.  Evans,  5 
N.  H.  54.  But,  if  the  mortgagor 
reeerves  the  right  to  remam  in 
possession  until  after  default  made, 
the  mortgagee  cannot  treat  him  as 
a  tenant  and  recover  for  use  and 
occupation.  Mavo  v.  Shattuck,  14 
Pick.  (Mass.)  525;  McKinn  v. 
Mason,  3  Md.  Ch.  186.  But  the 
doctrine  that  the  mortgagee  is  en- 
titled to  immediate  possession  of 
the  premises,  upon  the  dehvery  of 
the  mortgage,  was  predicated  upon 
the  theory  that  the  mortgage  con- 
veyed the  legal  estate  in  the  prera- 
ircs  to  the  mortgagee,  and  that  the 
mortgagor  had  only  an  equitable 


estate  therein ;  bat  this  doctrine  is 
now  generally  ignored  in  most  of 
the  States,  and  the  mortgagor  is 
held  to  retain  both  the  legal  and 
equitable  estate  until  after  condi- 
tion broken.  Carpenter  v.  Bowen, 
42  Miss.  28 ;  Fletcher  v.  Holmes, 
32  Ind.  497  ;  Pease  v.  Pital  Knob 
Iron  Co.,  49  Mo.  124;  Mack  v. 
Wetzler,  89  Cal.  247;  Priest  v. 
Wheelock,  58IU.  114;  Wilkins  v. 
French,  20  Me.  Ill;  Ellison  v. 
Daniels,  11  N.  H.  274 ;  Hitchcock 
V.  Harrington,  6  John.  (N.  Y.)  295 ; 
Hooper  v.  Wilson,  12  Vt.  695.  And 
in  those  States  where  this  doctrine 
is  held,  as  well  as  in  those  in  w^hich 
by  statute  the  mortgagor  is  given 
the  right  of  possession  until  after 
foreclosure  and  sale,  or  after  the 
expiration  of  the  decree,  where  a 
term  of  redemption  is  given,  Shaw 
V.  Hoadley,  8  Blackf.  (Ind.)  165 ; 
Tucker  v.  Keeler,  4  Vt.  161,  the 
mortgagor  may  make  a  lease  of  the 

E remises  that  will    be  valid  and 
inding  against  the  mortgagee,  at 
least  until  condition  broken.    Crip- 

Sen  V.  Morrison,  13  Mich.  28 ;  La- 
uc  V.  Detroit,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  18 
id.  880 ;  Hooper  v.  Wilson,  12  Vt. 
695 :  Elf  V.  Cole,  26  Ga.  197  ;  Kidd 
V.  Temple,  22  Cal.  255.  And  in 
those  States  where  the  mortgagor's 
right  of  entry  does  not  attach  un- 
til after  the  expiration  of  the  term 
of  redemption,  until  the  decree 
obtained  in  foreclosure  proceed- 
ings has  expired.  Hooper  v.  Wil- 
son, ante ;  Kidd  v.  Temple,  ante; 
if  the  tenant  or  the  mortgagor  re- 
mains in  possession  after  the  de- 
cree has  expired,  he  is  not  liable 
for  rent,  unless  there  is  an  express 
or  implied  promise  to  pay  it,  "but 
is  a  mere  tenant  at  sufferance. 
Tucker  v.  Keeler,  4  Vt.  161.  Great 
confusion  exists  in  the  decisions  of 
the  courts  of  this  country,  as  well 
as  of  the  English  courts,  as  to  what 
the  real  relations  of  the  mortgagor 
and  mortgagee  are  to  the  lands 
covered  by  the  mortgage,  but  this 
matter  in  many  of  the  States  is 
regulated  by  statute,  and  the  ques- 
tion in  a  given  case  can  be  deter- 
mined only  by  reference  to  the  stat- 


tenant  at  ■< 
relation,'  c 
ing  of  the 


in  such  a  t 
validity  of 

nte  of  the  8t 
lies,  and  by 
mortj^age  itei 
ever,  IB  certa 
the  mortoag 
leaee  made  si 
gage,  tn&y 
against  tlie  n 
son  claiming 
him,  BO  louK 
any  right  or 
in  the  premii 
the  tenant  in 
tested  by  thi 
gagor. 

'  Sweetzer 
Colton  V.  Sn 
8U ;  Pettinj 
H.  64. 

'  Belcher 
Lord  Mansfi 
I  Doug.  21. 

>lf  a  moi 
rent  from  th 
gagor,  at  re 
wards  refiudi 


M.  &  W.  Ml 

7  Bine.  833. 
under  the  foil 
In  that  case, 
mortgagee,  tr 
for  the  morf 
occnpierof  tt 
the  interest  < 
and  threaten 
rent  waa  no 
peared  that 
rent  from  th 
five  limes.  1 
the  mort^^ 
interest.  Th 
was  an  ack 
mor^gee  tl 
not  a  trespas 
be  could  not 
day  of  the  d 
waa  accordi 
this  ruling 
hearing  by 
The  principli 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


By  Mortqaqoe. 


251 


der  a  lease  made  before  the  mortgage  was  executed,  by 
remainiDg  iu  possession  after  condition  broken,  and 
notice  from  the  mortgagee  to  pay  the  rent  to  him,  is 
treated  as  having  assented  to  continue  in,  as  tenant  of 
the  mortgagee,  if  not  under  the  old  lease,  at  least  as 
tenant  to  him  upon  the  same  terms.'  But  by  giving 
notice  to  the  tenant  to  pay  the  rent  to  him,  the  mortgagee 
cannot  compel  the  tenant  to  remain  in  possession  as  his 
tenant  upon  the  terms  of  the  old  lease.  The  tenant  may 
undoubtedly,  upon  the  receipt  of  such  notice,  unless  the 
lease  has  been  assigned  to  the  mortgagee,  or  under  the 
circumstances  he  is  to  be  treated  as  assignee,  give  up  pos- 
session within  a  reasonable  time,  and  by  so  doing  cannot 
be  liable  either  to  the  mortgagor  or  mortgagee  for  a 
breach  of  his  covenants.  After  such  notice  and  demand, 
the  obligation  of  the  tenant  to  pay  the  rent  to  his  lessor 
ceases,  unless  the  claim  set  up  by  the  mortgagee  is  un- 
founded, and  payment  of  the  rent  by  him  to  the 
mortgagee  is  an  answer  to  an  action  brought  by  the 
mortgagor,  as  a^s^nee  of  the  reversion.*    The  mortgagee 


the  loose  talk  of  Judges  and  of  law- 
writers,  to  the  enect  that  the  mort- 
gagee ie  tenant  to  the  mortgagor, 
or  is  his  agent,  it  is  dear  tlutt  the 
morigagiJT  in  poaaesgion  is  not  a 
tenant  at  all.  He  is  m  posseHsion 
as  of  right,  and  under  a  legal  and 
equitabFe  title,  uotil  after  default 
made,  and  such  is  now  the  doc- 
trine held  hj  the  English  courts. 
Hickman  t.  Machin,  7  H.  A  N. 
782.  1/  the  mortgagor  is  entitled 
topoa»w»ion,  as  ne  is,  after  condi- 
tion broken,  at  least,  according  to 
th«  doctrine  of  our  courta ;  except 
when  provision  is  otherwise  made 
hj  statute,  as  stated  in  a  previous 
note,  page  191,  tliere  would  seem 
to   be  no  qtiestion   but  that  from 


until  such  election  is  made,  can 
the  mortgagor  be  treated  as  a  ten- 
ant. MLliinn  v.  Mason.  8  Md.  Ch, 
186  ;  and  unlees  entry  is  made  hj 
the  mortgagee,  or  action  brought 
t«  recover  jioaseHsion  within  the 
periods  provided  by  law,  his  right 
wiU  be  barred.  Lord  v.  Morris,  18 
Cal.  482;  HaskeU  v.  Bailey,  23 
Conn.  669.  But  this  rule  does  not 
apply  if  the  mortgagee  is  in  posses- 
sion, although  he  has  not  brought 
foreclosure  proceedings  to  perfect 
his  right  witnin  the  statutory  per- 
iod. Hall  v.  FuUer,  7  Vt.  106.  and 
in  equity,  unless  the  statute  clear- 
ly  applies  to  this  class  of  securities, 
will  foreclosure  proceedings  bo 
barred  by  the  statute.  Michigan 
Ins.  Co.  V.  Brown.  11  Mich.  265; 
Union,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Murphy  &,  Co., 
23  CaL  630, 
'  Brown  v.  Story.  1  M.  &«.  114, 
'  Smith  T.  Tavlor,  9  Ala.  838 ; 
Weidcer  v.  Foster.  2  P.  &  W, 
(Penn.)23.  TheMass.  Lifelns.  Co. 
V.  Wilson.  10  Met.  (Maas.M26;  My- 
ere  V.  White,  1  Rowle  (Penn.)  805. 

IT 


258  MOBTGAQOR  ASD  MOBTQAGEB.  [§  123. 

cannot  maintain  trespass  or  ejectment  against  him,  be- 
cause his  right  is  prior  to  that  of  the  mortgagee,  and  if 
be  has  taken  the  premises  under  a  lease  for  a  long  term 
and  in  good  faith  paid  the  lessor  for  the  full  term  in  a 
gross  sum,  the  mortgagee  takes  only  the  reversion,  and 
cannot  enter  until  his  term  expires.'  But,  a  tenant 
under  a  lease  made  after  the  mortgage,  although  he  has 
paid  the  lessor  in  advance  for  the  full  term,  is  neverthe- 
less liable  to  the  mortgagee  for  all  rents  that  accrue  after 
his  right  of  entry  attaches,  and  notice  has  been  given  that 
the  rent  must  bepaidto  him.'  Thus  inthecase  last  cited, 
the  tenant  took  a  lease  of  mortgaged  premises  for  a  term 
of  years,  and  made  an  advance  to  the  lessor,  to  be  ex- 
pended in  improvements  upon  the  estate,  vehich  was 
done.  The  mortgagee  subsequently,  before  his  term  had 
expired,  and  before  the  rents  had  hquidated  the  advance, 
brought  ejectment  against  the  tenant  and  obtained  a 
judgment  against  him.  It  wfis  held  that  the  mortgagee 
was  not  liable  to  him  for  the  improvements  made  upon 
the  premises,  although  he  had  reason  to  believe  that, 
under  the  terms  of  the  mortgage,  the  mortgagor  had  a 
right  to  execute  such  a  lease.  Where  a  tenant,  whether 
under  a  lease  made  before  or  after  the  mortgage,  is  sued 
by  the  mortgagor  for  the  rent,  he  cannot  defend  by 
setting  up  a  notice  from  the  mortgagee  to  pay  the  reut  to 
him  ;  he  must,  in  order  to  defend,  have  paid  the  rent  in 
compliance  with  the  notice.'  Mere  notice  by  the  mort- 
gagee is  not  sufBcient  to  determine  the  contract.*  The 
rule  is,  that  a  tenant  under  a  lease  made  by  a  mortgagor 
either  before  or  after  the  mortgage,  may,  without  pre- 
judice, pay  rent  to  the  mortgagor,  until  he  receives  notice 

'  Jones V.  Thomas, 8Blackr.(Iiid.)     which  the  lessee  flies  apleaof  ttui 

4a8;WiJ'--   "-■---    •"'-■-      ^------■-    --. =---. 

(HaBB.)8 
N.H.  58 
Buinph. 

'Hare 
8Allen( 
of  land, . 
gage,  lea 
after  an 
ditLon  ol 
writ  of  e 
xeoovcT  ; 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


By  Mortgagor. 


259 


from  the  mortgagee  to  pay  to  him.*  In  England  it  is 
held  that  after  such  notice,  where  the  lease  was  made 
prior  to  the  mortgage,  the  mortgagee  may  distrain 
not  only  for  the  rent  accuring  subsequent  to  the  notice, 
but  also  for  all  arrears  that  accrued  before  ;  that  is,  that 
the  notice  divests  the  mortgagor  of  all  interest  in  any  of 
the  rent  remaining  unpaid  when  notice  is  given.'  But  in 
our  courts  it  is  not  believed  that  the  mortgagee  can  claim 
any  rents,  except  such  that  accrue  subsequently  to  the 
notice,'  and  in  any  event  it  would  seem  that  he 
could  recover  no  arrears,  except  such  as  accrued  subse- 
quent to  the  time  when  his  right  of  entry  attached.  The 
English  cases  holding  the  doctrine  previously  stated, 
proceed  upon  the  ground  that,  under  the  peculiar 
form  of  mortgages  employed,  the  mortgagor  is  in- 
stantlyy  upon  the  delivery  of  the  mpjtgage,  entitled 
to  possession  ;*  and  where  by  the  terms  of  the  mort- 
gage such  are  the  rights  of  the  mortgagee,  it  is 
possible  that  he  might  by  notice,  intercept  the  rent  in 
arrears  at  the  time  when  it  was  given,  as  well  as  that 
accruing  subsequently  thereto,*  although  a  different 
doctrine  is  intimated  by  Patterson,  B.,*  in  the  case 
referred  to.  He  says,  "  I  cannot  comprehend  how  a  right 
of  action  for  rents  already  dvs,  should  be  vested  in  the 
mortgagor  before  the  notice,  and  the  notice  should  undo 
that  vested  right  of  action,  and  set  up  in  lien  of  it,  a  right 
of  action  in  the  mortgagee.  It  has  been  so  held,"  but  that 
case  is  beyond  my  comprehension,"  and  in  a  previous 
paragraph  he  says,  **I  think  it  a  grave  question,  whether 
the  latter  is  not  a  fallacy."*    In  all  cases,  the  question 


*  Trent  v,  Aunt,  9  Excbq.  14; 
Sniith  V.  Taylor.  9  Ala,  «83 ;  W^id- 
ner  v.  Foster,  2  P.  &  W,  (Penn.) 
23;  life  Ins.  Co,  v.  Wilson.  10 
Met.  (Mass.)  126;  Carvis  v.  Mc- 
Clavy,  5  N.  H.  580;  Jones  v. 
Thomas,  8  Blackf.  (Ind.)  428; 
Field  V.  Swan,  10  Met.  (Mass.)  112. 

'  Moss  V.  Gallimore,  1  Doug.  279 ; 
Burrows  v.  Graddin,  1  D.  &  L. 
218 ;  Rogers  v.  Humphreys,  4  Ad. 
&E1.  299. 

»  Hatch  V.  Dwight,  17  Mass.  289 ; 


Wilder  v.  Houghton,  1  Pick. 
(Mass.)  87 ;  Field  v.  Swan,  10  Met. 
(Mass.^  112.  But  see  Russell  v.  Al- 
len, 12  Allen  (Mass.)  42. 

*  Opinion  of  Bbamwell,  B.,  in 
Trent  v.  Hunt,  9  Exchq.  21. 

*  Hutchinson  t.  Dearmg,  20  Ala. 
790 ;  Latimer  v.  Moore,  4  McLean 
(U.  S.)  110. 

*  Wilton  V,  Dunn,  17  Q.  B.  800. 
t  In  Waddilove  v.  Bamett,  2  N. 

C.  538. 

*  Referring  to  the  doctrine  of 


MORTQAGOB  AND  MOBTQAQEE. 


[§124. 


as  to  whether  such  right  on  the  part  of  the  mortgagor 
exists  or  not,  will  depend  upon  the  terms  of  the  mortgage, 
and  the  provisions  of  the  statute  in  the  State  ia  which 
the  land  is  situated.  A  mortgagee,  who  has  never  been 
in  actual  possession,  cannot  maintain  trespass  against 
the  lessee  of  the  mortgagor,  nor  can  he  waive  the  tort, 
and  maintain  an  action  for  the  use  and  occupation  of  the 
and,'  but  if,  after  notice  from  the  mortgagee  the  tenant 
remains  in  possession,  from  this  fact, —unless  possibly 
there  are  facts  to  rebut  it — the  law  implies  a  promise  on 
the  tenant's  part  to  pay  him  for  the  use  of  the  premises  ;' 
and  under  some  circumstances  it  has  been  held  that, 
although  not  entitled  to  recover  them  as  rent,  he  can, 
nevertheless,  recover  the  rents,  issues,  and  profits." 
When  a  lease  is  given  by  a  mortgagor,  if  the  mortgage  is 
foreclosed  before  the  term  expires,  the  presumption  is 
that  the  lessee  sustains  no  damage,  the  rent  being  an 
equivalent  for  the  use.  If  damages  are  claimed  the 
burden  is  upon  the  tenant  to  show  them.' 

Sec.  124.     Wben  ton^t  not  entitled  to  crops.— A  lessee 
who  goes  into  possession  under  a  lease  subsequent  to  the 


Waddilove  v.  Baraett,  ante,  and 
to  that  portion  ot  Mr.  Smith's  note 
to  Moss  V.  Gallimore,  1  8m.  Lead- 
ing Cos.  Sd  Ed.  SI?,  in  which  he 
reiterates  the  doctrine  of  that  case. 

'  Turner  v.  Steam  Coal  Co.,  5 
Eichq.  fl33 ;  Mayo  v.  Shattuck,  14 
Kck.  (Mass.)  833 :  Watts  v.  Coffin, 
11  John.  (N.  Y.)  495.  But  see 
Wheeler  V.  Bates.  31  N.  H.  460. 
where  it  ia  held  that  the  mortgagee 
may  treat  any  person  found  in 
poeaession  of  the  mortgaged  prem- 
ises as  a  wrong-doer  or  disseizor, 
at  hie  election. 

'Standenv.  Christmas,  10  Q.  B. 
185  :  Waddilove  v.  Bamett,  2  Bine. 

entera  ( 
orders  tl 

themorl 
ianotefl 
forecloBi 
19  Pick. 
*BiU- 
Jbb.Co. 
m.   In 


(Mass.)  863,  it  was  held  that  if. 
during  the  pendency  of  an  action 
to  foreclose  a  mortgage  of  land, 
the  mortgagor  leases  and  dehvers 
possession  of  a  portion  of  the 
mortgaged  premises  to  a  tenant, 
who  retains  the  actual  pt^session 
thereof  under  a  claim  oi  right,  by 
virtue  of  certain  provisions  of  the 
mortgage,  after  lornial  possession 
has  Seen  dehvered  to  the  mort- 
gagee upon  the  execution  recovered 
m  Ills  suit,  and  it  is  aftemards 
adjudged,  in  a  writ  of  entry 
brought  to  try  the  title,  that  the 
mor^gee  is  entitled  to  possesion 
as  against  such  tenant,  he   may 


CHAP,  xvm.] 


To  Join  in  Lease. 


261 


mortgage,  is  not,  as  against  the  mortgagee,  after  bis 
right  of  entry  has  attached,  entitled  to  the  growing 
a-ops,  and  the  mortgagee  or  any  other  person  who  be- 
comes entitled  thereto,  either  under  a  sale,  or  under  a 
decree  of  foreclosure,  may  maintain  trespass  against  the 
lessee  for  taking  and  carrying  them  away.' 

Sec.  125.  Mortgagor  and  mortgagee  should  join  in  lease.— 
From  what  has  already  been  said,  it  will  be  seen  that  in 
order  to  protect  a  tenant  under  a  lease  for  a  term  that  is 
made  subsequent  to  a  mortgage  of  the  premises,  both  the 
mortgagor  Jind  mortgagee  should  join  in  the  lease,'  and 
the  covenants  of  the  lessee  should  be  made  with  the 
mortgagee,  with  a  view  to  running  with  the  land,  and 
the  proviso  for  re-entry  should  be  reserved  to  the  mort- 
gagee, and  not  to  the  mortgagor,  with  such  other  pro- 
visions as  to  quit  enjoyment  and  payment  of  rent,  as  are 
essential  to  protect  the  lessee  in  his  term,  from  the  con- 
flicting claims  of  either.* 

Sec.  126.  Lease  by  Mortgagee.— A  mortgagee  cannot 
make  a  lease  of  the  premises  that'will  not  be  liable  to  be 
defeated  by  the  mortgagor  until  he  has  perfected  his 
right  by  foreclosure  proceedings.'     But  if  he  enters  for 

ble  promiBBory  notes  Bocured  by 
mortgage,  which  the  creditor  ac- 
cepts in  eatisfaction  pro  tanto  of 
the  landlord's  indebt^dncsa  to  hil", 
entering  a  credit  as  for  a  pojiial 
payment,  operates  on  the  prmciple 
of  novation  and  Eubstitution  and 
effects  an  extinguishment  of  the 
original  debta  between  the  parties. 
Aa  against  all  the  world  except 
the  mortgagee  and  those  clainiine 
under  him,  the  mortgagor  is  regard- 
ed SB  the  owner  of  the  mortgaged 
property,  and  has  the  right  *o  coi»- 
„«..         inn^«  It —   _..,.jp^j  ^  jjjg 

itied  to  the 
ter  the  law 
until  they 

active  as- 
mrt  of  the 
tice  to  the 

by  bill  in 

inds  which 


'Lanev.  King,  8  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
684 ;  Walmaley  v.  Milne,  7  C.  B- 
N.  8.  115. 

<  FninksUnksi  v.  Bull,  84  L.  J. 
Ch.  153  ;  Hughes  v.  Bucknett,  B  C. 
A  P.  566  ;  Carpenter  v.  Parker,  S 
C.  B-  N.  8.  306;  Bumey  v.  Adame, 
30.  &  J.  333. 

•Webb.  V.  Rusaell.  3T.  R.  89S; 
Ruseell  v.  Stokes,  1  H.  Bl.  562 ; 
Sunders  v.  Merryweather,  8  H.  & 
C.903. 

'  Stone  V.  Patterson.  IB  Pick. 
^MiwBj)  478 :  Hughes  v.  BucknaU,  8 


263  MOBTOAGOB  AND  MORTQAGEE.  [§  126. 

condition  broken,  as  he  may  do,  unless  restricted  by 
statute  or  by  the  terms  of  the  mortgage,  a  lease  made  by 
him  would  be  good  until  the  mortgagor  redeems  the 
premises  from  the  mortgage-debt,  or  that  part  of  it  which 
was  due  at  the  time  of  entry."  But  until  entry  or  suit 
brought  to  recover  possession  for  condition  broken,  he 
can  make  no  lease  that  will  give  his  lessee  the  right  to 
exclude  the  owner  of  the  equity  of  redemption,  or  a  ten- 
ant under  him  from  the  premises.*  The  mortgagee  of  a 
leasehold  estate,  for  years,  may  secure  a  renewal  thereof, 
whether  the  lease  expired  before  renewal  or  not,  hut  the 
renewal  will  inure  to  the  benefit  of  the  mortgagor,  sub- 
ject to  the  mortgagee's  expenses  in  the  matter.'  The 
mortgagee  cannot,  therefore,  make  a  lease  for  years,  of 
property  in  mortgage,  that  will  be  operative  against  the 
mortgagor,  until  after  he  has  forfeited  his  rights  by  fore- 
closure proceedings,  unless,  perhaps,  to  avoid  an  appar- 
ent loss,  and  merely  of  necessity.'  If  a  mortgagee  ac- 
cepts a  tenant  of  the  mortgagor  as  his  tenant,  such  ten- 
ant becomes  merely  a  tenant  from  year  to  year  to  the 
mortgagee,  subject  to  such  of  the  terms  of  the  lease  as 
are  applicable  to  such  tenancy.*  But,  it  seems  that  pay- 
are  subject  to  an  outetanding  lease,  the  mortgage,  etatntoiy  notice  to 
the  morteagee  is  regarded  as  the  him  by  the  mortgagee,  aa  such  pnr- 
aBBigneeot  the  reversion  and  is  en-  Chaaer,  "veetB"mhim  the  right  to 
titled  to  the  rente  past  due  and  un-  the  pomeeeion  in  the  same  manner 
paid  as  well  an  those  afterwards  aa  if  such  tenant  had  attorned  to 
accruing,  though  the  tenant  is  jub-  him  (Code  2ST8)  but  while  be  may 
tifled  in  paying  them  to  the  mort-  poasioly  thereby  acquire  a  right  to 
gagor,  until  they  are  iiit«rcept«d  by  maintcun  an  action  for  future  uae 
notice  or  proper  legal  proceedings ;  and  occupation,  he  cannot  recover 
but,  when  the  lease  is  made  by  the  rente  past  due  and  unpaid,  whic^ 
mortgagor  after  the  execution  of  the  mortgagor  had  already  traiia- 
the  mortgage,  it  is  not  binding  on  ferred  to  another. 
the  mortgagoe  who  may  annul  it  ■  Silloway  v.  Brown,  12  Allen 
at  pleasure  and  eject  the  lessee  as  (Mass.)  SO.  ' 
a  trespasser ;  and  be  cannot  treat  *  Moore  v.  Titmon,  44  111.  867. 
the  lessee  as  his  tenant  by  merely  >  Powell  on  Mortgages,  188;  Hun- 
giving  him  no( '      '  '  "     '  '    ' 

When  a  moi 
purchaser  at  1 
power  in  the  i 
valid  as  betw( 
withstanding  t 
unless  set  asidi 
and  if  the  land 
of  a  tenant  um 
by  the  mortg 


CHAP,  xvm.]  Covenant  Between.  263 

ment  of  the  rent  does  not  relate  back  to  the  date  of 
the  service  of  notice  of  the  mortgage  so  as  to  make  the 
new  tenancy  commence  from  that  time/  but  for  the  pur- 
poses of  a  notice  to  quit,  the  new  tenancy  will  be  taken 
to  have  commenced  from  the  same  date  as  the  original 
term."  Where  a  tenant  attorns  expressly  as  from  a  pre- 
vious specified  day,  a  distress  may  be  made  for  rent  cal- 
culated from  that  day.*  When  a  new  tenancy  is  created 
by  an  attornment  to  the  mortgagee,  the  latter  is  thence- 
forth the  landlord,  and  may  sue  or  distrain  for  the  rent, 
or  bring  an  action  for  use  and  occupation,*  but,  until 
after  the  usual  notice  to  quit  is  given,  he  cannot  main- 
tain ejectment.* 

Sec.  127.  EfR»ot  of  a  covenant  to  permit  the  mort|^6r 
to  take  rents,  ftc—If  a  mortgagee  covenants  that  the  mort- 
gagor shall  take  the  profits  till  default  in  payment,  or 
that  the  mortgagor  and  his  heirs  shall  take  the  profits  ; 
in  the  one  case  the  mortgagor,  and  in  the  other  his  heir 
after  his  death,  shall  be  tenant  at  will ;  *  but  in  case  of 
the  death  of  the  mortgagor,  the  tenancy  at  will  sesms 
to  be  determined,  till  there  is  a  receipt  of  interest 
from  the  heir,  which  seems  to  make  him  also  then 
tenant  at  will  to  the  mortgagee."  If  the  mortgagee 
covenant  that  he  will  not  take  the  profits  till  de- 
fault in  payment,  and  the  mortgagor  retains  pos- 
session, he  shall  not  be  tenant  at  will,  but  only  on  suf- 
ferance ;  for  it  was  not  agreed  that  he  should  take,  but 
that  the  mortgagee  should  not  take.*  So  if  a  mort- 
gage be  made  with  a  proviso  that  the  mortgagee,  his 
heirs  and  assigns,  ^' shall  hot  intermeddle  with  the  actual 
possession  of  the  premises,  or  perception  of  the  rents," 
until  default  of  a  payment,  the  mortgagor  is  a  tenant  on 
sufferance,  and  not  a  tenant  at  will,  as  he  would  have 
been  on  a  covenant  that  he  should  take  the  profits  till 

1  Collins  V.  Weller,  7  T.  R.  478.  »  Pole  V.  Davis,  1  F.  &  F.  284 ; 

>  Qladman  v.  Plumer,  15  L.  J.  Q.  Ck>le  on  Ejectment,  474,  477 ;  Lord 

B.  80.  Downe  v.  Thompson,  ante. 

» Brown  v.  Storey,  1 M.  &  G.  117 ;  •  Com.  Dig.  Estates  (H.  1) ;  Arch- 
Rogers  T.  Humphrey,  4  Ad.  &  El.  er  v.  Dalbv,  Cro.  Jac.  660. 
299.  '  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Mortgage  (A.). 

*  Lord   Downe  v.  Thompson,  9  «  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Estate  (H.  2). 
Q.  B.  1037. 


261 

default  f< 
power  of 
contained 
be  no  salt 
ing  posse 
mortgago 
enjoymer 
payment 
this  deed 
mortgage 
thereby  c 
the  usual 
1S34,  and 
not  call  i 
if  the  in 
covenant 
enjoy  the 
or  interes 
as  a  lease 
tenant  fc 
gage  to 
after  nan 
ures  and 
the  prov 
for  recon 
day,  and 
gagee  mi] 
the  prem: 
held,  thai 
not  attac! 
paid,  and 
of  trespa 
premises, 
that  if  tl 
after,  the 


Jac.  659. 

'  WilkiDsi 
C.  e08 ;  Ljt 


CHAP,  xvin.]      Mortgagee's  Liabujtt.  265 

that  upon  default  the  lessee  might  sell ;  and  there  was  a 
covenant  by  the  lessor  for  payment  of  principal  and  inter- 
est, and  that  at  any  tim^  after  default  it  should  be  law- 
ful for  the  lessee  to  enter,  and  from  thenceforth  to  hold 
the  premises  and  take  the  rents ;  it  was  held,  that  the 
lessee  might  take  possession  immediately  and  before 
default.' 

Sec.  128.  LialdlitieB  of  a  mortgagee  is  possession.—  A 
mortgagee  in  possession  is  not  obliged  to  lay  out  money 
any  further  than  to  keep  the  estate  in  necessary  repair  ; 
but  on  a  bill  to  redeem  he  will  be  made  to  account  for 
all  loss  and  damage  occasioned  by  his  gross  negligence 
in  respect  of  bad  cultivation  and  non-repair.'  He  will 
also  be  charged,  not  only  for  all  rents  received,  but  also 
for  all  rents  which  but  for  his  wilful  neglect  or  default 
he  might  have  received.'  A  mortgagee  in  possession  has 
been  held  not  chargeable  as  for  willful  default  in  declin- 
ing to  defend  an  action  of  replevin  brought  by  the  owner 
of  goods  distrained  on  the  premises  by  such  mortgagee.' 
If  he  has  expended  any  sum  in  supporting  the  right  of 
the  mortgagor  to  the  estate,  where  his  title  has  been 
impeached,  the  mortgagee  may  certainly  add  that  to  the 
principal  of  his  debt ;  and  it  shall  carry  interest.  Where 
a  mortgagee  has  been  put  to  expense  in  defending  the 
title  to  the  estate,  the  defence  being  for  the  benefit  of  all 
parties  interested,  he  is  entitled  to  charge  such  expenses 
against  the  estate  ;  but  if  his  title  to  the  mortgage  only 
is  disputed,  the  costs  of  his  defence  should  not  be  borne 
by  the  estate,  as  against  parties  interested  in  the  equity 
of  redemption,  unless  they  can  be  shown  to  have  con- 
curred or  assisted  in  the  litigation.'  If  the  estate  lays 
at  such  a  distance  that  the  mortgagee  must  employ  an 
i  4.-  -.11.-4.  11 i.    _.L_i  1 i_  11.-  aggnt 

receive 
I  Court 


366  MORTOAQOB  AKD  MORT 

of  Chancery  not  to  take  an  account  i 
in  possesion  with  annual  rents,  whei 
entering  into  possession,  there  is  an 
A  mortgagee  of  leaseholds  may  ta 
where  there  is  no  arrear  of  interest 
stances  which  may  not  render  him  li 
annual  rents  ;  as  where  he  enters  ii 
forfeiture  for  non-payment  of  grou 
insurance.'  The  Court  of  Chancery 
deed  of  mortgage,  any  stipulation 
estate  should  become  an  absolute  p 
gagee  upon  any  event  whatsoever.' 
law  has  no  power  to  compel  a  recon 
gaged  estate  after  payment  of  the  i 
est  and  costs.* 

'  Nelon  V.  Booth,  8  De  G.  &  J.  261 ;   Vei 

119.  110;    Fit 

'  Patch  T.  Wild,  30  Beav.  9S.  Uortgagi 

■  Bonham  t.  Newcomb,  1  Vem.  *  Qot«l 

8,  383 1  Toomw  r.  Conast,  8  Atk. 


V  ■* 


CHAP,  xnr.]      BmDiNa  upon  Principal. 


267 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

LEAS2S  BY    AGENTS. 

Ssc.  129.  By  an  Agent. 

Sbc,  130.  How  should  be  executed. 

Sec.  131.  Agent  or  attorney  cannot  delegate  his  power. 

Ssc,  132.  Real  estate  agents. 

Sec.  183.  Authority  must  be  strictly  pursued. 

Sec.  184.  Agent  to  take  leases. 

Sec.  185.  Misrepresentation  by  agent. 

Section  133.  By  an  agent.— A  lease  made  by  an  agent, 
who  acts  under  a  power  of  attorney  authorizing  him  to 
do  so,  either  expressly  or  by  necessary  implication,  ef- 
fectually binds  the  principgd,*  and  an  agreement  for  a 
lease,  made  by  him  within  the  scope  of  his  power,  would 
be  specifically  enforced  agamst  the  principal.*  If  the 
lease  or  agreement  is  to  be  or  is  under  seal,  and  is  to  be 
executed  by  the  agent,  the  instrument  empowering  him 
shouU  also  be  under  seal.'  But  authority  to  make  a 
parol  lease,  or  to  make  an  agreement  for  a  lease  under 
seal  that-  is  to  be  executed  by  the  principal,  need  not  even 


1  Hamilton  t.  Clanricarde,  1  Bro. 
P.  C.  841 ;  Ridgeway  v.  Wharton, 
3  De  a.  M.  &  G.  677  ;  Comfoot  v. 
Fowke,  6  M.  &  W.  858 ;  Fuller  v. 
Wilson,  8  Q.  B.  58  reversed  3  id. 
68.    See  also  id.  1009. 

^Brillhart  v.  McConnell,  25  Ul. 
476. 

*8  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases,  408  ; 
Harrison  y  Jackson,  7  T.  R.  207 ; 
Steightz  T.  Egginffton,  Holt  N.  P. 
141 ;  Harshaw  y.  McKesson,  65  N. 
C.  fi88 ;  Cooper  v.  Rankin,  6  Binn. 
(Penn.)  612 ;  Blood  v.  Goodrich,  9 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  68 ;  Rose  v.  Ware, 
90  Ga.  278 ;  Cain  v.  Heard,  1  Coldw. 


(Tenn.)  173 ;  Shuetze  v.  Bailey,  40 
Mo.  69 ;  Smith  v.  Perry,  29  N.  J.  L. 
74  ;  Banorgee  v.  Havey,  5  Mass.  11 ; 
Moss  V.  Worthing,  4  111.  26  ;Wheel- 
er  V.  Nivins,  34  Me.  45 ;  Rhodes  v. 
Loutham,  8  Blackf.  (Ind.)413;  King 
V.  Brooks,  9  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  218; 
Gordon  v.  Bulkley,  14  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  331 ;  McMenty  v.  Frank,  4 
T.  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  35 ;  but  where  a 
seal  is  not  essential  to  the  validity 
of  the  contract  or  instrument,  it 
may  be  rejected  as  surplusage,  and 
the  instrument  will  be  treated  as  a 
simple  contract.  Long  v.  Hartwell, 
84  N.  J.  L.  116. 


J 


268 


AOEKTS. 


[§129. 


be  in  writing/  If  the  agent  exceeds  his  authority,  the 
lease  will  be  invalid  a^  against  the  principal,  but  the 
agent  himself  becomes  personally  liable  thereon.'  But 
even  though  an  agent  exceeds  his  authority,  or  even 
though  in  the  first  instance  he  acts  without  any  authority 
whatever,  and  executes  a  lease  under  seal  in  the  name 
of  the  principal,  the  principal  may  ratify  and  confibrm 
his  acts  and  give  vaUdity  thereto  as  against  himself,  the 
same  as  though  the  act  had  been  done  under  competent 
authority  in  the  first  instance,"  but  in  order  to  operate  as 
a  vahd  instrument  against  third  persons,  and  thus  fully 
protect  the  lessor,  it  is  necessary  that  the  authority 
should  be  under  seal,  or  that  it  should  be  subsequently 
ratified  by  the  principal,  in  writing  under  seal,*  or  at  least 
that  there  should  be  a  clear  and  express  ratification  or 
facts  and  circumstances  equally  clear  and  undisputed 
from  which  it  can  be  implied,*  and  upon  the  principle 
that,  where  a  principal  enjoys  the  benefits  and  fruits  of 
an  agent's  acts,  knowing  what  he  has  done,  he  shall  be 
bound  thereby,  there  would  be  no  question  but  that  a 
receipt  of  rent  from  a  tenant,  under  a  lease  made  by  an 
agent,  without  authority,  would  amount  to  a  ratification 
that  would  bind  the  principal,  even  though  not  operative 
against  third  persons.*    If  a  lease  is  executed  by  an  agent, 


'  Brown  t.  Eaton,  21  Minn.  409 ; 
CJoles  v.Trecothick,  9  Ve8.250 ;  Dyafi 
T.  Cruise,  2  Jan.  &  Lat.  451 ;  Clinan 
V.  Cooke,  1  Sch.  &  Lef .  22 ;  Champ- 
Un  V.  Parish,  11  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
406  ;  1  Sugden's  Vendors,  186. 

*  Hamilton  V.  Clanricarde,  5  Bro. 
P.  C.  547 ;  Fenn  v.  Harrison,  3  T. 
R.  758.  But  where  an  agent  acts 
in  good  faith  and  discloses  his  real 
authority,  the  fact  that  he  executes 
a  lease  m  excess  of  his  authority 
will  not  make  it  personally  binding 
upon  him.  It  is  only  when  he  pro- 
fesses to  have  a  power  that  he  does 
not  in  fact  possess,  that  he  is  liable. 
If  the  party  who  contracts  with 
him  knowing  the  facts,  takes  a  con- 
tract in  excess  of  his  authority,  he 
must  suffer  the  consequences  him- 
self. Sinclair  v.  Jackson,  8  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  543. 

» Adams  v.  Power,  52  Miss.  828; 


Irons  V.  Raybum,  11  Ark.  878 
Haynes  v.  Seachrist,  13  Iowa,  455  : 
Wisconsin  Bank  v.  Mortley,  19 
Wis.  62;  Bragg  v.  Fessenden,  11 
lU.  544 ;  Goodell  v.  Woodruff,  20 
111.  191 ;  Overby  v.  Overby,  18  La. 
An.  546;  Odiome  v.  Maxey,  18 
Mass.  178;  Baines  v.  Burbrid^, 
15  La.  An.  625 ;  Powell  v.  Goseon, 
18  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  179;  Breithaupt 
V.  Thurmond,  8  Rich.  (S.  C.)  216 ; 
Hall  V.  Vanness,  49  Penn.  St.  457. 

*  Pollard  V.  Gibbs,  55  Ga.  45. 

*  Wisconsin  Bank  v.  Mortley,  19 
Wis.  62 ;  Haynes  v.  Seachrist,  18 
Iowa  455 ;  Roby  v.  Coesitt,  78  DL 
638. 

•Low  V.  Conn.  &c.  R.  R.  Co.,  46 
N.  H.  284 ;  Ruggles  v.  Washington 
County,  3  Mo.  496;  Reid  v.  Hib- 
bard,  6  Wis.  175 ;  Hastings  v.  Ban- 
gor House,  18  Me.  486. 


A 


CJHAP.  XIX.]      Principal  May  Ratify.  269 

under  seal,  in  the  presence  of  the  principal  and  with  his 
knowledge,  no  other  authority  is  necessary  ;  *  and  if  he 
subsequently  ratifies  a  lease  made  by  his  agent,  which  is 
invalid  in  a  court  of  law  for  want  of  a  seal  or  other  in- 
formality, a  court  of  equity  will  compel  him  to  ratify 
and  confirm  it  as  a  valid  instrument  by  attaching  a  seal 
thereto,  or  doing  any  other  act  requisite  to  give  it  valid- 
ity as  a  legal  instrument,"  a  court  of  equity  having  ample 
power  to  reform  any  instrument  so  as  to  make  it  express 
and  effectuate  the  real  intention  of  the  parties,'  and  in 
order  to  ascertain  and  carry  out  their  intention,  it  will 
look  at  the  whole  transaction  and  the  situation  of  the 
parties  at  the  time  of  its  execution,  as  well  as  at  their 
acts  since.*  In  order  to  make  out  a  ratification  by  the 
principal,  from  his  acts,  it  must  appear  that  they  were 
done  with  knowledge  of  all  the  material  facts,*  and  his 
failure  to  repudiate  the  lease  within  a  reasonable  time, 
after  informed  of  its  terms,  would  be  construed  as  an  ac- 
quiescence." At  all  events,  whenever  an  agent  executes 
a  deed,  lease  or  other  instrument  under  seal,  without 
competent  authority,  the  principal  may  adopt  and  ratify 
it  by  a  re-delivery  thereof,  or  any  act  tantamount  there- 
to.' The  authority  of  an  agent,  if  disputed,  must  be 
proved  by  the  party  seeking  to  avail  himself  of  his  acts,' 

^  Gardner  v.   Gardner,  5  Ciish.     Ala.   143 ;  Hammond  v.   Hannin, 
(Mass.)  483.  21  Mich.  374 ;  Wright  v.  Burbank, 

*  Story  on  Agency,  Sec.  49.  64  Penn.  St.  247  ;  Gulick  v.  Grover, 


•White  V.  Denman,  16  Ohio,  59 
Webster  v.  Harris,  16  id.  490 
Bushby  v.  Littlefield,  31 N.  H.  193 


33  N.  J.  L,  463 ;  Vincent  v.  Rather, 
31  Tex.  77 ;  Drakeley  v.  Gregg,  8 
WaU.    (N.    8.)    242;  Williams   v. 


Ward  V.  Camp,    28  Ga.  74 ;  Tisson  Storms,  6  Coldw.  (Tenn.)  203.     But 

V.  Ins.  Co.,  40  Mo.  33.  acts  done  in  ignorance  of  material 

-Trink  t.  Cole,  10  111.  839  ;  Clap-  facts  cannot  amount  to  a  ratifica- 

ton  V.  Martin,  11  Ala.  187  ;  Mosby  tion.    Lester  t.  Kinne,  37  Conn.  9. 

V.    Wall,    23    Miss.  81 ;  Hook   v.  « Kenior  v.  Kimble,  26  La.  An. 

Craighead,  32  Mo.  405;  McKay  v.  713;  Farwell  v.  Howard,  26  Iowa 

Simpson,  6  Ired.  (N.  C,)  Eq.  452 ;  381 ;  Searing  v.  Butter,  69  111.  575; 

Kent  V.  Manchester,  29  Barb.  (N.  Whitehead  v.  Wells,  29  Ark.  99 ; 

Y.)595 ;  Lankins  v.  Biddle,  21  Ala.  Mining  Co.  t.  Bank,  2  Col.  T.  248 ; 

252.  Bredin  v.   Dubarry,   14   S.  &   R. 

•Seymour  v.  WyckoflF,  10  N.  Y.  (Penn.)  27 ;  Hawkms  t.  Large,  22 

218;  Mapp  v.  Phillips,  32  Ga.  72;  Minn.  557;    Mayer  v.  Morgan,  51 

Dickinson   v.    Conway,   12   Allen  Miss.  21 ;    Saveland  v.  Green,  40 

(Mass.)  487;  Fletcher  v.  Dysart,  9  Wis.  431 ;  Kelsey  v.  Bank,  &c.,  69 

B.  Mon.  (Ky.)413;  Tidrickv.  Rice,  Penn.  St.  426. 

13  Iowa,  214 ;  Burgress  v.  Harris,  '  Tupper  v.  Faulkes,  9  C.  B.  (N. 

47  Vt.  822;  Meehan  v.   Forrester,  S.)797;  Sheppard's  Touchstone,  57. 

52  N.  Y.  277 ;  Chapman  v.  Lee,  47  »  Turner  v.  Hutchinson,  2  F.  & 


270  Agents.  [§  130. 

and  this  may  be  done  by  proving  express  authorit3r,  or 
by  showing  a  state  of  facts  from  which  authority  may  be 
implied,  or  by  showing  that  the  principal  has  ratified  his 
acts.*    If  a  person  relies  upon  the  apparent  authority  of 
an  agent,  he  is  bound  to  know  the  extent  of  such  appar- 
ent authority,  and  if  he  seeks  to  avail  himself  of  acts  in 
excess  thereof,  he  must  either  show  that  the  agent  has 
done  similar  acts  in  excess  of  his  apparent  authority, 
which  were  subsequently  ratified  by  the  principal,"  or 
that  this  particular  act  was  ratified  by  him  either  ex- 
pressly or  by  fair  implication.    Prima  facicj  a  person 
having  merely  the  care  and  oversight  of  lands,  as  a  stew- 
ard or  land  agent,  has  no  authority  to  bind  his  principal 
either  by  a  contract  for  a  lease,  or  by  a  lease,  and  if  his 
authority  in  that  respect  is  relied  upon,  and  is  questioned 
by  the  principal,  it  must  be  established  by  competent 
proof. ^    In  an  English  case,"  it  was  held  that  a  person 
who  had  authority  to  let  from  year  to  year  on  usual 
terms,  and  receive  rents,  derives  no  implied  authority 
from  such  circumstances,  to  let  upon  unvsual  terms,  or 
to  make  any  special  stipulations,  without  the  express 
authority  of  the  principal ;  and  an  agent  employed  to  let 
a  house,  does  iiot  necessarily  have  an  implied  authority 
to  let  a  person  into  possession."    If  the  landlord,  how- 
ever, has  delivered  the  keys  of  the  house  to  the  agent, 
from  this  circumstance,  authority  to  let  into  possession 
might  be  implied,  and  in  any  event  but  slight  evidence 
would  be  necessary  to  prove  that  he  had  express  au- 
thority.*   A  person  having  authority  merely  to  collect 
rents,  and  look  after  the  estate,  cannot  be  treated  as 
having  an  implied  power  to  lease  the  premises  for  a 

F.  185 ;  Ridgway  t.  VHiartoii,  6  B.  *  Morlat  v.  Lyons,  8  Ir.  Ch.  118; 

L.  Cas.  238 ;  Blore  t.  Sutton,  8  Mor.  Ridgway  v.  Wharton,  6  H.  L.  Caa. 

237 ;    Firth  v.  Greenwood,  1  Jur.  238 ;  Collun  v.  Gardner,  21  Beav. 

N.  S.  806.  540 ;    Gybson  v.  Searls,  Bro.  Jac. 

>  Frailey  v.  Waters,  7  Penn.  St.  84,  176. 

221 ;  Damon  v.  Granby,  2  Pick.  *  Turner  v.  Hutchinson,  2  F.  & 

(Mass.)  845 ;  Odiome  v.  Maxey,  13  ^F.  185. 

Mass.  178 ;  Richards  v.  Folsom,  11  •  Slack  v.  Crowe,  2  F.  &  F.  59. 

Me.  70.  '  Ibid. 

«  Tibbitts  V.  Moore,  19  N.  H.  869. 

*  Chamberlain    v.  CoUinson,  45 
Iowa,  429. 


CHAP.  XIX.] 


How  Executed. 


271 


term,  but  it  would  scorn  that  he  may  lease  them  at  will 
without  any  special  authority,  because,  having  to  an- 
swer for  the  rents  to  his  principal,  the  principal  might 
sustain  great  prejudice,  if  the  agent  might  not  lease  at 
wilL' 

Seo.  130.  How  should  be  exeouted.—An  agent  leasing 
an  estate  for  his  principal,  whether  under  verbal 
authority,  or  by  power  of  attorney,  should  execute  it  in 
the  name  of  his  principal,  as  "  John  Doe,  by  Eichard 
Roe,  his  agent,"  or  "  his  attorney,"  and  if  he  executes  it 
in  his  own  name,  as ' '  Richard  Roe,  Agent  for  John  Doe, " 
or  "  attorney  for  John  Doe,"  no  interest  in  the  premises 
passes  under  the  lease.'  The  form  of  the  execution  is 
not  material,  if  it  is  really  executed  in  the  name  of  the 
person  giving  the  authority.'    Thus  a  lease  or  other  in- 


'  Woodfall'8  L.  at  T.  63 ;  Shop- 
land  V,  Rydler,  Cro.  Jac.  55  ;  Qyb- 
Mm  T.  Searls.  Cro.  Jac.  84,  176. 

*  The  addition  to  the  Dame  is 
treated  as  a  mere  detcriptio  per- 
aorux,  wid  evidence  is  not  admia- 
Hible  to  show  that  it  was  intended 
to  bind  the  principal  named. 
Kleckner  v.  Klapp,  a  W.  &  8. 
(Penn.)  44 ;  BobertBon  v.  Pope,  1 
Rich.  (S.  C.)  501  ;  McBean  v.  Mor- 
rieon,  1  A.  K.  Mar.  (Ky)  645  ;  Fiak 
V.  Eldridge,  la  Gray  (Masa.)  474  ; 
Bobertaon  v.  Banks,  S  Misa.  666 ; 
Cravena  v,  Logan,  7  Ark.  103 ; 
Fowler  V,  Atkinson,  6  Minn.  67S  ; 
Austell  V.  Rice,  5  Ga.  472  ;  Bryant* 
T.  Durkee,  9  Co.  169;  Boyd  v. 
Plumb.  7  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  800: 
BriKham  v.  Calvert,  13  Ark.  889 ; 
Taasey  v.  Church,  4  W.  8.  (Penn.) 
»4fi  ;  Hill  T,  Bannister,  8  Cow.  {N. 
Y.)  31 ;  Chadsey  v.  McGreevy,  27 
EL  253. 

»  The  agent  ahonld  always  «gn 
leofhia  princi[»l  by  him- 


self es  aaent.  and  n 


tract  of  Richard  Roe,  and  he  alone 
may  sue  or  be  sued  upon  it.  Clay 
v.  Southern,  ante.  And  parol  ev- 
idence would  not  be  adnuasible  to 
exonerate  him  from  liabihty  there- 
on, as  that  would  contradict  the 
writing.  Higgins  v.  Senior,  8  M. 
&  W.  844;  Wells  \.  Coons,  20 
Wend.  (N,  Y.)  S57 ;  but  it  would 
be  admiasible  to  charge  the  prin- 
cipal and  to  enable  him  to  sue  or 
be  sued  thereon.  Higgins  v. 
Senior,  8  M.  &  W.  844  ;  Humphrey 
V.  Dale,  7  E.  &  B.  266.  If  he  at- 
tempts to  convey  lands  or  any  in- 
terest therein  in  his  own  name,  no 
title  or  interest  therein  passes. 
Pryor  v.  Coulter,  1  Bailey  (S.  C.) 
617  ;  Campton  v.  Cassada,  32  Ga. 
428;  Bellas  v.  Hays,  5  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  437 ;  but  if  the  iostniment 
on  its  face  purports  lo  be  the  con- 
tract or  covenant  of  the  princii^, 
it  will  bind  the  principal,  altboUKh 
it  ia  signed  by  the  name  of  ma 

agent    as    "agent    (or ,"    the 

DrincipaL  H^  v.  Woods,  10  N. 
[.  470.  See  also  Cook  v.  Sanford, 
Dana  (Ky.)  337,  where  it  was  held 
liat  where  the  terms  of  an  obliga- 
ion,  signed  by  an  agent  for  his 
rinuipal,  and  not  with  that  of  the 
gent,  as  "  the  promise  to  pay," 
igned,  -v.  M.  for  N.  B.  C.  & 
'«.,"  it  must  be  understood  as  the 
bligation  of  the  principal,  and  this 
I  generally  the  rule,  when  it  ap- 


3t2  AgbNTS.  [§  130. 

strument  executed  by  an  agent,  as  follows,  "John 
Doe,  Agent  for  Eichard  Eoe,"  all  that  follows  after  his 
own  name,  is  mere  matter  of  description,  and  the  lease 
or  other  instrument  is  treated  as  that  of  the  agent,  and  is 
not  binding  upon  the  principal,'  Great  care  in  this 
respect  should  be  observed  by  agents  or  attornies, '  as,  if 
they  execute  the  instrument  professedly  for  another  he, 
thereby  impliedly  warrants  that  he  has  sufticient  and 
ample  authority  to  execute  such  contract  on  his  behalf, 
and  an  action  will  lie  against  him  for  a  breach  of  such 
warranty,  if  he  in  fact  has  not  such  authority,'  and  if 
he  has  authority  in  fact  but  executes  the  instrument  so 
defectively  as  not  to  bind  the  principal,  but  as  appear  to 
be  his  own  personal  contract,  he  will  be  personally 
responsible  thereon.  So,  too,  care  should  be  observed 
that  the  covenants  of  the  leaseappear  to  be  the  covenants 
of  the  principal,  as,  if  a  person  describes  himself  in  the 
beginning  of  an  agreement  to  grant  a  lease,  as  making 
it  on  behalf  of  another,  but  in  the  subsequent  part  of  it 
says  that  ke  will  execute  the  lease,  he  is  personally 
liable.     Thus,  where  the  solicitor  of  the  assignees  of  a 

pears  upon  the  face  of  the  instru-  art.  25  Iowa  115 ;   in  Haiae,  bj 

ment  tnat  he  acta  in  the   capacity  statute.  Jenkins  t.  School  District. 

of  agent.    Dean  v.  Boeeler,  II  Hill  89  Me.  220. 

(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  420;  Magill  v.  Hina-         '  Echols  v.  Cheney,  28  Cal.  157; 

dale,  6  Conn.  464,  and  it  must  be  Locks  v.  Alexander,  1  Hawks.  (N. 

executed  in  the  name  oftheprin-  C.)  411;    Bogart   v.  DeBusa^,  8 

cipal  or    he  will   not    be   bound.  John.  (N.  Y.)  64;  Morrison  v.  Bow- 

Sencerbox    v.   McOrade,   6  Minn,  man,  S9  Cal.  837;  Saxon  v.  Blake, 

484;   Copeland  v.  Ins.  Co.,  6  Pick.  39  Beav.   438;    Froutier  v.  SmaU, 

(Mass.)  1U8;  Savage  v.Eii,  8  N.H.  1  Stra.     7015;    3  Ld.   Rayd.    1418; 

283 ;   DemiiBon  v.  Story,  1  Oregon,  Combe's  Case,  9  Coke,  77  a.     Cook 

373:   Spencer  v.  Field,   lOWend.,  v.   Wilson,    1    C.   B.    N.    S.    153; 

(N.  Y.)  87,  and  if  the  authority  is  White  v.  Cuyler,  6  T.  R.  177 :  Ap- 

special,  it  must  be  strictly  pu);Hued,  iileton  v.  Binks,  5  East,  148 :  Par- 

andany Bubstantialvariationthere-  ker  v.   Winlow,  7   E.   &   B.   943; 

from   renders   it  void.     Nixon  v.  Wilks  v.  Bach,  3  East,  142. 
Hyserant,  5  John.  (N.  Y.)  58 ;  Al-        'In  Combe's  Case,  9  Coke.  77  a, 

len  V.  Ogden,  1  Wash.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  the  court  held   that,   "  when  one 

178;  andif '"'""■■mnrBAContaarB  hns    mithnHlE   tn   Hn    on    aM     Via 

appointed,  < 
V.   Perkins, 

7'n.  H.  353; 
8  W.  &  S. 
Phelps,  6  M 
York  a  maj 

S6T  V.  Tomti 
834 ;  B3  in  L 


CHAP.  XIX.]     Cannot  Delegate  Power. 


273 


bankrupt  tenant,  upon  whose  lands  a  distress  had  been 
put  by  the  landlord,  executed  an  instrument  as  follows : 
'*  We,  as  solicitors  to  the  assignees  undertake  to  pay  to 
the  landlord  his  rent,  provided  it  do  not  exceed  the  value 
to  the  effects  distrained."  they  were  held  personally  liable 
thereon.  So  where  one  covenants  for  himself,  his  heirs 
and  assigns,  and  under  his  own  hand  and  seal,  for  the  act 
of  another,  he  is  personally  bound  by  the  covenant, 
although  he  describes  himself  in  the  instrument  as 
covenanting  for,  and  on  behalf  of  such  other   person. 

Sec.  131.  Agent  or  attorney  cannot  delegate  his  power.— 
Where  a  power  is  given,  whether  over  real  or  personal 
estate,  and  whether  the  execution  of  it  will  confer  the 
legal,  or  only  equitable  rights  on  the  appointee,  if  the 
power  reposes  a  personal  trust  and  confidence  in  the  agents 
to  exercise  his  own  judgment  and  discretion,  he  cannot 
refer  the  power  to  the  execution  of  another,  for  delegates, 
nonpotest  delegare.  Thus,  where  a  father  had  a  power 
of  appointment  to  his  children  over  real  estate,  and  ha 
delegated  the  power  to  his  wife,  Lord  Hardwicke  said 
that  this  must  be  considered  as  a  power  of  attorney 
which  could  be  executed  only  by  the  husband,  to  whom 
it  was  solely  confined,  and  was  not  in  its  nature  trans- 
missible or  delegatory  to  a  third  person.*  A  person 
whose  consent  is  made  requisite  to  the  due  execution  of 
power,  cannot  authorize  another  as  his  attorney  to  con- 
sent to  an  execution  of  it, '  unless  the  instrument  itself 
authorizes  such  delegation  of  power.*  But  where  a 
person  acts  under  a  parol  authority,  or  even  under  a 
written  appointment,  if  be  delegates  authority  to  another 
to  do  an  act  embraced  within  the  scope  of  his  agency, 
and  the  principal  adopts  it,  it  is  as  obligatory  as  though 
done  by  the  agent  himself ;  and  the  same  is  true  if  from 


*  Tneram  v.  Ingram,  2  Atk.  88 ; 
Hamilton  v.  Royse,  2  Sch.  &  Lef. 
830.  This,  however,  is  not  the 
rule  where  the  appointment  itself 
provides  for  the  apix)intment  of 
sub-agents,  or  that  the  act  may  be 
done  oy  any  i)erson  whom  the 
agent  or  attorney  may  appoint,  or, 


where  the  nature  of  the  act  or  acts 
to  be  done  are  such  as  necessarily 
to  call  for  the  aid  of  others.  Pal- 
User  V.  Ord,  Bunb.  160. 

*  Hawkins  v.  Kemp,  3  East,  410 ; 
Atty.  Genl.  v.  Scott,  1  Ves.  407 
Suj^den  on  Powers,  17o. 

3  Palliser  v.  Ord,  Bunb.  IGO. 

18 


the  cin 
parties 
him.' 

Sec. 
ployed 
at  leag 
author: 
choose 
it  has  I 
if  they 
vencyc 
was  a  I 
in  viev 
there  s 
The  au 
the  pri 
as  the: 
to  let  p 

■Lvon 

T.)  488 ; 


HUl  (N. ' 
ekill,  disc 
fldeDce, 
Daly  (N. 
SulHvan, 

such  IB  ( 
the  natu 
the  pecul 
case,  or  t 

the  parti 
employ  c 

163 ;"  Stoi 
622.  Wl 
attorney, 
tion.  eith 
of  land,  ij 
the  lattei 
or  deed 
attorney . 

202,  but' 
corer  the 


CHAP.  XIX.]        Lmrr  of  ArrrHORiTY. 


275 


undertakes  to  act  for  another  in  a  matter  cannot  in  the 
same  matter  act  for  himself.* 


Sec.  1^3. — Authority  must  be  strictly  pursued.— An  agent 
for  the  letting  of  real  estate,  whether  authorized  in  writ- 
ing under  seal  or  by  parol,  must  proceed  substantially  ac- 
cording to  the  power  conferred,'  and  if  he  exceeds  his 
instmctions,  his  principal  is  not  bound  by  his  acts,  and 
he  becomes  personally  responsible,  and  the  fact  that  his 
intentions  were  good,  and,  as  he  believed,  his  acts  were 
for  the  benefit  of  his  principal,  will  hot  excuse  him.'  But 
there  are  instances  where  his  acts  have  been  sustained, 
when  in  excess  of  his  authority,  at  least  so  far  as  they 
were  consistent  with  his  authority.  Thus,  where  an 
agent  made  a  lease  for  twenty  years,  when  he  was  author- 
ized to  make  it  for  only  few,  was  held  in  equity  to  be  a 
good  lease  for  ten  years,*  but  at  law  it  is  held  jiot  to  be 
good  pro  tanto ;  *  but  if  the  te^a^t  enters  under  it,  and 
the  landlord  has  received  the  rent,  it  is  evidence  of  some 
kind  of  tenancy,  the  nature  of  which  is  to  be  determined 
by  a  jury." 


'  Whichcx)te  v.  Lawrence,  8  Ves. 
746. 

*  Long  V.  Coburn,  11  Maes.  97 ; 
Townsend  v.  Hubbard,  4  Hill  (N. 
Y.)  357;  Walker  v.  Smith,  1 
Wash.  (U.  8.  C.  C.)  152 ;  Kerr  v. 
Colton,  23  Tex.  411. 

»  Hardeman  v.  Ford,  12  Ga.  205 ; 
Holmes  t.  llisroom,  3  Brev.  (S.  C.) 
209 ;  Merritt  v.  Wright,  19  La.  Au. 
91 ;  but  he  ifi  bound  by  hid  instruc- 
tions only  as  he  understood  them, 
unless  there  is  fraud,  or  some  fault 
on  his  part  in  not  comprehending 
them,  and  in  the  absence  of  all 
proof  he  will  not  be  presumed  to 
De  in  fault  in  not  projierly  compre- 
hending his  instructions  to  tneir 
full  extent,  particularly  if  such  in- 
structions were  given  orally,  or  if 
in  writing,  if  they  were  suscepti- 
ble of  such  a  construction  as  he 
put  upon  them.  Pickett  ▼.  Pear- 
son, 17  Vt.  470.  But  if  the  agent 
is  guilty  of  any  fraud,  or  if 
fraud  is  fairly  inferrable  from  the 
circumstances,  the  principal  will 
not  be  bound.  Proudfoot  t. 
Wightman,  78  111.  553. 


*  Perry  v.  Bowen,  Nelson,  87; 
ISugdenon  Powers,  545 ;  Alexander 
V.  Alexander,  2  Ves.  644;  Pitt  v. 
Jackson,  2  Bro.  Ch.  Cas.  54 ;  Phill- 
pot's  Case,  3  Leon,  29. 

»Roe  V.  Prideaux,  10  East,  158. 

•  In  Roe  V.  Prideaux,  ante,  an  es- 
tate was  settled  on  several  tenants 
for  life,  in  succession,  with  re- 
mainders in  tail,  with  power  to  ev- 
ery tenant  for  life  who  should  be 
entitled  to  the  freehold  of  the 
premises,  or  any  part  thereof,  to 
make  leases  for  any  time  or  num- 
ber of  years  not  exceeding  twenty- 
one.  It  was  held  that  a  lease  made 
by  one  of  the  tenants  for  ninty- 
nme  years,  determinable  on  lives 
as  it  might  exceed  twenty-one, 
was  void  at  law,  and  was  not  even 
^ood  pro  tanto,  but  the  jury  hav- 
mg  found  that  the  tenant  m  tail 
had  received  the  rent  reserved  by 
such  lease,  after  the  death  of  the 
tenant  for  life  who  made  it,  and 
who  had  not  given  any  notice  to 
quit,  it  was  held  that  the  receipt 
of  the  rent  by  him  was  evidence  of 
a  tenancy,  the  particular  natiure  of 


•  4iivyiF«i« 


276 


Agents. 


[§134. 


Sec.  134.  Agent  to  take  leases.— A  person  who  is  author- 
ized to  take  a  lease  of  premises  for  another,  can  bind  his 
principal  by  any  usual  covenants,  though  not  speciaUy 
empowered  in  that  respect.  If  he  takes  the  lease  in  his 
own  name,  the  principal  may  compel  him  to  assign  it  to 
him,  if  it  is  shown  that  the  real  object  and  understanding 
of  the  parties  was,  that  the  lease  was  to  be  for  the  ben- 
efit of  the  principal ;  or  if  it  is  a  mere  agreement  for  a 
lease,  made  in  the  agent's  name,  the  principal  may,  by 
bill  in  equity  against  the  lessor  and  the  agent,  compel  the 
making  of  a  lease  in  pursuance  of  the  agreement  to  him,^ 
and  it  is  not  material  whether  at  the  moment  he  intended 
that  the  agreement  should  be  for  his  benefit  or  the 
principal's,  as  in  either  case  the  principal  would,  as  against 
him,  be  entitled  to  its  benefits,'  as  the  agent  is  to  be 
treated  as  a  trustee  for  his  principal.' 

Sec.  1 35 .  Misrepresentation  by  agent.— If  ,  upon  the  leas- 
ing of  premises  by  an  agent,  he  fraudulently  misrepre- 
sents their  condition,  the  principal  will  be  bound  thereby, 
although  he  gave  no  instructions  to  the  agent  in  that  re- 
spect.*   But  in  order  to  sustain  an  action  against  the  prin- 


which  it  was  the  duty  of  the  jury 
to  decide  upon.  It  is  hardly  to  be 
doubted  that  at  the  present  time, 
acquiescence  on  the  part  of  a  prin- 
cipal in  the  acts  of  his  agent,  or  of 
one  who  has  done  an  act  for  him, 
knowing  the  facts,  will  constitute  a 
full  ratification  thereof  that  will 
make  his  acts  binding  upon  the 
principal,  especially  w^here  such 
acquiescence  cannot  be  explained 
or  otherwise  accounted  for,  except 
upon  the  ground  that  the  principal 
ratified  and  confirmed  his  acts. 
Shaw  V.  Nudd,  8  Pick.  (Miss.)  9 
Farwell  v.  Howard,  26  Iowa  381 
Williams  v.  Merritt,  23  111.  628 
Bredin  v.  Dubarry,  14  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  27  ;  Caimes  v.  Bleecher,  13 
John.  (N.  Y.)  300 ;  Kehlor  v.  Kem- 
ble,  26  La.  An.  713;  Burgess  v. 
Harris,  47  Vt.  322;  Union,  &c.. 
Mining  Co.  v.  Rocky  Mountain  Na- 
tional Bank,  2  Cal.  T.  565 ;  White- 
head V.  WeUs,  99  Ark.  99  ;  Searing 
V.  Butter,  69  111.  675 ;  Abbott  v. 
May,  50  Ala.  97 ;  Turner  v.  Wilcox, 
54  Ga.  593. 


» Taylor  v.  Sabnon,  4  My.  &  Cr. 
184. 

» Wilson  V.  Hart,  1  J.  B.  Moore 
45 ;  Lees  v.  Nuttall,  1  R.  &  My. 
53 ;  Maclean  v.  Dunn,  4  Bing.  722. 

'Lees  V.  Nuttall,  ante. 

*In  Law  V.  Grant,  87  Wis.  548, 
an  agent  employed  to  sell  lands 
made  certain  false  representations 
in  reference  thereto,  without  the 
authority  or  knowledge  of  his 
principal.  The  court  held  that  the 
principal  was  chargeable  with  the 
fraud  in  the  same  manner  as 
though  he  had  known  of,  and 
authorized  them.  See  also  Fuller 
V.  Wilson,  3  Q  B.  58.  It  is  prof  er 
to  say,  however,  that  the  doctrine 
of  tliiscase  was  subsequently  over- 
ruled upon  a  hearing  of  the  case 
in  the  Exchequer  Chamber,  3  Q. 
B.  68,  and  the  court  held  that,  un- 
less actual  fraud  was  shown, 
either  on  the  part  of  the  principal, 
or  of  the  agent,  no  recovery  coidd 
be  had.  See  also  3  Q.  B.  1009, 
where  the  opinion  of  Tindal,  J., 
is  given. 


CHAP.   XIX.] 


Misrepresentation. 


277 


cipal,  either  for  fraud '  or  for  deceit ;'  fraud,  either  upon 
the  part  of  the  principal,  or  of  the  agent,  must  be  shown. 
If  the  principal,  knowing  that  the  premises  were  objec- 
tionable on  account  of  a  nuisance  existing  thereon,  should 
purposely  employ  an  agent  to  lease  the  same,  who  knew 
nothing  of  the  existence  of  the  nuisance,  and  the  agent 
in  ignorance  thereof  should  represent  the  house  as  not 
objectionable,'  the  principal  would  be  deemed  guilty  of 


'FuUer  v.  Wilson,  3  Q.  B.  68, 
1009  ;  Feret  v.  Hill,  15  C.  B.  207  ; 
Ctornfoot  V.  Fowke,  6  M.  &  W. 
358 

« brmond  v.  Huth,  14  M.  &  W. 
651  ;  Puller  v.  Wilson,  ante. 

'  See  opinion  of  Alderson,  B.  , 
in  Cornfoot  v.  Fowke,  6  M.  &  W. 
871,  where  he  says :  **It  is  said  that 
this  will  open  a  door  to  fraud,  by 
enabling  parties  in  the  situation  of 
this  principal  to  appoint  agents 
who  unconsciously  maj  make 
misrepresentations  to  the  injury  of 
third  persons.  This  does  not  fol- 
low. If  the  fact  could  be  shown, 
it  would  he  a  fraud  on  thepart  of 
theprincipal,  vnth  stich  a  motive, 
to* appoint  such  an  agent.-*  In 
this  case  the  principal  employed 
an  agent  to  let  a  house  for  him, 
and  the  agent  upon  being  inquired 
of  by  him  if  the  house  was  ob- 
jectionable, replied  that  it  was  not, 
and  the  defendant  thereupon  en- 
tered into  an  agreement  to  take  a 
lease  of  it.  It  turned  out  that  the 
house  was  objectionable,  because 
the  house  next  door  was  a  brothel, 
but  the  agent  was  ignorant  of  this 
fact,  nor  did  the  landlord  instruct 
him  to  make  any  representations 
in  reference  to  the  matter,  or 
fraudulently  concealed  the  fact 
from  him.  The  defendant,  upon 
ascertaining  the  fact,  refused  to 
take  the  lease,  and  in  an  action 
against  him  for  breach  of  the 
agreement,  the  court  held  that  the 
plaintiff  was  entitled  to  recover 
oecause  no  fraud  upon  the  part 
either  of  the  principal  or  agent, 
was  established,  and  that  in  order 
to  sustain  an  action  for  fraudulent 
representation,  or  in  order  to  de- 
fend against  an  action  upon  that 
ground,  the  representation  should 
have  been  communicated  for  a 
fraudulent  purpose.     See  also  to 


same  effect,  Ormond  v.  Huth,  14 
M.  &  W.  551 ;  Moens  v.  Hey  worth, 
10  id.  147 ;  Taylor  v.  Ashton,  11  id. 
401  ;  Wilson  v.  Fuller,  8  Q.  B.  68, 
1009  ;  Evans  v.  CoUins,  5  Q.  B.  820. 
But  in  the  case  of  Cornfoot  v. 
Fowke,  ante,  Lord  Abinqer,  C. 
B.,  dissented  from  the  doctrine 
advanced  by  the  court,  and  in  an 
able  opinion,  the  arguments  ad- 
duced in  which  are  much  more 
consistent  with  principle,  and 
much  more  convincing,  insisted 
that  liabilitv  should  exist  on  the 
part  of  tne  principal  for  the 
misrepresentations  of  the  agent  in 
reference  to  the  business  with 
which  he  was  entrusted,  whether 
he  was  guilty  of  intentional  fraud 
or  not,  insisting  that  it  was  a  fraud 
upon  the  part  of  the  agent  to  give 
an  assurance  upon  a  matter  in 
reference  to  which  he  knew  noth- 
ing, as  well  as  to  give  an  answer 
which  he  knew  to  be  false.  And 
this  is  believed  to  be  the  American 
doctrine.  If  an  agent  assumes  to 
give  information  as  to  material 
matters,  about  the  truth  or  falsity 
of  ivhich  he  knows  nothing,  it  is 
difficult  to  conceive  why,  if  the 
information  is  in  fact  false,  it  is 
not  as  much  a  fraud  upon  the 
party  with  whom  he  is  dealing, 
as  a  statement  made  by  him  which 
he  knows  to  be  false  (Bennett  v. 
Judson,  21  N.  Y.  288) ;  and  it  wiU 
be  noticed  that  the  court,  in  Fuller 
V.  Wilson,  3  Q.  B.  68,  do  not 
attempt  to  justify  the  doctrine  of 
Cornfoot  v.  Fowke,  ante,  but 
based  their  decision  upon  the 
ground  that  the  defendant  did  not 
rely  upon  any  representations  of 
the  agent,  but  grounded  himself 
upon  a  supposed  knowledge  of  the 
usual  course  of  practice  in  such 
cases;  and  upon  the  ground  the 
doctrine    of    the    case  is  clearly 


i 


278 


Agents. 


[§  135. 


a  fraud,  and  liable  therefor/  although  he  did  not  instruct 
him  to  make  such  representations.'  If  the  principal  au- 
thorizes any  false  representations  to  be  made  by  the 
agent,  or  if  he  connives  in  any  way  to  their  being  made, 
as,  by  purposely  concealing  the  facts  from  him,  or  know- 
ingly employs  an  agent  who  is  ignorant  of  the  real  con- 
dition of  the  lease,  or  of  well  grounded  objections  thereto, 
in  order  that  he  may  inaccurately  or  ignorantly  answer 
questions  in  reference  thereto,  the  person  deceived  there- 
by has  his  remedy  against  the  principal  for  the  fraud, 
and  in  some  cases,  where  he  can  put  the  other  party  in 
statu  quo,  may  rescind  the  contract  upon  that  ground.* 
But  if  the  estate  has  passed  to  him,  or  if  he  has  taken 
possession,  he  cannot  put  the  other  party  in  statu  quoy 
and  cannot  rescind/ 


maintainable.  Beoause,  if  the 
person  does  not  rdy  upon  a  state- 
ment made  by  an  agent,  but 
makes  inquiries  for  himself  and 
acts  upon  his  own  supposed 
knowledge,  he  cannot  claim  that 
he  has  been  misled  by  the  agent. 
In  our  courts  it  is  held  that  the 
acts,  representations  and  declara- 
tions of  an  agent,  made  within  the 
scope  of  his  real  or  apparerU 
autnority,  are  to  be  treated  as 
having  been  made  by  the  prin- 
cipal himself.  Ohorpennin^  v. 
Eoyoe,  58Penn.  St.  476 ;  American 
Fur  Co.  V.  United  States,  2  Pet. 
(U.  S.)  358 ;  Sharp  v.  New  York, 
40  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  266 ;  City  Bank  v. 
Bateman,  7  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  104; 
Locke  V.  Steams,  1  Met.  (Mass.) 
560.  And  this  is  so  even  though 
the  agent  made  such  representa- 
tions without  the  knowledge  of 
his  mrincipal.  Wright  v.  Calhoun, 
19  Tex.  412 ;  Henderson  v.  R. 
R.  Co.,  17  Tex.  660:  Jeffreys  v, 
Bigelow,  la  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  618 ; 


or  even  though  he  acted  contrary 
to  the  instructions  of  the  principcd 
in  making  such  representations. 
Lobdell  V.  Baker,  1  Met  (Mass.) 
198.  But  representations  made  by 
an  ageut  without  authority,  and 
contradicted  by  the  express  terms 
of  the  contracty  are  not  binding 
upon  the  principal.  Cook  v.  Whit- 
field, 41  Miss.  841.  Whatever  may 
be  the  English  doctrine,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  in  this  country 
the  defence  set  up  in  Comf oot  v. 
Fowke,  ante,  would  be  available, 
even  though  the  agent  did  not  at 
the  time  know  tiiat  his  representa- 
tions were  false.  Bennett  v. 
Judson,  21  N.  Y.  288. 

*  See  last  note. 

» In  Fuller  v,  Wilson,  Q.  B.  68, 
68,1009. 

•Hunt  V.  Silk,  6  Ea^,  449; 
Blackburn  v.  Smith,  2  Exchg. 
788 ;  Clark  v.  Dickson,  £.  B.  &  E. 
148. 

^Blackburn  v.  Smith,  ante. 


.] 


PmNdPAL  TO  Agent. 


279 


Sec.  186. 
g^aardlan — '. 
Sec.  187. 
Sec.  188. 
Sec.  139. 
Sec.  140. 
Sec.  141. 
Sec.  142. 
Sec.  143. 
Sec.  144. 
Sec.  145. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

OF  LEASES  BETWEEN  PARTICULAB  INDIVIDUAIiL 

By  principal  to  agent — By  client  to  attorney — By  ward  to 
By  cestui  que  trust  to  trustee^By  mortgagor  to  mortgagee. 
Leases  to,  may  be  good. 
Consideration  may  be  mixed. 

What  should  be  done  to  avert  suspicion  of  unfair  dealing. 
E^ect  of  acquiescence. 
Leases  from  client  to  attorney. 
Rule  in  Dawson  v.  Massey. 

Leases  between  relatives  and  members  of  the  family. 
Rule  in  Mulhallen  v.  Marum. 
Mortgagor  to  Mortgagee. 


Sec.  136.  By  principal  to  agent— By  olient  to  attorney— 
By  ward  to  guardian  —  By  cestid  que  trust  to  trustee— By 

mortgagor  to  mortgagee.—*^  Leases, '^  says  Mr.  Piatt  in  his 
work  on  Leases/  '*  granted  to  agents  by  their  principals 
or  employers  ;  to  attorneys  by  their  clients  ;  to  guardians 
by  their  wards,  soon  after  attaining  their  majority  ;  to 
trustees  by  their  cestuis  que  trust,  and  others  in  similar 
fiduciary  situations,  though  unimpeachable  at  law,  are 
viewed  with  the  utmost  jealousy  in  equity,  lest  an  undue 
advantage  should  be  taken  by  the  lessees  of  the  influence 
or  knowledge  acquired  by  them  in  their  confidential 
character ;  and  the  slightest  appearance  of  unfair  deal- 
ing will  suffice  to  invalidate  the  entire  transaction. 

Sec.  137.  LeaseB  to,  may  he  good.— But  there  is  no  rule 
of  policy  even  in  equity,  which  absolutely  prohibits  an 
agent,  or  attorney,  from  being  the  lessee  of  his  employer, 
principal,  or  client.'    And  a  lease  purely  voluntary  may 

1  Piatt  V.  Leases,  559,  566.  84  ;  Lord  Selsey  v.  Rhoades,  2  Sim. 

» Harris  v.  Tremenheere,  15  Ves.     &  Stu.  41,  49 ;  on  appeal,  1  Bli.  P. 


2S0  PaBTICULAK  iNDITIDTJAIfl.  [§   137. 

be  granted  from  motives  of  kindness  and  friendship,  even 
during  the  continuance  of  the  relation  ;  nor  can  it  be  an- 
nulled unless  misrepresentation,  circumvention,  or  undue 
means,  be  resoi-ted  to  for  the  purpose  of  influencing  tlie 
lessor.  The  slightest  hint,  however,  in  answer  to  a  bill 
or  in  the  evidence,  that  the  lessee  had  laid  before  the  les- 
sor an  account  of  the  value  of  the  premises,  which  was 
not  perfectly  accurate,  will  be  a  sufficient  inducement 
for  the  court  to  set  aside  such  lease,  whatever  the  parties 
might  intend,  upon  the  general  ground,  that  the  princi- 
pal never  would  be  safe  if  the  agent  could  take  a  gift  from 
him  upon  a  representation  that  was  not  most  accurate 
and  precise.' 

If  the  lease  be  granted  to  the  agent,  not  gratuitously, 
but  upon  consideration,  if  any  doubt  be  raised,  it  is  in- 
cumbent on  the  lessee  to  shew  that  he  made  as  good  a 
bai^ain  for  his  employer,  as  against  himself,  as  a  provi- 
dent, well  managing,  honorable  agent,  acting  most  ad- 
versely, in  a  fair  sense,  would  ;  and  that  he  paid  the  full 
amount  that  he  could  have  obtained  from  any  other  per- 
son.' Thus  in  one  case  the  lease  was  set  aside,  the  lessee, 
who  was  the  agent  and  attorney  of  the  lessor,  having  ob- 
tained it  for  a  consideration  grossly  inadequate ;  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  lessor  being  at  the  time  in  an  extreme- 
ly embarrassed  state.*  And,  in  like  manner,  where  a 
reversionary  lease  was  granted  to  commence  upon  the 
determination  of  a  life  of  seventy,  contrary  to  a  former 
resolution  by  the  lessor  not  to  grant  another  reversionary 
lease  where  only  one  life  above  the  age  of  sixty  was  exist- 
ing, and  the  consideration  professed  to  have  been  given 
for  the  lease  was  150/.  IiOrd  Eldon  thought  that  the 
defendant  should  have  produced  evidence,  in  support  of 
the  transaction,  that  the  consideration  was  adequate ; 

C.  N.  8. 1 ;  T« 
P.  C.  470;H' 
&  Keen,  113, 
2  Yo.  &  Col. 
V.  Lord  Dud  I 
G0&,  6j3  ;  Ma 
&  War.  31,  S 
bniT.lWillfl 
see  l>eat  t.  J 


TSfrvy 


CHAP.  XX.] 


Consideration. 


281 


for  the  fairness  of  the  bargain  was  not  to  be  presumed ;  and 
as  he  had  failed  to  do  so>  an  issue  was  directed ;  and  the  ver- 
dict upon  the  trial  being  against  the  adequacy  of  the  con- 
sideration, a  decree  was  made  directing  the  lease  to  be 
delivered  up.* 

The  same  equity  affects  an  assignee  of  the  lease  with 
notice." 

Sec.  13*.  ConBideration  may  be  mixed.— Notwithstand- 
ing Lord  Eldon's  remark  that  when  the  grant  is  found- 
ed on  a  proposal  for  purchase,  the  court  will  not  permit 
motives  of  kindness  and  gratuity  to  be  mixed  with  it,' 
it  is  said,  in  a  more  recent  case,  that  the  transaction  may 
be  founded  partly  on  a  pecuniary  consideration,  and  part- 
ly on  motives  of  bounty ;  but  that,  where  the  consider- 
ation is  thus  mixed,  the  steward  is  bound  to  make  out 
that  his  employer  was  fully  apprised  of  every  circum- 
stance respecting  the  property  which  either  was  or  ought 
to  have  been  within  the  knowledge  of  the  steward,  and 
whijh  could  tend  to  demonstrate  the  value  of  the  prop- 
erty, and  the  precise  measure  and  extent  of  the  bounty 
of  the  employer.* 

Sec.  139.  What  should  be  done  to  avert  suspioion  of  un- 
fkir  dealing.— In  all  cases  of  this  kind,  to  avoid  the  sus, 
picion  of  unfair  dealing,  the  party  contracting  for  the 
lease  should  avail  himself  of  the  mediation  of  a  third 
person  ;  the  neglect  of  this  precaution  being  sufficient  to 
justify  an  examination.  *    * '  The  court, "  said  Lord  Eldon, 


'  Harris  v.  Tremenheere,  15  Ves. 
39, 40,  per  Lord  Eldon.  Hunter  v. 
Atkins,  3  Myl.  &  Keen,  138 ;  Ker  v. 
Dungannon,  1  Dm.  &  War.  509, 
542. 

'  Harris  v.  Tremenheere,  15  Ves. 
43 ;  Lord  Selsey  v.  Rhoades,  2  Sim. 
&  Stu.  50 ;  Beaumont  v.  Boulsbee,  5 
Ves.  485  ;  S.  C.  7  Ves.  599  ;  11  Ves. 
358 ;  Lady  Ormond  v.  Hutchinson, 
13  Ves.  47  ;  16.  Ves.  94 ;  Medlicott 
V.  0'Donnel»  1  Ball  &  Beat.  164 ; 
Hunter  v.  Atkins,  3  Myl.  &  Keen, 
4a5 ;  140 ;  Champion  v.  Rigby,  1 
Russ.  &  Myl.  539  ;  S.  C.  1  Taml.  421. 
And  see  Riossiter  v.  Walsh,  2  Con. 
&  Law.  563 ;  S.  C.  4  Dru.  &  War. 
458  ;  noticed  ante  p.  391. 


8  Ward  V.  Hartpole,  3  Bli.  P.  C. 
470 ;  and  Gartside  v.  Isherwood,  1 
Bro.  C.  C.  558 ;  Appendix,  5th  ed. 
by  Belt. 

-^Lord  Selsey  v.  Rhoades,  2  Sim. 
&  Stu.  50,  per  Leach,  V.  C. ;  S.  C. 
1  Bli.  P.  C.  N.  8.  1.  And  see  Daw- 
son V.  Massey,  1  Ball  &  Beat.  235 ; 
Lord  Kingsland  v.  ^mewall,  1 
Bro.  P.  C.  164;  Toml.  ed.  vol.  4,  p. 
154 ;  Jour.  vol.  18,  p.  264 ;  Rhoades 
V.  Beauvoir,  6  Bli.  P.  C.  N.  8.  195. 

*  Harris  v.  Tremenheere,  15  Ves. 
40-1 ;  Hunter  v.  Atkins,  8  Myl.  & 
Keen,  137,  et  seg ;  Watt  v.  Grove, 
Grove  v.  Watt,  2  Scho.  &  Lef.  592, 
692. 


J 


263  Pabticdlab  Indiv: 

"never ought  to  give  costs  upon  tl 
nation,  where  the  party  has  not  in 
son  "  ; '  and  in  one  case  he  refused 
declaring  at  the  same  time  that  he 
costs  in  the  court  below,  as  had  1: 
Chancellor."  The  costs  which  we 
missal  of  the  bill  in  Harris  v.  Tn 
of  the  voluntary  leases  granted  ti 
given  on  the  ground  of  such  lease 
to,  and  provision  upon,  the  defend 
But,  on  setting  aside  leases  so  g 
be  allowed  credit  for  valuable  and 
of  the  property.' 

Sec.  140.  Efibot  of  aotjnidaoeno 
cence,  however,  or  acts  of  confirm 
to  leases  which  could  not  original!; 
had  means  been  resorted  to  withii 
the  purpose  of  setting  them  aside, 
the  plaintiff  had  slept  upon  his 
years,  during  which  period  the  dei 
divested  of  the  fiduciary  chaiacte 
other  character  which  could  have 
tion  had  ceased  to  subsist,  the  cou 
to  vacate  the  leases.*  The  same 
case  of  Lord  Selsey  v.  Bhoades. 
being  tenant  for  life  with  power  ( 
1804,  concurred  with  Mr.  Peachy, 
ant  for  life,  in  an  agreement  witl 
steward,  to  grant  him  a  lease  forti 
circumstances  which  it  is  not  necf 
On  Lord  Selsey's  death  in  1808,  H 
Lord  Selsey)  became  tenant  for 
lease  in  1809  according  to  the  tei 
He  died  in  1816,  when  the  reven 

<  Ibid.      And   see   Medlicott    v.  9  Mod 

O'Doiuiel,  1  BaU  Sc  Beat.  156.  BU.  P. 

■SelBCT  T.  Rhoades,  1  BU.  P.  C.        *Mei 

N.  S.  8.  Beat, 

■  Watt  T.  Grove,  Grove  v.  Watt,  eney  i 

2  Scho.  &  Lef.  463,  513  ;  Attorney-  887  ;  C 

General  v.  Baliol  College,  Oxford,  &  Hyl 


CHAP.   XX.]  CLIBNT  to  ATTORNEY.  283 

the  appellant,  who  delayed  the  filing  of  his  bill  till  1821, 
having  in  the  meantime  accepted  the  rent  reserved  in  the 
lease.  "I  have  looked,"  said  Lord  Eldon/  *'into  this 
case,  with  a  desire  to  affect  the  lease  ;  for  the  situation 
of  the  parties  was  such  as  to  induce  a  court  of  equity  to 
look  at  the  transaction  with  great  suspicion.  If  the  suit 
had  been  instituted  recently  after  the  contract,  and  there 
had  been  no  acts  of  confirmation,  probably  the  lease 
might  not  have  stood  ;  but  James  Lord  Selsey  and  John 
Lord  Selsey  acquiesced  so  long,  being  well  acquainted 
with  the  facts,  that  it  is  diflScult  to  say  that  they  could 
have  impeached  the  lease,  and  the  appellant  cannot  do 
that  which  they  could  not  have  done."  There  is  no 
limited  time,  however,  within  which  relief  must  be 
sought ;  every  case  must  depend  on  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances which  give  rise  to  the  appBcaticm. 

Sec.  141.  Leases  from  olient  to  attomey.-^Leases  granted 
by  a  cUent  to  his  attorney  are  governed  by  the  same 
principles  as  those  between  employer  and  steward.* 

As  to  leases  taken  by  a  guardian  of  his  ward,  it  was 
said  by  L.  C.  Manners,  *  * '  Generally  speaking,  there 
are  no  transactions  in  a  man's  life  that  ought  in  this 
court  to  be  more  scrupulously  or  with  more  jealousy  ex- 
amined, than  those  which  occur  recently  after  a  ward 
attains  the  age  of  twenty-one,  affecting  his  real  prop- 
erty. Antecedent  to  that  period  his  infancy  is  his  pro- 
tection, his  disabilities  are  his  security ;  but  instantly 
after  he  attains  the  age  of  twenty -one,  as  if  he  had  ac- 
quired all  the  prudence  and  experience  necessary  to  the 
management  or  disposal  of  his  property,  with  the  pos- 
session are  given  the  absolute  control  and  dominion  over 
his  estates.  At  law,  all  his  acts  are  binding,  all  his  deeds 
are  valid,  unless,  upon  some  distinct  case  of  fraud,   they 

» Selsey  v.  Rhoades,  1  Bli.  P.  C.  ott,  8  Bli.  P.  C.  N.  S.  287 ;  Jones  v. 

N.  S.  8.  Thomas,  2  Yo.  &  Ck)l.  Exchq.  498; 

'Harris   v.    Tremenheere,   sup.  Champion  v.    Rigby,  1    Russ.    & 

Lord  Selsey  v.  Rhoades,  sup. ;  Ward  Myl.  639 ;  S.  C.  Taml.  421 ;  Rhodes 

V.  Hartpole,  sup. ;  Watt  v.  Grove,  v.  Beauvoir,  6  Bli.  P.  C.  N.  S.  195. 

Grove  V.  Watt,  2  Scho.  &  Lef.  492,  *  Dawson  v.    Massey,  1    Ball  & 

503.    And  see  Kenney  v.  Browne,  Beat.  282. 
3  Ridg.  P.  C.  402 ;  Blakeney  v.  Bag- 


284 

cannot  be  i 
those  relatio] 
trustee  and  < 
a  court  of  U 
lidity  of  a  ■ 
not  he  impes 
This  last  p 
haps,  is  i'ec< 
cipal  and  a^ 
least,  is  cert 
cited  in  this 
actions  betw 
the  determir 
factory  proo: 

Sec.  142. 
lish  case,'  M 
uncle,  bad  b 
years,  and  ; 
knowledge  ( 
then  became 
man  educat< 
since  he  was 
age,  and  the 
point  an  agi 
urged  him  e 
pression,  "t 
estate  for  y^ 
one  John  M 
went  over  t 
after  enterec 
tained  five  le 
some  for  ev 
ter  containiu 
afterwards  u 
IZOOl.  per  ai 
John  Masse; 
let  at  an  und 


CHAP.  ZX.]  BbLATIVES.  285 

■with  him,  and  actually  turned  him  out  of  the  room  when 
he  was  treating  with  the  plaintiff  for  a  lease,  for  having 
offered  his  opinion  as  to  the  value.  It  also  appeared  that 
the  uncle,  an  elderly  mau  without  children,  had  a  con- 
siderable influence  over  his  nephew,  then  very  ines- 
perienced  in  the  value  of  his  estates ;  and  that  he  held 
out  inducements  hoth  to  Massey,  the  agent,  and  to  the 
plaintiff,  by  letter,  stating  that  whatever  interest  he  got 
in  the  leases  would  ultimately  be  for  the  benefit  of  the 
plaintiff.  It  was  also  proved  that  persons  who  would 
have  bid  for  some  parts  of  the  lands  taken  by  the  de- 
fendant, declined  doing  so,  finding  that  he  had  proposed 
for  them.  It  appeared  that,  before  the  defendant  got 
leases  of  the  principal  part  of  the  estate,  the  plaintiff  and 
his  agent  visited  them,  and  received  several  proposals  for 
leases  which  were  not  accepted.  Upon  these  grounds, 
as  well  as  upon  the  ground  of  the  subsisting  influence  of 
the  uncle  over  the  nephew,  though  the  relation  of  guard- 
ian and  ward  bad  ceased,  and  of  the  absence  of  all  se- 
curity for  the  inducement  held  out  that  the  transaction 
would  ultimately  tend  to  the  advantage  of  the  plaintiff, 
the  court  decreed  the  leases  to  be  set  aside,  and  gave  the 
plaintiff  his  costs. 

Sec.  143.  Iieasea  between  relativeB  and  members  of  tbe 
fiunily.— As  to  the  dealing  being  one  of  a  family  nature, 
an  arraugement  between  the  uncle  and  nephew,  so  that 
the  full  value  of  the  property  or  the  highest  rent  was  not 
to  be  taken  as  the  only  consideration  between  the  parties, 
or  the  criterion  by  which  the  court  was  to  form  a  judg- 
ment of  its  fairness,  his  lordship  said,  that  that  was  not 
the  ground  upon  which  the  defence  was  rested,  nor  was 
there  any  proof  of  it; '  and,  indeed,  he  should  expect  some 

*■  '    "--        --■■■  i-i'   -- 1 "--'■  upon  such 

1  was  well 
what  was 
mt  to  the 


plaintiff's 
and  to  ke« 

Sec.  14^ 
trine  was 
renewable 
ment  of  h 
of  his  gua 
on  ground 
tm  had  de 
the  grant  < 

And  in  i 
sou  from  1 
set  aside  t 
of  weak  i 
under  the 
family.  1 
the  circuD 

Sec.  141 
even  in  ec 
ing  granb 
there  be  a: 
action  wit 
cited,  the 
tained  it 


M  BaUv. 
•Hulhallei 
War.  317. 

•  Alyward 
Beat.  46S. 

*  Gubbina 
Lef.  214. 

The  whole 
Piatt  on  Lei 
that  woik,  a 


CHAP,  sxl]  Gbkeballt.  287 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

T.TgAHTiM  UKDER  POWEBS. 

Sec.  146.  Generally. 

Sec.  147.  Construction  of  power. 

Sec.  148.  Execution  of  the  power. 

Sec.  149.  What  kind  of  leases  may  he  granted. 

Sec.  150.  In  whom  powers  may  vest. 

Sec.  151.  Usual  covenants — ^proviso  for  re-entry— counterpart. 

Sec.  152.  Leases  in  possession  or  reversion. 

Sec.  158.  On' what  land  they  attach. 

Sec.  154.  What  is  a  lease  in  reversion. 

Sec.  155.  Effect  of  existing  leases. 

Sec.  156.  Leases  in  possession  or  reversion. 

Sec.  157.  What  are  usual  covenants  within  such  powers. 

Sec.  158.  Ways,  &c. 

Sec.  159.  Power  to  grant  leases  with  a  proviso  for  re-entry. 

Sec.  160.  What  lands  are  considered  as  having  heen  lands  usually 

let. 

Sec.  161.  Whether  lands  not  before  in  lease  may  be  demised. 

Sec.  162.  Whether  such  leases  are  good  for  part  only. 

Sec.  168.  Execution  of  powers  delegated  to  infants,  lunatics,  feme 

covert,  &c. 

Sec.  164.  Statutory  powers. 

Section  146.  Gtenerally.— A  power  is  an  authority 
given  to  a  person  to  dispose  of  an  interest  which  is  given 
to  another.*  Settlements  and  wills  often  empower  trus- 
tees, or  other  persons  named  therein  to  grant  leases ;  in- 
deed Lord  Mansfield  once  said,  "  of  all  kinds  of  powers, 
this  is  the  most  frequent. " '  The  distinction  between 
powers  conferred  by  deed,  will  or  other  grant,  and  a  mere 

»  Goodhill  V.  Brigham,  1  B.  &  P.         *  Atkyns  v.  Horde,  1  Burr.  120. 


naked  pon 
that  in  the 
cess  of  tha 
power,  or 
binding  u] 
the  latter  < 
sor's  estat( 
he  may  gr 
his  life ;  h 
the  next  d 
But,  if  the 
term  of  hi! 
thereof  no 
fed  by  the 
term,  and 
couraged. 
of  the  est 
lease,  he  cc 
own  time ; 
land  being 
The  plan  o 


Sec.  ur, 
stnied  accx 
and  so  as 

'  The  powt 
manent  lease 
the  estate  th< 
lessor,  never  i 
It  must  be  ex 
it  doee  not  exi 
be  avoided 
Bolton  V.  Ora 
Markham  v. 


the  parties  f  o 
xrantor  could 
fowly  V.  Gowi 

'AtkynB  V, 
Campbell  v. 
Sliannon  t.  E 
Let.  ei. 

' Sugden  on 


CHAP.  XXI.]       Construction  of  Power. 


289 


efifect  to  its  execution,  if  not  improperly  or  improvidently 
exercised. '  The  creation,  execution  and  construction  of 
I)owers  depends  on  the  words  used  and  the  substantia 
intention  and  purpose  of  the  parties  who  gave  the  power," 
and  such  intention  is  to  be  collected  from  the  words  used, 


the  share  of  the  one  first  dying  with- 
out issue   to  go  to    the    survivor 
under  the  same  conditions.     Both 
married,   and  by  a  deed  of  three 
parts,  the  trustees  bv  the  direction 
and  appointment   of   the    nieces, 
conveyed   all  their  estate,  interest, 
right  and  title  to  the  defendant 
during   the  natural  lives  of  the 
nieces.    The   deed  was   acknowl- 
edged as  if  suijuriSt  and  without 
separate  examination  of  the  mar- 
ried   women.     K    died    without 
issue,  leaving  C,  who  filed  a  bill 
i^g^inst  the    defendant    for    £.'s 
share.    It  was  held  that  the  design 
was  to  limit  the  power  of  disposal 
to  the  rents  and  profits,  and  that 
the  nieces  had  no  power  to  unite 
with  the  trustees  to  convey   the 
fee;  that  they  had  power  to  ap- 
point the  rents  and  profits  arising 
out  of  the  contingent  remainders 
to  each  depending  on  the  previous 
death  of  the  other  ;  that  the  words 
*'fTom.  time  to  time"  are  not  suffi- 
cient to  limit  the  appointment  and 
prevent    anticipation.     Cooke    v. 
Musbands,  11  Md.  492.    Land  was 
devised  to  trustees  to  pav  the  rents 
and  profits  to  the  use  of  the  wife 
and  children  of  S.  during  his  life, 
and  a  power  of  appointment  by 
will  was  given  toS.    In  1840  the 
trustees,  with  S.,  his  wife  and  one 
child,  conveyed  a  portion  of  the 
estate  to  the  other  child.    Under 
this  deed,  defendant  deduced  title, 
and  was  in  possession.    S.  coven- 
anted not  to  exercise  his  power  of 
appointment,  and  agreed  that  all 
his  title  was  extinguished.  In  1852 
however,  S.  died,  and  by  his  power 
of  ai>pointment,  devised  the  prem- 
ises in  suit,  as  well  as  the  remain- 
der of   the   estate,    to   his   wife, 
through  whom   plaintiff  claimed 
and  brought  this  action  of  eject 
ment.    It  was  held,  1.  That  as  S. 
had  no  beneficial  or  equitable  title- 
in  the  land,  his  power  of  appoint- 
ment was  simply   collateral,  and 
could  not  be  barred  by  any  act  of 
his    2.    That  the  covenant  of  S. 
pMMonil  only.    3.  Ttttft,  1^' 


the  deed  of  1840,  an  estate  during 
the  life  of  S.  only  was  conveyed, 
the  remainder  passing,  either  by 
his  appointment  or  in  the  absence 
of  it,  over,  in  accordance  with 
the  provisions,  in  that  alternative, 
of  the  original  will.  4.  That  the 
widow  of  o.  was  not  estopped  by 
the  deed  of  1840  from  taking  under 
S.'s  appointment ;  as  a  feme  covert, 
she  could  pass  only  her  present 
beneficial  interest  for  the  life  of  S. 
5.  That  the  defendant's  possession 
had  not  been  adverse,  as  after 
death  of  S.  he  became  tenant  by 
sufferance.  Learned  v.  Tallmage, 
56  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  443. 

*  Carver  v.  Richards,  29  L.  J. 
Ch.  867.  The  rules  for  the  con- 
struction of  powers  are  variously 
given.  In  some  cases  it  has  been 
held  that  they  should  be  construed 
strictly  for  the  tenant  for  life,  and 
liberally  for  the  reminder-man. 
Atkyns  v.  Horde,  1  Burr.  60,  125  ; 
Orly  V.  Mahun,  Gilb.  Exq.  Rep.  58, 
strictly ;  Fitzwilliam's  Case,  6  Coke 
82,  favorably  for  the  donor,  Berry 
V.  White ;  O'Bridgman  by  Bann. 
90, 93,  liberally;  Bassett  v.  Thomas, 
8  Burr.  1441,  equitably  in  favor  of 
the  donee;  Wood  v.  Hartpole,  S 
Bligh.  470,  indifferently,  without 
leaning  to  either  side  ;  Earl  of  Jer- 
sey V.  Smith,  7  Price,  318 ;  Clarges 
V.  Funucan,  2  Daug.  573,  but  after 
all  this  diversity,  but  one  rule  can 
be  sustained,  and  that  is,  that  the 
construction  must  accord  with  the 
evident  intention  of  the  parties 
thereto,  as  previously  stated.  In 
Hawkins  v.  Kemp,  3  East  441 ,  Lord 
Ellenbobouqh  says,  "The  court 
is  to  decide  according  to  what  they 
shaU  judge  to  be  the  intention  of 
the  parties,  not  restraining  or  les- 
sening the  power  by  a  narrow  and 
rigid  construction,  nor  by  a  loose 
and  extended  construction,  dis- 
pensing with  the  substance  of  what 
was  meant  to  be  performed." 

«  Hall  V.  Bulkley,  1  Doug.  293 ; 
Pomeroy  v.  Partington,  8  T.  R. 
605 ;  Atkyns  v.  Horde  1  Burr.  60. 


19 


not  accoi 
may  con 
that  the 

Sec.  !■ 
strictly  p 
all  acts  di 
able  ther 
tain  coDi 
conformi 
the  interi 


remaindt 

■  Oriffltb 
748.    Opini 

LEB^.  J. 

'  Woodft 
'  LordU 
Horde,  a  Bi 
is  coupled  ' 
stantiol  coi 
Rowe  T.  Be 
T.  Lewis,  8( 

•  Cavani 
A  power,  g. 

acead&at,  di 
»  general  o 
to  hUgraiu 
Norris,  49  F 
Bennett,  5  < 
nor  to  child 
tator'a  deatt 
Maes.  353, 
the  separate 

eolvent,  wai 
by  deed,  pr 
be  held  in  t 
the  wife  du 
bet  death  f< 
BOD  as  th( 
made  befra 
the  wife, 
the  refrom, 
alsoprovidi 
should  min 
land  should 
and  her  hei 
held  that  t 
meiit  could 
bnatund  on 


CHAP.  XXI.]        Execution  op  Power. 


291 


does  not  help  the  matter.  Thus,  where  the  power  reuqires 
that  a  certain  fixed  rent  and  a  money  heriot,  payable  under 
peculiar  circumstances,  shall  be  reserved,  a  lease  granted 
under  the  power  reserving  a  longer  heriotj  is  void ;  *  nor 
where  power  is  given  to  demise  lands  or  any  part  of  them, 
is  the  power  well  executed  by  a  demise  of  part,  with  lib- 
erty of  shooting  over  the  whole."    So  under  a  power  to 


the  proceeds.  The  children  left 
their  home,  and,  the  youngest  be- 
ing eight  years  of  age,  filed  their 
bill  to  compel  a  sale  of  the  real 
estate,  on  the  ground  that  the  wid- 
ow had  an  illegitimate  child  bom 
before  her  marriage,  and  that  she 
was  low  in  social  position  and  of 
Tulgar  reputation.  It  was  held 
that  the  court  could  not,  under  the 
circumstances,  and  against  the 
wish  of  the  widow,  interfere  with 
the  discretion  of  the  executor,  he 
not  thinking  proper  to  make  the 
sale.  Greer  v.  McBeth,  12  Rich. 
(S.  C.)  Eq.  254.  Where  a  will  gave 
a  life  estate  to  the  wife  for  life, 
and  then  provided,  **  I  further  will 
and  request  that  at  her  death  she 
make  such  a  disposition  of  it  as 
she  thinks  best,"  it  was  held  that 
such  power  could  be  executed  only 
by  an  appointment  by  will  and 
could  not  be  executed  by  deed  or 
other  conveyance.  Potter  v. 
Thomas,  23  Ga.  467 ;  Moore  v.  Di- 
mond,  5  R.  I.  121.  So  where  a  tes- 
tator demised  slaves  to  his  wife 
during  her  natural  life,  and  at  her 
death  to  be  sold  and  equally  di- 
vided among  his  lawful  .heirs ;  it 
was  held  tlmt  such  power  could 
not  be  executed  by  the  executors 
during  her  life.  Duke  v.  Palmer, 
10  Rich.  (S.  C.)  Eq.  380.  Where  a 
power  is  conditional,  and  depend- 
ent upon  a  contingency,  it  cannot 
be  executed  until  such  contingency 
happens,  as  where  a  testator  di- 
rect^ his  debts  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  moneys  due  him,  **  but  in  case 
my  creditors  will  not  wait  a  rea- 
sonable time  to  allow  my  execu- 
tors to  collect  my  debts  or  to  raise 
the  sum  I  owe  from  the  income  of 
my  estate,  then,  and  in  such  case, 
I  empower  my  executors  to  sell 
and  dispose  of  such  part  of  my 
estate  as  they  shall  thmk  most  to 
the  advantage  of  my  estate,"  it 
held  that  this  power  ocmlitlnit 


be  executed  until  the  necessit- 
thereafter  arose.  S.  Carolina  it. 
R.  C5o.  V.  Toomer,  9  Rich.  (S.  C.) 
£q.  270.  See  also  Cleveland  v. 
Boerum,  27  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  252  ;  and 
Hull  V.  Culver,  34  Conn.  403 ;  to 
the  same  effect.  In  Sherman  v. 
Hicks,  14  Gratt.  (Va.)  96  ;  T.  con- 
veyed land  to  S.,  ana  C.  his  wife, 
to  have  and  to  hold  to  S.  during  his 
natural  life,  with  reversion  fee  to 
C.  and  her  heirs.  S.  covenanted 
with  T.  and  C.  that  she  should 
have  the  privilege,  whether  she 
should  choose  to  execute  it  during 
coverture  or  not,  to  nominate  by 
last  will  and  testament,  or  power 
of  appointment,  in  presence  of  two 
witnesses,  such  person  as  she  might 
designate  for  her  heir  or  heirs  to 
such  land  after  the  death  of  B.  It 
was  held,  1.  That  a  valid  power  of 
appointment,  in  during  the  lifetime 
or  her  husband,  was  conferred  on 
C,  notwithstanding  her  ^tate  in 
fee.  2.  That  this  power  was  well 
executed  by  an  holograph  will,  the 
provision  as  to  witnesss  applying 
ro  other  methods  of  appointment, 

*  Egremont  v.  Hellmg,  Q  Jur, 
(Q.  3.)821. 

'Dayrell  v.  Hoare,  12  Ad.  & 
El.  356.  The  reason  for  this  rule  is 
that  the  right  of  shooting  cannot 
be  granted  of  itself  imderapower 
that  simply  confers  the  right  to 
lease  **the  estate,  hereditaments  or 
premises,  or  any  part  thereof,"  be- 
cause it  is  a  mere  privilege  to  the 
grantee,  and  not  comprehended 
imder  the  power  conferred.  There 
being  nothing  to  which  it  is 
appendant  or  appurtenant,  it  can- 
not be  considered  as  an  easement. 
It  is  a  r^ht  which  can  arise  onlv 
out  of  tne  possession  of  the  land, 
and  is  an  incident  to  the  land  and 
such  a  power  does  not  warrant  the 
separation  of  the  incident  from 
the  land.  Pattison,  J. ,  in  Dayrell 
^.  floftre,  12  id.  870.    In  Waldrou 


-.1 


>J3S^* 


F/- 


292 


UmiER  Powers. 


[§  148. 


demise  lands  reserving  the  ancient  rent,  a  demise  of  those 


V.  Chastney,  2  Blatch.    (U.  S.  C. 
C.)  62;  E.,  in  1B19,  devised  real 
estate  to  R.,  hi^  wife,  for  life  or 
during  her  widowhood,  to  support 
herself,  her  three  daughters,  and 
one   P.,   and    on    the    death    or 
marriage  of  R.  the  same  to  go  to 
P.,  for  life,  to  support  himseli  and 
the  daughters ;  and  after  the  death 
or  marriage  of  R.  and  the  death  of 
P.  to  go  to  the  daughters  in  fee. 
Power  was  given  to  R.  so  long  as 
she  remained    single,    and  after- 
wards to  P.  to  sell  and  convey  the 
real  estate,  provided  that  B.  shall 
in  writing,  signed  with  his  hand, 
approve  and  consent  to  such  sale ; 
but  no  such  sale    shall  be  valid 
without    such     approbation    and 
consent;  and  the  moneys  arising 
from  the  sale  were  directed  to  be 
invested  as  B.  should  direct.    It 
was  held  that  under  the  will,  R. 
had  only  a  naJced  power  in  respect 
to  the  (usposition  of  the  estate,  and 
that  the  power  could  be  rightly 
exercised  only  bv  a   sale  of  the 
estate  in  fee ;  and  that  a  lease,  as 
a  conveyance  under  the  power  of 
sale  in  the  will,  was  void,  as  not 
fulfilling  the  intent  of  the  testator, 
and  not  being  a  sale  of  the  estate 
for    cash,    or    something    which 
could  be  invested  as  its  representa- 
tive.    But  R.   having  an  absolute 
estate  for  her  widowhood,  it  was 
held,  that  she  could  lease  that,  in- 
dependently of  the  power  of  sale, 
and  that  the  lease  given  was  good 
for  the  interest  she  had,  and  void 
only  for  any  surplus  of  the  term 
unexpired  at  her    decease.     The 
testator  having  died,  and  the  will 
being  duly  proved,  R,  in  1825  as 
executrix  .  and  trustee,  leased  the 
estate  for  twenty-one  years  to  N., 
setting  forth  the  will  at  large  in 
the  lease,  the  lessee  to  pay  a  cer- 
tain rent  to    R.,    her    neirs  and 
assigns,  yearly  during  the  term, 
if  she  should  so  long  live  and  re- 
main the  widow  of  E.,  and  after 
her  death  or  marriage,  during  the 
residue  of  the  term  then  imexpired 
to  P.    In  1827,  R.  sold  and  con- 
veyed the  same  real  estate  in  fee 
to  H.,  the  conveyance  purporting 
to  be  made  by  her  executrix  and 
trustee  under  the  will  and  in  pur- 
suance of  the  power  of  sale.     It 


was  held  that  the  lease  to  N.  was 
no  impediment  to  the  exercise  of 
the  power  of  sale.     The  approba- 
tion and  consent  of  B.  to  the  deed 
of  H.,  were  given  by  his  wnitin^ 
at  the  foot  of  tiiie  deed,  and  di- 
rectly following  the  signature  of 
R.,  **  I  consent  to  the  above,"  and 
subscribing  his  name  thereto.     It 
was  held  that  this  was  sufficient 
approbation  and  consent  under  the 
power  of  sale  in  the  will,  and  that 
questions  touching  the  discreet  ex- 
ercise of  the  power  of  sale  belonged 
to  a  court  or  equity,  and  that  the 
deed  to  H.  being  valid  on  its  face, 
so  far  as  R's  capacity  to  execute  it 
was  concerned,  must  so  operate  at 
law  against  the  remainder-men,  if 
executed  in  compliance  with  the 
directions  of  the  will.    A  trustee, 
empowered  in  a  will  to  make  leases 
"for  twenty-one  years  from  the 
making  thereof,"  must   lease   in 
possession,  and  if  there  is  a  valid 
outstanding  term  at  the  time  a  new 
lease   is   made    for   * 'twenty-one 
years  from  date,"  the  lessee  can 
enter  only  at  the  expiration  of  the 
existing  term,  and  the  new  lease, 
being  the  grant  of  a  reversion,  is 
void.     A  lease  executed  and  de- 
livered on  December  20,  demising 
I)remi8es  from  the  first  of  May  fol- 
owing,     for     twenty-one     years 
"from  the   day   of  its   date,"   is 
a  void  execution  of  a  power  in  a 
will  to  make  leases  for  **twenty- 
one  years  from  the  making  theiV- 
of ,"  nor  is  it  a  case  in  which  equity 
can  aid  the  defective  execution  of 
a  power  and  render  this  a  valid 
lease  in  possession  for  twenty-one 
years  from  May  first.    A  lease  for 
twenty-one  years,  with  a  right  for 
the  lessee  to  renew  for  two  similar 
terms  at  the  same  rate  made  under 
a  power  to  lease  for  only  twenty- 
one  years,  is  not  void,  but  a  court 
of  equity  will  sustain  it  for  twenty- 
one  years,  and  cut  off  the  right  to 
renew .    A  power  given  to  a  tnistee 
to  lease  for  the  best  improved  rent 
obtainable,  requires  for  its  valid 
discharge  reasonable  diligence  as 
well  as  good  faith,  and  if  it  is  shown 
that   due    diligence  would   have 
secured  a  much  larger  rent  at  the 
time  of  making  a  lease  than  is 
reserred,     such     lease    is    void. 


nwr^ 


CHAP.  XXI.]        Execution  op  Power. 


293 


lands  jointly  with  others  reserving  a  gross  rent,  is  void.'  So 
generally,  if  the  donee  of  a  limited  power  of  leasing  grants 
a  lease  exceeding  the  power,  the  lease  is  void  and  not  sus* 
ceptible  of  confirmation  by  the  reversioner,  unless  other- 
wise provided  by  statute.  But  if  the  reversioner  accepts 
rent  under  the  lease  after  the  death  of  the  tenant  for 
life,  it  is  an  admission  that  he  is  his  tenant,  and  he  is 
entitled  to  a  notice  to  quit;"  but  if  the  reversioner  has 
not  accepted  rent  or  recognized  the  tenancy,  he  may  enter 
without  notice  or  demand  of  possession.'  In  granting  a 
lease  it  is  not  necessary  to  refer  to  the  power,  as  the  only 
right  to  demise  being  conferred  by  the  power,  the  lessor 
is  understood  as  having  reference  to  it  in  making  the 
lease ; '  but  it  is  said  that  the  intention  to  execute  a  dele- 
gated power  must  always  appear  in  the  execution  thereof, 
either  by  a  reference  to  the  power  itself,  or  by  some  rela- 


Griffin  v.  Ford,  1  Bob.  (N.  Y.  Supr. 
Ct.)123.  Where  a  will  gives  to 
executors  a  power  to  seU,  and  a 
codicil  ratifies  the  will  and  adds  a 
power  to  lease,  and  then  orders  all 
the  rest  and  residue  of  the  property, 
after  certain  legacies  are  paid,  to 
be  distributed  among  the  children 
of  the  deceased,  the  order  for 
division  is  not  incompatible  with 
the  power  of  sale ;  but  the  execu- 
tors ma^  sell  to  pay  debts  or  lega- 
cies, give  full  receipts  to  pur- 
chasers, and  discharge  them  m>m 
looking  after  the  purchase-money. 
A  power  to  sell  and  a  power  to 
divide,  in  a  will,  are  not  incom- 
patible,but  the  former  is  frequently 
necessary  to  execute  the  latter, 
and  hence  a  power  to  sell,  not  ex- 
pressly given,  may  be  implied  as 
mcidental  to  that  of  division.  A 
general  power  to  sell  given  to  five 
executors  as  such,  and  not  as 
individuals,  and  tiieir  survivor  or 
survivors,  is  well  executed  by  two, 
if  one  of  the  others  refused  to 
serve  and  two  are  dead,  for  the 
power  vested  in  the  survivors. 
Conover  v.  Hoffman,  1  Bos.  (N. 
Y..8upt.  a.)  214. 

>  Williams  v.  Matthews,  5  B.  & 
Ad.  756. 

»  Martin  v.  Watts,  7  T.  R.  83 ; 
S.  C.  2  Esp.  601 ;  Wright  v.  Smith, 
5  Esp.  208;  Pennington  v.  Tan- 


niere,  12  Q.  B.  998 ;  Potter  v.  Ar- 
cher, 1  B.  &  P.  681 ;  Tucker  v. 
Moore,  1  B.  &  Ad.  866 ;  Collins  v. 
toWeUer,7T.R.478.  But  in  equity 
acceptance  of  rent  does  not  amount 
a  confirmation  of  the  lease.  Bow- 
ers V.  East  London,  &c.,  Co.,  Jac. 
824. 

»  Brigcs  V.  White,  2  D.  &  R.  719. 

*  Porcner  v.  Daniel,  12  Rich. 
(S.  C.)  Eq.  849.  Nor  is  it  necessary 
to  recite  either  the  power  or  the 
terms  of  the  appointment.  It  is 
enough  if  there  oe  such  a  dealing 
with  the  estate  as  can  be  effectu- 
ated only  by  virtue  of  the  power. 
CampbeU  v.  Leach,  Ambl.  748. 
The  rule  is  that,  if  the  instrument 
will  work  two  ways,  the  one  way 
by  interest  and  the  other  way  by 
authority  or  power,  and  it  is  in- 
different whether  it  work  one  way 
or  the  other,  the  law  will  attribute 
it  to  the  interest,  and  not  to  the 
authority  ;  but,  where  interest  and 
authority  meet,  if  the  party  clearly 
declare  that  it  shall  take  effect  by 
virtue  of  his  authority  or  power, 
ithen  such  expressed  intention  will 
prevail  against  interest  for  modus 
conventio  vineunt  legem,  Brekley 
V.  York,  6  East  86 ;  Hob.  169,  and 
if  the  lease,  if  construed  to  be  de- 
rived out  of  the  interest,  would 
have  some  effect,  but  not  all  in- 
tended by  the  parties,  th&n,  in  cr- 


v:- 


294: 


Under  Powers. 


[§  149. 


tion  to  the  subject  matter  of  it,  in  a  way  which  can  leave 
no  doubt  of  such  intention.* 

The  grantor  of  a  lease  under  a  power  need  not  be  in 
the  actual  possession  of  the  premises,  but  a  constructive 
possession,  by  the  receipt  of  the  rents  and  profits,  is  suf- 
ficient ;  as,  if  actual  possession  was  essential,  a  leasing 
power  could  never  be  executed  where  the  lands  were  in 
the  possession  of  a  tenant.' 

Sec.  149.  What  kind  ol  leases  may  be  granted.— Power  to 
lease  for  Uves  or  years,  may  be  executed  by  a  lease  either 
absolutely  for  certain  Uves,  or  conditionally  for  a  number 
of  years,  determinable  upon  a  Ufe  or  lives.*  So  where 
power  is  given  to  make  leases  for  the  Uves  of  three  persons, 
he  may  make  a  lease  to  them  for  their  three  Uves,  or  to 
the  longest  liver  of  them.*  So  a  lease  to  one  for  three 
Uves,  or  to  three  for  their  lives,  is  good.*  But  a  power 
to  make  a  lease  for  three  Uves  does  not  warrant  a  lease 
for  ninety-nine  years,  determinable  upon  three  Uves.* 


der  to  effectuate  the  main  design, 
the  estate  will  pass  under  the  power, 
1  Vent.  228 ;  Campbell  v.  Leach, 
Ambl.  748 ;  Thomlinson  v.  Digh- 
ton,  10  Mod.  36  ;  1  Salk.  239 ;  An- 
drews V.  Brumfield,  32  Miss. 
107. 

*  Davis  V.  Vincent,  1  Houst. 
(Del.)  416.  In  Myers  v.  McBride, 
13  Rich.  (S.  C.)  L.  178,  a  wife  hav- 
ing power  under  a  marriage  set- 
tlement to  convey  the  land  by 
deed  of  herself  and  husband,  not 
purporting  to  be  in  execution  of 
the  power  and  without  a  valid  re- 
lease of  her  inheritance,  was  held 
not  to  convey  her  title  to  the  land. 
See  also  Gee  v.  Graves,  2  Head. 
(Tenn.)  289,  where  it  was  held  that 
there  must  be  something  to  show 
that  the  party  intended  to  execute 
it. 

8  Hall  V.  Bukley,  1  Doug.  292 ; 
Rodgers  v.  Wallace,  5  Jone  (N.  C.) 
9  L.  181. 

'Commons  v.  Marshall,  6  Bro. 
P.  C.  168.  Sugden  on  Powers, 
409,  737. 

*  AIsop  V.  Pine,  3  Keb.  44 ;  Doe 
V.  Dardwicke,  10  East,  549 ;  Ba- 
con's Abr.  Tit.  Leases,  (I.)  11. 

*  Baugh  V.  Haynes,  Cro.  Jac.  76. 


•  Whitlock's  Case,  8  Coke,  69  6.  ; 
Rattle  V.  Popham,  2  Stra.  992.  In 
Zouch  V.  Wallaston,  3  Burr.  1147  ; 
Lord  Mansfield  said,  that  in  Rat- 
tle V.  Popham,  ante,  the  court 
thought  themselves  bound  by  the 
resolution  in  Whitlock's  Case,  and. 
held  the  lease  not  to  be  warranted 
by  the  power.  The  widow  brought 
her  bill  in  chancery,  and  Lord 
Talbot,  reasoning  from  the  same 
premises,  held  the  lease  to  be  war- 
ranted by  the  pNOwer.  He  said  it 
was  not  a  defective,  but  a  blunder^ 
ing  execution.  In  Shannon  v. 
Bradstreet,  1  Sch.  &  Sef.  71;  Lord 
Redesdale  said,  that  if  Lord 
Mansfield  foimd  fault  with  the 
decision  in  Rattle  v.  Popham,  as 
he  was  represented  to  have  done, 
he  thought,  with  deference,  there 
was  no  groimd  for  the  remark. 
From  a  MSS.  note  of  the  case,  to 
be  found  in  the  appendix  to  Sug- 
den on  Powers,  No.  20,  it  will  be 
seen  that  Lord  Talbot  admitted 
that  the  power  was  not  well  exe- 
cuted at  law,  but  relief  was  given 
against  the  defective  execution 
upon  the  general  rules  of  equity. 
In  Rae  v.  Prideaux,  10  East,  452, 
where    the    power    authorized  a 


—r^~ 


CHAP.   XXI.] 


Kind  Granted. 


295 


Mr.  Woodfall,  in  his  work  on  Landlord  and  Tienant^ 
pp.  157-168,  says  :  *' Where,  by  marriage  settlement,  the 
husband  had  the  wife's  estate  for  life,  with  a  power  to 
grant  leases  for  twenty-one  years,  but  no  longer,  and  in 
breach  of  the  power,  he  granted  a  lease  to  A  for  ninety- 
nine  years,  determinable  upon  Uves ;  and  the  wife  sur- 
vived him,  and  conveyed  the  fee  to  B ;  and  in  the  con- 
veyance was  recited  the  lease  to  A,  who  was  recognized 
as  being  then  tenant  in  possession  of  the  estate,  at  the 
yearly  rent  reserved  :  on  an  action  of  ejectment  brought 
by  B  against  the  assignee  of  the  lease,  it  was  held  that  the 


lease  for  any  number  of  years  not 
exceeding  twenty-one,  or  for  the 
lijfe  or  lives  of  any  two  or  three 
persons,  so  as  no  neater  estate 
than  for  three  lives  be  at  any  one 
time  in  being  in  any  part  of  the 
premises ;  it  was  held  that  the 
power  authorized  a  lease  for  years, 
out  not  a  lease  for  years  determin- 
able upon  lives,  and  that  a  lease 
by  a  tenant  for  life  for  ninety- 
nine  years/determinable  on  lives, 
as  it  might  exceed  twenty-one 
years,  was  void  at  law,  and  was 
not  good  even  pro  tanto.  The 
court  relied  on  Whitlock's  Case 
and  Rattle  v.  Popham,  ante,  as  ex- 
pressive of  gooa  law.  Mr.  Sug- 
DEN,  in  his  work  upon  powers,  468, 
says:  "The  result  of  aU  the  au- 
thorities appears  to  be  that,  sub- 
ject to  the  distinction  taken  in 
whitlock's  Case,  where  a  freehold 
interest  is  authorized  to  be  ap- 
pointed under  a  power,  a  different 
species  of  estate,  although  less  val- 
uable as  a  term  for  ninety-nine 
years  determinable  with  the  life, 
cannot  at  law  be  granted:  but 
Hiat  in  equity,  such  an  execution 
will  be  supported  because  less  than 
the  power  ts  effected,  and  it  clearly 
appears  how  much  less."  Equity- 
will  support  the  exercise  of  a 
power,  wnere  the  donee  thereof  is 
clothed  with  discretion  rs  to  its  ex- 
ercise, when  it  appears  that  he 
acted  fairly  and  hone«tly,  although 
mistakenly.  Thus  a  testator  di- 
rects, in  his  will,  that  his  wife 
shall  retain  possession  of  his  farm 
for  five  years  after  his  death,  the 
family  to  be  kept  together,  and  the 
plantation   managed  by  her,  and 


certain  kindred  supported  by  her ; 
and  he  provides  means  to  enable 
her  to  conduct  the  farm.  By  a 
subsequent  clause  he  authorizes 
his  executor  **  at  a  proper  time,  say 
at  the  expiration  of  five  years 
from  the  time  of  my  decease," 
(but  expressing  a  desire  that  his 
wife  retain  possession  longer,  if 
for  the  interest  of  the  family),  to 
dispose  of  all  his  estate  in  fee  sim- 
ple, and  as  each  child  comes  of 
aj^e  to  pay  him  or  her  a  distribu- 
tive share.  The  widow  hves  on 
the  farm  till  the  expiration  of  the 
five  years,  when,  the  oldest  child 
being  within  a  few  months  of 
twenty-one  years  of  aee,  the  exec- 
utor offers  the  land  for  sale. 
Held,  that  the  executor,  acting  in 
good  faith,  and  being  of  opinion 
uiat  the  interests  of  the  family  re- 
quired a  sale,  which  opinion  was 
not  contravened  by  evidence,  it 
would  be  an  improper  exercise  of 
power  in  a  chancellor  to  interfere 
and  substitute  his  own  discretion 
for  the  executor's,  when  the  power 
has  not  been  exceeded.  Dixon  v. 
McCue,  14  Gratt.  (Va.)  540.  E(^ui- 
ty  may  aid  the  defective  execution 
of  a  power,  but  not  a  non-execu- 
tion. Howard  v.  Carpenter,  11 
Md.  259.  In  Isherwood  v.  Old- 
know,  3  M.  &  S.  882,  the  court 
held  that  when  a  power  author^ 
ized  a  lease  for  twenty-one  years, 
without  saying  for  any  time  not 
exceeding  twenty-one  years,  a 
lease  may  be  made  for  faurteeriy 
or  any  number  of  years  less  than 
twenty-one,  and  the  covenants 
enure  to  the  reversioner. 


*S98  Uhdee  Powebs.  [§  149. 

lease  was  void,  and  the  recital  only  matter  of  description.' 
Under  a  power  to  lease  for  years  or  lives,  with  or  with- 
out covenants  for  renewals,  leases  for  999  years  are  valid.* 
A  man  having  a  power  may  do  less  than  than  such  power 
enables  him  to  do ;  or,  if  he  do  more,  it  shall  be  good  to 
the  extent  of  his  power ;  thus,  if  a  man  have  power  to 
lease  for  ten  years,  and  he  lease  for  twenty  years,  the 
lease  for  twenty  years  shall  be  good  for  ten  years  of  the 
twenty  in  equity.'  A  lease  for  fourteen  years  is  war- 
ranted byapowerto  lease  for  twenty -one  years.'  A  power 
to  lease  for  any  term  or  number  of  years  certain, 
not  exceeding  twenty-one  years,  will  warrant  a  lease  for 
twenty-one  years,  determinable  at  the  option  of  the  les- 
see at  the  end  of  the  first  seven  or  fourteen  years.*  A 
power  to  lease  for  three  lives  may  be  executed  by  a  lease 
for  two  lives.'  Power  to  lease  for  any  term  not  exceed- 
ing three  Uves  and  forty-one  years  will  warrant  a  lease 
for  three  lives  and  forty-one  years,  to  commence  from 
the  1st  of  November  preceding  the  day  of  the  death  of 
the  survivor  of  the  cestui  que  vie.''  A  tenant  for  life, 
having  power  to  grant  building  leases  for  sixty-one 
years,  reserving  the  best  improved  ground  rent,  granted 
a  lease  for  that  term,  which  was  not  expressed  to  be 
a  building  lease,  but  which  contained  a  covenant  by 
the  lessee  to  keep  in  repair  the  premises  demised  (old 
houses)  or  such  other  "  house  as  should  be  built  during 
the  term  : "  it  was  held,  that  this  was  not  a  building 
lease  within  the  power,  and  that  such  a  lease  being 
granted  by  tenant  for  Ufe,  who  had  a  bare  naked  power 
without  any  legal  interest,  was  void,  and  not  capa- 
ble of  being  confirmed  by  acceptance  of  rent  by  the 
remainder- man.'    Soapower  to  grant  long  leases  "for 

'  Biggs  V.  White,  3  D.  &  R.  716.  •  Edwarda  v.  Milbank,  4  Drew. 

V.  Chinnery, ; 
keny  t.  Shee 
Sue- H.  L.  Ca 

Mod.  m !  13 

*  Isherwood 
S.  883;  EasU 
678;  38  L.  J., 


CHAP.  Xjq.]  CtND  0BAfiTED.  297 

the  purpose  of  new  building  or  eflfectually  rebuild- 
ing and  repairing  any  messuage,  &c.,  being  or  to  be  on 
the  premises,"  is  not  well  executed  by  a  lease  containing 
a  covenant  effectually  to  repair,  as  it  is  not  equivalent  to 
a  covenant  effectually  to  rebuild  and  repair. '  But  a  power 
to  grant  leases  for  twenty-one  years,  or  building  or  re- 
pairing leases  for  61  years,  is  well  executed  by  a  lease  for 
forty  years  containing  the  usual  covenants  to  repair  and 
keep  in  repair  the  demised  premises,  and  so  to  leave  them 
at  the  end  of  the  term.'  In  this  case  there  was  no  abso- 
-  lute  covenant  to  put  in  repair,  or  to  expend  any  definite 
sum  in  repairing,  nor  was  the  lease  expressed  to  be 
granted  in  consideration  of  any  such  outlay.'  Upon  a 
power  to  grant  building  leases,  such  a  lease  expressly 
exempting  the  lessee  from  rebuilding  in  case  of  fire,  and 
by  another  clause  enabling  him  to  surrender  the  lease 
upon  notice,  could  not  be  sustained.'  Lands  held  on 
a  lease  for  Hves,  renewable  forever,  were  settled  on  one 
for  life,  with  a  power  for  him  and  all  other  persons  to 
whom  any  use  was  hmited,  when  in  actual  possession, 
to  demise  for  any  number  of  lives  or  years  consistent 
with  their  respective  interests  therein,  to  commence  in 
possession  and  not  in  reversion,  reserving  the  best  rents 
without  taking  any  fine  :  the  tenant  for  life  granted  a 
lease  at  a  farm  rent  for  the  lives  of  three  persons  named, 
with  a  covenant  that  on  the  failure  of  any  of  the  lives, 
the  lessor,  his  heirs  and  assigns,  would,  on  payment  of 
five  pounds  as  a  fine,  add  to  the  time  and  term  of  the 
lease  another  life  from  time  to  time  forever  ;  held  that 
the  lease  was  not  warranted  by  the  power.'  Under  a 
power  to  a  tenant  in  possession  to  let  all  or  any  part  of 
the  premises,  so  as  the  usual  rents  be  reserved,  a  lease 
of  tithes,  which  had  never  been  let  before,  was  held  void.' 
'    '        ■  reversion, 

y  term  or 


298  UnDEB  POWEBS.  [§  150. 

number  of  years  determinable  upon  one  life  or  two  or 
three  lives,  any  part  of  the  premises  usually  bo  letten, 
does  not  authorize  a  lease  at  a  single  rent  of  premises 
under  the  power,  together  with  other  premises  to  which 
the  power  does  not  extend  ;  but  joining  different  lands 
in  one  lease  which  are  all  under  the  power,  though  they 
had  never  before  been  let  by  a  single  demise,  is  not  ob- 
jectionable.' A  power  to  demise  lands  or  any  part 
with  of  them  is  not  well  executed  by  a  demise  of  part 
liberty  of  shooting  over  the  whole.'  But  the  right  to 
shoot  and  iish  over  the  lands  demised  may  be  excepted 
and  reserved  to  the  lessor  and  his  assigns.'  If  a  tenant 
for  life  make  a  lease  without  tak  ing  notice  of  his  power, 
it  shall  be  an  execution  of  his  power  to  make  leases  ;  for 
otherwise  the  lease  shall  not  have  an  effectual  continu- 
ance.' If  a  man  having  a  power  annexed  to  his  estate, 
charge  his  estate,  and  afterwards  execute  his  power,  the 
estate  which  rises  by  the  execution  of  the  power  shall  be 
subject  to  the  charge  during  the  estate  ;  as  if  a  tenant 
for  life,  with  power  to  make  leases,  grant  a  rent-charge, 
and  afterwards  make  a  lease,  the  lessee  shall  take  sub- 
ject to  the  rent-chai'ge  during  the  life  of  the  lessor.' 

Sec.  150.  iDwbom  powers  ma^  vent.— If  the  power  be  a 
man  and  his  assigns  to  make  leases,  &c.,  it  may  be  exer- 
cised toties  quoties,'  and  will  run  with  the  estate  to  the 
assignee  in  deed  or  in  law,  and  go  to  his  executor,  or  to 
the  assignee  of  the  executor  ;'  or  to  his  heir,  together 
with  the  estate. '  It  is  no  objection  to  a  lease  under  a  power, 
that  it  is  intrust  for  him  who  executes  the  power ;  pro- 
vided the  legal  tenant  be  bound  during  the  term  in  all  re- 
quisite covenants  and  conditions.*   But  where,  by  a  mar- 

'  Earl  of  Egremont  v.  Stephens, 
2  Q.  B.  208  i  Doe  d.  Earl  of  Ecre- 
mont  V.  Willi 

'DayreU  v 
856. 

>  Ooodtitle 

see. 

'  1  Ventr.  2: 

>  Sabbarton 
temp.  Hardw 

'  Sug.  Pow, 


CHAP.  XXI.]  In  Whom  Vested.  2&9 

riage  settlement,  a  power  was  given  to  the  wife,  after  the 
death  of  her  husband,  to  grant  leases  for  twenty-one 
years,  reserving  the  best  rent,  &c.,  it  was  held  that  a 
lease  by  the  wife  to  a  second  husband  was  not  a  good 
execution  of  the  power.*  Where  trustees  are  invested 
ndth  a  i>ower  of  leasing,  they  must  exercise  it  in  like 
manner  as  a  trust  to  let,'  Where  devisees  in  trust,  with 
discretionary  powers,  disclaim,  and  the  trust  estate 
descends  to  the  heir,  he  cannot  exercise  any  of  the  discre- 
tionary powers,  such  as  granting  leases,  &c.'  Where  the 
heir  of  a  surviving  trustee  is  the  proper  party  to  demise, 
a  lease  granted  by  the  executors  of  such  trustee  is  void.* 
By  a  private  act,  being  an  act  to  confirm  a  marriage  set- 
tlement of  lands  made  by  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  power 
was  given  to  the  persons  entitled  in  possession  for  the 
time  being  to  the  use  of  such  lands,  to  demise  and  lease 
all  or  any  part  of  the  lands  for  a  term  of  three 
lives  or  for  a  lease  of  twenty-one  years,  provided 
the  usual  or  accustomed  rent  were  reserved.  By  a  sub- 
sequent private  act,  all  the  estates  of  the  Earl  of 
Shrewsbury  were  vested  in  trustees  for  sale,  and 
for  laying  out  the  money  to  arise  from  such  sale  in  the 
purchase  of  other  lands,  to  be  settled  to  the  same  uses ; 
and  it  provided,  that,  until  the  lands  were  sold  in  pursu- 
ance of  the  trust  directed  by  the  act,  the  same  should  be 
held,  possessed  and  en  joyed,and  the  rents,  issues  and  profits 
should  be  had,  received  and  taken  by  the  person  who 
ought  to  have  held  and  enjoyed  the  same  if  the  act  had 
not  been  passed :  held,  that  this  act  did  not  preserve  the 
leasing  power  contained  in  the  first  act,  so  as  to  enable 
the  tenant  for  life  to  grant  leases  of  the  lands  which 
might  remain  unsold.*  By  a  private  act  of  parliament, 
lands  were,  in  1720,  settled  on  those  who  should  be  Earls 
of  Shrewsbury.  In  1803,  a  portion  of  these  estates,  by 
another  act,  was  vested  in  trustees  for  sale,  freed  from 

*  Doe  d.  Hartridge  v.  Gilbert,  5  *  Ex  parte   CJooper,  Ee  North 
Q.  B.  423.  London  R.  Co.  34  Law  J.,  Ch.  873. 

•  Sutton  V.  Jones,  15  Ves.  588 ;  *  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  v.  Keight- 
8ug.  Pow.  722.  ley,  10  C.  B.  N.  S.  606. 

»Robson  V.  Flight,  84  Law  J., 
Ch.  226 ;  18  W.  R.  893.    . 


L 


800  Ukdee  Powers.  [§  151. 

the  uses  of  prior  act,  with  a  provision  that  till  sale  they 
should  be  held  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  but  for  the  act 
would  be  entitled.  In  1843,  by  a  third  act,  which  provided 
for  the  sale  of  another  portion  of  the  estates,  it  was 
also  provided  that  those  to  whom  the  estates  limited  by 
the  first  act  were  successively  limited,  when  by  virtue  of 
the  limitations  they  came  into  possession  or  were  entitled 
to  the  profits  of  the  lands  which  should  for  the  time  being 
stand  limited  and  settled  to  such  of  the  uses  of  the  first 
act  as  should  then  be  subsisting  or  capable  of  effect, 
might  lease  them  in  a  particular  way  :  held,  that  this 
power  of  leasing  extended  to  lands  vested  in  trustees 
under  the  second  act,  and  still  unsold.' 

Sec.  151.  Usual  oovenants*  Proviso  for  reentry.  Coun- 
terpart.—Where  the  settlement  creating  the  power  makes 
no  mention  of  the  covenants  to  be  contained  in  the  leases, 
any  covenants  may  be  inserted  or  omitted  according  to 
the  agreement  of  the  parties,  provided  they  do  not  amount 
to  a  fraud  on  the  power  by  lessening  the  value  of  the  re- 
version." In  general  there  must  be  a  covenant  for  pay- 
ment of  rent  as  well  as  a  reservation  of  the  rent ;  for 
under  a  mere  reservation,  it  cannot  be  payable  till  entry, 
and  therefore,  in  fact,  may  never  be  payable  during  the 
term :  besides,  if  there  be  no  covenant  to  pay  the  rent, 
the  lease  may  be  assigned  to  a  succession  of  beggars.' 
There  must  also  be  a  clause  of  re-entry,  else  the  ground 
may  be  unoccupied  without  any,  or  at  least  a  sufScient, 
distress  upon  it,  so  that  the  remainder-man  can  neither 
have  his  rent  nor  his  land."  The  lessee  should  always  be 
required  to  execute  a  counterpart  or  duplicate  of  the 
lease,  even  where  that  is  not  expressly  prescribed  by  the 
power ;  as  is  generally  the  case. 

Sec.  152.  Leases  in  possession  or  reversion.— In  all  well 
drawn  x)Owers  of  leasing,  where  it  is  intended  that  a  lease 
in  reversion  may  be  granted,  it  is  expressly  declared  so  ; 

*  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  v.  Beazlej,  •  Atkjns  v.  Horde,  1  Burr.  125. 
10  C.  B.,  N.  S.  e51.  *  Douglas  v.  Lock,  3  A.  &  £.  705. 

*  Qoodtitle  v.  Funucan,  12  Doug. 
675. 


CHAP.   X2I.]        POSSESSIOIf  OR  BeTEKSIOIT.  SOI 

and  if  a  reversioiiary  lease  is  not  to  be  granted,  it  is  ex- 
pressly declared  that  the  lease  shall  be  made  to  take 
effect  in  possession,  and  not  in  reversion,  or  by  way  of 
future  interest.'  Upon  a  general  power  to  make  leases, 
without  saying  more,  the  law  adjudges  that  the  leases 
ought  to  be  leases  in  possession,  and  not  leases  in  rever- 
fiion,  or  in  future ;  for  if  upon  such  power  a  lease  might 
be  made  upon  a  lease,  the  party  might,  by  making  infi- 
nite leases,  detain  those  in  repsainder  out  of  possession 
forever ;  which  would  be  contrary  to  the  intent  of  the 
parties  and  against  reason.'  A  general  power  to  make 
leases  for  one-and-twenty  years,  does  not  enable  the 
party  to  make  such  a  lease  in  reversion.'  Under  a  power 
to  make  leases  to  one,  two  or  three  persons,  the  donee 
of  the  power  cannot  make  a  lease  for  the  life  of  the  first 
(unborn)  son  of  J.  S.'  A  power  to  trustees  "to  lease 
premises  for  a  term  not  exceeding  twenty-one  years,  and 
determinable  as  a  former  term  of  ninety-nine  years  was 
determinable,"  was  held  to  authorize  a  lease  in  possession 
only,  and  not  in  future  ;  and  as  the  trustee  had  let  the 
premises  for  ten  years,  determinable  as  in  the  original 
lease,  and  afterwards  relet  them  for  the  term  of  eleven 
years,  before  the  expiration  of  the  ten  years'  lease,  the  ' 
last  lease  was  held  void,  and  a  bad  execution  of  the  power. ' 
A  tenant  for  life,  having  power  to  lease  for  ninety-nine 
years  from  the  time  of  executing,  so  as  that  such  lease 
or  leases,  be  made  to  take  effect  in  possession,  or  imme- 
diately after  the  determination  of  the  leases  then  subsist- 
ing, reserving  the  best  and  most  beneficial  yearly  rents 
to  be  incident  to  the  immediate  reversion,  in  pursuance 
of  one  entire  bargain,  granted,  at  the  same  time,  in  1787, 
two  leases,  one  for  thirty  years,  to  commence  from  Oc- 
tober, 1791,  on  the  expiration  of  an  existing  lease,  and 
'"         "  ~      "ler,  1821:  it 


T.  Baym.  168. 
era,  8  Moo.  196. 
'ey,  1  B.  &  C. 


302  Under  Powers.  [§  153. 

Sec.  153.  On  what  Land  they  attach.— If  there  is  a 
power  to  make  leases  expressly  stated  to  be  in  possession, 
which  attaches  upon  an  estate,  part  of  which  is  in  posses- 
sion and  part  in  reversion  at  the  creation  of  the  power, 
the  donee  of  the  power  may  immediately  make  leases  in 
possession  of  the  estate  in  reversion,  as  well  as  of  that 
in  possession ;  for  in  such  case  the  word  ' '  possession " 
in  the  power  refers  to  the  lease,  and  not  to  the  land :  * 
but  it  seems,  that  if  a  power  enable  any  one  to  make 
leases  in  reversion  as  well  as  in  possession,  and  some 
parts  of  the  lands  subject  to  the  power  be  in  possession, 
and  other  parts  of  it  in  reversion,  he  cannot  make  a  lease 
in  possession  and  another  lease  in  reversion  of  the  same 
land  ;  but  his  power  to  make  leases  in  reversion  will  be 
confined  to  such  land  as  was  not  then  in  possession." 

Sec.  154.  What  is  a  Lease  in  Beversion.— Where  there  is 
a  power  to  grant  leases  in  possession  only,  a  lease  in 
possession  is  not  contrary  to  the  power,  although  the 
estate  at  the  time  of  granting  the  lease  was  held  by 
tenants  at  will,  if,  at  the  time,  they  receive  directions 
from  the  lessor  to  pay  their  rent  to  the  lessee,  to  which 
they  assent.'  Where  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year  has 
expired,  but  the  out-going  tenant  has  a  customary  right 
over  part  till  a  future  day,  a  lease  in  possession  may  be 
granted.*  Where  one  under  a  power  to  lease  for  twenty- 
one  years  in  possession,  but  not  in  reversion,  granted  a 
lease  to  his  only  daughter  for  twenty -one  years,  "to 
commence /rom  the  day  of  the  date  " ;  it  was  adjudged  a 
good  lease,  as  the  word  "from"  may  mean  either  inclu- 
sive or  exclusive,  according  to  the  context  and  subject- 
matter,  and  the  court  will  construe  it  so  as  to  effectuate 
the  deeds  of  parties,  and  not  to  destroy  them.     But 

*  Powell  on  Powers,  425  ;  Bac.  Doe  v.  Calvert,  2  East,  576  ;  Sug. 

Abr.  tit.  Leases  (I.) ;  Fox  v.  Prick-  Pow.  763. 

wood,  Cro.  Jac.  347 ;  2  Roll.  Abr.  *  Pugh  v.  Duke  of  Leeds,  Cowp. 

260,  pi.  5 ;  Sug.  Pow.  755.  714  ;  Freeman  v.  West,  2   Wils. 

« Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (I.)  11.  765 ;  Denn  v.  Feamside,  1  Wils. 

»  Clarges  v.  Funucan,  2  Doug.  176  ;    Atty.-Gen.    v.   Countess   of 

565  ;  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (I.)  11  ;  Portland,  Cowp.  723 ;  Sug.  Pow. 

Sufr.  Pow.  762.  760,  761. 


*  Snowden,  2  W.    Blac.    1224 


4 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ExiSTiKG  Leases.  303 

if  made  to  commence  only  a  day  after  the  execu- 
tion of  the  lease,  it  was  not  good  at  common  law 
or  in  equity  213  a  lease  in  possession.'  Under  a  power  to 
demise  for  twenty-one  years  in  possession,  and  not  in 
reversion,  a  lease  dated  l7th  February,  1802,  to  hold 
from  the  25th  of  March  next  ensuing  the  date  thereof,  is 
good,  if  not  executed  and  delivered  till  after  thS  25th  of 
March,  for  it  then  takes  effect  as  a  lease  in  possession, 
with  reference  back  to  the  date  actually  expr^sed  : '  but 
under  a  power  to  lease  in  possession  and  not  in  reversion, 
a  lease  for  years  executed  on  the  29th  of  March  to  the 
then  tenant  in  possession,  to  hold  as  to  the  arable  land 
from  the  the  13th  of  Februaiy  preceding,  and  as  to  the 
the  pasture  from  the  5th  of  April  then  next,  under  a 
yearly  rent  payable  quarterly  on  the  10th  of  July,  10th 
of  October,  10th  of  January  and  10th  of  April,  was  held 
void  for  the  whole ;  though  such  leases  were  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  country,  and  the  same  had  been  before 
granted  by  the  person  creating  the  power." 

Sec.  155.  Efibot  of  existmg  leases. — The  circumstance 
of  the  second  lease  for  years  being  granted  to  the  same 
lessee  who  holds  under  a  former  lease,  to  commence  after 
the  expiration  of  such  former  lease,  does  not  operate  to 
make  the  latter  a  continuation  of  the  former  lease,  where 
the  terras  are  granted  by  different  deeds ;  although  the 
residue  of  the  time  to  come  after  the  forraer  lease,  together 
with  the  period  for  which  the  latter  lease  is  granted,  do 
not  in  length  of  time  exceed  the  limits  fixed  by  the  power  ; 
for  the  latter  will  notwithstanding  be  considered  as  a 
reversionary  lease,  as  much  as  if  it  had  been  granted  to 
a  reversionary  lessee.* 

Sec.  156.     Leaaea  in  Fosseasion  or  Beveraioa. — If  a  man 
aversion,  and 

t,  3  Eaat,  876. 
'V.  LadyCavftn, 
T.  Day,  a  M.  a 


304 


Under  Powers. 


[§  157. 


lie  make  a  lease  in  possession  once,  he  shall  never  after- 
wards make  a  lease  in  reversion,  for  he  has  an  election  to 
do  the  one  or  the  other,  but  not  both.  Under  a  power  to 
lease  in  possession  for  lives,  or  for  years  determinable  on 
lives,  a  man  cannot  make  an  absolute  lease  in  posses- 
sion  for  years ;  but  he  may  make  an  absolute  lease  in  rever- 
sion for  years.  *  Where  powers  were  given  to  make  leases 
of  present  but  not  of  future  interest,  and  so  as  the 
same  should  go  with  and  be  incident  to  the  remainder 
and  reversion ;  a  lease  with  a  reversion  in  execution  of 
those  powers  to  the  tenant  in  possession  of  the  freehold, 
his  heirs  and  assigns,  was  held  good,  because  *'heire 
and  assigns"  meant  those  to  whom  the  remainder  and 
reversion  would  go."  Where  one  having  power  to  make 
leases  for  twenty-one  years  in  possession  made  a  lease  to 
A  for  twenty-onia  years  in  trust  for  the  payment  of 
debts,  but  the  lease. was  made  to  commence  from  a  time 
to  come,  and  so  not  pursuant  to  the  power,  yet  being  made 
for  the  payment  of  debts,  it  was  supported  in  equity.* 

Sec.  157.  What  are  usual  Covenants  within  such  Pow- 
ers.—What  are  tLsiuxl  covenants  in  a  lease,  under  a  power 
requiring  such  covenants,  is  a  question  of  fact  for  the 
jury,  and  not  for  the  court.*  It  depends  on  what  are  the 
usual  and  customary  covenants  of  the  neighborhood  ;*  but  it 
has  been  held,  that  what  are  the  * '  usual  and  reasonable  cov- 
enants" must  depend  on  the  leases  of  the  same  land  in  exist- 
ence at  the  time  of  the  creation  of  the  power.*  Where  a 
power  to  lease  was  given  upon  reserving  the  ancient,  usual 
and  accustomed  rents,  heriots,  boons  and  services ;  a 
covenant  "  to  keep  in  repair  "  was  held  to  be  *'  an  ancient 
boon,"  and  the  omission  of  it  was  deemed  fatal.'  Where 
there  was  a  power  to  tenants  for  life  to  lease  for  years. 


*  Winter  v.  Loveday,  1  Ld.  Raym. 
267 ; »  Salk.  537. 

« Hotley  V.  Scott,  Lofft,  816. 

» Pollard  V.  Greenvil,  1  Ch.  Cas. 
10  ;  1  Ch.  Rep.  184. 

^Clarges  v.  Funucan,  2  Doug. 
565  ;  Bennett  v.  Womack,  3  C.  & 
P.  96 ;  7  B.  &  C.  627 ;  Powell  on 
Powers,  578. 


*  Boardman  v«  Most3rn,  6  Ves. 
467, 171 ;  4  Jar.  Prec.  297  (8rd.  ed.) 

^  Earl  of  Egremont  v.  Stephens,  6 
Q.  B.  208 ;  Smith  v.  Doe  d.  Earl  of 
Jersey,  7  Price,  281 ;  Doe  d.  Earl 
of  Egremont  v.  Williams,  11  Q.  B. 
688. 

^  Earl  of  Cardigan  v.  Montague, 
Sug.  Pow.  918  (8th.  ed.) 


CHAP.  XXI.]  Wats,  &c.  305 

with  the  usual  covenants,  &c.,  it  was  held,  that  a  lease 
made  by  him,  containing  a  proviso,  that  in  case  the 
premises  were  blown  down,  or  bumed,  the  lessor  should 
rebuild,  otherwise  the  rent  should  cease,  is  void,  the  jury 
finding  that  such  covenant  is  unusual ; '  so  a  covenant  not 
to  assign  without  license  does  not  come  within  a  contract 
to  gi-ant  a  lease  with  common  and  usual  covenants.' 
Where  the  settlement  creating  the  power  does  not  re- 
quire the  usual  covenants  to  be  inserted  in  the  leases,  £iny 
covenants  may  be  inserted  or  omitted,  as  agreed  on,  pro- 
vided they  do  not  amount  to  a  fraud  on  the  power.* 

Sec.  158.  WayB,  &o.— A  private  act  of  parliament  en- 
abled a  tenant  for  life  to  grant  building  leases,  and  "  to 
lay  out  and  appropriate  any  part  of  the  land  authorized 
to  be  leased  as  and  for  a  way  or  ways,  street  or  streets, 
avenue  or  avenues,  square  or  squares,  passage  or  passages, 
se^wer  or  sewers,  or  other  conveniences  for  the  general  im- 
provement of  the  estate  and  the  accommodation  of  the 
tenants  thereof."  A  tenant  for  life  having  appropriated 
certain  land,  and  laid  it  out  for  a  way  for  the  general  im- 
provement of  the  estate,  in  exercise  of  the  powers  of  the 
act,  by  deed  granted  rights  of  way  over  it  to  two  several 
tenants  :  held  that  tenants  under  other  leases  granted  in 
pursuance  of  the  act,  but  containing  no  grant  by  deed  of 
a  right  to  use  the  way,  were  not  entitled  by  the  provis- 
ions of  the  act  to  use  it.* 

Sec.  159.  Power  to  grant  leases  wiUi  a  proviso  for  re- 
entry.— A  power  to  tenants  for  life  to  grant  or  renew 
leases  for  Uves,  provided  that  a  right  of  re-entry  is  re- 
served upon  such  leases  for  non-payment  of  rent,  is  well 
executed  by  a  lease  for  lives,  providing  a  re-entry  in  case 
thft  mntrflmains  in  arrftar  fifteen  dava.  (ind  thf.re  is  nO  Suf- 

nal  proviso 
ver  of  leas- 


f  Jersey,  5  M. 
'ankerville   v. 

849  ;  but  see 
,  13  East  lis. 


806  Undeb  Powees.  [§  160. 

ing  required  the  insertion  in  the  lease  of  a  clause  of  re- 
entry for  non-payment  of  rent,  and  a  lease  was  made  with 
a  proviso  for  re-entry  if  the  rent  should  be  forty-  two  days 
in  arrear,  it  was  held  such  a  lease  was  valid.'  But  a  lease 
■with  a  proviso  for  re-entry,  if  the  tenant  should  suffer 
the  premises  to  be  out  of  repair,  and  should  not  repair  the 
same  toithin  six  months  next  after  notice,  was  held  bad, 
the  clause  as  to  notice  not  being  usual.' 

Sec.  160.  What  lands  are  oonaideredKsliaviiig  been  lands 
ufluoll;  let.— In  modem  settlements  the  power  of  leasing 
usually  extends  to  all  the  hereditaments  therein  com- 
prised ;  and  if  the  mansion-house  or  any  other  part  is  not 
intended  to  be  let,  it  is  expressly  excepted.'  Where 
leases  are  granted  under  powers  to  lease  lands  "usually 
demised,"  it  must  be  shown  by  old  leases  or  other  satis- 
factory evidence  that  the  lands  have  usually  been  demised ; 
or  otherwise  they  cannot  be  supported.*  Lands  not  de- 
mised for  the  space  of  twenty  years  before  the  execution 
of  a  power  to  demise  at  the  rent  then  usually  reserved 
and  paid,  cannot  be  leased  under  such  a  power.'  Where 
the  power  was  to  extend  to  land  usually  demised,  it  was 
held,  that  land  settled  for  years,  determinable  on  lives, 
by  a  family  settlement,  came  within  that  description;' 
BO  are  lands  which  have  been  previously  let  two  or  three 
times,  but  not  lands  which  have  been  let  only  once  for  a 
short  term ;  if  lands  have  been  let  by  virtue  of  a  con- 
tract from  year  to  year  for  three  years,  they  cannot  be 
Eaid  to  have  been  usually  demised ;'  but  lands  which 
have  been  held  under  a  lease  for  a  long  tenn  may  be 
said  to  have  been  usually  demised,  within  the  meaaing 
of  the  power.'  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  land  should 
have  been  demised  by  indenture  ;  a  demise  at  will,  or  by 
copy,  is  sufl" 

'  Rutland  t. 

688  ;  12  id.  31)5 

'  Earl  of  Egn 
6  Q.  B.  SS9. 

'  Sue.  Pow.  ' 

•  Id.  735  :  E 


CHAP.  XXI.]         Lands  Usually  Let.  307 

demisable ; '  and  a  covenant  to  stand  seized,  may  amount 
to  a  sufficient  demise,'  Under  a  power  in  a  will,  "to 
demise  and  lease  such  parts  of  the  testator's  premises  as 
had  been  usually  granted  or  demised,  and  were  then  in 
lease,  for  any  term  of  years  determinable  on  lives,  to 
any  persons,  for  the  like  tenus,  and  in  like  manner,  and 
under  the  like  rents,  services  and  conditions  as  the  same 
bad  been  usually  granted  ;  and  the  residue  of  the  same 
premises,  unto  any  persons,  for  any  term  of  years  not 
exceeding  twenty -one  years  in  possession,  at  the  best  and 
most  improved  rent  that  could  be  reasonably  gotten  for 
the  same,  so  as  that  no  such  demise  or  lease  should  be 
made  dispunishable  for  waste,  nor  without  a  condition 
of  re-entry  on  non-payment  of  the  rent  or  sevices  there- 
by reserved,  and  so  as  each  lessee  should  execute  a 
coimterpart  of  his  lease : "  it  was  held,  that  the  word 
"such"  could  not  be  thrown  back,  so  as  to  apply  to  or 
govern  the  first  class  of  the  testator's  premises,  which 
had  been  usually  let  and  were  then  in  lease,  but  must  be 
confined  to  the  latter  class  of  property,  viz.,  the  residue 
of  the  premises,  as  to  the  terms  of  leasing  which  the 
testator  had  given  separate  and  specific  directions :  *  also 
that  a  lease  under  the  power  of  lauds  which  were  in 
l^ase  at  the  time  of  the  creation  of  the  power  (the  second 
lease  accurately  following  the  terms  of  the  former  lease 
of  the  same  lands)  was  well  executed  under  such  power, 
although  the  second  lease  did  not  contain  a  clause  of  re- 
entry on  non-payment  of  405.  reserved  in  lieu  of  a  heriot ; 
the  first  lease  containing  no  clause  of  re-entry  on  non- 
payment of  a  like  reservation.*  In  a  settlement  of  per- 
sonal property  the  parties  covenanted  to  settle  aU  future- 
acquired  property  upon  the  same  trusts,  &c. ;  held,  that 
this  authorized  the  insertion  of  a  power  to  grant  raining 
'isequently-acquired  free- 
g  granted  such  leases, 
een  effectually  worked.* 

Bligh  T.  Colmaa,  1  Bing.  28. 

Ibid. 

Scott  T.  Steward,  27  Bear.  367. 


308  Under  Powers.  [§  161. 

Under  a  power  of  leasing  "for  one,  two  or  three  lives, 
or  for  any  term  of  years  determinable  on  one,  two  or 
three  lives,  such  lands  as  were  then  demised  for  any  such 
term,"  lands  are  not  included  which  were  then  held  un- 
der a  demise  to  "  W  and  G  for  ninety-nine  years,  if  W 
and  his  widow,  and  any  eldest  son  living,  or  in  ventre  sa 
mere  at  the  time  of  his  (W's)  death,  or  if  no  son,  any- 
eldest  daughter  then  living  or  in  ventre  sa  mere,  or  any 
or  either  of  those  three,  viz. ,  of  the  said  W  and  such  his 
wife,  son  or  daughter,  should  so  long  live,  remainder  to 
the  said  G  and  his  widow,  son  or  daughter,  in  the  same 
manner,"  of  which  description  of  persons  five  were  in 
fact  living  at  the  time  of  the  power  reserved,  who  were 
all  entitled  in  succession,  three  at  a  time,  to  come  in  un- 
der the  lease :  undfer  such  a  general  power  the  three  lives 
must  be  certain  and  co-existing.  * 

Sec.  161.  Whether  lands  not  before  in  lease  may  be  demifled. 
— It  seems  now  to  be  settled  that  the  question — whether 
lands  not  before  in  lease  may  be  demised  under  a  power 
to  lease  lands  and  other  hereditaments,  provided  that  such 
rent  or  more  be  reserved  upon  every  lease  as  has  been 
reserved,  or  paid  for  it,  within  a  given  time  previous  to 
the  creation  of  the  power, — is  a  question  of  construction 
on  the  intention  of  the  author  of  the  power,  to  be  collected 
from  the  instrument  creating  the  power,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  estate. *  Thus,  where  there  was  a  power 
to  lease  a  manor,  except  the  demesne  lands,  it  was  held  that 
copyholds,  though  within  the  description,  could  not  be  de- 
mised :  yet  that  the  rents  and  services  of  the  manor  might, 
notwithstanding  a  qualification  annexed  to  the  power, 
which  said  that  the  ancient  rent  should  be  reserved,  and 
there  could  be  no  reservation  of  rent  upon  a  lease  of  rents 
and  services  out  of  which  no  rent  issues :  for  it  appeared 
to  be  the  intent  of  the  settlement,  that  part  of  the  manor 
should  be  demisable."    Under  a  power  in  a  family  settle- 

»  Wyndham  v.  Halcombe,  7  T.  »  Loveday  v.  Winter,  5  Mod.  245, 

R.  718.  378 ;  12  Mod.  148 ;  1  Comb.  87  ;  1 

«  Powell  on  Powers.  402 ;  2  Roll,  Ld.  Raym.  267  ;  2  Salk.  537 ;  Leigh 

Abr.  262  ;  Wakeman  v.  Walker,  3  v.  Earl  of  Balcarres,  6  C.  B.  847. 
Keb.  597  ;  1  Vent.  294  ;  2  Lev.  150. 


CHAP.  XXI.]     Whether  Good  for  Part.  309 

ment  to  make  leases  of  all  or  any  part  of  the  premises, 
reserving  the  ancient  rent,  lands  always  occupied  with 
the  family  seat  cannot  be  demised  ;  for  in  such  case  the 
qualification  annexed  to  the  power,  "that  the  ancient 
rent  must  be  reserved,"  manifestly  excludes  the  mansion- 
house  and  lands  about  it  nether  let :  the  nature  of  the  thing 
in  such  case  speaks  the  intent.'  So,  under  the  settlement 
of  an  estate,  with  a  power  to  the  tenant  in  possession  to 
let  all  or  any  part  of  the  premises,  so  as  the  usual  cove- 
nants be  reserved,  a  lease  of  tithes  which  had  never  been 
let  before  was  held  void.  In  all  these  cases  the  intention 
of  the  parties  is  to  govern  the  court  in  construing  the 
powers.' 

■  Sec.  162.  Wfaflther  auoh  leases  are  good  tot  part  only.— 
"Where  there  was  a  devise  of  lands  to  trustees  and  their 
heirs,  in  trust  to  the  use  of  a  man  and  his  first  and  other 
sons  in  strict  settlement,  remainder  to  another  and  his 
first  and  other  sons  in  strict  settlement,  with  power  to 
the  trustees  from  time  to  time,  during  the  minorities  of 
the  persons  to  whom  the  premises  should  descend,  and  to 
any  tenant  for  life,  to  grant  any  lease  of  all  or  any  part  of 
the  lands  so  limited,  so  as  there  be  reserved  the  ancient 
and  accustomed  yearly  rent,  &c.:  a  lease  of  part  of  the 
lands  devised,  in  several  parcels,  in  one  of  which  parcels 
were  included,  together  with  lands  anciently  demised, 
two  closes  never  before  demised,  at  one  entire  rent,  viz., 
the  ancien*  rent  for  that  part  which  had  been  anciently 
demised,  was  held  to  be  void  for  the  whole  of  the  lands 
included  in  that  parcel,  as  well  the  lands  never  before  let 
as  those  anciently  let ;  but  it  was  considered  good  as  to 
the  other  parcels,  which  contained  only  lands  anciently 
demised,  and  on   each  of  which  there  was  a  separate 

■.■ac^a^ttaiinn      nf     tha     anfiant    rant  •       TST'liai.ii     lauds     Were 

ease  for  lives 
bbe  like  rents 

lie,  3  M.  &  s.  90 ; 


810 


Under  Powers. 


[§  163. 


as  were  then  reserved,  or  more,  the  rents  then  being  29Z.; 
and  the  devisee  made  a  lease  for  three  lives  at  the  yearly 
rent  of  40Z.  of  the  lands  within  the  power  and  part  of  the  ex- 
cepted lands ;  it  was  held  that  the  rent  could  not  be  appor- 
tioned, and  that  the  lease  being  void  for  the  excepted  lands 
was  void  as  to  all.*  But  where  a  lease  was  held  void  be- 
cause lands  under  a  power  were  let  together  with  other 
lands  not  under  the  power,  it  was  held  that  the  lease  was 
good  as  to  the  latter  lands  against  the  heir  of  the  lessor/ 

Sec.  163.  Execution  of  powers  to  infonts,  lunatics,  feme 
covert,  &o.--An  infant  cannot  execute  a  power  unless  the 
donor  expressly  declares  that  infancy  shall  not  disquaUfy." 
A  power  delegated  to  a  feme  sole  who  subsequently 
becomes  a.  feme  covert  is  not  suspended  by  her  coverture, 
but  she  and  her  husband  may  effectually  execute  it, 
but,  she  alone,  unless  otherwise  provided  by  statute, 
cannot  execute  it.*  Except  where  the  statute 
confers  the  authority  upon  a  committee  of  a  lunatic, 
if  a  donee  of  a  power  becomes  a  lunatic  before  the 
power  has  been  exercised,  it  cannot  be  exercised 
during  his  lunacy,*  and  a  court  of  equity  has  no  power 
to  substitute  the  consent  of  his  committee,^  but  where 
the  statute  provides  that,  where  any  person,  being  a 
lunatic,  shall  be  seized  or  possessed  of  lands,  &c.,  the 
power  of  leasing,  &c.,  shall  be  vested  in  his  committee, 
the  power  is  exercisable  by  them."  Where  the  donee  of 
a  power  dies  without  having  executed  it,  it  becomes  in- 
operative."    When  the  purpose  for  which  a  power  was 


*  Williams  v.  Matthews,  5  B.  & 
Ad.  298. 

'  Lord  Egi-emont  v.  Stephens,  6 
Q.  B.  208. 

'  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  401 ;  Hearle 
V.  Greenbank,  3  Atk.  695-710; 
Grange  v.  living,  O'Briodyn  by 
Barm.  116 ;  Ex  Parte,  The  Com- 
mittee of  Lord  Bradford,  Oo. 
Temp.  Hardw.  Ch.  113. 

*  Bagley  v.  Warburton,  Com. 
494 ;  Grange  v.  Tiving,  ante ;  Har- 
ris V.  Graham,  1  Roll.  Ab.  tit.  Au- 
thoritie  (B.)  pi.  12 ;  Daniel  v.  Uply, 
Latch.  9 ;  Dighton  v.  Tomlinson, 
Com.  194. 


*  Grange  v.  Tivine,  ante ;  1  Sug- 
den  on  Powers,  19  (6th  Ed.). 

«  Ex  Parte  Smyth,  2  Swanst.  890. 

'  Ex  Parte  Smyth,  ante.  The 
donee  of  a  power  in  whose  discre- 
tion special  confidence  is  reposed, 
cannot  act  by  another,  sane  in 
those  matters  not  requiring  the  ex- 
ercise of  Judgment.  Singleton  v. 
Scott,  11  Iowa,  589. 

*  Ex  Parte,  The  Committee  of 
Lord  Bradford,  ante. 

» Hotclikiss  V.  Etting,  86  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  38,  but  this  is  not  so  when 
the  power  is  given  to  executors  by 
official  designation.    In  such  case. 


"••■ 


CHAP.  XXL] 


Statutory. 


311 


given  has  been  accomplished  or  becomes  impossible  of 
execution,  it  ceases. ' 

Sec.  164.  statutory  powers.  -Where  powers  are  derived 
under  a  statute,  whether  general  or  special,  the  extent 
of  the  power,  as  well  as  the  rules  and  directions  for  its 
execution,  must  be  sought  for  in,  and  must  conform  to, 
the  statute." 


the  power  survives,  unless  the 
power  is  expressly  joint.  Davis 
V.  Christain,  16  Qratt.  (Va.)  11; 
Beiate  v.  White,  2  Head.  (Tenn.) 
703. 

»  Smyth  V.  Taylor,  21  Dl.  290. 

» Baltimore  v.  Porter,  18  Md.  284. 
The  New  York  statutes  of  1830, 
relating  to  active  trusts,  limit  and 
define  the  cases  in  which  the  estate 
and  title  can  be  given  to  one  to  be 
used  for  the  benefit  of  another; 
but  it  expressly  provides  that 
limitations  in  trust  not  within  the 
allowed  cases  shaU  be  effectuated 
by  holding  the  limitaton  to  be  a 
grant  of  a  power  to  be  used  for 
the  purposes  designated,  if  those 
purposes  can  be  attained  by  means 
of  a  power.  The  statute  does  not 
limit  the  purposes  for  which  a 
power  may  be  created,  and  where 
limitation  by  way  of  trust  is  in- 
valid under  the  statute,  but  when 
the  desired  object  can  be  accom- 
plished  by  means   of  a   power, 


which  is  not  forbidden  by  statute, 
the  apparent  trust  will  be  con- 
strued as  a  grant  of  a  power. 
Manufacturing  establishments  can 
be  carried  on  by  means  of  a  power 
in  the  trustees,  as  well  as  by  vest- 
ing the  legal  estate  in  them,  and  a 
direction  to  sell  those  establish- 
ments at  a  certain  specified  time, 
or  sooner,  at  the  direction  of  the 
trustees,  and  to  distribute  the 
proceeds,  does  not  require  a 
legal  estate  in  the  trustees,  but 
may  be  carried  out  by  means  of  a 
power.  Downing  v.  Marshall,  28 
N.  Y.  866.  Where  a  sale  of  a 
lottery  privilege  was  made  by 
agents  or  managers  under  an 
authority  conferred  by  the  legisla- 
ture, it  was  held,  that  the  authority 
must  be  strictly  pursued;  and  if 
departed  from,  no  acquiescence  of 
the  parties  to  the  contract,  or  the 
parties  interested,  can  render  it 
valid.  Gregory  v,  Shelby  College, 
2  Met.  (Ky.)  589. 


J 


By  Teustbes.  [§  165. 


CHAPTEKXXIL 

BY  TRUSTBS8, 

Sec.  16S.  Oenenlly. 

Sec.  1M.  Powers  of  cestui  que  trust. 

Sec.  107.  For  what  t«rm  trustees  may  leaae. 

Sec.  168.  Confirmation  of  imperfect  lease  hj  cestui  que  trasti 

Bec.  169.  Trustee  not  liable  for  loes,  when. 

Sec.  17{).  Trustee  cannot  be  compeUed  to  epecifically  perforotcoa 

tracts  of  his  grantor,  when. 

Sec.  171.  Cannot  subject  property  to  his  own  debts. 

Sec  172.  Lease  may  be  good  in  part,  and  bad  in  part. 

Sec.  178.  Lease  under  power,  requiring  the  best  rent 

Sec.  174.  Leases  by  trustees  of  charities. 

Sec.  17S.  Grounds  on  wliich  equity  intervenes. 

Sec.  ITO.  Bow  rental  value  is  to  be  acertained. 

Sec.  165.  Generally.— A  trustee  of  lands,  being  the 
owner  of  the  legal  interest,'  may  grant  leases  at  law 
which  cannot  be  impeached  in  equity,  bo  long  as  they 
are  justified  by  the  quantity  of  his  estate.  But  a  person 
taking  a  lease  from  a  trustee  with  notice  of  the  trust,  and 
without  the  concurrence  of  the  cestui  que  trust,  is  sub- 
ject to  the  control  of  a  Court  of  Equity.' 

'  Upham  T.  Tamey,  15  N.  H.     vie),  which  it  is  hia  duty  to  pre 
426  ;  Fay  v.  Taft,  13  Cush,  (Mass.)     serve  ;  and  the  statute  forthwith 
448  ;  Pearce  v.  Savage,  45  Me.  90 ;     executes  the  use  as  to  the  residue 
Gill  V.  Logan,  11  B.  Mon.  (Ky.j     in  the  remainder-men,  concerning 
281.    "Where  an  estate  is  devised     whose  interest  the  trustee  had  no 
to  a  trustee,  in  fee 
use,  benefit,  and  bel 
ried  woman  for  life 
death   "for  the  sol 
andbehoof'of  &j« 
persona,  who  are  ii 
«at  juris,   the  legi 
given  to  the  trustee 
an  estate  commenH 
separate  estate  for  ] 
tied  woman  (an  es 


CHAP,  xxn.]  Generally.  818 

But  where  the  trast  is  to  sell,  the  granting  of  a  lease, 
or  of  an  under-lease  of  a  term,  is  prima  facie  inconsist- 
ent with  the  trust.  There  may  be  circumstances,  how- 
ever, that  would  justify  such  action,  as,  it,  after  making 
reasonable  eflEorts,  a  purchaser  at  a  reasonable  price  could 
not  be  found,  or  if  there  exists  such  financial  depression 
as  renders  it  impossible  to  obtain  the  fair  value  of  the 
property,  the  trustee  would  doubtless  be  justified  in  de- 
parting from  the  trust.' 

Sec.  166.  Powers  of  cestui  que  trust.— The  cestui  que 
trust,  having  only  an  equitable  estate,  cannot,  without 
the  concurrence  of  the  trustee,  convey  a  legal  interest ; 
but  he  can  give  a  good  title  in  equity,  and  his  demise 
may  be  operative  by  way  of  estoppel ;  but  such  a  tenancy 
is  precarious,  and,  a^  against  the  trustee,  the  tenant  is  a 
mere  trespasser,'  and  liable  to  be  evicted  by  the  trustee 
without  previous  notice  to  quit.'  In  order  to  fully  pro- 
tect the  lessee,  the  trustee  and  cestui  que  trust  should 
join  in  the  lease.  The  trustee  should  "demise  and 
lease,"  and  the  cestui  que  trust  should  insert  not  only 
words  of  demise,  but  also  of  consent  and  approbation.* 
If  there  are  several  cestuis  que  trust,  of  course  the  assent 
of  all  should  be  obtained,  as  none  will  be  bound,  except 
those  who  concur,  and  the  lessee,  from  the  circumstance 
of  the  recital,  is  bound  to  make  further  inquiry,  and 
thereby  being  treated  as  having  notice  of  the  title  of  the 
other  cestuis  que  trust,  cannot  hold  in  opposition  to 
them.'  The  rule  is,  that,  if  a  man  has  before  him  that 
which  ought  to  put  him  on  fair  inquiry,  and  he  does  not 
inquire,  the  knowledge  of  all  that  he  might  have  learned 
by  such  inquiry  is  imputed  to  him.'  In  order  that  the 
covenants  in  such  a  lease  should  run  with  the  land,  they 

ith  the  trustee,'  but  the  rent 

r,      •  Ibid.  124.  ■ 

1,         '  PlaCt  on  Leasea,  124 ;  Mulpas  v. 
n     Acklaud.  8  Russ.  373. 
■0        '  Mr.  SuaDE.v  in  his  aivnment  in 
it     Mulpas  V.  Ackland,  8  Rubs.  378, 
e     and  adopted  by  tlie  Master  of  Ute 

Rolls  ID  that  case. 
'  Webb  V.  RusseU,  3  T.  R  898. 

The  covenants  should  run  to  one 


814 


By  Trustees. 


[§  167. 


should  be  reserved  generally,  without  si)ecifying  to 
whom,  leaving  it  to  the  law  to  make  the  proi)er  applica- 
tion. * 


Seo.  167.  For  what  term  trustees  may  lease.— The  trus- 
tee may  lease  the  premises  for  a  reasonable  term,  and  as 
to  what  is  reasonable  is  to  be  determined  in  view  of  the 
nature,  character  and  purpose  of  the  trust,  and  is  there- 
fore a  question  that  must  necessarily  dei)end  upon  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  each  case.  Thus,  where  a  tes- 
tator devised  lands  to  trustees  upon  trust,  to  pay  out  of 
the  rents  and  profits  certain  annuities,  and  subject 
thereto  to  permit  A,  and  after  him  his  wife,  to  take 
the  rents  and  profits  during  their  respective  lives,  the 
lands,  after  their  decease,  to  go  to  their  children,  it  was 
held  that  a  lease  made  by  the  trustee  for  the  term  of  ten 
years  was  reasonable  and  valid.'  In  a  New  York  case,  a 
lease  made  by  trustees  for  twenty-one  years,  was  upheld  ; 
however,  the  burden  of  establishing  the  reasonableness 
of  the  term  devolves  on  the  trustee  and  the  lessee  hold- 
ing under  him.*  Trustees  to  whom  a  discretionary  power 
is  given  of  renewing  leases,  have  not  an  arbitrary  power 
of  renewal,  but  must  renew  when  most  for  the  benefit  of 
the  cestui  que  trust.* 


who  holds  the  legal  estate,  Stokes 
V.  Russell,  8  id.  678;  Russell  v. 
Stokes,  8  H.  Bl.  562. 

1  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  124 ;  Whit- 
lock's  Case,  8  Coke,  69  &. ,  71  a. 

« Greason  v.  Keteltas,  17  N.  Y. 
491 :  Naylor  v.  Amitt,  1  Russ.  & 
My.  501.  See  also  Attorney-General 
V.  Owen,  10  Ves.  Jr.  555,  where 
Lord  Eldon  held  that,  while  a  trus- 
tee might  do  what  is  reasonable,  he 
certainly  could  not  alienate  the 
term  for  ninety-nine  years. 

^  In  that  case  it  was  held,  that  a 
trustee  holding  a  legal  fee,  deter- 
minable when  the  trust  shall  cease, 
has  power  at  law  to  lease  for  a 
term  which  may  extend  beyond 
the  period  of  his  trust-estate,  sub- 
ject to  the  jurisdiction  of  a  court 
of  equity  to  annul  the  lease  if  un- 
reasonable or  improvident.  Thus, 
trustees  having  a  fee  determinable 
upon  the  death  of  testator's  chil- 


dren, have  power  to  lease  for  a 
term  of  years,  with  a  covenant  to 
renew  or  pav  for  buildings  to  be 
erected  by  the  lesse.  Greason  v. 
Keteltas,  17  N.  Y.  491.  To  the 
same  effect  is  a  previous  decision  in 
S.  C,  19  Barb.  608. 

*  Attorney-General  v.  Owen,  10 
Ves.  555. 

*  Milsinton  v.  Mulgrave,  8  Madd. 
491.  Where  a  manor  is  conveyed  to 
trustees,  upon  trust,  to  divide  the 
profits  of  it  amongst  the  tenants 
of  the  manor,  it  is  the  duty  of  trus- 
tees not  to  let  the  right  of  sporting 
to  any  of  the  tenants,  upon  terms 
advantageous  to  them  as  tenants, 
but  to  make  the  best  profit  they 
can,  by  letting  the  right' of  sport- 
ing to  all  eligible  persons,  whether 
tenants  or  otherwise,  and  to  divide 
the  profit  so  made,  rataUy  amongst 
the  cestui  que  trusts.  Hutchinson. 
V.  Morritt,  8  Yon.  &  C.  547.  Forin^ 


»> 


CHAP,  xxn.]  Impebfect  Lbasb.  315 

Sec.  168.  Conflrmation  of  impetfeot  leftse  by  oestTii  que 
trurt.— Where  a  cestui  que  trust  receives  the  rents  from  a 
tenant  under  a  lease  executed  by  a  trustee  in  excess  of 
his  authority  as  such,  he  will,  in  equity,  be  bound 
thereby ;  but  the  acceptance  of  rent,  even  for  a  long 
period  (in  the  ease  cited,  for  nine  years),  the  cestui  que 
trust  will  not  be  precluded  from  obtaining  equitable  re- 
lief against  the  lease,  if  he  was  ignorant  of  the  fact  that 
the  trustee  had  imperfectly  exercised  his  power."  The 
role  seems  to  be  that  the  cestui  que  trust  may  confirm, 
by  his  acquiescence  therein,  any  act  of  the  trustee  which 
would  have  been  valid  if  it  had  originally  been  concurred 
in  by  the  cestui  que  trust.' 

Sec.  169.  Trustee  not  llfttile  for  loss,  when.— A  trus- 
tee letting  premiaea  originally  at  a  proper  rent, 
will  not  be  held  personally  liable  for  the  differ- 
ence between  that  rent  and  the  rent  which,  at  a 
subsequent  period  of  the  tenancy,  might  have  been 
obtained,  merely  because  he  n^iected  to  give  notice  to 
quit  a  few  months  after  there  appeared  to  be  a  probabil- 
ity that  the  price  of  an  agricultural  produce  would  enable 
him  with  propriety,  as  between  landlord  and  tenant,  to 
obtain  a  higher  rent.  And  this  rule  would  be  appUcable 
even  to  a  case  in  which  the  tenant  was  a  near  relation  of 
the  trustee,  unless  there  were  some  other  circumstances 
to  confirm  the  suspicion  of  personal  favor  which  that 
relationship  is  calculated  to  excite.' 

Sec.  170.  Trustee  oannot  be  oompelled  to  speoifioally  per- 
form contracts  of  his  grantor,  when.— A  trustee  cannot  be 
compelled  to  specifically  perform  any  contract  entered 
into  by  his  grantor ;  where  he  has  no  beneficial  interest 
in  thfi  AHtAte  hft  will  h«  rpquired  to  enter  into  covenants 
vn  acta.     Thus,  a  copyholder 

e        '  Barnes  v.  East  London  Wator- 

n  works  Co.,  8Madd.  875. 

r-        » Munch  v.  CookereU,  5  MyL  & 

i !  Cr.  178. 

\        •Feiraby  t.  Hobson,  2  Ph.  S65. 


316  By  Teustbb.  [§  IVl. 

agreed  to  demise  a  tenement  within  the  manor  for  sixty- 
three  years,  on  a  building  lease,  and,  aa  the  custom  did 
not  allow  a  lease  to  be  made  for  more  than  twenty -one 
years,  the  copyholder  agreed  to  execute  a  lease  for  twen- 
ty-one years,  with  a  covenant,  for  himself,  his  heirs  and 
assigns,  to  renew  the  lease  for  a  further  term  of  twenty- 
one  years  at  the  expiration  of  the  first,  and  for  a  further 
term  of  twenty-one  years  at  the  expiration  of  the  second 
term.  The  copyholder  died  before  the  lease  was  exe- 
cuted, having  devised  the  premises  to  a  trustee.  It  was 
held,  on  a  bill  by  the  lessee  against  the  trustee  for  spe- 
cific performance,  that  the  trustee,  having  no  beneficial 
interest  in  the  estate,  was  not  bound  in  the  lease  for  twen- 
ty-one years  to  enter  into  any  covenant  for  the  renewal 
of  the  lease  at  the  expiration  of  that  term,  and  that  he 
could  be  required  to  covenant  only  against  his  own  acts." 

Sec.  171.  Cannot  sultjeot  property  to  hia  own  debts.— A 
trustee  cannot,  by  permitting  the  property  of  his  cesluis 
que  trust  to  be  hired  out  by  another,  divert  the  title  of 
the  donees,  or  subject  the  property  to  the  payment  of  his 
own  debts  or  those  of  a  third  party,  especially  when  the 
donees  are  infants.*  But  he  may  bind  the  estate  under  a 
building  lease,  either  to  renew  the  lease  according  to  a 
covenant  to  that  effect,  or  to  pay  for  the  erections  made 
upon  the  estate.* 

Sec.  172,  Lease  may  be  good  in  part,  and  bad  in  part.— 
A  trustee,  empowered  to  lease  for  twenty-one  years,  must 
have  a  right  to  the  possession,  and  if  there  is  a  valid  out- 
standing term  at  the  time  a  new  lease  is  made  ' '  for  twenty- 
one  years  from  date,"  inasmuch  as  the  lessee  cannot  enter 
until  after  the  p'«"'^""°  *■"-■"  ^■"-  a-t^^-^-i    +i^<.  !-«=-»  i^ 
void  because  it 
has  no  power  to 
it  a  valid  lease  f 
of  the  outstandi 

'"Worley  v.  Fram 

GSO :  EvBDB  V.  Jack» 

•Eaely  t.  Dye,  14 


CHAP,  xxn.]  Best  Kent.  81T 

fact  that  it  contains  a  covenant  for  a  renewal  for  two 
terms  of  twenty-one  years  each.,  where  the  power  gives 
only  the  right  to  make  the  lease  for  one  term  of  twenty- 
one  years,  will  not  invalidate  it,  bnt  equity  will  sastain 
it  as  a  lease  for  twenty-one  years,  and  cut  off  the  right 
to  renew.' 

Sec.  173.  Lease  mider  power,  requiring  the  beat  rent.— 
A  power  given  to  a  trustee  to  lease  for  the  best  improved 
rent  is  void,  if  it  is  shown  that  reasonable  diligence 
would  have  secured  a  much  larger  at  the  time  the  lease 
wa^  made.  Such  a  power  requires  ihat  the  trustee  should 
not  only  exercise  good  faith,  but  reasonable  diligence, 
and  whether  he  used  such  diligence  or  not,  will  depend 
upon  the  circumstances  of  each  case ; '  and  generally 
where  the  rent  reserved  is  so  grossly  inadequate  as  to 
evince  a  lack  of  good  faith,  and  want  of  the  exercise  of 
reasonable  judgment  and  discretion  on  the  part  of  the 
trustee,  a  court  of  equity  will  set  it  aside ; '  but  mere 
inadequacy  Is  not  enough  of  itself,  unless  so  grossly 
inadequate  as  to  pat  the  lessee  on  inquiry  as  to  the  fair- 
ness of  the  transaction,  or  raise  a  presumption  of  fraud.* 

Sec.  171.  Leaeea  by  trustees  of  charities.— Leases  made 
by  trustees  of  charities,  except  where  they  are  specially 
regulated  by  statute,  are  under  the  immediate  supervision 
of  the  Courts  of  Chancery,  as  paramount  trustee,'  which 
exercise  the  utmost  vigilance  to  prevent  any  unfairness 
or  fraud,  as  well  as  to  restrain  any  essential  deviation 
from  the  intention  of  the  founder  of  the  charity,  and, 

"Oriffenv.  Ford,  1  Bob.  (N.  Y.)     liams  t.  Pearson,  88  Ala.  381;  Mc- 

128.  Cord  V.  Ochiltree,  8  BlackT.  (Ind.) 

'Ibid.  15 :  Beall  v.  Foi,  4  Ga.  404 ;  Tappan 

■Hinterv.  Stirgel,IMd.Ch.S83;     v.   Deblola,    4G  Me.    132;    Duteh 

Johnson  V.  Doreey,  7Gm(Md.)2e».     Church  v.  Mott.TPaigeCh.  (N.  Y.) 

7;BurT  v.  Smith,  7  Vt.  141.   At- 

omCT-General  v.  JoUy,  1  IUch.(S. 

;.)  99 ;  Perrin  v.  Corey,  24  Dew. 

U.   S.)  465;  Goingv.   Emery,   16 

*ick.  (MdflH.)  107  ;  Whitmaii  v.  Sex, 

78.  &R  (Penn.)88.    The  statute 

rf  Eliz.  43,  is  notinforcein  Mary- 

and  or  VirKinia.  It  was  repealed  in 

ha  latter  State  in  1793. 


318 


Bt  Trustees. 


[§  175. 


unless  beneficial  to  the  interests  of  the  charity,  they  will 
be  set  aside,  irrespective  of  the  length  of  time  which  they 
have  existed.*  Lord  Eldon  was  of  the  opinion  that 
trustees  of  charities  were  not  bound  to  look  with  more 
providence  to  the  affairs  of  the  charity  than  their  own  ;  * 
but  this  does  not  seem  to  be  the  accepted  doctrine,  and 
in  several  later  cases  it  has  been  held  that  the  fact  that 
a  trustee  has  acted  with  reference  to  the  affairs  of  a  char- 
ity, with  the  same  prudence  that  he  would  have  acted 
in  his  own  business,  is  not  suflScient,  but  that  he  must 
be  able  to  satisfy  the  court  that  he  has  acted  fairly  and 
prudently,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  cestui  que  trust.* 

Sec.  176.  Grounds  on  which  equity  intervenes. — The 
court  always  rests  its  intervention  in  such  cases  upon  the 
assumption  that  the  lessor  has  been  guilty  of  a  breach 
of  trust,  and  that  the  lessee  was  accessory  thereto  by  ac- 
cepting such  a  lease,*  and  this  is  especially  the  case  where 
the  lease  is  made  for  a  long  term  at  a  stationary  rent.* 


1 4  Jaurm.  Byth,  259  (3d  Edn.) ; 
Attomev-General  v.  Hatham,  8 
Russ.  415;  Attomey-Qeneral  v. 
Owen,  10  Vee.  Jr.  555 ;  Attorney- 
General  V.  Brooke,  18  id.  320 ;  At- 
torney-General V.  Hungerford,  3 
Bligh.  N.  &  C.  487. 

*  Attorney-General  v.  Dixie,  13 
Ves.  Jr.  519. 

*  Attorney-General  V.  So.  Sea  Co., 
4  Beav.  458.  In  Attorney-General 
V.  Kerr,  2  id.  420,  Lord  Lanodale, 
Master  of  the  Rolls,  said :  *'  As  to 
granting  leases  of  a  charity  prop- 
erty, it  is  certainly  a  strong  prop- 
osition to  lay  down,  that  the  trus- 
tees of  a  charity  have  the  same 
powers  which  a  prudent  owner  has 
with  respect  to  nis  own  property  ; 
there  may  perhaps  be  dicta  which 
go  almost  to  that  extent,  but  I  ap- 
prehend that  much  more  is  expect- 
ed from  trustees  acting  for  a  para- 
moimt  charity,  than  can  be  expect- 
ed from  the  ordinary,  prudence  of 
a  man  in  dealing  between  himself 
and  other  persons.  A  man  acting 
for  himself  may  indulge  his  own 
caprices,  and  consider  what  is 
convenient  or  agreeable  to  himself, 
as  well  as  what  is  strictly  prudent, 
and  his  prudential  motives  cannot 


afterwards  be  separated  from  the 
others  which  may  have  governed 
him.  Trustees  of  a  charity,  with- 
in the  limits  of  their  authority, 
whatever  they  may  be,  should  be 
guided  only  by  a  desire  to  promote 
the  lasting  mterests  of  the  charity.** 
See  opinion  of  Lord  Brougham^  in 
Attomey-Gteneral  v.  Mayor,  &c., 
of  Newbury,  8  My.  &  R.  647. 

*  Attv.-Gfeneral  v.  Cross,  8  Meriv. 
589 ;  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Moses,  2  Madd. 
208. 

*  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Cross,  ante ; 
Attv.-Genl.  v.  Brooke,  18  Ves.  326. 
An  nusbandry  lease  for  ninety-nine 
years  at  a  uniform  rent.  Atty.- 
Genl.  V.  Owen,  10  Ves.  556  ;  Atty.- 
Genl.  V.  East  India  Co.,  11  Sim. 
860;  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Morgan,  2 
Russ.  806;  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Cashel, 
2  D.  &  W.  294  ;  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Lord 
Hotham,  1  T.  &  R.  209;  affd.  8 
Russ.  415,  or  for  seventy  years,  at 
a  stationary  rent,  Attv.-Genl.  v. 
Griffith,  18  Ves.  575 ;  Atty.-Genl. 
V.  Foord,  6  Beav.  288 ;  Atty.-Genl. 
V.  Backhouse,  17  ves.  290 ;  Atty.- 
Genl.  V.  Warren,  2  Swanst.  804, 
will  be  set  aside  as  improvident, 
unless  they  are  shown  to  oe  benefi- 
cial  to   the    surety.    "It    is  too 


CHAP,  xxn.]         Equitt  Inteevenes.  819 

Bat  if  the  lease  is  beneficial  to  tlie  charity,  the  fact  that 
it  is  for  a  long  term  is  not  regarded  as  a  sufficient  ground 
for  setting  it  aside.  Thus,  in  one  case,  a  bailding  lease 
for  six  hundred  years  was  upheld,  it  being  made  to  ap- 
pear that  the  lease  was  beneficial  to  the  charity.'  The 
same  principles  apply  to  the  renewal  of  each  leases,  un- 
der a  covenant  to  renew,  contained  in  the  lease.  What- 
ever may  formerly  have  been  the  rule,'  it  is  now  certain 
that  a  renewal  wDl  not  be  decreed,  unless  it  is  shown  to 
be  beneficial  to  the  charity,*  or,  unless  the  lessee  has 
made  extensive  improvements  upon  the  lands,  and  the 
renewal  will  afford  him  no  more  than  a  just  compensa- 
tion for  the  outlay. '  It  is  not,  however,  an  inflexible 
rale,  that  the  courts  will  not  uphold  leases  by  trustees 
of  a  charity  for  a  long  term,  as  circumstances  may  exist 
which  will  justifiy  such  leases,  or  even  an  absolute  aliena- 
tion of  the  property. '  Thus,  in  the  case  last  cited,  the 
court  upheld  a  lease  for  nine  hundred  and  ninety -nine 
years,  at  a  fixed  rent,  because  the  transaction  was  fair, 
and  the  rent  reserved  adequate  for  the  term.  In  an  Irish 
case,'  which  was  afterwards  affirmed  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  the  court  refused  to  set  aside  a  lease  made  by  the 
trustees  of  a  charity,  with  covenants  for  perpetual  re- 
newal, because  it  appeared  to  be  a  beneficial  disposition 
of  the  property.  But  it  may  be  stated  as  a  general  rule, 
that  leases  of  property  belonging  to  a  charity  will  in  all 
cases  be  set  aside,  unless  they  are  shown  to  be  provident 
and  beneficial,  und  the  burden  of  establishing  their 
beneficial  character  is  upon  the  lessee  and  trustees 
who  seek  to  uphold  it.'.   If,  however  the  lease,  at  the 

cl«ar,"  saya  Snt  Thomas  Plukob,      tal,  14  Ves.  Jr.  883 ;  Atty.-Gen!.  t. 
M.  R.,  in  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Hotham,      ■Wftrren.  2  Swanst.    8(B  ;    Atty.- 
onte,  "  to  admit  of  aaj  doubt,  that      Oeal.  v.  Brooke,  18  Ves.  Jr.  g36. 
.  i...<,h...^.Mr  1^...^  »r  i.t,Jq  lui^..^.  *  Atty.-Oenl.   v.  Baliol  College, 

ra      9  Mod.  407. 

i,         '  Atty.-Genl.  t.  So.  Sea  Ca,  4 
is      Beav.  258. 

'  Atty.-G«nl.  t.  Hungerford,  3 

CI  &  F.  857. 

a         '  Atty.-Qen.  V.  So  8eaC/0.,ftnte; 

a      Atty.-Oenl.  v.  Griffin,  13  Vea.  Jr. 

la      575;  AttT.-Genl.   v.  Owen,  10  id. 

560;  Atty.-Genl.  t.  Keix.iEeav. 


820 


By  Trustees. 


[§  175. 


time  when  it  was  made,  was  fair  and  free  from  all 
suspicion  of  collusion  or  fraud,  it  will  not  be  set  aside, 
because  by  adventitious  circumstances  its  rental  nature 
has  been  largely  increased/  But  if  the  founder  of  the 
charity  prescribes  a  definite  term  as  the  utmost  limits  of 
leases  to  be  made  by  his  trustees,  they  cannot  exceed 
such  limits  either  directly  or  indirectly,'  and  a  court  of 
equity  has  no  power  to  order  a  lease  to  be  made  for  a 
longer  term, '  although  in  the  case  last  referred  to,  the 
court  granted  such  an  order;  but  Vice-Chancellor  Sir 
Anthony  Hart  said :  "But,  I  would  not  take  such  a 
lease  under  the  order  of  this,  or  any  other  court  of  equity. 
There  must  be  an  Act  of  Parliament  to  render  legal  such 
deviation  from  the  founder's  intention."*  Courts  of 
equity  will  set  aside  leases  by  trustees  of  a  charity,  when 
the  rent  reserved  is  satisfactorily  shown  to  be  so  con- 
siderably below  the  actual  rental  value  as  to  evince  un- 
fairness on  the  part  of  the  lessee.  * 


'  In  Atty.-GenL  v.  Pembroke,  2 
Sim.  &  Stu.  441 ;  affd.  1  Russ.  & 
My.  751,  Sir  John  Leach,  V.  C, 
said :  '  *  I  cannot  think  it  the  office 
of  a  court  of  equity,  at  the  distance 
of  more  than  two  centuries,  to  un- 
do an  arrangement  which  was  per- 
fectly fair  at  the  time  between  the 
contfactine  parties,  and  was  sane- 
tioned  with  the  full  approbation  of 
the  executor  of  the  foimder,  and 
has  become  unequal  only  from  ac- 
cidents arising  out  of  the  course  of 
time." 

*  Watson  V,  Hunsworth  Hospi- 
tal, 14  Ves.  Jr.,  824;  Atty.-Genl. 
V.  Griffith,  13  id.  665 ;  Taylor  v. 
Dulwich  Hospital,  1  P.  Wms.  655. 

•  Atty.-Grenl.  v.  Rochester,  2 
Sims.  84. 

^  But  see  Birkhampstead  Free 
School,  Ex  parte,  2  V.  &  B.  138. 

»  See  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Wilson,  18 
Ves.  Jr.  518 ;  Reresby  v.  Farrer,  2 
Vem.  414 ;  East  v.  Ryal,  2  P.  Wms. 
284 ;  Attv-Genl.  v.  Gore,  9  Mad.  224, 
Where  the  court  assumed  to  control 
a  power  conferred  b^  the  founder 
of  the  charity,  when  it  was  shown 
not  to  be  the  best  to  act  uponit, 
Atty-GenL  v.  Cross,  3  Meriv.  541 ; 
Atty-GeijL  v.  Hungerford.  2  C1.& 
F.  357.  It  does  not  follow  that  a  ten- 


ant who  has  got  a  lease  of  charity 
estate  at  too  low  a  rent  with  refer- 
ence to  the  actual  value,  is  of  neces- 
sity to  be  turned  out,  if  it  appear 
that  he  himself  has  acted  fairly  and 
honestly.  Ex  parte  Skinner ;  m  the 
matter  of  Lawford  Charity,  2  Meriv. 
453-457 ;  S.  C.  1  Wils.  Ch-  Ca.  14 ; 
Attorney-General  v.  Hungerford,  2 
CI.  &  F.  357.  The  only  eround  for 
BO  dealing  with  him  womd  be  some 
evidence  or  presumption  of  col- 
lusion or  corruption  of  motive.  The 
circumstance  of  the  tenant  being  a 
relation  of  the  trustee,  furnishes  a 
ground  of  suspicion.  Ex  poLrie 
bkinner,  2  Meriv  457.  But  if  the 
trustee,  or  one  of  the  governors  of 
the  charity,  be  himself  the  tenant, 
though  nothing  wrong  in  a  moral 

E^int  of  view  can  be  imputable  to 
m,  or  the  other  governors,  yet, 
according  to  the  general  rule  adopt- 
ed in  equity  for  the  purpose  of 
guarding  against  possible  fraud,the 
court  will  not  allow  him  to  temain 
lessee  of  the  lands,  which,  as  trus- 
tee or  governor,  it  was  his  duty  to 
let  at  the  greatest  possible  advan- 
tage. Attorney-General  v.  Dixie, 
13  Ves.  519,  531,  534 ;  Attorney- 
General  V.  Earl  of  Clarendon,  17 
Ves.  600.    It  ought,  how^ever,  to  be 


CHAP.   XXH.] 


Eental  Value. 


321 


Sec.  176.  How  rental  valueistobe  a8oertained.--But,  in 
ascertaining  the  real  rental  value,  regard  is  to  be  had  to 


remembered,  that  the  case  of  a 
charity  estate  is  one  in  which,  of 
all  others,  the  security  of  the  rent 
is  the  first  object  to  be  regarded ; 
and,  therefore,  in  such  cases,  the  in- 
adequacy of  the  rent  is  less  a  badge 
of  fraud  then  it  would  be  in  al- 
most any  other  instance.  Ex  parte 
Skinner,  ante.  The  discovery  of  the 
fact  of  undervalue,  depending,  as  it 
necessarily  must,  on  numerous  rel- 
ative circumstances,  and  involved 
in  obscurity  in  proportion  to  the 
remoteness  of  the  transaction,  is 
occasionally  surrounded  by  diffi- 
culties of  the  most  perplexing  char- 
acter. From  the  conmctin^  nature 
of  the  evidence  adduced,  it  is  some- 
times next  to  impossible  to  elicit 
any  data,  or  establish  any  position, 
as  a  safe  or  satisfactory  guide  to 
the  judgment.  Surveyors  very 
seldom  concur  in  opinion.  Attor- 
ney-General V.  Owen,  10  Ves.  560. 
In  one  case  (Attorney-General  v. 
Magwood,  18  Ves.  317);  for  instance, 
a  messuage  was  estimated  by  differ- 
ent witnesses  to  be  of  the  annual 
value  of  552.,  502.,  and  802.  But  in 
one  of  later  decision  (Attorney-Gen- 
eral V.  Cross,  8  Meriv.  535,  the  dif- 
ference was  rather  more  startling. 
Witnesses  were  examined  on  botn 
sides,  and  a  good  deal  of  contra- 
dictory evidence  produced,  as  to 
the  value  of  the  estate  at  the  re- 
spective times  of  granting  certain 
ceases  in  1772, 1801,  and  1814,  and 
filing  the  original  information,  and 
the  proportion  of  the  several  fines 
paid  and  of  the  rent  reserved  to 
such  annual  value.  The  same, 
according  to  the  witnesses  for  the 
plaintiff,  was  made  to  amount  in 
1772  to  80Z.,  in  1801  to  180Z.,  and  in 
1814  to  280/.,  exclusive  of  outgo- 
ings ;  while  the  witnesses  for  the 
defendants  differed  in  their  opin- 
ions as  to  value,  making  it  from 
402.  to  652.  at  the  first,  from  1062. 
to  1502.  at  the  second,  and  from 
1002.  to  1302.  at  the  third,  of  the 
above  periods.  These  examples  fur- 
nish additional  and  painful  proof,  if 
additional  proof  be  wanting,  of  the 
uncertainty  and  insecurity  of  hu- 
man testimony.  When,  nowever, 
these  differences  occur,  the  testi- 
mony of  witnesses  who  have  never 


had  occasion  to  survey  the  prem- 
ises with  a  view  to  a  correct  esti- 
mate of  their  value,  but  who,  upon 
a  loose  recollection  of  the  several 
circumstances  that  entered  into 
their  computation  at  a  distant  peri- 
od, offer  opinions  as  to  their  value 
at  that  period,  cannot  be  put  into 
an^  degree  of  competition  with  the 
evidence  of  persons  who  made  a 
survey  for  that  express  purpose  at 
the  granting  of  the  lease,  particu- 
larly where  neither  the  skill  nor 
integrity  of  the  surveyor  can  be 
impeached,  nor  improper  motives 
for  undervaluing  the  land  imputed 
to  him.  Attorney-  General  v.  Cross, 
8  Meriv.  542.  l^iese  considerations 
suggest  the  policy  of  having  the 
estate  valued  by  a  surveyor  of  skill 
and  reputation  previously  to  a  lease 
being  granted.  In  administering 
relief,  the  mode  may  differ  with 
the  peculiarities  of  the  case ,  but 
where  the  lease  has  been  granted 
for  an  unreasonable  term,  the  court 
usually  decrees  its  cancellation. 
Yervel  Poor  v.  Sutton,  Duke's 
Charit.  Uses,  43,  Bridgm.  edit.  628 ; 
Attorney-General  v.  Green,  6  Ves. 
452;  Attorney -General  v.  Owen,  10 
Ves.  555  ;  Attorney-General  v.  Grif- 
fith, 13  Ves.  565 ;  Attorney-General 
V.  Hotham,  1  Turn.  &  Russ.  209; 
affirmed  on  appeal,  3  Russ.  415.  If 
inadequate  consideration  form  a 
ground  of  complaint,  the  payment 
of  an  additional  rent,  generally 
computed  from  the  fiUng  of  the 
information,  or  previous  demand 
by  the  releasors,  Attorney-General 
V.  Green,  ante ;  Attorney-General 
V.  Owen,  ante;  Attorney-General 
V.  Griffith,  ante  ;  is  decreed  against 
the  lessee.  Id. ;  Yervel  Poor  v. 
Sutton,  Sup ;  Eltham  Parish  v. 
Warreyn,  Duke's  Charit.  Uses,  67, 
641 ;  Wright  v.  Newport  Pond 
School,  Duke's  Charit.  Uses,  46, 649 ; 
Reresby  v.  Farrer,  2  Vem.  414 ;  1 
Eq.  Ca.  Ab.  100,  pi.  7 ;  Smith  v. 
Stowel,  1  Ch.  Ca.  195.  But,  as  equi- 
ty cannot  relieve  without  being 
acquainted  with  the  terms  of  the 
original  contract,  in  cases  of  un- 
certainty, where,  for  example,  the 
surrender  of  a  former  lease  formed 
part  of  the  consideration,  an  inquiry 
will  be  directed  to  ascertain  wheth- 

21 


322 


By  Trustees. 


[§ 


176. 


the  condition  of  the  property  and  its  rental  value  when 
the  lease  was  made^  and  the  fact  that  the  lessee  subse- 
quently underlet  the  property  for  a  much  greater  rental, 
does  not  afford  conclusive  evidence  that  the  rental  was 
undervalued,  because  the  increase  may  be  due  to  the  good- 
will established  by  the  lessee,  or  to  improvements  made 
by  him,  and  these  matters  are  always  to  be  considered/ 


er  the  lease  were  reasonable  at  first, 
regard  being  had  to  the  rent  reserv- 
ed, the  money  expended  in  build- 
ing, or  otherwise,  and  the  duration 
of  the  term.  Attomev-General  v. 
Backhouse,  17  Ves.  283  :  Attorney- 
General  V.  Magwood,  18  Ves.  816. 
A  specific  prayer  for  an  account  of 
the  rent  is  not  requisite.  The  rule 
in  cases  of  charity  is  ahnot  univer- 
sal, that  the  general  prater  is  suf- 
ficient ;  and  the  rehef  will  be  adapt- 
ed to  the  case  (Attorney-General  v. 
Brooke,  18  Ves.  819),  even  although 
the  information  prays  wrong  relief. 
Attorney -General  v.  Whiteley,  11 
Ves.  247.  The  court  does  not  per- 
mit its  feelings  upon  the  abuse  of  a 
charity  estate  to  carry  it  beyond 
what  is  just,  even  against  those  who 
are  guilty,  much  less  against  inno- 
cent parties,  (Attorney-General  v. 
Backhouse,  17  Ves.  292.  And  see 
Attorney-General  v.  Griffith,  18 
Ves.  579) ;  therefore,  if  the  lease  be 
valid  at  law,  equity  will  not  set  it 
aside  without  allowing  for  lasting 
(Attorney-General  v.  Baliol  Col- 
lege, 9  Mod.  407,  411 ;  S.  C.  Duke's 
Charit.  Uses,  268;  Attorney-Gen- 
eral V.  Kerr,  2  Beav.  420.  But  see 
Attorney-General  v,  Griffith.  13 
Ves.  580),  though  not  for  merely 
ornamental  (Attorney-General  v. 
Kerr,  2  Beav.  420)  improvements. 
And  it  would  appear,  that,  if,  un- 
der a  covenant  to  build,  buildings 
be  erected,  not  ejuadem  generis, 
but  equallv  beneficial  to  the  charity 
as  if  tliey  liad  been  made  pursuant 
to  the  stipulation,  the  court  would 
be  imwnling  to  hold  that  the 
charity,  after  a  great  lapse  of  time, 
should  have  both  the  buildings  and 
the  price  due,  upon  the  principle  of 
waste,  by  the  failure  to  perform 
the  covenants.  Attomev-General 
V.  Backhouse,  17  Ves.  292*]  So,  the 
enjoyment  at  an  under-lessee  is  sel- 
dom disturbed.  Id, ;  Attorney-Gen- 


eral V.  Griffith,  13  Ves.  565 ;  Attor- 
ney-General V.  Foord,  6  Beav.  288. 
The  court,  feeling  the  extreme 
hardship  upon  those  who  have 
given  a  full  consideration,  usuaUy 
mitigates  the  decree  with  regara 
to  their  interests,  bv  merely  direct- 
ing them  to  pav  the  rent  to  other 
persons  than  those  to  whom  they 
had  contracted  topay.it;  for,  as 
the  interests  of  those  persons  may 
be  very  fair  as  between  them  and 
those  from  whom  they  take,  the 
rehef  is  adapted  to  the  conduct  of 
the  parties,  as  the  court  finds  them 
respectively  to  have  acted  fairly  or 
not  towards  the  trust,  Attorney- 
General  V.  Backhouse,  18  Ves.  292. 
The  same  indulgence  is  extended 
to  a  party  purchasing  the  under- 
lessee's  interest ;  for  though  the  pur- 
chaser of  a  lease  has  never  been 
considered  as  a  purchaser  for  val- 
uable consideration  without  notice, 
to  the  extent  of  not  being  bound 
to  know  from  whom  the  lessor  de- 
rived his  title,  yet  no  case  has 
p;one  the  len^^h  of  saying  tliat  he 
IS  to  take  notice  of  all  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  lessor 
derived  that  title.  The  purchaser 
of  the  underlease  must  oe  under- 
stood at  least  to  have  notice  that 
the  lessors  were  trustees  for  a 
charity ;  bid  not  that  the  lease  teas 
bad;  that  depending  upon  a  vari- 
ety of  circumstances  dehors  the 
lease.  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Backhouse, 
17  Ves.  Jr.  283 ;  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Par- 
geter,  6  Beav.  150.  In  setting 
aside  a  lease  improperly  granted, 
the  court  will  not  permit  the  per- 
sonal covenants  of  the  trustee  for 
quiet  enjoyment  to  remain  in  force, 
but  will  annul  the  transaction  in 
toto,  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Morgan,  2 
Russ.  806;  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  pp. 
859-862. 

*  Attv.-GenL    v.    Magwood,    18 
Ves.  315. 


CHAP,  xxu.]  Rental  Value.  3^3 

and  even  though  the  rent  ia  too  small,  yet,  if  the 
lessee  has  acted  fairly  and  honestly,  the  lease  ought 
not  to  be  disturbed.' 

■£xparfeSkmner,2MeriT.453;     Al^.-Genl,  t.  Eungerford,  S  CL 


321 


DiSSEIZOB  OB  DlSSmZSE. 


[§  177. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


BY  DISSEIZOB  OB  DISSEIZEE. 


Sec.  177.    Leases  by  disseizor. 
Sec.   178.    By  disseizee. 

Sec.  177.  Leased  by  disseizor.— A  person  in  possession 
of  landSj  may  grant  a  lease  thereof,  that  will  be  valid  as 
against  him  and  all  others  not  having  a  better  title,  and 
this  is  so,  although  his  possession  is  tortious,  and  he  is  a 
mere  disseizor ;  *  and  if  he  subsequently  becomes  entitled 
to  the  lands;  by  conveyance  from  the  rightful  owner,  he 
is  estopped  from  denying  the  vaUdity  of  the  lease,  if  the 
tenant  was,  at  the  time  of  the  purchase,  in  possession 
imder  it.  His  after-acquired  title  does  not  affect  the 
tenant,  except  to  make  his  rights,  under  the  tenancy, 
more  secure.'  But  the  rule  is  otherwise,  if  it  appears  by 
the  recitals  in  the  lease,  that  the  lessor  has  no  title,  and, 
consequently,  nothing  to  demise :  and  in  such  a  case  a 
subsequent  purchase  of  the  premise  by  the  lessor,  would 


*  Lee  V.  Norris,  Cro.  Eliz.  331 ; 
Thurston^s  Case,  Ow.  66 ;  Webb  v. 
Austin,  8  Scott,  N.  R.  419. 

«  Cooke  V.  Brogan,  5  Ark.  693 ; 
Jackson  v.  Murray,  12  Jolm.  (N. 
Y.)  201 ;  Leicester  v.  Rehaboth,  4 
Mass.  180;  Sinclair  v.  Jackson,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  548  ;  Trevivan  v. 
Lawrence,  6  Mod.  258  ;  Faulkner 
V.  Morse,  3  T.  R.  871 ;  the  subse- 
quent acouisition  of  title  by  the 
lessor  feeos  the  estoppel,  Christmas 
V.  Oliver,  5  M.  •&  R.  202 ;  2  Smith's 
L.  C.  418.  Pabke,  B.,  in  Sturgeon 
V.  Wingfields,  15  M.  &  W.  230.  In 
Rawlins*  Case,  4  Coke,  58  6.,  one 
Cartwright  made  a  lease  to  War- 
low,  for  six  years,  by  indenture,  of 
a  house,  in  which  he  had  no  title, 


and  afterwards  he  purch&se4  a 
lease  of  Rawlins  of  the  same  house 
for  twenty-one  years ;  then  Cart- 
wright  redemised  to  Rawlins  for 
ten  years.  The  court  held  :  1st. 
That  the  lease  by  Cartwright  to 
Warlow  was  ^odd  for  six  years 
against  Cartwnght  by  conclusion, 
but  nothing  in  interest.  2d.  That 
as  soon  as  Cartwright  had  pur- 
chased his  interest  for  twenty-one 
years,  Warlow's  interest  for  six 
years  became  a  lease  tn  interest, 
the  reversion  in  Cartwright.  8d- 
Tliat  when  Rawlins  took  a  re- 
demise from  Cartwright,  for  ten 
years,  he  was  bound  by  the  estop- 
pel, and  took  only  a  future  inter- 
est, there  being  no  attornment. 


CHAP,  xxm.]  Disseizor.  82S 

not  feed  the  estoppel,'  the  rule  being,  that  a  party  is  not 
estopped  by  a  deed  or  other  conveyance  executed  by  him, 
if  the  whole  truth  of  the  case  appears  in  the  recitals." 
Of  course,  a  lease  from  a  mere  trespasser  or  disseizor  has 
no  validity  against  the  real  owner,  and  he  may  be  ejected 
by  the  latter,  without  previfcus  notice  to  quit,'  unless 
the  disseizee  has  in  some  manner  ratified  or  confirmed 
the  lease,  as  he  may  do,  it  being  merely  voidable.'  If  the 
lease  is  for  life,  a  confirmation  of  the  land  by  the  disseizee 
confirms  the  whole  ;'  but  if  it  is  for  a  term  of  years,  he 
may  apportion  his  confirmation:  as,  where  the  disseizor's 
tenant  has  underlet,  he  may  ratify  the  one  lease,  and  not 
the  other,  or  may  confirm  the  whole  or  part  of  the  land 
for  any  number  of  years.*  If  the  lessee  of  the  disseizor 
is  evicted  by  the  disseizee,  he  is  thereby  released  from 
all  liability  upon  his  covenants  to  the  disseizor ;  but, 
until  he  is  evicted,  he  is  bound  by  his  covenants,  and 
must  perform  them,'  as  he  cannot  deny  the  title  of  his 
landlord,  where  no  fraud  was  used,  and,  therefore,  must 
pay  the  rent,  and  perform  all  the  covenants  he  has  taken 
upon  himself  under  the  lease. 

Sec.  178.  By  diflBeizee.— Possession  in  law,  or  in  fact,  is 

>  Dew  V.Camp,  19  N.  J.  L.  148'  in  8  Dyer.  888  6. ,-  Cro.  Eliz.  447;  1 
Warean  v.  Letand,  2  Barb.  (N,  Y.)  And.  47.  In  Dyer,  the  court  is  rej)- 
SIS.  -  resented  as  not  having  been  unaui' 

'  Hermitage  t.  Tomkina,  1  Ld.  mous,  Jeffrsst,  J.,  oeing  of  the 
Itayd,  739.  In  Lockard  v.  Bar-  opinion  that  the  confirmation  was 
ton,  78  Ala.  189,  it  was  held  that  a  void  for  the  whole,  and  judgment 
peiBon  who  receivEB  the  rents  of  is  represented  aa  having  been  ren- 
iMids,  while  in  posseastan  under  dered  without  argument  for  the  01 
claim  of  title  adverse  to  the  plain-  years ;  but  COKE  saya,  and  C&OKa 
tiff,  is  not  liable  to  the  plaintiff  in  and  Akderson  both  agree  with  him 
an  action  for  money  had  and  re-  in  thia  respect,  that  the  conflnn- 
ceived,  although  a  suit  in  equity  ation  was  held  to  be  good  for  the 
was  pending  at  the  time  to  nold  whole  time.  In  4  Bacon's  Abr.  dt. 
him  liable  as  trustee  of  the  lands  Leasee,  (H.)  4,  the  author  says ;  "If 
for  the  benefit  of  the  plaintiff.  a  disseizor  makea  a  lease  for  years, 

•ITiurston's  Case,  Ow.  16;  Vi-  or  grants  a  rent  charge,  and  the 
ner's  Abr.  tit.  Estates.  (R.  o,  S)  pL  dUaeixee  confirmt  it,  andaft«r,  re- 
"  ■  "  '^' — *-  "''  enters,  yet  he  shall  not  avoid  the 

lease  or  rent,  because,  by  his  con- 
firmation of  them,  he  hath  depart- 
ed with  so  much  of  his  ancient 
rights,  which  incorporates  or  mixes 
with  the  lease  or  grant,  so  ^lat  he 
can  never  after  avoid  them. 

'Andrews  v,    Needham,    Cro. 
Ellz.  666. 


326 


Disseizor  or  Disseizee. 


[§  1Y8. 


indispensable^  both  by  the  statutes  existing  in  most^  if 
not  in  all,  the  States,  and  by  the  common  law,  in  order 
to  create  a  lease  to  operate  in  presenti,^  and  if  the  prem- 
ises are  in  the  adverse  possession  of  another,  a  lease  made 
and  delivered  while  they  are  so  adversely  held,  will  be 
absolutely  void.*  But  whei-e  there  is  no  adverse  holdings 
the  possession  will  follow  the  title,  and  be  deemed  to  be 
in  him  who  has  the  title ; '  consequently,  in  all  cases 
where  there  is  no  adverse  occupancy,  the  owner  of  the 
land  has  such  a  constructive  occupancy  as  will  give  val- 
idity to  a  lease  made  by  him.  Therefore,  a  lease  made  of 
premises,  to  take  effect  when  another  lease  outstanding 
terminates,  is  valid,  because  the  possession  of  the  tenant 
is  the  possession  of  the  landlord  and  enures  to  his  benefit, 
and  cannot  be  adverse/    A  disseizee  can  make  a  valid 


»  Co.  litt.  46  &,  853  a ;  Parsley  v. 
Day,  2  Q.  B.  147  ;  the  lessor  must 
either  have  possession  or  an  inter 
esse  termini,  Sheppard's  Touch- 
stone, 269. 

'  Isham  V.  Morrice,  Cro.  Car.  109 ; 
at  common  law,  an  actual  or  con- 
structive possession  of  land  is  an 
indispensable  requisite  to  the  trans- 
mission of  any  right  or  interest 
therein.  Jackson  v.  Huntington, 
5  Pet.  (U.  S.)  402.  And  the  rule  is 
the  '8ame>  whether  such  adverse 
possession  has  existed  for  a  long,  or 
for  only  a  brief  period,  or  even 
whether  the  lessor  knew  of  such 
adverse  occupancy.  Sohier  v.  Cof- 
fin, 101  Mass*  179.  If  an  actual 
adverse  possession  existed,  it  will 
defeat  the  conveyance  of  any  inter- 
est therein  by  the  owner,  until  he 
reinvests  himself  with  the  posses- 
sion, either  by  action,  or  by  forci- 
bly turning  the  disseizor  out  of  pso- 
session.  In  order  to  constitute  an 
adverse  possession  there  must  be 
a  possession  under  a  claim  of  right, 
adverse  to  the  true  owner.  Baker 
V.  Swan,  83  Md.  855.  And  unless 
the  occupancy  is  under  a  color  of 
title  it  must  be  actual,  as  there  can 
be  no  constructive  possession  with- 
out it.  Wells  V.  Jackson  Mfg.  Co., 
48  N.  H.  491 ;  Sepulveda  v.  Sepul- 
veda,  89  Cal.  13.  But  if  a  lease  is 
made  to,  and  accepted  by,  the  dis- 
seizor, it  is  good,  because  by  such 
accepted  the  disseizin  ends,  and  the 


relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  aris- 
es ;  and  so  long  as  this  lease  is  out- 
standing, or  as  he  recognizes  the 
lessor's  title,  no  adverse  possession 
exists.  Abbey,  &c.,  Assn.  v.Wel- 
land,  48  Cal.  614. 

» Halley  v.  Hawley,  39  Vr.  525  ; 
Fasgate  v.  Mfg.  Co.,  12  N.  Y.  580, 
and  the  burden  of  establishing  an. 
adverse  occupancy,  is  upon  him. 
who  seeks  to  avail  himself  of  it,  as 
the  presimiption  that  the  owner  is 
in  possession  must  be  overcome  by 
proof.  Washburn  v.  Cutter,  17 
Minn.  861 ;  Lamb  v.  Burbank;  1 
Sawyer,  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  227. 

*  Coming  v.  Troy  Iron  Factory, 
84  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  485  ;  Sharp  v. 
Kellogg,  5  Den.  (N.  Y.)  431 ;  Bel- 
Ungham  v.  Alsop,  Cro.  Jac.  52, 
408:  Grant  v.  T^wnsend,  2  Hill 
(N.  Y.),  554;  Sassyn  v.  Adams, 
Cro.  Jac.  66  Roll.  1242 ;  Burton  v. 
Brown,  Cro.  Jac.  648 ;  Fish  v 
Bellany,  Cro.  Jac.  71.  A  rever- 
sionary lease,  which  may  be  de- 
fined to  be  a  lease  to  commence  on 
a  future  day,  or  event.  Winter  v. 
Loveday,  2  Salk.  537;  Clarges  v. 
Funucan,  2  Doug.  565,  operating  in 
the  mean  time  as  an  inter  esse 
termini;  Smith  v.  Day,  2  M.  & 
W.  684,  may  be  granted  at  com- 
mon law,  with  or  without  deed, 
even  by  a  person  who  has  merely 
a  reversion  or  remainder;  but 
when  granted  without  deed,  it 
confers  no  right  to  the  posseesion 


CHAP,  xxm.] 


Disseizee. 


327 


lease,  only  while  actually  disseized,  by  delivering  it  in 
escrow,  to  be  delivered  after  entry  and  actual  possession 
of  the  lands  demised,  in  his  name.  "Or,"  says  Bacon' 
after  signing  and  sealing  before  actual  delivery,  he  may 
make  a  letter  of  attorney  to  a  third  person,  to  enter  up- 
on the  land  in  his  name,  and  after  such  entry  to  deliver 
it  upon  the  land,  or  elsewhere,  as  his  deed,  to  the  lessee  ; 
and  though  such  letter  of  attorney  be  aflBxed  to  the  deed 
^and  to  make  it  an  effectual  letter  of  attorney,  it  must  be 
sealed  and  delivered),  yet  the  sealing  and  delivery  of  that 
by  the  lessor,  though  affixed  to  the  deed  of  lease,  will  not 
be  construed  a  deUvery  of  the  lease  itself,  because  no  such 
intent  appears,  but  the  contrary  ;  and,  therefore,  the  de- 
livery of  the  letter  of  attorney  shall  have  no  more  influ- 
ence upon  the  deed  of  lease  than  if  it  had  not  been  affixed 
thereto :  as  such  disseizee  may  prepare  a  deed  of  lease, 
and  at  the  same  time  execute  a  letter  of  attorney  to  a 
third  person,  to  enter  upon  the  land,  and  after  such  entry 
to  sign,  seal,  and  deliver  the  lease  as  his  act  and  deed  to 
the  lessee :  and  ail  these  ways  are  good,  because  the  de- 
livery is  the  essential  and  finishing  part  of  a  deed ;  and 
if  the  possession  and  seizin  be  reduced  before  that  comes, 
the  delivery  after  is  as  effectual  as  if  the  whole  deed  had 
been  prepared  and  executed  after ;  because,  till  the  de- 
livery, the  deed  took  no  effect,  and  when  the  delivery 
was,  he  was  in  actual  possession,  and  consequently 
might  make  such  lease.^    But  if  such  disvseizee  being  out 


until  the  possession  is  vacant,  nor 
to  the  rents  accruing  in  the  in- 
terim ;  on  a  reversionary  lease, 
however,  as  well  as  leases  of  the 
reversion,  the  lessor  may  reserve 
rent  immediately;  because  there 
is  a  valid  contract,  upon  which  the 
lessee  is  bound,  ana  upon  which 
an  action  of  debt  will  lie  against 
him  ;  and  when  the  lessee  comes 
into  possession,  the  lessor  may  pro^ 
ceed  against  him  by  distress  for 
the  arrears.  2  Roll's  Abr.  406-7,  1 
Just.  47  a,  411  (G.)  Plowd.  423. 
But  such  leases  do  not  disentitle 
the  lessor  to  proceed  against  the 
first  lessee  by  action  or  distress, 
tor  the  rent.    Smith  v.  Day,  ante ; 


Rawlings  v.  Walker,  5  B.  &  C. 
111.  A  reversionary  lease  takes 
effect  immediately  upon  the  deter- 
mination of  the  first  lease.  Hinch- 
cliffe  V.  Kinnval,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  1. 
By  giving  a  lease  to  commence  at 
a  future  day,  the  tenant  acquires  a 
right  to  enter  when  the  aay  ar- 
rives. "Wall  V.  Granger,  8  N.  Y. 
115. 

*  4  Bacon's  Abr.  tit.  Leases,  (H.) 
4. 

«  Co.  Litt.  48  b ;  Sharp  v.  Sharp, 
Cro.  Eliz.  483 ;  Stephens  v.  Elliot, 
id.  484;  Jemmings  v.  Bragg,  id. 
446 ;  Davis  v.  Bridges,  2  RolFs  Abr. 
25. 


828  Disseizor  or  Disseizee.  [§  178. 

of  possession,  had  sealed  and  delivered  the  deed  of  lease 
as  his  deed,  though  he  had  after  actually  entered  upon 
the  land,  and  then  delivered  the  lease  again  as  his  deed, 
yet,  no  interest  would  pass  to  the  lessee  by  either  of  these 
deUveries,  for,  as  his  deed,  it  took. absolute  effect  by  the 
first  delivery,  and  then  the  second  delivery,  to  make  it 
his  deed,  was  void,  and  to  no  purpose,  *  for  a  deed  cannot 
have  two  deliveries,'  for,  if  the  first  delivery  took  effect, 
the  second  is  void,'  and  the  first  deUvery  to  make  it  a 
lease  was  void  ^because  he  was  then  out  of  possessioUy  and 
had  only  a  right  of  entry,  which  he  could  not  transfer  to 
a  stranger ;  and,  therefore,  the  lease  is  absolutely  void  to 
carry  any  interest  to  the  lessee.  And  so  it  would  be,  if 
after  such  delivery  of  it  as  his  deed,  he  had  made  a  letter 
of  attorney  to  enter  and  deUver  it  as  his  deed  upon  the 
land ;  for  the  first  delivery  made  it  his  deed  effectually  ; 
but  that  could  pass  no  interest,  because  he  was  then  out 
of  possession  ;  and  the  second  delivery  to  make  it  a  deed 
was  void,  because  it  was  his  deed  by  the  first  delivery, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  dehvered  again ;  and  quosrey  in 
the  case  above-mentioned,  if  the  letter  of  attorney  were 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  deed  of  lease,  in  the  very  same 
parchment  or  paper,  whether  the  disseizee  could  distin- 
guish his  seahng  and  delivery  of  that  as  a  letter  of  attor- 
ney, so  that  should  not  amount  to  a  sealing  and  deUvery  of 
the  deed  itself,  and  thereby  make  void  any  after-deUvery, 
when  the  possession  and  seizin  were  reduced  ?*  The  heir, 
after  the  death  of  his  ancestor,  before  any  actual  entry, 
may  make  a  lease  for  years,  because  the  possession  in 
law  was  cast  upon  him  immediately  by  the  death  of  his 
ancestor,  and  none  had  possession  in  fact.  But  if  a 
stranger  first  enter  by  abatement,  then  such  lease  made 
by  him  after,  will  be  void ;  because  by  the  entry  the  stran- 
ger gains  possession  in  fact,  which  divests  the  possession 
in  law  of  the  heir,  so  that  the  heir  hath  neither  posses- 

'  Stephens  v.  Elliot,  Cro.  Eliz,        <  Plowd,  137  a,  142.    See  Comyn* 
484.  Dig.  tit.  Seizin,  (A.)  2 ;  Sheppaid'  a 

«  Perkins,  Sec.  154.  Touchstone,  269. 

'  Gkx>dright  v.  Straphan,  Ck)wp. 
208. 


m 


CHAP,  xxm.]  Disseizee.  S2d 

sion  in  fact  nor  law,  whereof  to  make  a  lease,  and  conse- 
quently the  lease  must  be  void,'  A  bargainee  of  a  free- 
hold estate,  before  it  is  enrolled,  still  labors  under  this 
disability  ;  and  subsequent  enrollment,  within  the  stat- 
utory period,  will  not  give  validity  to  the  lease  by  rela- 
tion.' The  rule  is  the  same  in  reference  to  a  tenant  by 
dower.  She  is  incapable  of  demising  her  estate  in  the 
land,  until  it  has  been  set  out  to  her  and  seizin  has  been 
deUvered  to  her.'  The  possession  conferred  by  the  stat- 
ute of  uses,  is  sufficient  to  enable  the  cestui  que  trust  to 
grant  a  lease,  without  a  previous  entry  into  the  lands 
demised.* 

'  Comjn's  Digest,  tit.  Seizin,  (A.)  *  Sheppard's  Tonchetone,  269. 

2  ;  Sheppard's  TouchEtone,  269.  *  Latwetch  t.  Autton,  Cro.  Jac. 

'  EUiot  V.  Danby,  13   Mod.    8;  604  ;  Gearj  v.  Bearcroft,  Corth.  67 ; 

Bellingtukm  v.  Aleop,  Cro.  Jac  52.  Barber  •</.  Kent,  2  Mod.  349. 


330  AOBEEMENT.  [§  1T9. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


AGREEMEKT  FOR  A  LEASE. 

6sc.  179.  When  a  present  demise. 

Sec.  180.  Agreement  must  be  complete. 

Sec.  181.  When  not  a  present  demise. 

Sec.  182.  Entry  under  agreement  for  lease— Effect  of . 

Sec.  183.  Agreement  should  contain  all  covenants  that  are  to  be  em- 
bodied in  the  lease. 

Sbo.  184.  Statute  of  frauds — Effect  of,  upon  agreements  for  leases. 

Sec.  185.  Remedies  upon  valid  agreements. 

Sec.  186.  Remedy  at  law. 

Sec.  187.  Specific  performance  of  valid  agreements. 

Sec.  188.  Illegal  purx)06es. 

Sec.  189.  Want  of  authority  by  intended  lessort 

Sec.  190.  Surprise,  mistake,  fraud. 

Sec.  191.  Contract  will  not  be  varied. 

Sec.  192.  Party  will  not  be  compelled  to  accept  less  than  he  con- 
tracted for. — May  elect  to  do  so. 

Sec.  193.  Where  anything  remains  to  be  fixed  or  decided  by  third  per- 
sons. 

Sec.  194.  When  contract  conditional  on  lessor's  ability. 

Sec.  195.  Where  intended  lessor  has  no  sufi&cient  title. 

Sec.  196.  Where  the  contract  is  uncertain 

Sec.  197.  Common  covenants. 

Sec.  198.  Not  of  part  of  a  contract— Exceptions. 

Sec.  199.  After  unnecessary  delay  by  plaintiff. 

Sec.  200.  Oral  agreements  partly  performed. 

Sec.  201.  What  constitutes  part  perfoAaance. 

Sec.  202.  Parties  plaintiff  in  actions  for — Defendants. 

Section  179.  When  a  present  demise.— An  agreement 
for  a  lease  will  be  treated  as  a  present  demise,  when  the 
agreement  does  not  contemplate  the  execution  of  any 
formal  lease,  and  possession  is  taken  under  it ;  *  but,  if 

^  Jenkins  v.  Eldrich,  8  Story  (U.  483 ;  Munson  v.  Wray.  7  Blackf . 
S.)  825  ;  Emn^ons  Y.  Kiger,  23  Ind.     (Md.)  403 ;  Doe  v.  RichardB,  4  IxuL 


CHAP.  XXIV.]            Preseitt  Dehise.                             381 

the  agreement  contemplates  the  execution  of  a  formal 
lease,  or  if  anything  remains  to  be  done,  or  if  all  the  in- 
gredients essential  to  make  a  lease  are  not  embodied  in 
the  agreement,  it  cannot  operate  as  a  lease  unless  clearly 

so  intended  by  the  parties.'  The  nile  may  be  said  to  be 

874;  Municipality  No.  t  v.  N.  O.,  bendum  for  twenty-one  years  from 
5  Ia.  A",  761 ;  People  \.  Kelsey,  a  day  past,  but  detenuinable  as 
88  Baib.  (N.  Y.)  ij69 ;  Bacon  v.  hereinafter  mentioned.  B  coven- 
Bowdoin,  23  Pick,  {Mass.)  401;  ante  to  lay  out  a  Hum  on  the  prem- 
Hurlbutv.  Poet,  1  Boe.  (N.  Y.  Supr.  ises;  and  it  is  agreed  that  the  lease 
Ct.)38.  ThuB.inacasewherebyan  shall  contain  a  covenant  for  the 
inBtnimentunderBeal,aiidBtamped  payment  of  rent,  and  other  usual 
with  a  lease  stamp,  W,  in  con-  covenants;  and  also  a  covenant, 
dderatiou  of  the  rents,  covenants  aa  it  is  also  hereby  agreed  on  the 
and  agreements  therein  reserved  part  of  A,forthe<tuieteDiojment, 
onthepart  of  Cghia executors,  &:c,,  &c. ;  and,  in  theeventof  a  lease 
tobepaid,  performed  and  observed,  being  executed,  there  shall  be  con- 
covenanted,  promised,  and  agreed  tained  in  the  leaae  a  proviso  em- 
with  C,  his  executors,  &c.,  that  powering  B  to  determine  theten- 
Bhe,W,her  heirsor  aasigns, should  ancy  of  the  lease,  &c.,  the  agree- 
and  would,  at  any  time  during  the  ment  operates  as  a  present  demise- 
term  thereinafter  agreed  to  be  de-  Curling  v.  Mills,  6  Man.  &  G  173. 
mised,  u^ton  reijuest  made  to  her  '  Buell  v.  Cook,  4  Conn.  £38 ; 
or  them  in  writing  under  the  hand  People  v.  Gillia,  24  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
of  C,  his  executors,  &c.,  for  that  201,    In  Kabley  v.  Worcester  Gas- 

turpose,  grant  and  execute  to  C,  light  Co.,  103  Mass.  3S2,  an  agree- 
is  executors,  &c,  :  and  C  thereby  ment  "to  rent  or  lease"  to  the  de- 
consented  and  agreed  to  accept  fendant,  certain  described  prem- 
and  execute  a  counterpart  of  a  iaes,  "for  the  purpose  of  deliver- 
good  and  effectual  demise  or  lease  ina  sand,  bricks  and  cement,"  and 
of  certain  premises  therein  de-  "io  be  occupied  during  the  con- 
ecribed,  for  the  term  of  twenty-  sfruetian  of  the  same,"  was  held  a 
one  years  from  a  day  past,  det^-  present  demise,  and  the  lessor  hav- 
mmable  as  thereinafter  mentioned,  ing,  at  the  defendant's  request, 
at  a  certain  rent,  payable  quarterly ;  cleared  the  premises  of  trees  and  a 
and  C  thereby  covenanted  to  lay  building,  for  such  purposes,  was 
out  a  certain  sum  in  repairing,  held  entitled  to  recover  the  agreed 
painting,  &c,  ;  and  it  was  agreed,  rent,  although  the  defendant  did 
that  there  should  be  contained  in  not  occupy  tne  premises  under  the 
the  said  leaae  and  counterpart,  by  lease.  But.  ia  another  case,  Mc- 
and  on  the  part  of  C,  hia  executors,  Orath  v.  Barton,  103  Mass.  869, 
Ac,,  a  covenant  for  payment  of  where  the  agreement  was :  "  I 
rent,  to  repair,  &c,  ;  and  also  a  hereby  agree  to  let"  to  the  plaint- 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  and  iS a  certain  house;  "heagreesto 
a  power  to  C,  his  executors,  &c.,  pay  me  $400  per  year,  monthly." 
to  terminate  the  tenancy  in  the  he  to  do  the  inside  repairs.  "  I 
lease  at  the  end  of  tlie  third,  am  te  do  all  outside  repairs,  and 
seventh,  or  fourteenth  year  of  the  at  present  to  fence  the  ytmi,  re- 
term  of  twenty-one  years,  on  giving  pair  the  cellar  and  lay  a  water 

._: »j__      T. i.„ij   g^  pipe;  and  I  tmR  jnake  a  lease  to 

a-  jUfiOrath  of  the  premUeg  foi  three, 

III-  with  the  privilege  of  five,  yeaia 

09.  from  date,     waa  held  not  a  pree- 

in  ent  demise  ;  and  tliat  the  plaintiff, 

re-  who    had    gone    inte    possession, 

ter  could    not    maintain    an    action 
»rt 


882  Agreement.  [§  179* 

that  although  an  agreement  between  an  intended  lessor 
and  lessee  may  possibly  amount  at  law  to  a  present  de- 
mise or  assignment,  yeU  if  upon  the  fax^e  of  the  instru- 
ment^ it  appears  that  a  further  instrument  is  necessary  to 
carry  the  intention  of  the  parties  into  executiony  a  court 
of  equity  will  decree  specific  performance  of  the  agree- 
ment in  that  particular,  and  the  instrument  cannot  be 
operative  as  a  demise  of  the  premises  until  such  future 
instrument  is  executed,  either  voluntarily  by  the  lessor, 
or  under  a  decree  of  the  court. '  Thus,  an  agreement 
that  A  will  let  B  certain  premises  at  a  certain  fixed  rent 
named  in  the  agreement,  provided  C  will  consent 
thereto,  is  a  mere  agreement  for  a  lease,  because  it  can 
become  operative  only  upon  a  contingency  that  may 
never  happen  ; '  neither  can  an  agreement  be  regarded  as 
a  lease  where  no  sum  as  rent  is  fixed  therein,  because  in 
that  case  an  essential  ingredient  of  a  lease  is  lacking  ;  * 
nor  can  an  agreement  that  clearly  indicates  that  some 
future  act  is  to  be  done,  be  treated  as  a  lease.  Thus,  a 
document  entitled  '*  proposals"  for  letting  a  farm,  stated 
the  quantity  of  land,  length  of  term  and  the  amount  of 
rent,  and,  with  certain  specified  alterations,  referred  to 
the  covenants  and  provisos  of  a  former  lease  of  the 
same  premises.  To  this  was  annexed  an  agreement  as 
follows  :  **  Agreed  to  the  above  rent,  provided  the  house, 
cottages  and  buildings  are  put  into  good  tenable  repair, 
on  a  plan  to  be  mutually  determined  upon  and  finally 

Becker  v.  DeForest,  1  Sweeney  O.  street,  where  P.  takes  posses- 
(N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  528,  as  to  the  sion ;  rent  to  begm  October  1st, 
effect  of  a  mere  agreement  for  a  1870,  for  one  year  at  $150.  The 
lease.  In  Shaw  v.  Famsworth,  court  held  that  this  was  a  lease, 
108  Mass.  858,  a  proposal  by  a  ten-  and  that  oral  evidence  was  admis- 
ant  at  will,  for  a  lease  for  three  sible  to  show  that  the  demised 
years  from  a  certain  date,  **  if  the  premises  consisted  of  a  lot  of  land 
owner  would  put  in  a  new  fur-  on  which  was  a  stable,  and  a  small 
nace,"  and  the  acceptance  thereof  house  which  had  been  occupied  by 
by  the  owner  and  performance  of  H.'s  groom,  and  that  the  pluntiff 
the  condition  by  hun,  was  held  to  took  possession  thereunder, 
be  a  present  demise  to  commence  ^  Fenner  t.  Hepburn,  2  You.  &  C. 
in  the  future,  and  not  a  mere  156 ;  McGrath  v.  Barton,  103  Mass. 
agreement  to  execute  a  lease.  In  869 ;  as  to  when  an  agreement  pro- 
Eastman  T.  Perkins,  111  Mass.  80,  viding  for  the  execution  of  a  future 
at  the  foot  of  a  receipted  biU  of  lease  may  be  regmded  as  a  present 
sale  of  hay,  headed  **  P.  bought  of  demise. 
H."  was  a  memorandum  signed  by  '  Buell  v.  Cook,  4  Ck>mi.  288. 
H. ,  as  follows :   *  *  Left  at  stable  on  *  Haughery  v.  Lee,  l7  La.  An.  fSSL 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  Present  Demise.  333 

settled  within  one  month  from  the  date  hereof,"  and 
signed  by  A,  was  held  to  be  merely  a  conditional  agree- 
ment for  a  future  tenancy,  and  not  a  present  demise ; ' 
and  a  similar  doctrine  was  held,  where  A,  by  an  instru- 
ment in  writing,  not  under  seal,  agreed  "to  let  and  grant 
a  lease  "  of  certain  mines  to  B,  at  a  certain  rate  per  ton, 
for  seventy  years.  The  rent  waa  to  commence  "in  a 
year  from  the  time  a  pit  waa  sunk  through  the  four-foot 
coal."  B  bound  himself  to  commence  working  a  pit 
before  the  24th  of  the  succeeding  June,  and  A  bound 
himself  that  he  had  not  incumbered  the  estate  so  as  to 
prevent  him  entering  into  a  lease,  which  lease  was  to 
contain  "the  usual  covenants,  and  as  entered  into  by 
his  brother."  A  further  agreed  "to  sign  a  lease  upon 
the  said  terms,  as  soon  as  it  can  be  prepared."  In  this 
case  it  will  be  observed  that  the  agreement  not  only  con- 
templated the  execution  of  a  lease  by  the  land  owner, 
but  also  an  act  to  be  done  by  the  intended  lessee  as  a 
condition  thereto ;  and  the  court  held  that  the  agree- 
ment, although  containing  all  the  requisite  elements  for 
a  lease,  could  not  operate  as  a  present  demise,  because 
it  was  clearly  not  intended  by  the  parties  that  it  should 
so  operate."  Whether  an  instrument  is  to  be  construed 
as  a  lease  or  an  agreement,  depends  upon  the  intention  of 
the  parties,  to  be  collected  from  the  instrument  itself,  and 
the  nature  of  the  subject-matter,  without  reference  to  any 

'  Wood  T,  Clark,  9  Jur.  136  ;  but  which  rent  is  to  commence  in  a 

where  nothing  remains  to  be  done,  ;ear  from  the  time  a  pit  ie  sumk 

even    though    the  agreement  con-  through  the  four-foot  coal :  never- 

templates  that  a  lease  nuty  be  ex-  thclesa,  if  at  any  time  during  the 

ecut«d,  but  leaves  the  matter  in  term  B  should  think  fit,  from  the 

Buchawajthattheexecution  there-  quality  of  coal  being  uosouiid,  on 

of  isoptionat.ratherthanotherwiBe,  giving  six  month's  notice,  to  quit 

it  will  operate  as  a  present  demise,  the  mme,  as  if  this  agreement  had 

Curling  v.  Uills,  G  M.  &  O.  ITS.  never  been    entered   into ;  and    I 

'  Morgan  t.  Powell,  8  Jur.  1128.  hereby  bind  myself  to  commence 

T_  *i,:„  «„.~  »!.«  „~-^™„...-„.=  j„t.  sinkingapitbeforethe  34th of  June 

LB  next ;  ana  A  engagee  that  he  has 

d  not  incumbered  the  estate  to  pre- 

>f  vent  him  entering  into   a   lease  on 

it  the  above  terms,  nhicb  lease  is  to 

>f  contaiB  the  usual   covenants,  and 

le  as  entered  into  b^p  his  brother  ;  and 

1,  A  engages  to  sign  a  lease  upon 

Jl  these  terms  as  soon  as  it  can  be  pre- 

w  pored.'" 


33i 


Agreement. 


[§  179, 


extrinsic  circumstances  or  subsequent  acts  of  the  parties, 
and  even  a  letter  written  by  one  of  the  parties  subsequent 
to  the  date  of  the  agreement,  is  not  admissible  to  show- 
that  he  intended  that  the  instrument  should  operate  as 
a  lease.'  If  an  agreement  contains  words  of  present 
demise^  such  as  ^^ doth  let y^^  ^ ^ hereby  letSy  ^^  d;c,,andaU 
the  elements  requisite  to  a  valid  leascy  the  mere  fact  that 
it  provides  for  the  execution  of  a  future  lease,  if  required, 
and  that  such  lease  shall  contain  all  usual  covenants, 
will  not  prevent  its  becoming  operative  as  a  present 
demise, '  if  the  intention  of  the  parties  appears  to  be  to 


'  Morgan  v.  Powell,  S.  Scott,  N. 
R.  687  ;  Perring  v.  Brook,  7  C.  & 
P.  860. 

>  Curling  v.  Mills,  6  M.  &  G.  178 ; 
Warman  v.  Faithful,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
1042.  **  An  instrument,"  savs  the 
court,  in  Livingston  v.  Kisselorack, 
10  John.  (N.  Y.)  836,  "containing 
words  of  present  demise,  will 
amount  to  a  lease,  though  it  pro- 
vides for  the  execution  of  a  future 
lease  ;  such  provision  being  treated 
as  a  covenant  for  future  assur- 
ance,^* The  intention  of  the  par- 
ties must  control,  and  if  woros  of 
present  demise  are  used,  such  as 
"  doth  let, "  "  hereby  lets, "  **  doth 
hereby  demise, "  "  hath  set  and  to 
farm  let,"  and  the  t^rms  of  the  de- 
mise are  explicit,  it  will  be  treated 
as  a  lease,  notwithstanding  the  fact 
that  the  ej^ecution  of  a  future  lease 
is  provided  for,  Jackson  v.  Van 
Hoesen,  4  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  325 ;  Thorn- 
ton V.  Payne,  6  John.  (N.  Y.)  74 ; 
Bulkley  v.  De  Lacroix,  2  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  483 ;  Averill  v.  Taylor,  8 
N.  Y.  44 ;  Hurlburt  v.  Post,  1  Bos. 
(N.  Y.)  28.  The  words  "  shall  hold 
and  enjoy,"  Jackson  v.  Ashbumer, 
5T.  R.  163;  or  "I  demise,  &c-" 
Gaselee  J.,  in Pinero  v.  Judson,  6 
Bing.  212  ;  or  **  a^ree  to  let  or 
lease,"  Wilson  v.  Clusholm,  4  C.  & 
P.  474 ;  or  "  I  this  day  agree  to  let," 
Staniforth  v.  Fox,  7  Bing.  590, 
&c.,  &c.,  are  aU  words  of  present 
demise,  and  so  are  any  words  that 
show  an  intention  on  the  part  of 
the  landlord  to  give,  and  of  the  ten- 
ant to  take,  possession  under  the 
instrument.  But  where  an  instru- 
ment contains  words  of  present  de- 
mise, but  in  which  are  mserted  an 


a^eement  by  the  owner  to  make 
cuterations  and  improvements, 
and  by  the  other  party  to  take  a 
lease  when  the  premises  should  he 
so  altered  and  improved ;  and  the 
term  was  stipulated  to  commence 
from  the  day  that  the  premises 
should  be  altered  and  improved  in 
the  manner  agreed  on,  it  was  held 
to  be  but  an  agreement  for  a  lease. 
Jackson  De  Lacroix,  2  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  433.  So  where  the  intended 
tenant  agreed  to  repair  a  mill  for 
the  owner  for  a  sum  to  be  paid 
after  the  work  was  finished,  and 
the  owner  agreed  to  secure  the 
premises  to  htm  until  thepricevxis 
realized  out  of  the  profits  of  the 
mill,  it  w^as  held  a  mere  a^eement 
for  a  lea^e,  and  not  a  demise  of  the 
mm.  People  v.  Gillis,  24  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  201,  In  Aiken  v.  Smith, 
21  Yt.  172,  the  defendant  entered 
into  a  contract  with  A. ,  in  writing, 
not  under  seal,  by  which  he  agreed 
*'  to  let"  to  A.  a  certain  farm,  the 
tenancy  to  commence  on  the  1st  of 
April,  1842,  and  continue  6x)m 
year  to  year  for  the  term  of  Give 
years,  or  so  long  as  the  parties 
should  agree  and  be  satisfied,  re- 
serving to  either  party  the  right  to 
terminate  the  contract  by  giving 
one  month's  notice  in  writing,  the 
produce  of  the  farm  "  to  be  equally 
divided  by  weight  or  measure  be- 
tween the  parties."  It  was  held, 
that,  although  this  gave  to  A.  an 
interest  in  the  land,  and  a  right  to 
occupy  it  without  molestation  from 
the  defendant,  while  he  continued 
in  the  performance  of  the  contract, 
yet  that  it  did  not  constitute  a  lease 
of  the  farm,  but  that  A.  was  a 


CHAP.  XXIV.] 


Present  Demise. 


335 


git^e  to  it  that  effect  and  character.^  The  intention  of  the 
pa*,iieSy  as  gathered  from  the  language  employed  in  the 
instrumenty  must  control^  and  an  instrument  which  con- 
tains words  of  present  demise,  which  will  be  given  that 
effect  i£  such  appears  to  be  the  paramount  intention  o£ 
the  parties^  although  it  contains  a  stipulation  for  the 
execution  of  a  future  lease,  "with  usual  covenants,"" 
but  if  the  agreement  provides  for  the  execution  of  a  lease 


quasi  tenant  at  will,  while  the  con- 
tract continued  in  force,  and  that 
the  defendant  and  A.  were  tenants 
in  common  of  the  growing  crope, 
and  of  the  produce  of  the  farm  be- 
fore severance.  An  instrument 
whereby  one  party  **  agrees  to  let 
for  one  year  '*  from  its  date,  and  the 
other  party  agrees  to  pay  the  stip- 
ulated rent  quarterly,  and  -which 
declares  that  it  shall  continue  in 
force  for  one  year  from  its  date, 
has  been  construed  to  be  a  present 
lease.  Hurlbut  v.  Post,  1  Bos.  (N. 
T.  Superior  Ct.)  28  ;  so  an  instru- 
ment by  which  one  agrees  '^to 
lease  and  rent,''  and  the  other 
'^agrees  to  rent  the  said  premises.'' 
ATerill  v.  Taylor,  8  N.  ^  44. 

*  Poole  V.  Bentley,  2  Camp.  286. 
In  this  case,  as  reported  in  12  East, 
168,  one  agreed  to  let,  and  the 
other  agreed  to  take,  certain  land> 
for  the  period  of  sixty-one  years, 
at  a  certain  rent  for  building,  and 
the  tenant  agreed  to  expend  £2000, 
within  four  years,  in  building  five 
or  more  houses,  and  when  five 
houses  were  covered  in,  the  land* 
lord  agreed  **to  grant  a  lease  or 
leases  (whichever  might  be  for  the 
more  convenient  underletting  or 
assignment  of  the  leases),"  but  the 
agreement  was  to  be  considered 
bmding  till  one  fully  prepared 
could  be  produced :  the  instrument 
was  held  to  operate  as  a  present 
lease.  **The  rule  to  be  collected 
from  all  the  cases,"  said  Lord 
Mansfield,  C.  J.,  ^^is  that  the  in- 
tention of  the  partieSj  as  declared 
by  the  vxrrds  of  the  instrument^ 
must  govern  the  construction,  and 
here,  their  intention  appears  to 
have  been  that  the  tenant,  who 
was  to  expend  so  much  capital  up- 
on the  premises  within  the  firet 
four  years  of  the  term,  should  have 
a  present  legal  interest  in  the  term, 
which  was   to    be   binding  upon 


both  parties,  though,  when  a  cer- 
tain progress  was  made  in  the 
buildings,  a  more  formal  lease  or 
leases  *  *  might  be  executed." 
See  also  to  the  same  effect,  Pearce 
V.  Chesslvn,  4  Ad.  &  £1.  225  ;  Han- 
cock V.  Coffyn,  8  Bing.  858 ;  Pin- 
ero  V.  Judson,  6  Bing.  206 ;  War- 
man  V.  Faithful,  5  B.  &  Ad.  1042 ; 
Alderman  v.  Neate,  4  M.  &  W.  704 ; 
Phillip  V.  Benjamin,  9  .Ad.  &  £1. 
644;  Chapman  v.  Bluck,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  187 ;  Pearson  v.  Ries,  8  Bing. 
178 ;  Staniforth  v.  Fox,  7  Bing.  590 ; 
Walker  v.  Groves,  15  East,  244; 
Barry  v.  Myent,  5  T.  R.  165  w.; 
Wright  V.  Trezevant,  8  C.  &  P. 
441 ;  Jackson  v.  Ashbumer,  5  T. 
&  R.  168 ;  Wilson  v.  Chishohn,  4 
C.  &  P.  474, 

«Warman  v.  Faithful,  5  B.  & 
Ad.  1042 ;  Pearson  v.  Ries,  8  Bing. 
182;  Walker  v.  Groves.  15  East, 
244 ;  Paule  v.  Bentley,  ante.  The 
addition  of  a  clause  that  a  lease 
shall  be  made  '^  with  usual  cove- 
nants," does  not  preveQt  the  agree- 
ment from  beooming  operative  as 
a  present  lease,  because^  in  all 
cases,  where  no  other  provision  is 
made,  it  is  the  right  ofooth  parties 
to  have  the  lease  contain  those 
covenants.  Flight  v.  Barton,  8 
My.  &  K.  282.  And  no  special 
covenants  can  be  inserted  in  a 
lease,  as  against  carr^g  on  a  par- 
ticular trade  therem,  or  against 
imderletting,  &c.,  &c.,  unless  spe- 
ciallypro  vided  for  in  the  agreement. 
Probert  v.  Parker,  8  id.  280 ;  Van 
V.  Corpe,  8  id.  81 ;  Henderson  v. 
Hay,  3  Bro.  C.  C.  652 ;  Browne  v. 
Rahan,  15  Ves.  528 ;  Vine  v.  Lane- 
don,  12  Ves.  179;  Church  v. 
Brown,  15  id.  258 ;  Jones  v.  Jones, 
12  id.  187  ;  Jackson  v.  De  Lacroix, 
2  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  488 ;  Livingston 
V.  Kisselbrack,  10  John.  (N.  Y.) 
836. 


336 


Agreement. 


[§  179. 


with  special  or  unusual  covenants,  it  is  held  not  to 
amount  to  a  lease.'  The  fact  that  the  contract  is  con- 
ditional, will  not  prevent  it  from  operating  as  a  lease,  if 
the  condition  is  performed  or  satisfied^ '  or  waived.*  No 
particular  form  is  necessary  to  give  an  agreement  in  this 
effect,  nor  is  it  essential  that  it  should  be  contained  in 
one  instrument.  It  may  be  made  out  by  letters  between 
the  parties.  All  that  is  essential  is,  that  there  should  be 
an  agreement,  and  that  the  intention  of  the  parties  should 
clearly  appear.*  It  is  enough  if  there  are  words  show- 
ing a  present  intention,  that  one  is  to  give  and  the  other 
to  have  possession  for  any  determinate  time,  in  whatever 
form  they  arise,  *  whether  in  the  form  of  a  license,* 
covenant, '  or  agreement ; '  and  if  the  words  of  the  in- 
strument are  ambiguous,  the  acts  of  the  parties,  and  their 


>  Burnell  v.  Curtis,  4  Jur.  490. 

'  In  Chapman  v.  Bluck,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  187,  TiNDAL,  C.  J.,  said: 
'*  It  is  said  that  the  contract  is  con- 
ditional only,  depending  ontlie  de- 
fendants being  satisfied  with  the 
reference  for  character,  and  that, 
being  conditional,  it  conveys  no 
interest.  But  upon  the  defend- 
anfs  expresfsing  his  mtisfaction 
at  the  character  aiveuy  the  condi- 
tion is  performed  and  the  agree- 
ment absolute, 

*In  Chapman  t.  Bluck,  ante, 
there  was  to  be  a  valuation,  but 
the  plaintiff  having  paid  the  de- 
fendant £100  towards  the  valua- 
tion when  made,  the  defendant 
let  liim  into  possession.  Hie  court 
held  that  this  ^ve  the  plaintiff 
more  than  an  mchoate  mterest, 
and  was  really  a  possession  under 
a  demise. 

*  Chapman  v.  Bluck,  ante;  Steel 
V.  FricK,  56  Penn.  St.  176 ;  Jones  v. 
Reynolds,  1  Q.  B.  506.  A.,  the  de- 
fendant wrote  to  his  soUcitor,  who 
was  also  the  solicitor  of  E.  the 
plaintiff :  "  You  maymake  Mr.  E. 
an  offer  of  the  T.  Hotel  at  150Z. 
per  annum  from  Lady-day,  1881; 
tenant  to  pay  all  rates  and  taxes,  ex- 
cept property  tax,  and  do  internal 
and  external  painting  and  repairs ; 
the  roof  and  walls  to  be  kept  in  re- 
pair by  the  landlord.  Term,  ten 
years ;  a  proper  lease  to  be  drawn 
up  with  all  proper  clauses,  and  to  be 


approved  by  me  and  my  solicitor.** 
Tnis  letter  was  forwarded  to  the 
plaintiff,  who  at  once  wrote  and 
accepted  the  offer.  There  was 
some  evidence  that  the  defendant 
knew  the  plaintiff  was  n  brewer. 
It  was  held,  that  the  words,  **to  be 
approved  by  me  and  my  solicitor," 
dia  not  prevent  the  letters  forming 
a  complete  contract,  and  that  the 
defendant  was  not  entitled  to  in- 
sist on  the  lease  containing  a  cov- 
enant against  \mderletting.  (2)  A 
subsequent  letter  from  the  defend- 
ant to  the  solicitor,  expressing  sat- 
isfaction that  E.  had  accepted  the 
offer,  was  tendered  in  evidence. 
It  was  held  that  the  letter  was  privi- 
leged. Eadie  v.  Addison,  47  L. 
T.  Rep..  N.  S.  543. 

^  pAiiK,  B.,  in  BickneU  v.  Hood, 
5  M.  &  W.  106 ;  Jackson  v.  DeLa- 
croix,  2  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  483 ;  Bacon 
V.  Bowdoin,  22  Pick.  (Mass.)  401  ; 
Chicago,  Ac,  Co.  v.  United  States, 
4fec.,  Co.,  57  Penn.  St.  83;  Walker 
V.  Giles,  6  C.  B.  662 ;  Drake  v. 
Munday,  Cro.  Car.  207 ;  4  Bacon's 
Abr.  tit.  Leases  (K.) 

• V.    Wood,  2    B.  & 

Aid.  724;  HaU  v.  Seabright,  1 
Mod.  14. 

'  Pritchard  v.  Dodd,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
693 ;  Fenny  v.  Child,  2  M.  &  S. 
255;  Whitlock  v.  Horton,  Cro. 
Jac.  91. 

8  Lovelock  V.  Franklyn,  8  Q.  B. 
871. 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  Present  Demise.  837 

contemporaneous  or  subsequent  dealings  under  it,  may  be 
looked  at  for  the  purpose  of  ascei-taining their  intention.' 
In  England,  under  the  stamp  act,  the  fact  that  an 
agreement  is  stamped  as  a  lease,  has  been  held,  in  the 
absence  of  anything  in  the  agreement  indicating  a  con- 
trary intention,  sufficient  to  indicate  the  purpose  of  the 
parties  to  have  the  agreement  operate  as  a  lease ;  *  and  so 
generally  where  there  is  anything  to  indicate  such  an 
intention  the  instrument  will  be  construed  as  a  lease.' 
Especially  is  this  so  when  such  words  as  "agrees  to  let" 
or  "agrees  to  take  "  are  employed ; '  and  the  fact  that  a 
more  formal  lease  is  contemplated  will  not  change  the 
rule.'  An  instrument  containing  an  express  proviso 
that  it  shall  not  operate  as  a  lease,  but  only  ^  an  agree- 
ment, will  be  construed  as  an  agreement  only,  although 
it  contains  words  of  present  demise,  because  the  inten- 
tion of  the  parties  must  control.'  But  the  intention  of 
the  parties,  as  gathered  from  the  whole  instrument,  must 
be  looked  at ;  and  though  there  is  an  express  provision 
that  the  instrument  shall  operate  only  as  an  agreement, 
yet,  if  there  are  subsequent  clauses  that  create  an  actual 
demise,  the  instrument  will  besoconstrued,'  Thus,  where 
an  agreement  contained  the  following  clause  :  "  And  it  is 
hereby  mutually  agreed  that  these  presents  shall  operate 
as  an  agreement  only,  and  that  until  a  lease  shall  be  ex- 
ecuted, the  rents,  covenants  and  agreements  agreed  to  be 
therein  reserved  and  contained  shall  be  paid  and  observed, 
and  the  several  rights  and  remedies  shall  be  enforced  in 
the  same  manner  as  if  the  same  had  been  actually  ex- 
ecuted," the  concluding  stipulation  was  held  to  create 
a  tenancy  at  a  fixed  rent,  for  which  distress  might  be 
made,'andasimilardoctrinewas  held  in  an  earlier  case.' 

•Peiringv.Brook,  7  C.&P.859. 

s        '  Rollason  v.  Leon,  7  H.  &  N. 

78 ;  Pinero  v,  Judson,  6  Bi^.  2M  j 

Anderson  v.  Midland  R.  EL  Co., 

•  AndersoD  v.  Midland  R.  R,  Co. 

80  L.  J.  Q.  B.  94. 
;         '  Pinero  v.  JudsoD,  ante.    An-in- 
I     strument  by  which  A  agreed  to 

grant  a  lease  for  a  certain  term 


838 


Agreement. 


[§  179. 


In  England,  so  much  litigation  originated,  and  so  much 
conflict  of  doctrine  grew  out  of  contracts  of  this  charac- 


upon  covenants  specified,  some  of 
which  were  inconsistent  with  a 
tenancy  from  year  to  year,  and  B 
agreed  to  take  a  lease  upon  such 
terms,  **  and  in  the  mean  tune,  and 
until  the  lease  should  be  made,  to 
pay  the  rent,  and  hold  subject  to 
the  covenants,  and  to  repair  forth- 
with, with  power  of  re-entry,  be- 
fore lease  executed,  on  breach  of 
the  stipulations,"  constitutes  a  let- 
ting upon  the  terms  stated.  Pinero 
V.  Judson,  V.  Bing.  206.  And 
where,  by  a  written  instrument, 
K  agreed  to  let  and  P  agreed,  to 
take  a  house  in  its  unfinished  state 
for  the  term  of  sixty  years,  being 
the  whole  term  tbiat  K  had  the 
same  leased  to  him,  at  the  rent  of 
525  L  payable  quarterly,  the  first 
payment  to  be  made  for  the  half 
quarter  at  Christmas  next,  P  to 
insure  and  to  have  the  benefit  of 
an  insurance  lately  made,  a  lease 
and  counterpart  to  be  prepared  at 
P's  expense,  and  to  contain  all  the 
clauses,  covenants  and  a^greements 
K  entered  into  in  the  lease  granted 
to  him ;  it  was  held,  that  this  was 
an  actual  demise,  and  not  a  mere 
agreement  for  a  lease,  particularly 
as  P  was  put  into  immediate  pos- 
session, rearson  v.  Ries,  8  Bmg. 
178.  And  in  Chapman  v.  Bluck. 
4  Bing,  N.  C.  187,  where  the  plaint- 
iff by  letter  offered  to  take  a  farm 
of  defendant  at  a  certain  specified 
term  and  rent,  the  crops  to  be 
valued,  and  a  lease  to  be  prepared 
at  the  plaintiff's  expanse,  tne  whole 
to  be  subject  to  a  certificate   of 

glaintiff^s  solvency,  and  defendant, 
aving  received  the  certificate  by 
letter,  accepted  of  plaintiff  as  ten- 
ant on  the  terms  proposed ;  the 
valuation  was  deferred  from  time 
to  time,  but  plaintiff  on  paying 
lOOZ.  towards  the  amount  was  let 
into  possession ;  it  was  held,  that 
theletters  of  the  plaintiff  and  de- 
fendant (at  all  events  as  explained 
by  the  above  circumstances  and 
some  admissions  made  by  plaintiff 
after  a  distress),  constituted  an  ac- 
tual demise,  on  which  defendant 
was  authorized  to  distrain  for  rent 
in  arrear,  and  not  to  a  mere  agree- 
ment for  a  lease.  And  an  agree- 
ment by  which  A  agrees  to  "  let " 


premises  to  B  "on  lease."  for  a 
certain  term  at  a  certain  rent, 
'*  subject  to  the  stipulations  and 
covenants  in  the  original  lease  un- 
der which  he  holds,"  and  '*  to  keep 
these  stipulations  in  every  respect 
until  the  lease  shall  be  granted, 
which  lease,  when  requiredby  B^ 
is  to  be  prepared  by  As  solicitor  at 
B's  expense,"  is  a  lease,  and  not 
an  agreement  for  one.  Wilson  v. 
Chishohn,  5  C.  &  P.  474.  So  a 
memorandum  by  which  A  agrees 
to  let  B  certain  lands  mentioned  in. 
an  annexed  abandoned  lease  from 
A  to  C,  upon  the  conditions  and 
agreements  contained  in  the  same 
lease,  and  by  which  A  and  B  bind 
themselves  to  execute  a  lease  simi- 
lar to  such  abandoned  lease,  is 
itself  a  vaUd  lease.  Pearce  v.  Cheft- 
lyn,  5  N.  &  M.  652.  A  agreed  that 
''B  the  mills,  &c.,  should  enjoy, 
and  engaged  to  give  him  a  lease 
for  the  term,  &c.,  and  at  the  rent, 
&c."  By  another  part  of  the  agree- 
ment '*  an  additional  piece  of  land 
was  to  be  purchasea  by  A  to  be 
added  to  the  land  demised."  It 
was  held,  that  this  amounted  only 
to  an  agreement  for  a  lease.  Jack- 
son V.  Ashburner,  5  T.  R.  568,  cited 
by  Bailet,  J.,  in  Doe  v.  Groves, 
1 5  East  247.  And  where  it  appears 
that  there  is  no  present  power  to 
lease,  and  the  instrument  contem- 
plates a  future  state  of  things,  it 
will  be  considered  a  mere  agree- 
ment for  a  future  lease,  and  not 
an  actual  demise ;  as,  where  it  was 
agreed  that  a  lease  should  be 
granted  when  tlie  intended  lessor 
should  have  obtained  a  lease  to 
himself  under  a  then  subsisting 
agreement  between  liimself  and 
the  owner  of  the  premises ;  Hay- 
wood V.  Haswell,  6  Ad.  &  EL  265  ; 
and  an  express  proviso  that  the 
instrument  shall  not  be  construed 
or  taken  to*  operate  as  a  lease  or 
actual  demise  will  restrain  its  op- 
eration as  such,  though  it  mignt 
otherwise  amount  to  a  present  de- 
mise. Perring  v.  Brook,  7  C.  & 
P.  360.  It  is  reported  to  have  hem 
decided  that  an  agreement  by  A  to 
grants  and  B  to  take^  a  lease,  for  a 
certain  term,  at  a  fixed  rent,  is 
per  see  only  a  contract  for  a  future 


CHAP,  xxrv.] 


Pkesent  Dejosk. 


ter>  and  in  determining  whether  they  were  to  be  treated 
as  leases,  or  as  mere  agreements  therefor,  that  by  act  of 
parliament  in  1845,'  it  was  provided  that  "a  lease  re- 
quired by  law  to  be  in  writing,  made  after  the  1st  day  of 
Oct.,  1845,  shall  be  void  at  law  unless  made  by  deed." 
This  statute  obviates  many  of  the  difficulties  formerly 
existing,  and  applies  to  all  leases  "for  a  term  exceeding 
three  years  from  the  making  thereof,  whereupon  the 
rent  reserved  to  the  landlord  during  such  terra,  amounts 
to  two-thirda  part  at  least  of  the  full  improved 
value  of  the  thing  demised."'  Under  this  statute,  a  con- 
tract not  under  seal  for  a  lease  for  more  than  three  years, 
or  for  three  years,  to  commence  at  a  future  day,  or  for 
any  less  time,  if  the  rent  reserved  is  less  than  two-thirds 


demEse.    PhilUpe  t.  Bartlej,  8  C. 

&  P.  181 ;  see  Clayton  v.  Burthen- 
Bhaw.  6  B,  &  C.  41  ;  7  D.  &  R.  800, 
S.  C.  See  also  Rawson  v.  Picke,  7 
Ad.  4  E.  451.  Where  the  mstru- 
ment  was  held  to  amount  to  ait 
agreement  for  a  lease,  and  cot  an 
actual  lease.  If  strong  circum- 
stauces  of  inconverience  would 
arise  from  an  mstrument  being 
construed  as  a  present  demise, 
that  fact  maj  indicate  that  the  in- 
tention of  the  parties  was  liiat  it 
ebould  be  an  agreement  onlj ;  such 
aa  a  stipulation  that  out  of  the  rent 
mentioned,  a  proportionate  abate- 
ment should  be  made  in  respect  to 
certain  excttpted  premisee  ;  and  a 
stipulation  that  the  tenant  "should 
hold,  under  all  ueual  covenants, 
&c,"  for  it  may  be  disputed  what 
are  usual  covenants.  Morgan  d. 
Downing  t.  BiseeU.  8  Taunt,  66 ; 
Colley  T,  Streeton,  3  D.  &  R.  522. 
Jt  is  observable  that  in  these  cases, 
the  terms  of  the  future  lease  were 
not  ascertained  at  the  time  ;  where 
the  terms,  though  not  stated,  can 
hf.  tiMpcled  at  once  f  mm  an  instni- 


a  let- 


tenant  to  find  sureties  for  his  pay- 
ing the  rent ;  but  the  amount  was 
not  settled  and  the  sureties  were 
not  given  ;  it  was  held,  that  tlie 
instrument,  altliougb  it  contained 
words  of  present  demise,  did  not 
operate  .as  a  lease,  or  alter  the 
terms  of  the  existing  tenancy. 
John  V.  Jenkins,  I  C.  &  M.  227. 
Though  it  might  have  been  other- 
wise had  the  valuation  taken  place, 
and  the  suretieebeen  found.  Chap- 
man V.  Bluck,  ante,  A  agreed  "  to 
let  premisee  to  B  on  lease,  with  a 
purchasing  clause,  for  twenty-one 
jeaiB,  at  6!ii  per  year  ;"  B  to  enter 
any  time  on  or  before  a  particular 
day,  &c.  It  was  held,  that  this 
was  only  an  agreement  for  a  lease, 
the  eoiul  saying  there  were  no 
words  of  demise,  thai  the  com- 
mencement of  the  tenancy  was  left 
uncertain,  and  that  the  words  as 
to  purchasing  showed  that  the  let- 
ting was  to  be  by  a  particular  in- 
strument containing  such  a  clause. 
Dunk  V.  Hunter,  5  B.  &  Aid.  832 ; 
Clayton  v.  Burthensiiaw,  5  B  & 
C.  41.  See  Brown  v,  Warner,  14 
Ves.  156.  Where  there  is  a  suf- 
ficient demise  of  premises,  the  law 
impUea  a  promise  by  the  party  de- 
mising t«  give  possession  to  his 
tenant ;  and  assumpsit  liee  against 
the  party  letting  for  the  breach  of 
such  promise.  Coev.  Clay,  7  Bing. 
440. 


^^mwmm 


340 


Agreement. 


[§  180. 


improved  the  value  of  the  thing  demised,  cannot  operate 
as  a  lease,  but  may  operate  as  an  agreement  for  a  lease, 
and  as  such  will  be  specifically  enforced  in  equity,'  and 
in  some  cases  it  has  been  held  to  create  an  equitable  term, 
that  even  a  court  of  law  would  recognize  for  some  pur- 
poses ; '  but  generally,  a  court  of  law  will  not  notice  an 
equitable  right  to  a  lease  under  a  parol  contract,  nor  give 
to  a  subsequently  executed  lease,  relation  back  to  the 
contract."  A  lease  for  a  term  longer  than  that  which  by 
statute  can  be  granted  by  parol,  and  which  is  conse- 
quently void  at  law  because  not  by  deed,  may,  neverthe- 
less, be  good  in  equity  as  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  and 
enforced  as  such  :  *  and,  even  at  law,  it  may  be  given  the 
force  and  effect  of  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  and  also 
with  respect  to  any  covenants  therein,  so  as  to  support 
an  action  for  a  breach  of  such  stipulations  ;  *  but  no  action 
can  be  maintained  for  not  giving  possession  under  a  void 
lease.'  But,  if  the  lessee  goes  into  possession  and  pays 
rent  under  the  lease,  he  becomes  a  tenant  from  year  to 
year,  subject  to  all  the  covenants  in  the  lease  applicable 
to  such  a  tenancy.' 

Sec.  ISO.     Agreement  must  be  complete.— The  agreement 


»  Cowen  V.  Phillips,  88  Beav.  18 
Parker  v.  TasweU,  2  DeG.  &  J,  559 
Rollason  v.  Lion.  7  H.  <fc  N.  78 
Tidey  v.  Mallett,  16  C.  B.  N.  S.  298 
Bond  V.  Rofiling,  1  B.  &  S.  871. 

« WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  158 ;  Hunt 
V.  Harris,  19  C.  B.  N.  S.  13.  If  the 
agreement  amounts  to  a  lease,  the 
lessee  during  his  rightful  enjoy- 
ment, cannot  be  evicted,  as  that 
form  of  action  requires  that  the 
plaintiff  should  have  the  legal  es- 
tate. Weakley  v.  Bucknell,  Comp. 
473,  holding  that  an  agreement  for 
a  lease  constitutes  a  valid  defence 
to  an  action  of  ejectment,  has  been 
over-ruled  by  innumerable  cases, 
and  it  is  weU  settled,  that  at  law, 
the  mere  signing  of  an  agreement, 
and  an  entiy  into  possession  under 
it  by  the  tenant,  during  the  inter- 
val before  the  lease  is  executed, 
creates  merely  a  tenancy  at  will ; 
Braithwaite  v.  Hitchcock,  10  M.  & 
W.  497 ;  Hammerton  v.  Stead,  8 
B.  &  C.  478 ;  Chapman  v.  Towner, 


6  M.  &  W.  100 ;  determinable  in- 
stanter  and  without  previous  no- 
tice to  quit,  except  where  the 
statute  otherwise  provides  :  Hegan 
V.  Johnson,  2  Taunt.  148  ;  Knight 
V.  Bennett,  3  Bing.  361 ;  unless  by 
payment  of  rent  the  tenancy  has 
become  one  from  year  to  year. 
Perfect  v.  Smith,  1  Man.  &  Ry. 
137 ;  Clarke  v.  Moore,  1  Jo.  &  La. 
Lou.  728. 

» Norman  v.  Wills,  17  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  186. 

*  Parker  v.  Taswell,  2  DeG.  &  J. 
557. 

*  RollajBon  v.  Lion,  7  H.  &  N.  73 ; 
Hayne  v.  Cummings,  16  C.  B.  N. 
S.  421 ;  Bond  v.  RoSing,  1  B.  &  S. 
871 ;  Tidey  v.  Mallett.  16  C.  B.  13. 
S.  982 ;    Hunt  v.  Harris,  19  id.  N. 

*  Downy  v.  McNamara,  5  E.  & 
B.  612 ;  Tress  v.  Savage,  4  id,  86 ; 
Jinks  V.  Edwards,  11  Exch.  775; 
Lenatman  v.  Ambler,  8  id.  72. 

'Ken  V  Clark,  19  Mo.  132; 
Drake  v.  Newton,  23  N.  J.  L.  ill. 


CHAP.  XXIV,]         Must  be  Complete. 


341 


in  order  to  have  the  effect  of  a  present  demise,  must  be 
full  and  complete  and  must  contain  all  the  requisite  ele- 
ments of  a  lease.  Thus,  where  no  price  is  fixed  by  the 
parties,  hut  the  amount  of  rent  is  left  to  the  award  of  a 
third  person,  not  named  in  the  agreement,  there  is  an 
absence  of  an  essential  element  to  constitute  a  lease.' 
But  where  a  method  of  arriving  at  certainty  in  any  special 
particular  is  fixed  upon  in  the  agreement,  as  in  the  ca$e 
last  cited,  if  an  arbitrator  had  been  named  by  the  parties, 
the  defect  would  have  been  cured.  Thus,  the  fact  that 
no  precise  day  is  fixed  upon  when  rent  is  to  commence, 
has  been  held  not  sufficient  to  deprive  an  instrument  of 
the  character  of  a  present  lease,  when  the  party  ivas  let 
into  immediate  possessioti  under  it*  Certainly,  however, 
as  to  the  amount  of  rent,  and  the  commencement  and 
duration  of  the  term  are  essental,  and  the  instrument 
must  either  definitely  fix  them,  or  contain  elements  from 
which  they  may  be  definitely  .ascertained,  or  it  will  be 
treated  as  an  agreement  rather  than  a  lease,'  To  sum- 
marize from  the  examination  we  have  given  the  cases, 
it  seems  that,  whenever  an  agreement  contains  words  of 
present  demise,  and  the  elements  essential  to  constitute 
a  lease,  it  will  be  so  construed,  however  informal  it  may 


thete  respects,  the  inslmment  wHt 
not  be  a  lease.  But  if  we  can  find 
all  these  particulars  set  out,  then 
it  will  be  a  lease,  if  the  parties  itu 
tendeii  that  it  should  be,"  In  thia 
case  the  agreement  was  ' '  between 
A  &  B,  by  which  A  agrees  to  pay  G 
£140  a  year,  in  quarterly  payments, 
for  a  house  and  garden,  &c.  (de- 
scribing the  situation),  for  the  term 
of  seven,  fourteen  or  twenty-one 
years,  at  the  option  of  the  tenant, 
the  rent  to  commence  from  the  Ist 
of  Jan."  The  court  held  the  instru- 
ment a  lease  for  seven  years  cer- 
tain, and  after  that  for  fourteen  or 
twenty-one  yeara  at  the  option  of 
the  tenant.  Clayton  t,  Burlin- 
shaw.  5  B.  &  C.  41 :  Warman  v. 
Faithful.S  B.&Ad.  1(H3;  Pearson 
V.  Ries.  8  Bing.  178;  John  v.  Jen- 
kins, 8  Tfyw.  170  J  Dunk  v.  Hunt- 
er, S  B.  &  Aid.  322 :  Alderman  v. 
Neate,  4  M.  &  W.  704. 


'  Baughery  v.  Lee,  17  I«.  An, 
23 ;  "Wnght  v.  Trezevant,  B  C.  & 
P.  441 ;  John  v.  Jenkins,  3  Tryw. 
170 ;  Warman  t.  Faithfull,  5  B.  & 
Ad.  1043. 

'  TDiDAL,  C.  J.  in  Pearson  t. 
Kes,  8  Bing.  181. 

'  "Tlie  only  principle  applicable 
to  cases  of  this  kind,"  said  Beet, 
C.  J.,  in  Wright  v.  Trezevant,  3  C. 
&  P.  441,  ■'  is,  that  if,  in  the  instru- 
ment relied  on,  there  is  that  which 
in  point  of  law  will  satisfy  the 
word  lease,  then  it  will  operate  as 
a  lease,  unless  it  waa  the  intention 


342 


Agreement. 


[§  180. 


be,  unless  from  the  entire  instrument,  a  contrary  inten- 
tion appears.  "It  may  be  laid  down  for  a  rule,"  says 
Bacon,*  "that  whatever  words  are  suflBcient  to  explain 
the  intent  of  the  parties,  that  the  one  shall  divest  him- 
self of  the  possession,  and  the  other  come  into  for  such 
a  determinate  period  of  time,  such  words,  whether  they 
run  in  the  form  of  a  license,  covenant  or  agreement,  are 
of  themselves  sufficient,  and  will,  in  construction  of  law, 
amount  to  a  lease  for  years,  as  effectually  as  if  the  most 
pertinent  and  proper  words  had  been  made  use  of  for 
that  purpose ;  and  on  the  contrary  if  the  most  proper 
and  authentic  form  of  words  whereby  to  describe 
and  pass  a  present  lease  for  years  are  made  use  of,  yet, 
if  upon  the  whole  deed  there  appears  no  such  intent^  but 
that  they  are  only  preparatory  and  relative  to  a  future 
lease  to  be  made,  the  law  will  rather  do  violence  to  the 
words,  than  break  through  the  intent  of  the  parties."  * 


1  4  Bacon*p  Abr.  tit.  Leafies,  (K.) 
'A  writine  as  follows:  "Re- 
ceived of  B,  tnree  dollars  and  fifty 
cents,  for  the  rent  of  my  brick 
house,  &c.,  for  one  month,  with 
the  privilege  of  keeping  it  six 
roontns  at  the  same  rate.  No.  91 
or  95.  December  Ist,  1848,"  has 
been  held  good  as  a  lease.  So  has 
an  agreement  as  follows:  *'K 
agrees  to  let,  and  by  these  presents 
does  let  unto  W,  the  said  addition 
to  the  pier."  The  addition  was  not 
at  that  time  in  existence.  But  the 
court  held  that  it  operated  as  an 
actual  lease,  and  that  the  relation 
of  landlord  and  tenant  was  created 
as  soon  as  W  took  possession. 
People  V.  Kelsev,  88  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
269 ;  S.  C.  14  Afcb,  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  872. 
See  also  Steel  v.  Frick,  56  Penn.  St. 
172 ;  Hulbut  v.  Post,  1  Bos.  (N.  Y.) 
28 ;  Doe  v.  Richards,  4  Ind.  374. 
A  conti*act  by  which  one  is  to 
pay  a  certain  per  cent,  on  the 
cost  of  a  building,  with  the  right 
of  becoming  owner  on  paying  a 
certain  price,  is  a  lease,  and  these 
incidental  provisions  do  not  change 
its  character.  Mimicipality  No.  1 
V.  New  Orleans,  5  la.  An.  761. 
See  also  Emmons  v.  Kiger,  23  Ind. 
483.  A  memorandum  upon  an 
jibandoned  or  spent  lease,  in  w^hich 


the  lessor  in  such  lease  *'  agrees  to 
let "  the  premises  therein  described, 
and  binds  himself  to  execute  a 
lease  similar  to  the  old  lease,  is  of 
itself  a  valid  lease.  Pearce  v. 
Chesslyn,  4  Ad.  &  EL  225.  "G 
F,  does  this  day  agree  to  let  J  S, 
three  cottages  for  ten  years ;  he 
further  agrees  to  build  a  brew- 
house  and  make  a  cellar  at  the  rent 
of  £35 ;  he  agrees  to  pay  the 
ground  rent,  and  has  tliis  day  re- 
ceived £4  from  J  S,  in  earnest," 
was  held  a  lease,  and  not  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease.  Stanifortn  v. 
Fox,7  Bing.  590.  In  Walker  v. 
Groves,  15  East,  244,  by  an  instru- 
ment in  writing,  tlie  landlord 
agreed  to  let,  and,  also,  upon  de- 
mand, to  execute  a  lease  to  the 
tenant  of  a  certain  farm,  and  the 
tenant  on  his  part  agreed  to  take, 
and  upon  demand  to  execute  a 
counterpart  of  such  lease.  The 
court  held  tliat  the  instrument  was 
a  lease,  the  agreement  for  a  future 
lease  with  further  covenants  being 
for  the  better  security  of  the  par- 
ties. See  also  Barry  v.  Nugent,  8 
Dougl.  179 ;  Hancock  v.  Coffyn,  8 
Bing.  858  ;  Philhp  v.  Benjamin,  9 
Ad.  &  El.  044 ;  Alderman  v.  Neater 
4  M.  &  W.  704 ;  Hulbut  v.  Post,  1 
Bosw.  (N.  Y.  Supt.  Ct.)  28 ;  Tull, 


CHAP.  XXIV.]      Not  a  Presekt  Demise. 


343 


Sec.  161.  VTheai  not  a  preBdnt  demite-— As  previously 
stated,  unless  words  of  present  demise  are  used,  or  such 
circumstances  exist  as  show  an  intention  on  the  part  of 
the  parties  that  the  agreement  shall  have  that  effect,  it 
cannot  be  so  construed,  and  this  is  always  the  case  when 
the  demise  depends  upon  a  contingency.  Thus,  an  agree- 
ment by  A  to  demise  certain  premises,  ''in  case  it  shall 
turnout  that  he  is  entitled  thereto,'"  or  in  case  certain 
things  shall  be  satisfactory  to  the  intended  tenant,'  or 
where  the  terms  are  not  agreed  upon,'  or  where  by  the 
express  terms  of  the  instrument  it  is  not  to  take  effect 
until  a  future  day,' or  where  the  agreement  contemplates 
the  doing  of  some  future  act  to  make  it  effectual,'  or  the 
execution  of  another  instrument  to  embody  the  actual 
contract  between  the  parties,'  or  where  it  is  expressly 


T.  Oranger,  8  N.  Y.  115.  In  Bacon 
T.  Bowdoin,  23  Pick.  (Mass.)  401  ; 
A,  by  a  eealed  contract,  agreed  to 
erect  a  building  for  B,  and  by 
words  of  present  demise  in  the 
eame  inHtrument  leased  it  to  B  for 
ten  years,  from  the  day  fixed  for 
its  completioD,  and  B  agreed  to 
take  the  building  and  par  the  rent 
therefor.  The  court  held  that  this 
was  a  lease,  and  not  a  mere  agree- 
ment for  one. 

'  Core  T.  Clare.  2  T.  R.  786. 

*  Bromfield  v.  Smith.  6  East.  S80. 

'  Hegan  v.  Johnson,  2  Taunt. 
148  ;  Hougherey  v.  Lee,  17  I«.  An. 
22. 

'  BumeU  v.  Curtis,  4  Jur.  490 
CoUey  V.  Stretton,  a  D.  &  R.  622 . 
Brashier  v.  Jackson,  6  M.  &  W. 
M9;  Chapman  v.  Towner,  6  id. 
100. 

'  People  T.  GilliB,  24  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)2fll.  If  a  person  agrees  to  take 
a  lease  for  a  certain  definite  term, 
as,  for  three  years,  in  case  the 
landlord  will  make  certain  repairs 


left  optional  with  the  tenant 
whether  ho  wiU  assume  or  contin- 
ue the  relation  or  not.  Thus,  the 
defendant  by  leaae  under  seal  took 
a.  tenement  at  a  specified  rent,  for 
a  year,  the  lessors  agreeing  there- 
in "  to  lease  to  said  Young,  said 
premises  at  the  price  and  condi- 
tions named,  so  long  as  he  wishes 
to  occupy  the  same.  It  was  held 
that  this  stipulation  was  not  an 
^jeement  for  a  lease,  but  a  lease 
vpon  Vs  election  to  remain,  and 
that,  by  remaining  in  possession  at 
the  expiration  uf  the  year,  he  must 
he  treated  as  having  exercised  his 
election  to  treat  it  as  a  lease.  Hol- 
ley  V.  Young,  66  Me.  B20. 

'  Tempest  v.  Eawlings,  13  East, 
18 ;  Hegan  v.  Johnson,  2  Taunt. 
148;  Dunk  t.  Hunter,  5  B.  &  Aid. 
833.  Words  in  the  future  tense 
as,  "  A  agrees  to  let  to  B."  or  "A 
agrees  tSat  he  will  lease  to  B," 
Warner  t.  Browne,  8  East,  184; 
RawBon  v.  Eicke,  7  Ad.  &  El.  451 ; 
Browne  v.  Warner,  14  Ves.  Jr.  156, 
or  that  "he  will  grant  him  a 
lease."  Brashier  v.  Jackson,  6  M. 
&  W.  648 ;  Hammerton  v.  Stead, 
3  B.  &  C.  478 ;  Phillips  v.  Hartley, 
8  C.  A;  P.  131.  Tlie  following  let^ 
t«rs  were  held  to  constitute  an 
agreement  only,  and  not  a  demise 
from  the  plaintiff  to  the  defend- 
ant. On  the  aist  of  February, 
182,'),  the  defendant  wrote  to  the 
plaintiff:    "I   ehall    be  happy  to 


344 


Agreement. 


[§  181. 


stated  in  the  instrument  that  it  is  not  to  have  the  eflfet  t 
of  a  lease,  and,  generally,  unless  words  are  used  that  show 


take  a  lease  of  your  iron  ore  at  a 
royalty  of  Is.  per  ton,  and  I  will 
engage  to  work  the  seyeral  veins 
of  ironstone,  limestone,  ore  and 
manganese,  in  such  relative  pro- 
portions as  that  the  average  prod^ 
uce  of  iron  shall  not  exceed  the 
usual  average  of  the  common  ores 
(which  I  believe  to  be  about  forty 
per  cent.)>  the  term  to  be  about 
forty  years  from  the  24th  of  June 
next,  and  the  sleeping  rent  150Z. 
per  annum.  The  relative  propor- 
tion of  the  iron  ores  in  weight  to 
be  worked  together,  to  be  ascer- 
tained by  a  competent  person/' 
The  plaintiff  wrote  to  the  defend- 
ant m  answer:  **I  agree  to  the 
terms  contamed  in  your  letter.  / 
shall  be  ready  to  grant  a  lease  con- 
formable thereto,  Jones  v.  Rey- 
nolds, 1  Gale  &.  D.  62.  Where  A, 
by  an  agreement  under  seal, 
agreed  to  take  and  hire  of  B,  a  cer- 
tain house  and  premises  at  a  cer- 
tain annual  rent,  but  the  instru- 
ment contained  no  words  of  de- 
mise, and  there  was  nothing  to 
show  when  the  term  was  to  com- 
mence or  determine,  it  was  held 
only  an  agreement  for  a  lease; 
and.  where  by  the  same  instru- 
ment A  agreed  to  take  the  fixtures, 
stock  in  trade,  and  such  furniture 
as  should  be  thought  necessary,  at 
a  valuation  to  be  made  on  a  future 
day,  it  was  held  not  to  amount  to 
a  conveyance  of  a  present  interest 
in  such  property.  Clayton  v.  Bur- 
tenshow,  5  B.  &  C.  41.  And  even 
an  agreement  by  which  one  agrees 
to  grant  and  another  to  take  prem- 
ises for  a  certain  time,  at  a  certain 
yearly  rent,  is  merely  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  although  the  in- 
tended tenant  enters  and  occupies 
under  it  during  the  whole  term. 
Phillips  V.  HarBey,  8  C.  &  P.  121. 
The  fact  that  an  instnmient  con- 
tains words  of  present  demise,  will 
not  give  it  the  character  of  a  lease 
if  it  contains  other  words  that  in- 
dicate that  it  was  not  intended  as 
a  lease.  Thus,  A,  by  an  instru- 
ment not  under  seal,  agreed  to  let 
and  B  to  take  and  rent  certain 
premises,  **  to  hold  thenceforth  for 
a  term  of  thirty-four  years  deter- 
minable by  either  party  by  giving 


twelve  months*  notice,  at  the  end 
of  the  first  seven,  fourteen  or 
twenty-eight  years,  at  a  certedn 
yearly  rent,  clear  of  all  taxes; 
and  B  bound  himself  to  keep  the 
premises  in  tenantable  repair  dur- 
ing the  term,  with  a  further  agree- 
ment on  the  part  of  A  to  grant  a 
lease  thereof  on  like  terms,  with  the 
usual  covenants  within  three 
month^t  was  held  to  be  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  and  not  a  present 
demise.  Colley  v.  Stretton,  2  D. 
&  R.  522.  See  also  to  same  effect, 
Hammerton  v.  Stead,  3  B.  &  C.  H. 
78.  Where  a-lease  was  granted  to 
one  who  afterwards  took  another 
into  partnership,  and  both  applied 
jointly  to  the  landlord  to  enlarge 
the  premises,  agreeing  to  pay  102. 
per  cent,  per  annum  on  the  money 
laid  out,  which  was  accordingly 
done,  and  the  tenants  afterward 
dissolved  partnership :  —  It  was 
held  that  tne  ii^reement  was  col- 
lateral only  to  tne  lease,  and  not  a 
new  demise.  Hoby  v.  Roebuck,  6 
Taunt.  157.  A  *^paper  entitled 
''Memorandum  of  an  agreement 
between  A  &  B,"  and  signed  bv 
them,  expressing  that,  in  consid- 
eration of  402.,  A  doth  agree  to  let, 
and  B  doth  agree  to  ta£e,  a  mes- 
suage, &c. ,  at  402.  per  annum  rent ; 
and  it  is  further  agreed,  that  A 
shall  not  raise  the  rent,  nor  turn 
out  B,  so  long  as  the  rent  is  duly 
paid  quarterlv,  and  he  does  not 
sell  any  article  injurious  to  A  in. 
his  business.  Though  the  terms 
do  not  exclude  the  construction  of 
actual  demise,  yet  as  the  import  of 
the  whole  looks  to  some  futiire  in- 
strument, and  a  more  permanent 
interest  than  from  year  to  year,  a 
demurrer  to  a  bill  for  specific  per- 
formance against  A,  who  had  suc- 
ceeded in  an  ejectment,  was  over- 
ruled. Browne  v.  Warner,  14  Ves. 
156.  And  see  Warner  v.  Browne, 
8  East,  164.  Where  a  tenant  was 
in  possession  under  a  memoran- 
dum of  an  agreement,  whereby  the 
'defendant  as  lessor  agreed  to  let  a 
house  on  lease  for  twenty-one 
years,  at  the  net  clear  rent  of  682. 
per  annum,  the  tenant  to  enter  at 
any  time  on  or  before  a  particular 
day,  on  paying  the  sum  of  502.  on 


CHAP.  XXIV.] 


ElTTRT. 


345 


an  intention  on  the  part  of  the  parties  to  the  instrument ' 
to  make  it  operative  as  a  present  demise,  it  will  operate 
only  as  an  agreement  for  a  future  lease.' 

Sec.  182.  Entry  under  agreement  ftor  lease— £ffbot  of— 
When  a  person  enters  into  possession  under  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  even  though  it  has  no  vaUdity  as  an 
agreement,  so  that  as  such,  it  could  be  enforced  in  a  court 
of  equity,  or  damages  be  recovered  for  its  breach  in  a 
court  of  law,  yet,  if  rent  is  paid  under  it,  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year  is  thereby  created,  subject  to  all  the  terms 
of  the  agreement  applicable  to  this  species  of  tenancy, 
although,  until  rent  is  paid  or  agreed  to  be  paid,  the  party 
in  possession  is  a  mere  tenant  at  will.'  Actual  payment 
of  rent  in  money  or  property  is  not  essential,  but  there 
must  be  that  which  is  tantamount  thereto.  Mere  pay- 
entry  ;  and  there  was  a  purchaa- 
iOE  clause  in  the  lease; — It  was 
held,  that  tti'"  amounted  only  to 
an  agreement  for  a  future  lease, 
and  that  no  lease  had  been  exe- 
cuted. Dunk  T.  Hunter,  5  B.  & 
A.  323.  Where  A  agreed  "that 
he  would  by  indenture  demise  to 
B  a  house  for  fourteen  years  from 
the  25th  day  of  December  last  past, 
at  the  yearly  rent  of  40f.,  payable 
quarterly ;  nut  if  B  should  pay  A 
the  sum  of  401.  before  the  exoira- 
tion  of  the  first  quarter,  wliich 
would  be  at  Lady-day  then  next, 
in  that  case  the  rent  should  be  re- 
duced to  the  rato  of  331.  per  an- 
num, payable  quarterly;"  it  was 
held,  that  the  agreement  was  no 
demise.  Hegaa  f.  Johnson.  2 
Taunt.  148.  A  similar  doctrine 
was  held  In  reference  to  an  agree- 
ment executed  on  the  24th  No- 
Tember  upon  an  agreement  stamp, 
setting  forth  the  conditions  of  let- 
ting a  farm,  and  the  r^ulations  to 
be  observed  by  the  tenant,  Uiat  the 


and  not  a  present  demise,  there  be- 
ing no  present  occupatioD,  and  an 
express  stipulation  for  a  future 
lease,  as  well  as  time  given  to  pre- 
ratre  it.     Tempeet  t.  Bawling,  18 

'  Anderson  v.  Midland  R.  R.  Co., 
80  L.  J.  Q.  B.  94. 

'  Barry  v.  Goodman,  2  M.  &  W. 
768 ;  Hammerton  v.  Stead,  8  B.  & 
C.  478 :  John  v.  Jenkins,  1  C.  &  M. 
227 ;  Colley  v.  Stretton,  2  D.  &  R, 
522 ;  Cteyton  v,  Burtenshaw,  0  B. 
&  B.  41 ;  Phillips  v.  Hartley,  8  G. 
&P.  121;  Browne  v,  Warner,  14 
Ves.  Jr.  156;  Rawson  y.  Eicke,  7 
Ad.  &  EL  4S1;  Bromfield  v. 
Smith,  6  East,  580;  BickneU  v. 
Hood,  5  M.  &  W,  104 ;  Jonea  v. 
Reynolds,  I  Gale  &  D.  68 ;  Warner 
T.  Browne.  8  East,  164;  Coone  t. 
Clare,  2  T.  R,  789.  An  agreement 
to  lease,  if  certain  conditions  ars 
complied  with  or  if  certain  con- 
tingencies arise,  cannot  be  treated 
as  a  lease.  BueU  v.  Cook,  4  Conn. 
238. 

•  Cox  V.  Bent,  5  Bing.  185 ;  Vin- 
cent V.  Godson,  24  L.  J.  Ch.  123 ; 
Riggs  v.  Bell.  6  T.  R.  471 ;  Pen- 
nington v.  Taniere,  12  Q.  B.  998 ; 
Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  662;  Clay- 
ton T.  Blakeley.  8  T.  R.  S ;  Tress 
T.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  86,  and  a 
party  entering  under  such  an  agree- 
ment,  and  b«^ming  a  tenant  froni 
year  to  year,  cannot  abandon  the 
premises  and  terminate  the  tenan- 


346 


Agreement. 


[§  183. 


ment  of  rent  does  not  of  itself  create  a  tenancy,  but  only 
furnishes  evidence  from  which  the  fact  may  be  found. 
Therefore,  if  credit  is  given  to  the  tenant  as  for  rent,  it  is 
equally  as  valuable  a  fact  by  which  to  establish  a  tenancy, 
as  the  payment  ot  the  rent,*  as  the  admission  that  so 
much  rent  is  due  is  equivalent  to  a  payment  thereof,  as 
it  can  be  enforced  against  the  tenant  as  a  debt.*  The 
tenancy  being  from  year  to  year  is  only  subject  to  the 
terms  of  the  agreement  so  far  as  they  are  applicable  to 
that  relation.  If  the  agreement  provides  that  certain 
acts  shall  be  done  by  the  tenant  inconsistent  with  a  ten- 
ancy from  year  to  year,  as  that  he  shall  point  the  build- 
ings once  in  three  years,'  or  make  extensive  and  expensive 
repairs  at  the  beginning  of  the  term,  the  cost  of  which 
largely  exceeds  a  year's  rent,*  or  provides  that  either  party 
shall  give  two  or  more  year's  notice  to  quit,  in  those 
respects  the  terms  of  the  agreement  would  not  control, 
because  inconsistent  with  the  tenancy.' 

Sec.  183»  Agreement  Bhould  contain  all  covenants  that  are 
to  be  embodied  in  the  lease.— It  is  important  that  the  agree- 


cj  because  the  landlord  refuses  to 
execute  the  lease,  and  the  same 
rule  applies  where  the  tenancy  is 
from  month  to  month.  In  either 
oase  the  requisite  notice  to  termi- 
nate the  tenancy  must  be  given. 
Scully  V.  Murray,  84  Mo.  420. 

*  Cox  V.  Bent,  ante ;  Vincent  v. 
Godson,  ante. 

*  Qaselee,  J.,  in  Ck>x  v.  Bent,  5 
Bing.  186. 

•ftnero  v.  Judson,  6  Bing.  206. 
In  a  recent  English  case,  oy  an 
agreement  in  writing,  but  not 
under  seal,  plaintiff  agreed  to  let 
and  defendant  to  hire  on  lease  for 
twenty-one  years,  a  house,  etc. ,  on 
the  following  terms :  The  rent  to 
be  55/.  per  annum  ;  the  lease  to 
conmience  from  the  27th  of  March 
next,  and  to  contain  an  extract  of 
the  covenants  in  the  original  lease, 
which  the  plaintiff  is  boimd  under ; 
that  the  proposed  lease  shall  not 
be  sold,  parted  with,  or  any  por- 
tion of  the  property  underlet  with- 
out the  consent  in  writing  of  the 
plaintiff.  In  the  original  lease 
were  six  covenants  by  the  lessee, 


with  a  proviso  for  re-entry  on  the 
breach  of  any  of  them  ;  but  there 
was  no  covenant  not  to  underlet 
without  the  consent  of  the  land- 
lord. Defendant  entered  and  i>aid 
rent,  and  underlet  the  premises 
without  the  consent  of  plaintiff, 
who  thereupon  brought  ejectment, 
and  was  nonsuited.  Iiie  court 
held,  that  the  nonsuit  was  right. 
The  defendant  held  as  tenant  from 
year  to  year  on  such  of  the  terms 
of  the  agreement  as  were  appli- 
cable to  tnat  tenancy.  The  agree- 
ment incorporated  the  six  cove- 
nants in  the  original  lease,  and  the 
proviso  for  re-entry  on  the  breach 
of  any  one  of  those  covenants ;  but 
the  agreement  could  not  be  read  as 
applying  the  proviso  for  re-entry 
to  the  new  clause  as  to  not  under- 
letting ;  and,  on  the  authority  of 
Sliaw  V.  Coffim,  14  C.  B.  N.  S.  872, 
on  mere  words  of  agreement  a 
condition  cannot  be  created .  Craw- 
ley V.  Price,  L.  R.  10  Q.  B.  802. 

*  Pinero  v.  Judson,  ante. 

» Tooker  v.  Smith,  1  H.  &  N.  782. 


CHAP.  S2IV.]  C0VENANT9.  847 

ment  should  embody  all  the  covenants  and  conditions 
that  are  to  be  embraced  in  the  intended  lease,  and  if  the 
agreement  is  silent  npon  this  point,  only  the  vsual  cove- 
nants can  be  embodied  in  the  lease  when  executed,  and 
evidence  dehors  the  agreement  is  not  admissible  to  show 
that  other  special  covenants  were  agreed  upon.'  Usual 
covenants  are  implied  in  all  contracts  for  leases,  so  that 
it  is  wholly  immaterial  whether  the  agreement  provides 
therefor  or  not.'  But  it  is  often  difficult  to  determine 
what  covenants  are  nsnal,  and  what  are  not,  as  the  matter 
is  dependent  upon  the  custom  of  the  country,  and  what 
might  be  a  usual  covenant  in  one  locality,  might  not  be 
BO  in  another ;  so  that  common  prudence  would  suggest 
that,  in  the  drawing  of  agreements,  all  the  covenants 
intended  to  be  embodied  in  the  lease  should  be  specified, 
as  the  question  as  to  what  covenants  are  usual  is  one  of 
fact,  rather  than  of  law,'  and  the  burden  is  upon  the  les- 
sor to  show  the  fact.'  It  haa  been  held  that  a  covenant  to 
repair  without  exception  against  lire  or  tempest,'  is  a 
usual  covenant ;  so  covenants  to  pay  rent,  to  quit  at  the 

'  Prqpert  V.  Parker,  8  Mr.  &  K.  t,  Old,  3  B.  *  C.  627, 534,  uses  this 

280.     InAngeUT.  Duke,  83  L.  T.  language:  "Where  the  wholBmat- 

N.   8.   821,   the   Court  uf  Queen's  ter  passes  in  parol,  all  that  passes 

Bench  considered  the  admiBaibihtj  may  sometimes  be  taken  together 


of    parol    evidence  in   connection  as  forming  parcel  of  the  contract, 
with  written  agreements.     It  was  though  not  always;   because  mat- 
held  that,  where  a  written  contract  ter  talked  of  at  the  commencement 
was  ent«red  into,  whereby  defend-  of  a  bargain  may  be  eiciuded  by 
ant   let  a  house  and  furniture  to  the  language  used  at  its  termlna- 
plaintiff,  evidence  of    a  previous  tion.      Bui.  if  the   contract  be  in 
parol  promise  by  defendant  to  put  the  end  reduced  info  writing,  noth- 
in  more  furniture  was  inadmissi-  ing  trkich  is  not  found  in  the  writ- 
ble.    CoCKB0aN,  Ch.  J.,  said  that  ing  can  be  considered  as  a  part 
there  were  instances  of  collateral  of  the  contract." 
parol  agreements  which  would  be  '  Wilkins  v.  Fry,  1  Mer.  263  ; 
admiHsible,  but  this  was  not  such  a  Sharp  v.  Milligan,  23  Beav.  419  ; 
case.    "  Something  passes  between  Kendall  v.  Hill,  6  Jur.  N.  S.  968. 
the  parties  during  the  course  of  'Bennett  v.  Womack,  7  B.  &  C. 
■dthe  637.    InthiscaseLoKDTENTERDEN, 
igree-  C.   J.,  said:      "I    am    clearly  of 
a  the  opinion  that  what  is  a  usual  cove- 
ich  is  nant,  is  one  of  fact  for  the  jury." 
iruted  '  Church  v.  Brown,  15  Ves.  268. 
terms  See  especially  remarks  of   Lord 
STit  a  Eldon. 

rdset  'KendaUv.  HiU,  6  Jur,  N.  S. 

The  968;  Sharp  v.  Milligan,  23  Beav. 

same  41». 


348 


Agreemekt. 


[§  183. 


expiration  of  the  term,  for  quiet  enjoyment,  &c.,  are 
usual,  because  implied  even  in  parol  leases.*  But  cove- 
nants not  to  assign,*  or  underlet  without  license,'  or  to 
carry  on  particular  trades  in  the  demised  premises,*  or 
that  the  lessee  shall  personally  occupy,*  or  that  rent  shall 
cease  if  the  premises  are  blown  down  or  burned,  have 
been  held  not  to  be  usual  covenants.*  "  The  result  of  aU 
the  authorities,"  says  Mr.  Davidson,^  "appears  to  be, 
that  in  case  the  agreement  is  silent  as  to  the  particular 
covenants  to  be  inserted  in  the  lease,  and  provides  merely 


» Bandy  v.  Cartwright,  23  K  J. 
Exchq.  2a'5;  SExchq.  918;  Vernam 
V.  Smith,  15  N.  Y.  827. 

*  In  Hampshire  v.  Wickens,  38  L. 
T.  Rep.  (N.  S.)  408,  decided  in  the 
chancery  division  of  the  English 
High  Ck>urt  of  Justice,  the  defend- 
ant entered  into  an  a^eement  to 
take  a  lease  of  a  dwelhng-house  in 
Kensington,   to  contain  all  usual 
covenants  and  provisos.  The  lease 
tendered   to  the   defendant   con- 
tained a  covenant  not  to  assign 
without  the  lessor's  consent,  such 
consent  not  to  be  witliheld  to  a  re- 
spectable and  responsible  tenant. 
The  present  action  was  brought  to 
enforce  the  agreement.    The  court 
held,  that  the  covenant  was  not  a 
usual  covenant,  and  the  action  was 
dismissed.     The  authorities  upon 
the  subject  in  England  are  conffict- 
ing.    In  Church  v.  Brown,  15  Ves. 
258,  and  Henderson  v.  Hay,  3  Bro. 
C.  C.  682,  such  a  covenant  was  held 
not  to  be  usual,  but  in  Haines  v. 
Burnett,  27  Beav.  500,  and  Strang- 
ways  V.  Bishop,  29  L.  T.  Rep.  (O.  8.) 
120,  the  contrary  was  held.    The 
doctrine  of  the  principal  case  has 
also  the  support  of  tne  Court  of 
Appeal  in  Hodgkinson  v.  Crowe, 
L.  k  10  Ch.  622,  and  of  the  Court 
of  Chancery  in  the  same  case,  L. 
R.  19  Eq.  593.    In  Hodgkinson  v. 
Crowe,  ante,  an  agreement  for  a 
lease  of  mines  and  minerals  pro- 
vided that  the  lease  should  contain 
all  usual  and  customary  mining 
clauses.  It  was  held,  that  the  lessor 
was  not  entitled  to  have  inserted  in 
the  lease  a  proviso  for  re-entry  on 
non-payment  of  rents  and  royalties, 
or  if  and  whenever  there  should  be 
any  breach  by  the  lessee  of  any  of 


the  covenants  and  agreements  con- 
tained in  the  lease. 

'^  Henderson  v.  Hay,  3  Bro.  C.  C. 
632 ;  Buckland  v.  Papillon,  36  L.  J. 
Ch.  83 ;  Vine  v.  Lovedon,  12  Ves. 
179;  Brown  v.  Rahan,  15  id.  528; 
Church  V.  Brown,  15  id.  258. 

*Prqpert  v.  Parker,  3  My.  &  K. 
280 ;  Van  v.  Corpe,  8  id.  269.    In 
The  Marquis  of  Bute  v.  Guest,  15 
M.  &  W.  160,  A  agreed  to  let,  and 
B  to  take,  a  piece  of  land  with 
liberty  to  build  thereon  such  ware- 
houses, glasshouses,  kilns,  houses 
for  workmen  and  other  erections 
necessary  for  carrying  on  the  busi- 
ness of  a  glass  manufactory,  as  he 
should  thmk  fit  for  a  term  of  sixty- 
one  years,  at  a  certain  rent ;  and  B 
agreed  to  pav  the  rent,  to  build  in 
a  substannal  manner,  and  not  to 
use  the  premises  for  any  other  pur- 
pose than  that  of  a  glass  manufac- 
tory during  the  term :  a  lease  and 
counterpart  to  be  executed  in  con- 
formity with  the   agreement,  in. 
which  should  be  inserted  the  usual 
covenants.    It  was  held,  that  this 
did  not  warrant  the  insertion  of  an 
affirmative  covenant  in  the  lease, 
that  B  wovM  carry  on  the  business 
of  a  glass  manufactory  upon  the 
premises  during  the  term.    *  *  Not  h- 
mg,"  said  Parks,  B.,  "  is  to  be  in- 
troduced into  a  lease  as  a  matter  of 
covenant  beyond  the  precise  stipu- 
lations contained  in  the  memoran- 
dum of  agreement,  unless  we  can 
make  out  clearly  that  the  parties 
intended    something   more    than 
they  have  expressed  thereby." 

*  Clark  V.  dark,  49  fcal.  586. 

*  Medwin  v.  Sandham,  SSwanst. 
685 ;  S.  C.  1  T.  R.  705. 

"^  Davidson's  Precedents  on  Con- 
veyancing (8d  Ed.)  p.  48. 


.ilL-. 


'i** 


CHAP.   XXrV.]  COVEKANTS.  849 

for  the  lease  containing  nsnal  covenants,  or,  which  is  the 
same  thing,  is  an  open  agreement  without  reference  to 
the  covenants,  and  there  are  no  special  circumstances 
justifying  the  introduction  of  other  covenants,  the  follow- 
ing are  the  only  ones  which  either  party  can  insist  upon, 
namely,  covenants  by  the  lessee :  (1)  to  pay  rent ;  (2)  to 
pay  taxes,  except  such  as  are  expressly  payable  by  the 
landlord;  (3)  to  keep  and  deliver  up  the  premises  in 
repair ;  and  (4)  to  allow  the  lessor  to  re-enter  and  view 
the  state  of  repair,  and  the  usual  qualified  covenant  by 
the  lessor,  for  quiet  enjoyment  by  the  lessee."*    In 
equity,  the  leasey  if  one  is  made  in  pursuance  of  an  agree- 
ment, and  the  agreement  will  be  construed  together,  un- 
less it  is  shown  that  the  terms  of  the  agreement  were 
subsequently  changed  by  mutual  consent,  and  the  agree- 
ment will  control  the  lease  as  to  any  matter  about  which 
there  may  be  any  apparent  difference.    Thus,  in  an  Eng- 
lish case,*  H  agreed  to  lease  to  the  plaintiff  certain  prem- 
ises, the  lease  to  be  in  the  form  annexed  to  the  agree- 
ment ;  and  it  was  provided  in  the  agreement  that  noth- 
ing   therin    should    be    construed    as    giving   to    the 
plaintiff  a  right  to  any  easement  which  did  not  belong  to 
the  premises  to  be  demised  as  they  then  existed,  nor  to 
any  right  of  light  and  air  derived  from  over  the  houses 
opposite.    Subsequently  H  granted  to  the  plaintiff  a  lease 
of  said  premises,  together  with  the  house  erected  thereon, 
^^  and  all  cellars y  lights j  easements y  waySy  watercourseSy 
privileges,   advantages^  and  appurtenances  to  the  said 
premises  belonging,^^  being  in  the  form  annexed  to  the 
agreement.     H  subsequently  leased  to  the  defendants 
said  houses  opposite  the  premises  l^ed  the  plaintiff ; 
and  the  defendants  puUed  the  housesniown,  and  began 
the  erection  of  a  new  building  which  was  intended  to  be 
of  a  much  greater  height  than  the  houses  so  pulled  down. 
It  was  held,  that  the  lease  was  controlled  by  the  above 
provision  in  the  agreement,  and  that  the  plaintiff  was 

'  See,  however,  Wilbraham  v.  of  taxes,  is  not  usual  in  leases  of 

Livesay,  18  Beav.  S06,  and  Parish  dwellings. 
-^  V.  Steeman,  1  DeG.  F.  &  J.  828.         *Soloman  v.  Glover,  L.  R.  2  Eq. 

The  second  covenant  as  to  payment  444. 


350 


Agbeement. 


[§  184. 


not  entitled  to  restrain  the  erection  of  the  building  by 
the  defendants. 

Sec.  184.  statute  of  frauds— Effoot  of,  upon  agreements  for 
leases.— In  order  to  give  validity  either  to  an  agreement 
for  a  lease,  or  to  a  lease  itself,  it  must  be  made  con- 
formably to  the  requirements  of  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  in 
the  state  where  the  premises  lie.  The  Statute  29,  Car.  2, 
Chap.  3,  Sec.  4,  which  is  peculiarly  applicable  to  agree- 
ments, exists  in  most  of  the  States  without  essential 
change.  It  is  therein  provided  that,  "No  action  shall 
be  brought  whereby  to  charge  any  person  upon  any  con- 
tract or  sale  of  lands,  tenements  or  hereditaments,  or  any 
interest  in  or  concerning  them,  unless  the  agreement 
upon  which  such  action  is  brought  or  some  memorandum 
or  note  thereof,  shall  be  m  writing,  and  signed  by  the 
party  to  be  charged  therewith,  or  some  other  person 
thereunto  by  him  lawfully  authorized." '  And  contracts 
for  the  future  use  and  occupation  of  premises  come  within 
this  provision, '  unless  they  operate  as  a  present  demise. 


*  This  provision  is  adopted  sub- 
Btantiallj  in  Vermont,  Sec.  1. 
Chap.  20,  Genl.  Stat.  452,  the  words 
"promise,  contract  or"  being  in- 
serted before  the  word  "agree- 
ment." 

^  Inman  v.  Stamp,  1  Stark.  12, 
where  an  agreement  to  occupy 
lodgings  at  a  yearly  rent,  the  occu- 
pancy to  commence  at  a  future 
day,  was  held  to  come  within  the 
provisions  of  this  section  of  the 
statute,  although  Lord  Elleinbor- 
OUGH  intimates  a  different  rule  if 
possession  had  actually  been  taken 
under  the  agreement.  See  also 
Evans  v.  Roberts,  5  B.  &  C.  839  ; 
Edge  V.  Strafford,  1  Cr.  &  J.  391. 
An  agreement  for  a  lease 
from  July  to  May  next  and 
from  May  Ist  for  one  year 
additional,  constitutes  but  one 
contract,  and  is  within  the  Statute 
of  Frauds,  Halzderber  v.  Forrestal, 
13  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  85.  See  also 
Prial  v.  Cutwisth,  10  id.  398.  A 
and  B  entered  into  an  oral  agree- 
ment by  which  A  who  owned  a 
parcel  of  land,  was  to  buy  an  ad- 
joining parcel  at  a  certain  price, 


value  his  own  land  at  a  sum  named, 
and  erect  a  warehouse  on  both  par- 
cels according  to  certain  plans; 
and  B  was  to  nire  the  same  for  a 
term  of  years,  at  a  certain  per  cent- 
age  upon  the  cost  of  the  Duilding 
and  land,  at  the  valuation  so 
agreed  upon.  In  the  course  of 
building  B  asked  A  to  make  certain 
additions  and  alterations  and 
agreed  to  pay  a  certain  percentage 
for  the  term  of  lease,  upon  the  cost. 
The  building  was  erected  with  such 
additions  and  alterations  as  were 
requested;  but  B  refused  to  ac- 
cept the  lease.  It  was  held  that 
the  a^eement  to  take  a  lease  was 
within  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  and 
that  A  could  not  maintain  an  ac- 
tion against  B  for  the  cost  of  the 
land  bought  and  of  the  building 
erected  less  than  value  at  the  time 
of  B^s  refusal  to  take  the  lease; 
and  that  the  aOTeement  for  the  ad- 
ditions and  alterations  was  not  a 
separate  agreement.  Bacon  v. 
Parker,  187  Mass.  809.  A  parol  lease 
of  land  for  a  term  of  more  than 
three  years  is  under  the  Statute  of 
Frauds  but  a  lease  at  will    A  rati- 


r^^- 


TTTT 


CHAP.  XXIV.]        Statute  of  Frauds. 


851 


Under  this  statute,  which,  as  before  stated,  is  practically 
in  force  in  all  the  States,  it  is  not  essential  that  the  agree- 
ment and  memorandum  should  be  contemporaneous,*  or 
that  it  should  be  contained  in  a  single  paper,  but  a  series 
of  papers,  as  letters,*  telegrams,"  and  a  letter  or  other 


fication  of  a  x)arol  lease  of  land  for 
a  term  of  more  than  three  years  to 
avoid  the  effect  of  the  Statute  of 
Frauds,  must  be  signified  by  writ- 
ing. This  ratification  <;;aimot  be 
made  by  the  original  lessor  after 
he  has  conveyed  his  title  to  anoth- 
er. The  force  and  effect  as  well 
as  the  interpretation  and  con- 
struction of  a  writing,  as  to 
whether  it  be  a  lease  or  not,  is  for 
the  determination  of  the  court  and 
not  for  the  jury.  A  parol  demise 
of  land  for  more  than  three  years 
in  the  first  instwioe  creates  a  ten- 
ancy at  will  only,  and  this  satisfies 
the  Statute  of  Frauds ;  but  that  ten- 
ancy at  will  like  any  other  may 
be  subsequently  changed  into  a 
tenancy  from  year  to  year  by  pay- 
ment and  acceptance  of  the  rent 
annually,  or  other  circumstances 
indicating  that  to  be  the  inten- 
tion of  the  parties.  .  Where  the 
lease  is  from  year  to  year,  or  for 
any  other  indefinite  period,  notice 
is  necessary  to  terminate  the  de- 
mise, and  must  be  given  three 
months  before  the  expiration  of 
the  term.  Dunn  v.  Rotnermel,  112 
Penn.  St.  272.  A  lease  for  three 
years  from  a  time  subsequent  to 
the  time  it  was  made,  signed  and 
sealed  by  the  lessee,  and  signed 
by  one  as  agent  for  the  lessor, 
he  affixing  a  seal  to  the  lessor's 
name  without  anv  authority  to  ex- 
ecute the  said  lease  which  was 
never  accented  or  ratified  in  writ- 
ing b]^  the  lessor,  rests  no  certain 
term  in  the  lessee ;  he  holds  only 
an  estate  at  will.  Jennings  v. 
McComb,  112  Penn.  St.  528. 

'  Shippey  v.  Derrison,  5  Esp.  198. 
In  New  York  it  has  been  repiBated- 
ly  held  that  a  parol  lease  for  one 
year  to  commence  in  futuro  is  not 
an  executory  contract,  but  vesta  a 
present  interest  in  the  term,  and 
that  it  is  assignable  before  entry, 
and  that  the  lessee  can  bring  eject- 
ment if  possession  is  -withheld. 
■•  Young  V.  Duke,  6  N.  Y.  463 ;  Whit- 
3y  V.  Allaire,  1  id.  307 ;  Trull  v. 


Granger,  8  id.  715,  or  the  tenant 
may  bring  an  action  for  damages, 
or  of  tort,  for  withholding  the  pos- 
session. Trull  V.  Granger,  ante,  and 
the  lessee  cannot  rescind  the  con- 
tract b^  notice,  before  the  time 
for  takmg  possession  has  arrived, 
and  the  lessor  is  not  bound  after 
such  notice  to  let  the  premises  to 
another.  Becar  v.  Flues,  64  N.  Y. 
618,  and  a  similar  doctrine  is  held 
in  Colorado.  Sears  v.  Smith,  8 
Col.  287 ;  in  Indiana,  Huffman  v. 
Stark,  81  Ind.  474  ;  but  a  contrary 
doctrine  is  generally  held,  result- 
ing from  the  difference  in  the 
language  employed  in  the  Stat- 
ute of  Frauds  in  the  several 
States  affecting  the  question.  Par- 
ker v.*  Hollis,  50  Ala.  411.  Nathan 
V.  Stem,  18  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  890 ; 
Smith  V.  Alt,  7  id.  492. 

•  Lemed  v.  Wannemacher,  9  Al- 
len (Mass.)  416 ;  Tallman  v.  Frank- 
lin, 14  N.  Y.  584;  Parkhurst  v. 
Van  Cortlandt,  14  John.  (N.  Y.)  15 ; 
Gibson  v.  Holland,  L.  R.,  1  C.  P.  1. 
In  order  to  take  a  contract  tor  a 
lease  of  lands  out  of  the  Statute  of 
Frauds,  any  writing  executed  by 
either  of  the  parties  that  tends  to 
establish  a  consmnmated  contract 
may  be  given  in  evidence  as  a 
''memorandum,''  even  though  in 
order  to  apply  it,  evidence  of  con- 
versations between  the  parties  as 
to  the  subject  matter  of  the  con- 
tract are  necessary.  Thus,  the 
plaintiff  had  been  negotiating  with 
the  defendant  for  the  lease  of  a 
piece  of  ground  for  a  strawberry 
garden.  A  few  days  after,  he 
wrote  to  the  defendant  to  ascer- 
tain whether  he  could  have  the 
lands  on  the  terms  offered,  to  which 
the  plaintiff  replied,  "Set  your 
strawberries."  It  was  held  that 
this  was  sufficient  memorandum 
to  take  the  case  out  of  the  statute. 
Lindley  v.  Tibbals,  40  Conn.  522, 
even  though  there  was  a  misun- 
derstanding OB  to  the  terms  of  the 
lease. 

>  Palmer  v.  Marquette,  &c.,  Co., 


1 


&63 


Agseemest. 


[§  18*. 


docoment  signed,  may  be  used  in  connection  with  one 
previously  written,  but  not  signed,'  but  not  in  connec- 
tion with  one  subsequently  to  be  prepared.*  Letters 
written  to  any  third  person  containing  directions  to 
carry  the  agreement  into  effect,  have  been  held  sufficient." 
But  in  order  to  be  operative  as  a  memorandum,  the 
writing  or  writings  must  be  something  more  than  a 
proposal  for  a  tenancy  ;  it  or  they  mttst  contain  all  the 
elements  essential  to  constitute  a  valid  contract,  without 
the  aid  of  extrinsic  evidence,'  and  must  describe  the 


S2  Mich.  274.  In  an  action  of  con- 
tract for  breach  of  agreement  to 
take  a  lease,  it  appeared  that  the 
defendantH'  agent  wrote  to  the  de- 
fendants a  letter  containing  a  de- 
Bcription  of  the  premises,  and 
stating  the  aimuaJ  rent  for  a  term 
of  fire  years  ;  the  questions  of  the 
letter  being  whether  the  premises 
and  amount  of  rent  were  satief  ac- 
tor; to  the  defendant,  but  the  lel^ 
ter  did  not  state  or  refer  to  the  par- 
ticular terras  or  conditions  of  a. 
lease.  The  defendants  in  answer 
Bent  the  following  telegram  :  "  If 
basement  included  at  four  thous- 
and,aecurefiveyears'lease,"  Alet- 
ter  sent  by  the  agent  to  the  defend- 


lease  at  $4,000  included  the  base- 
ment, and  that  he  would  close  the 
matter  the  neit  day.  The  agent  had 
no  authority  to  accept  a  lease.  It 
was  held  that,  there  was  not  a  suf- 
ficient memorandum  in  writing  to 
satisfy  the  Statue  of  Frauds  ;  hfld, 
aiso,  that  letters  written  by  the  de- 
fendants subeequentl;,  referring 
to  an  incomplete  leaae,  had  no 
bearing  on  the  question.  Haet- 
ingB  V.  Weber,  Mass.  S.  C,  1887. 
'  Loomer  v.  Dawson.  Cheeves(S. 
C.)  88 ;  Buxton  v.  East.  L.  R.  7 
Eichq.  79.  Letters,  in  order  to 
satisfy  the  statute,  must,  taken  to- 
gether, amount  to  a  complete  con- 
tract. Wright  V.  St,  George  ;  12  Ir. 
Cli,  226 ;  a  written  propoeat  signed 
by  the  defendant,  and  accepted 
orally  by  the  plaintiff,  is  sufficient. 
Barker  v.  Allen.  5  H.  &  N.  C.  61  ; 
Smith  V,  Male.  2  C.  B.  N.  S,  67 ; 
Boys  V.  August,  8  Madd.  810 ;  ReuBs 
■V.  Picksley,  L.  R.  I.  Eichq.  342; 
Warner  v.    Willington,    8  Drew, 


62S :  but  a  written  proposal  signed 
by  iheplaintiff,  and  accepted  oral- 
ly by  the  defendant,  is  not  suffi- 
cient.   Felthouse  v.  Bindley,  11  C. 

B.  N.  8.  86fl.  See  also  the  eases 
last  cited. 

'Wood  V.  Midgeley,  6  DeG.  M. 
&  Q.  41. 

>Oilwon  T.  Holland,  L.  K.  1  C. 
P.  1. 

^Peabody  V.  Spcyers,  66  N.  T. 
280 ;  Forster  t.  Rowland.  7  H.  * 
N.  108 ;  Watte  v.  Ainsworth,  6  L. 
T.  N.  8.  252 ;  WiUiams  v.  l^e,  3 
E.  &  E.  848 ;   Clarke  t.  Fuller,  16 

C.  B.  N.  3.  iii.  It  has  been  held 
that,  where  there  is  a  sufficient 
writing  to  satisfy  the  statute,  but 
subsequent  to  its  execution  tlie 
parties  agreed  upon  certain 
changes  by  parol,  that  the  parol 
changes  cannot  be  enforced,  be- 
cause this  would  opeu  the  door  to 
the  very  mischief  that  the  statute 
seeks  to  prevent,  A  contract  of 
this  character  must  be  wholly  ea- 
tabliehed  by  the  writinE,  and  can- 
not be  shown  partly  oy  writing 
aitd  partly  by  parol.  Stead  v. 
Dowher,  10  Ad.  &  El.  57  ;  but.  un- 
less the  parol  cttange*  in  the  con- 
tract change  its  character  in  a  ma- 

to  en 
that  I 


chajoe 


CHAP.  XXIV.]         Statute  of  Frauds  353 

premises  with  reasonable  certainity, '  the  duration  of  the 
term,'  the  rent  to  be  paid  '  the  names  of  both  parties 
thereto, '  and  it  mastbe  signed  by  the  party  sought  to  be 
charged  thereby,  or  by  some  person  by  him  authorized 
for  that  purpose.'    It  is  not  indispensable  that  it  should 

114 ;  Martin  v.  Pycroft,  3  DeG.'M.  can  be  ehown  bj  parol.    Ogilvie  v, 

A  G.  785.    Thete  may  be  a  parol  Foljambe,  B  Uer.  61 ;  Ble^ej  v, 

■waiver  o(  a  written  contract,  and  Smith,  ante ;  Jenkine  v.  Green,  37 

the  quetjtion  in   these    cases   is,  Beav.  4!tT ;  LancaBt«r  t.  DeSliaf- 

whetherthe  changes  agreed  upon  ford,  SJur,   N.  8.  878;   Haywood 

by  parol  have  that  effect.    Gobs  v.  v.  Cope,  25  Beav,  140. 

Lord  Nugent,  5  B.  &  Ad.  64.    A  *  Fitzmaurice  v.  Bayley,  8  E.  & 

directed  his  agent  to   look  for  a  B.  664  ;   Clinan  v.  Cooke,  1  Sell.  & 

store  for  liim,  and  to  negotiate  for  Lef.  22 ;  HngheH  v.  Parker,  H  M.  & 

a  lease  of  it.    The  agent  wrote  a  W.  344 ;  Gordon  v.  Trevadyan,  1 

letter  to  A,   stating  that  he  had  Price  64  ;    Clarke  v.  Fuller,  166  B. 

been  looking  at  B's  store,  contain-  N.   S.   24 ;    Hersey  v.   Giblett,   18 

ing  a  description  of  the  premises,  Beav.  174  ;    Blore  v.  Sutton,  3  Me. 

naming  the  annual  rent  asked  for  337  ;    Hodges  v.  Howard,  G  R.  I. 

a  term  of  five  years,  and  inquiring  148, 

whether  the  promises  and  amount  'Wain  v.  Warlters,   5  East,  10. 

it  were  Mtisfactory.    A  tele-  An  agii!ement  for  a  lease  at  *' 


graphed  to  the  agent  as  follows  :  fair  rent "  has  been  held  BuJfi- 
"If  basement  included  at  four  cientir  certain ;  because  the  ten- 
thousand,  secure  five  years'  lease."     der  of  an  agreement  for  a  lease  at 


This  tele^'am  was  handed  by  the  a  sufficient  rent  must  precede  the 
agent  to  B,  who  verbally  accented  action  for  a  breach  of  the  agree- 
the  offer.     It  was  held  that  there  ment  to  lease,  unless  the  defendant 
was  not  a  sufficient  memorandum  has    waived  a   tender,   and   such 
in  writing  of  a  contract  to  accept  a  waiver  may  be  inferred  when  he 
lease  within  the  Statute  of  Frauds  has  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  per- 
to  enable  B  t«  maintain  an  action  form.     Weaver  v.  Wood,  9  Penn. 
against  A.     Hastings  v.  Weber,  St.  330  ;  Bauinann  v.  Jamee,  L.  P. 
142  Mass.  aaa.  3  Ch.  508 ;    PoweU  v.  Lovegrove,  8 
'  Lancaster  v.  DeTraflord,  81  L.  DeQ.   M.  &  G,   857 ;  Woolam   v. 
J.  Cb.  654;   Daniels  V.  Davison,  16  Heam,   7  Ves.    211;   Morphett  v. 
Ves.  349;    Ogilvie  v.  Fol;ambe.  8  Jones,  1  Swanst.  172. 
Mer.   53.     But   the  premises  need  'Chanipion  v.  Plummer,  G  &p, ; 
not  be  so  described  that  they  can  Lang  v.  Henny,  rA  N.  H.  67 ;  Wil- 
be  identified,  as  parol  evidence  is  liams  v.  Ijike,  2  E.  &  El  34B ;  War- 
admissible  to  identify  the  panic-  ner  v.  Willington,  3  Drew,  G30. 
ular  estate.     Bleakley  v.  Smith,  II  >  Sanborn   v.    Flagler,   8    Allen 
Sim.  150 ;  Price  v.  Griffith,  1  DeG.  (Maas.)474  ;  Stoddert  v.  Veetry  ot 
M,  &  G.  BO  ;    Owen  v,   Thomas,  3  Port  Tobacco,  2  G.  &  J.  fMd.)  237 ; 
My.  &K.  853.     A  reference  to  pre-  Kyle  v.   Roberts,  6    Leigh.    (Va.) 
cedintr  deeds  is  enousrh.     Owen  v,  48li ;  Bailey  v.  Ogden,  8  John.  (N. 
brick  Y.)  417.     The   signatxire  must  be 
idon,"  such  as  amounts  to  an   acknowl. 
id  by  edgment   bj-  the   party,   that  the 
se    on  agreement  is  his  ;  and  unless  such 
ilding  authenticity  is  thereby  given  to  the 
"the  instrument,  the  statute  ia  not  sat- 
is the  isfied.     Therefore,   the    memoran- 
le-foot  dum  muet  be  tigned  by  the  party 
eafter  to  be  charged,  and  it  isnot  enough 
k  End  that  his  name  is  inserted  in  Us 
finite,  own  hand  in  the  body  of  the  in- 
kes  a  strument.    Stokesv.  Moore,  1  Cox, 
estata  219  ;  nor  is  it  enough  that  the  mem- 


354 


Agreement. 


[§  184. 


be  signed  by  both  parties,  especially  as  such  agreements 
may  properly  be  unilateral,  but  it  must  be  signed  by  the 
person  sought  to  be  charged,  *  and  accepted  hy  the  other.* 
A  partner  may  sign  for  the  firm,  *  or  an  agent  of  a 
corporation  for  it/  and  in  the  case  of  a  partner  he  may 
sign  the  name  of  the  firm,  or  his  own  name,  and  it  may 
be  shown  in  either  case  that  he  signed  as  agent  of  the 
firm,  and  in  any  case  it  may  be  showTi  that  a  person 
signed  as  the  agent  of  another.*    But,  if  disputed,  the 


oranda  was  drawn  up  by  the  per- 
son to  be  charged  thereby,  with  his 
own  hand,  and  delivered  to  the 
other  partj.  The  absence  of  his 
signature  is  absolute  evidence  that 
he  regards  the  instrument  as  in- 
complete. Bawdes  v.  Amhurst, 
Prec.  Ch,  402.  But,  where  an 
agreement  has  been  signed  by  one 
party,  and  delivered  to  and  acted 
upon  by  the  other ^  it  is  not  a  valid 
objection  to  its  being  enforced  that 
the  party  seeking  performance  has 
not,  also,  signed  it.  Sutherland  v. 
Briggs,  1  Hare,  26 ;  Fowle  v.  Free- 
man, 9  Ves.  851 ;  Allen  v.  Bennett, 
8  Taunt.  176 ;  Huddlestonev.  Bris- 
coe, 11  Yes.  592 ;  Martin  v  Mitch- 
ell, 2  Jac.  &  W.  426 ;  Lathrop  v. 
Bryant,  2  Bing.  N.  C.  785. 

*  Coles  V.  Bowne,  10  Paige  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  526 ;  Emzy  v.  Gorton,  18  lU. 
488 ;  Frazer  v.  Ford,  2  Head.  (Tenn. ) 
464 ;  Boys  v.  Ayerst,  6  Madd.  828 ; 
Liverpool,  <S:c.,  Bank  v.  Eccles,  4 
H.  &P.  139 ;  Butter  v.  Powns,  2 
Coll.  161.  It  may  bo  in  any  x>art 
of  the  writing,  if  it  was  intended 
as  a  signature.  Bleakley  v.  Smith, 
11  Sim.  150 ;  Propent  v.  Parker. 
1  Russ.  &  My.  625  ;  and  either  with 
ink  or  by  pencil.  Selby  v.  Selby, 
8  Mer.  2. 

« Justice  V.  Lang,  47  N.  Y.  498  ; 
Sams  V,  Fripi)s.  10  Rich.  Eg.  (S. 
C. )  447.  A  written  contract  signed 
by  one  andacted  upon  by  the  other, 
may  be  enforced  in  equity  against 
the  one  who  did  .not  sign  it.  Old 
Colony  R.  R.  Co..  v.  Evans,  6  Gray 
(Mass.)  25  ;  Clason  v.  Bailey,  14 
John  (N.  Y.)  484  ;  Douglass  v. 
Spears,  2  N.  &  M.  (S.  C.)  2U7  ;  Rey- 
nolds V.  Dunkirk,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co., 
17  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  613.  In  Cadwal- 
der's  Appeal,  81  Penn.  St.  884,  it 
appeared  that  Penn  in  1784,  leased 
a  lot  to  Wormly  for  ten  thousand 


years,  at  an  annual  rent,  with  right 
of  distress  and  re-entry,  to  forfeit 
the  lease  in  default  of  payment,  if 
there  were  not  sufficient  mstresson 
the  premises  to  pay  the  rent. 
Wormly  died  in  1829  without 
known  heirs ;  App  then  took  pos- 
session of  the  lot ;  the  plaintiff  iiad 
been  agent  of  Penn  before  Woj*m- 
ley's  death,  and  so  continued  until 
1888,  when  Penn's  devisee  con- 
veyed to  him  the  ground-rent  and 
all  the  grantor's  estate  in  the  lot. 
No  rent  having  been  paid  by  Worm- 
ley,  the  plaintiff,  July  1,  1889,  en- 
tered for  its  non-payment,  declar- 
ing his  intention  to  resume  posses- 
sion. By  arrangement  with  App, 
in  order  that  plamtiff  might  make 
title  to  him ,  he  removed  evei 


from  the  lot,  and  continued  in  its 
occupancy  to  take  care  of  it  for 
plaintiff.  In  October,  1839,  App 
and  plaintiff  signed,  without  seals, 
a  paper  by  which  App  agreed  '*  to 
take  the  lot, "  describing  it,  on  a 
ground-rent  of  $60.  It  was  held, 
that  this  paper  was  an  agreement 
in  writing,  under  the  Statute  of 
Frauds,  for  a  lease  of  the  land  on 
groimd-rent.  The  requirements  of 
the  statute  are  met  by  a  memoran- 
diun  in  writing  signed  by  the  party 
to  be  charged  therewith.  If  signed 
by  the  vendor  alone,  and  delivered 
to  the  vendee,  no  more  is  required. 
It  is  not  necessary  that  the  writing 
be  under  seal  nor  in  any  particular 
form  of  words. 

»  Kyle  V.  Roberts,  6  Leigh.  (Va.) 
495 ;  Stackpole  v.  Arnold,  11  Mass. 
27. 

*  Stoddert  v.  Vestry  of  Port  To- 
bacco, 2  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  227. 

*  Higgins  V.  Senior,  S.  M.  &  W. 
834 ;  Muiard  v.  Mead,  8  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)68. 


CHAP,  xxrv.]       Kemedy  on  Agreement,  355 

anthority  of  the  agent  must  be  proved, '  and  this  may  be 
done  by  showing  a  subsequent  ratification  by  the 
principal.'  If  a  person  acting  as  agent  signed  his  own 
name  to  the  contract,  he  is  personally  bound  by,  and 
may  be  compelled  to  specifically  perform  it. ' 

Sec.  1S5,  Bemediea  upon  valid  agreements.— There  are 
two  remedies  open  to  the  parties  to  a  valid  agreement  for 
a  lease,  but  the  parties  must  elect  which  they  will  pursue, 
as  they  can  avail  themselves  of  only  one  of  them ;'  to 
wit,  an  action  at  law  for  damages  for  not  performing  the 
agreement,'  or  a  suit  in  equity  for  a  specific  performance 
— and  these  remedies  are  open  to  either  party  thereto.' 
Both  remedies  cannot  be  pursued  at  the  same  time,  and 
if  the  party  pursue  his  remedy  at  law  and  obtains  a  judg- 
ment for  damages,  he  cannot  afterwards  proceed  in  equity 
for  specific perf<Jrmance;'  andifhecommencesan  action 
at  law  for  damages,  and  also  in  equity  for  specific  per- 
formance, he  will  be  compelled  to  elect  which  remedy  to 
pursue,' as  a  court  of  equity  has  no  discretion  to  retain 
the  suit,  where  the  plaintiff  is  also  proceeding  at  law  for 
the  same  cause  of  action,  except  where  the  proceedings 
at  law  are  ausiliary  to  those  in  equity."  Where  a  party 
has  brought  an  action  at  law  and  failed,  equity  will  not 
enforce  the  contract,  unless  there  have  been  some  circum- 
stances excusing  the  failure  at  law,  or  waiver  of  the  for- 
feiture on  the  part  of  the  obligee. "    But  where  the  cause 

1  Bain«8  V.    Gwisg,    85   L.    J.     Bollason  v.  Leon,  7  B.  &  N.  73 ; 

Ezchq.    IM  ;  Blore   v,   Sutton,    8     Jinks  v.  Edwards,  11  Exchq.  T75  ; 

Mer.  237';  Foster  t.  Itowland,  7  H.     Hall  t.  Betty,   4  M.  &  O.    410; 

&  N.  108.  Wright  V.  Calls,  8  C.  B.  150. 

iMBi-Wnt-  n..t,n    JRino.   753-        « Qjwen  V.  Phillips,  88  Beav.  18  ; 

Parker  v.  Taswell,  3  DeG.  &  J. 

G57  ;  Fain  v.  Comba,  3  Sm.  6C  QiS. 

449. 

'  Sainter  t.  Ferguson,  ante ;  Har- 
aton  T.  Humphrey,  24  Me.  513. 

*  FenningB  t.  Humphrey.  4  Beav. 
1 ;  Ambrose  t.  Nott,  2  Hare,  648 ; 
Boule  T,  Wynne,  Cr.  &  Ph.  252. 

'  Roule  v.  Wynne,  anto  ;  Barker 
T.  Smark,  1  Russ.  &  M.  423  n.  1. 

'"  Tevis  V.  Richardson,  7  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  6M ;  Allen  v.  Beal,  8  A.  K. 
Mar.  (Ky.)  654. 


^"t" 


356 


Agreements. 


[§  186. 


is  not  the  same,  as,  where  the  action  at  law  is  brought 
for  the  non-performance  of  particular  acts  only,  as  for 
not  improving  or  repairing  the  property,  the  performance 
of  which  is  not  specifically  prayed  for,  or  for  acts  the 
specific  performance  of  which  cannot  be  decreed,  and  the 
action  is  brought  only  for  damages  sustained  up  to  the 
time  of  its  commencement,  the  party  is  not  driven  to  his 
election,  because  •  there  is  no  conflict  of  jurisdiction  or 
remedies.*  So,  too,  in  some  cases,  a  party  may  have  his 
remedy  in  equity,  when  he  has  lost  his  remedy  at  law  by 
reason  laches  on  his  part,  as,  by  permitting  the  day  to 
go  by  on  whicn  he  ought  to  have  performed  or  offered  to 
perform,"  or  some  other  condition  precedent,  he  may 
still  have  his  remedy  in  equity,  because,  in  the  language 
of  Anderson  B./  while  "at  law,  time  is  always  of  the 
essence  of  the  contract ;  in  equity  the  contract  is  con- 
sidered as  a  purchase  of  land  for  money,  withbut  refer- 
ence to  the  time  when  the  title  is  to  be  made  out."* 
But  to  entitle  him  to  this  equitable  remedy,  there  must 
have  been  a  substantial  performance,  or  offer  to  perform 
on  his  part,  or  circumstances  that  excuse  it,  so  that  in 
equity  and  good  conscience  the  agreement  *  ought  to  be 
performed. 

Sec.  186.  Bemedy  at  law.—Either  party  may  maintain 
an  action  at  law,  for  the  breach  of  a  complete  and  valid 
agreement  to  make  or  take  a  lease  of  premises.*  But,  in 
order  to  maintain  an  action  for  such  breach,  the  agree- 
ment must  be  full,  complete  and  perfect  in  all  the  essen- 
tail  elements  requisite  to  make  a  lease,  and  not  a  mere 
proposal  therefor.^    In  an  action  upon  an  agreement,  the 


'  Fcimings  v.  Humphrey,  4 
Brev.  1, 

« Tidey  v.  MoUett,  16  C.  B.  N.  S. 
298  ;  Berrv  v.  Young,  2  Esp.  640 
n.;  Stowell  v.  Robinson,  3  Bing.  N. 
C.  928. 

•  Hanslip  v.  Paderick,  5  Exchq. 
628. 

*  Cartan  v.  Bury,  10  Ir.  Ch.  887 ; 
Davis  V.  Hone,  2  Sch.  &  Lef .  841 ; 
Sugden's  Vendors  (14  Eng.  Edn.), 
212  ;  Fry  on  Specific  Performance, 

4. 


»  Coale  V.  Barney,  1  G.  &  J.  (Md.) 
824 ;  Voorhees  v.  DeMever,  2  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  87;  Guest  v.  bomfrey,  6 
Ves.  818;  Jones  v.  Price,  8* At 
924 ;  2  Tudor's  Leading  Cases,  443 ; 
Paine  v.  Miller,  6  Ves.  349 ;  Smith  y 
V.  Bumham,  2  At.  527. 

•  Ridgwav  V.  Wharton,  6  H.  L.  J. 
Gas.  288;  Forster  v.  Rowland,  TSi 
H.  &  N.  108.  S 

^  In  Forster  v.  Rowland,  aniij^F 
the  defendant  having  proposedGlft:  V 
take  a  lease  of  premises  for  Bmt&7[ 


.  /ftl,*  .■. ' 


CHAP.  XXIV.]      Specific  Performance. 


357 


"hi-. 

-V 


plaintiff  may  recover  back  any  sums  which  he  has  paid 
the  defendant,  as  well  as  the  actual  damage  he  has  sus- 
tained/ Generally,  an  action  will  not  lie  until  the  day 
arrives  for  the  execution  of  the  lease ;  but  if  the  defend- 
ant previously  to  that  time  has  disabled  himself  from  the 
performance  of  the  agreement,  as,  by  a  sale  of  the  prop- 
erty, or  by  granting  an  inconsistent  lease,  the  other 
party  may  bring  his  action  at  once,  as  such  acts  are 
regarded  as  a  breach  of  the  contract.'  If  an  action  is 
brought  by  the  intended  lessor  against  the  intended  lessee 
for  not  taking  the  lease,  the  latter  may  defend  upon  the 
ground  that  the  plaintiff  has  no  title  to  grant  such  a 
lease  as  he  contracted  to  gi'ant,  as  in  all  such  cases  the 
lessor  impUedly  undertakes  that  he  has  titled  under  right 
to  grant  such  a  lease  ;  *  and,  a  lessee  being  regarded  as 
a  purchaser  pro  ianto,  he  has  a  right  before  accepting 
the  lease  to  be  satisfied  as  to  the  lessor's  title,  and  to  call 
for  an  inspection  of  it/ 

Sec.  187.  Specific  performance  of  valid  agreements.~A 
decree  for  the  specific  performance  of  agreements  for 
leases,  in  all  i-espects  complying  with  the  provisions  of 
the  Statute  of  Frauds,  and  entered  into  by  parties  com- 
petent on  the  one  hand  to  lease,  and  on  the  other  to  take 
a  lease,  is  almost  as  much  a  matter  of  coujrse  in  a  court 
of  equity,  as  are  damages  for  their  breach  in  a  court  of 
law.*    The  fact  that  the  party  has  a  remedy  at  law  for 


years,  a  draft  lease  was  prepared, 
to  which  the  defeadant  objected, 
but  he  ultimately  took  it  away  to 
be  settled  by  his  solicitors,  and  the 
solicitors  afterwards  returned  it  to 
the  plaintiff's  solicitors  with  the 
following  letter:  "W^e  have  seen 
our  client,  and  have  altered  the 
draft  lease  in  accordance  with  his 
suggestions ;  we  trust  there  will  be 
no  impediment  to  prevent  an  ear- 
ly completion,  and  shall  be  glad  to 
receive  the  draft  as  soon  as  you 
can,  that  we  may  engross  the 
counterpart."  The  plaintiff's  so- 
licitors returned  the  papers,  stat- 
ing that,  according  to  the  practice, 
where  there  is  no  stipulation  on 
fte  subject,  the  lessor's  solicitor 
flji'ariably  prepares  the  lease,  &c. 


After  some  further  correspond- 
ence, the  defendant  refused  to 
execute  the  lease ;  and  in  an  ac- 
tion by  the  intended  landlord 
against  the  intended  tenant  to  re- 
cover damages  for  a  breach  of  the 
agreement  to  lease,  the  court  held 
that  no  valid  agreement  was 
shown. 

>  Wright  V.  Calls,  8  C.  B.  150. 

«  Ford  V.  Tiley,  6  B.  &  C.  325. 

»  Gevillim  v.  Stone,  3  Taunt.  432 ; 
Strauks  v.  St.  John,  L.  R.  2  C.  P. 
376 ;  Roper  v.  Coombes,  6  B.  &  G. 
534;  T^^^pl©  v-  Brown,  6  Taunt. 
60. 

*  Sugden's  Vendors,  141 ;  Purvis 
V.  Rayer,  9  Price,  488 ;  Keech  v. 
Hall,  1  Doug.  21. 

*  White  V.  Tudor's  Leading  Gas., 


Y^--^\—'^m, 


358 


Agreement. 


[§  187. 


damages,  affords  no  objection  to  the  exercise  of  this 
jurisdiction,  as  it  is  presumed  that  such  compensation 


645 ;  HaU  v.  Warren,  9  Vee.  608  ; 
Chance  v.  Beall,  20  Ga,  143 ;  Hooper 
V.  Hooper,  16  N.  J.  Eq.  147 ;  Rog- 
ers v.  Sanders,  16  Me.  92.  Courts 
of  law  have  no  power  to  enforce 
specifically  the  performance  of  any 
contract  or  obligation.  Its  power 
and  jurisdiction  extends  only  to 
the  giving  of  damages  for  its  breach 
or  non-performance,  no  matter 
how  imconscionable  or  inequitable 
it  may  be  to  compel  a  party  to  ac- 
cept such  redress ;  and,  it  can  give 
damages  for  the  breach  of  the  con- 
tract only  according  to  the  legal 
interpretation  of  the  langua^  em- 
ployed, although  it  does  not  m  fact 
express  the  real  intention  of  the 
parties,  or  the  contract  actually 
made  by  them.  But  courts  of 
equity,  taking  up  jurisdiction  from 
the  outer  limits  to  which  courts  of 
law  can  go,  are  endowed  with 
ample  power  not  only  to  correct 
any  mistakes  made  by  the  parties, 
in  the  contract  itself,  but  also,  in  a 
proper  case,  to  compel  the  parties 
to  perform  it,  according  to  its  true 
intention  as  gathered  from  the 
language  used,  and  the  subject 
matter  to  which  it  relates.  This 
jurisdiction,  however,  will  be  exer- 
cised only  when,  in  view  of  the 
terms  of  the  contract,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances surrounding  it,  equity 
and  good  conscience  reauires  that 
the  parties  should  substantially 
perform  that  which  they  have  con- 
tracted to  perform,  and  will  not 
compel  either  party  to  perform, 
when  such  performance  would  be 
inequitable  or  unconscionable. 
Barnett  v.  Spratt,  4  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
Ejq.  171 ;  Kimberly  v.  Jenmngs,  6 
Sim.  840 ;  Clarke  t.  Rochester,  &c., 
R.  R.  Co.,  18  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  350; 
Gould  V.  Kemp,  2  My.  &  K.  308 ; 
Canaday  v.  Shepherd,  2  Jones  (N. 
C.)  Eq.  224 ;  Wardsworth  v.  Man- 
ning, 4  Md.  59 ;  Roundtree  v.  Mc- 
Lain,  1  Hempst.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  245  : 
Durall  V.  Myers,  2  Md.  Ch.  59. 
And  this  is  so,  even  though  iAie 
contract  is  one  that,  if  executed,  it 
would  set  aside.  Barksdale  v. 
Payne,  Riley  (S.  C.)  Ch.  174 ;  CUth- 
w-all  V.  Ogilvie,  1  Dessau  (S.  C.)  250. 
Tlie  court  is  vested  with  large  dis- 
cretion in  this  respect,  but  this  dis- 


cretion must  be  reasonably  exer- 
cised, Howard  v.  Moore,  4  Sneed. 
(Tenn.)  817;  Humbard  v.  Hum- 
bard,  3  Head  (Tenn.)  100  ;  Hester 
V.  Hooker,  15  Miss.  768  ;  Auter  v. 
Miller,  18  Iowa  405 ;  Blackwilder 
V.  Loveless,  21  Ala.  871 ;  Pulliam 
V.  Owen.  25  id.  492  ;  Pigg  v.  Cord- 
er,  12  Leigh  (Va.)  69;  Leigh  v. 
Crump,  1  Ired.  (N.  C.)  Eq.  299; 
Ash  V.  Dagg,  6  Ind.  259 ;  McMiirtie 
V.  Bennett,  Harr.  (Mich.)  124,  and 
the  relief  prayed  for,  cannot  be 
arbitrarily  (Rogers  v.  Saunders,  16 
Me.  92;  Henderson  v.  H&jBy  2 
Watts  (Penn.)  148 ;  Meeker  v.  Sleek- 
er, 16  Conn.  403 ;  Broadwell  v. 
Broadwell,  6  Dl.  599  ;  Pigg  v.  Conf- 
er, 12  Leigh  (Va.)  69;  Leigh  v. 
Crump,  1  Ired.  (N.  C.)  Eq.  299  ; 
Turner  v.  Clay,  8  Bibb  (Ky.)  52 ; 
Tobey  v.  Co.  of  Bristol,  8  Story  (U. 
S.  C.  C.)  800 ;  Boeers  v.  Saunders, 
16  Me.  92 ;  Rudolph  t.  GofbII,  S 
Iowa  126 ;    Seymour  v.  Delanoev, 

6  John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  223;  Gould  V. 
Womack,  2  Ala.  88 ;  Smart  v.  Rea, 
19  Md.  898 ;  Pickering  v.  Picker- 
ing, 88  N.  H.  400 ;  King  v.  Mor- 
ford,  1  N.  J.  Eq.  274,  or  capri- 
ciously granted  or  denied.  Bowen. 
V.  Iri^,  &c..  Congregation,  6  Bos. 
(N.  Y.  Sup'r.  Ct.)  245 ;  Griffith  v. 
Frederick  Co.  Bank,  6  G.  &  J.  (Md.) 
424 ;  Cathcart  v.  Robinson,  5  Pet. 
(U.  S.)  268;  McWhorter  v.  Mc- 
Mahan,  1  Clarke's  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  400 ; 
Humbard  v.  Humbard,  8  Head 
(Tenn.),  100;  Waters  v.  Howard,  8 
Gill.  (Md.)  262 ;  Frisby  v.  Ballance, 
5  lU.  287  ;  Watts  v.  Rogers,  2  Abb. 
Pr.  (N.  Y.)  261 ;  Faure  v.  Martin, 

7  N.  Y.  210 ;  Veeder  v.  Fonda,  8 
Paige's  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  94.  A  bill  for 
the  si)ecific  performance  of  a  con- 
tract, is  addressed  to  the  sound  and 
reasonable  discretion  of  the  court, 
and,  while  not  strictly  a  matter  of 
right,  is  nevertheless  so  much  so, 
that  an  error  in  these  respects  will 
be  revised  by  an  appellate  tribunal. 
The  matter  is  regulated  by  certain 
rules  and  principles  that  the  court 
must  regard,  and  any  deviation 
therefrom  is  error  that  an  appellate 
tribunal  will  rectify.  Seymour  v. 
Delancey,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  345 
Meeker  v.  Meeker,  16  Conn.  4 
Tyson   v.  Watts,  1  Md.  Ch. 


m-M 


CHAP.  XXIV.]      SPEcaric  Pebfoemance.  359 

will  not  put  him  in  as  beneficial  a  position  as  if  the  agree- 
ment was  performed.'  But,  as  a  condition  precedent  to 
the  exercise  of  such  jurisdiction,  the  contract  must  be 
complete '  and  certain,  '  and  susceptible  of  proof  by  tlie 

CowenhoTen  v.  Brookl3T»,  88  Barb. 

(N.  Y.)  9 ;  St.  John  v.  Benedict,  6 
John.  Ch,(N.Y.)  111. 

'  Harnett  v.  Yielding,  1  Sch.  & 
Lef.  Si^.  The  rule  h,  that  equity 
will  specifically  enforce  perform- 
ance when  tliat  alono  will  answer 
thepurpose  of  justice.  Stayvesant 
T.  Mayor,  &c.,  11  Paige  (N.  Y.), 
Ch.  414;  and  the  court  will  be 
careful  to  see  that  the  exercise  of 
thia  jurisdiction  does  complete  ju3- 
tice.  King  v.  Mumford,  i  N.  J. 
Eq.  274. 

'Atid  the  terms  of  it  so  predm  as 
that  neither  party  could  reoson- 
abls  tniftuiderntatid  it.  If  it  is 
vague,  indefinite  or  uncertain,  or 
the  evidence  to  estabU»h  it  is  in- 
sufficient, thia  remedy  will  be  with- 
held. LockerHon  v.  Stilwell,  18  N. 
J.  Eq.  857 ;  Bowman  v.  Stilwell,  78 
111.  48;  Colson  t.  Thompson,  3 
Wheat.  (U.  S.)  836;  Mintum  v. 
Bayliss,  BBCal.  129 ;  OdeU  v.  Morin, 
5  Oreg.  08;  Tltynne  v.  Glengall,  3 
H.  L.  Cas.  131 ;  Martin  v.  Holley, 
61  Mo.  19fl ;  Miller  v.  Cottin,  5  Ga. 
341 ;  Burke  v.  Creditors,  »  La.  An. 
57 ;  Fitzpatrick  v.  Beatty,  6  111. 
454 ;  and,  unless  partly  performed, 
the  subject  matter  must  be  suscep- 
tible of  identification  from  tlie  de- 
scription in  the  contract,  "  the  120 
acres  in  Shannon  County,  Mis- 
souri," without  any  other  words 
of  identiflcation,  was  held  insuffi- 
cient, as  the  land  could  not  be 
identified  without  a  resort  to  parol 
evidence.  Miller  v.  Campbell,  52 
Ind.  rm.  But  if  it  had  been  ■'  the 
130  acres  of  land  owned  b^  me  in 


definite  in  all  essential  details. 
Wright  V.  Wright,  81  Mich.  880 ; 
Stanton  v.  Miller,  68  N.  Y.  193 ; 
Reese  v.  Eeese,  41  Md.  554.  Where 
the  contract  is  incomplete  in  any 
essential  respect,  and  lumislies  no 
means  of  identifying  the  property 
with  certainty,  this  remedy  will  be 
denied.  Patrick  v.  Horton,  3  W. 
Va,  23 ;  Hammer  t.  McEldowney, 
48  Penn.  St.  834;  Southern  Ins. 
Co.  V.  Cole,  4  Fla,  859 ;  Ohio  t. 
Baum  a  Ohio,  883 ;  Jordan  v.  Dea- 
ton,  23  Art.  704  ;  Prater  v.  MUler, 
5  Jones  (N.  C.)  Eq.  153.  "The 
houses  in  Smithfiela  St.,"  without 
other  designation,  held  too  uncer- 
tain. Hammer  v.  McEldowney, 
ante.  When  the  writing  appears 
to  be  only  the  basis  of  an  agree- 
ment and  not  the  agreement  itself, 
there  is  no  binding  agreement. 
Frostv.  Moulton,  21  BeaT.  488;  or 
when  it  provides  tliat  any  of  the 
terms  shall  be  afterwards  settled. 
Wood  V.  Midgelev,  Fi  DeG.  M.  & 
Q.  41 ;  Honeyman  v.  Maryatt,  21 
"  "  -^  that  further  negotia- 
templai  '  "-  ■  - 
,2V.& 
ney  v.  Crowther,  3  Br.  &  C.  C. 
318  ;  and  if  it  is  doubtful  whether 
a  positive  agreement  exists,  the 
court  will  not  interfere,  all  tlie 
terms  must  be  settled.  Huddle- 
stone  V.  Briscoe,  11  Ves.  682 ;  Jack- 
son V.  Oglander,  2  H.  &  M.  465. 
But  if  all  the  terms  are  settled  and 
agreed  upon,  the  fact  tliat  a  more 
formal  instrument  is  contemplated 
is  not  sufficient  to  defeat  this  re- 
lief. Skinner  v.  McDowall,  2  DeG. 
&S.  265. 

'  If  there  is  a  doubt  as  to  whether 
the  parties  understood  the  contract 
alike,  fairly  arising  from  the  lan- 
guage of  the  contract,  it  will  not 
be  enforced.  Cowles  v,  Bowne, 
10  Paige  (N.  Y,),  Ch.  526;  Buck- 
master  V.  Thompson,  86  N.  Y.  558. 
The  term  or  duration  of  a  lease  is 
an  essential  part  of  it,  and  specific 
performance  will  not  be  decreed 
when  the  contract  does  not  specify 
the  term.  Myers  v.  Forbes,  24  Md. 
598.    In  an  agreement  to  renew  a 


■  11^ 


360 


Agreement. 


[§  187. 


writing  itself,  *  unless  in  part  performed.'    It  must  also 
be  mutual*  and  fair,  and  just  in  all  its  parts,  *  and  other- 


lease  at  as  much  rent  as  any  one 
else  would  pay,  it  was  left  optional 
with  the  lessee  to  accept  it  or  not, 
and  it  was  held  lacking  both  in 
certainty  and  mutuality.  Gelston 
V.  Sigmimd,  27  Md.  834 ;  Heywood 
V.  Cope,  25  Beav.  140  ;  Jaylor  v. 
Partington,  7  DeG.  M.  &  G.  828 ; 
Parker  v.  Taswell,  2  DeG.  &  J. 
659.  Where  the  rent  is  to-be  after- 
wards fixed,  and  this  has  not  been 
done,  the  contract  is  too  incom- 
plete and  uncertain.  Graham  v. 
Call,  5  Munf.  (Va.)  396.  When  a 
contract  of  this  character,  or  any 
other,  is  uncertain  and  vague,  the 
court  will  leave  the  parties  to  their 
legal  remedies.  Maddox  v.  Mc- 
Queen, 3  A.  K.  Mar.  (Ky.)  400 ;  Mc- 
Kibbin  v.  Brown,  14  N.  J.  Eg.  13  ; 
Dobson  V.  Litton,  5  Coldw.  (Tenn.) 
616 ;  Sales  v.  Mickman,  20  Penn. 
St.  180.  Thus,  a  clause  in  a  lease 
which  reads  **  and  the  party  of  the 
first  part  agrees,  in  case  the  said 
parties  of  the  second  part  shall 
then  be  tenants  of  said  premises, 
to  first  offer  the  property  so  de- 
mised for  sale  to  and  purchase  by 
them  for  the  sum  of  f 2,000,"  was 
held  too  uncertain  for  enforcement, 
because  there  was  no  time  fixed 
within  which  it  was  to  be  per- 
formed, nor  any  agreement  that 
the  lessor  shoulii  convey  to  them 
at  any  time  for  that  sum  while 
they  were  tenants.  Buckmaster  v. 
Thompson,  86  N.  Y.  558.  So  a 
stipulation  to  renew  a  lease  at  ita 
expiration,  **  the  rent  to  be  propor- 
tioned to  the  valuation  of  said 
premises  at  said  time,"  and  pro- 
viding no  method  for  determining 
the  valuation,  was  held  too  uncer- 
tain to  be  specifically  enforced. 
Pray  v.  Clark,  113  Mass.  283. 

*  Dobson  V.  Litton,  ante,  113; 
Hammer  V.  McEldowney,46  Penn. 
St.  834.  By  this,  it  is  not  meant 
that  parol  evidence  to  identify  the 
property  is  never  admissible,  but 
that  the  writing  must  furnish  such 
a  basis  therefor  that  by  the  aid  of 
parol  evidence  absolute  certainty 
can  be  arrived  at.  Thus,  an  agree- 
ment *'for  the  sale  of  houses  on 
Smithfield  Street"  was  held  too 
uncertain,  because  the  contract 
furnished  no  guide  by  which  to 


arrive  at  a  certainity  as  to  what 
houses  were  intended.  Hammer 
V.  McEldowney,  ante.  But  if  it 
had  been  *'for  the  sale  of  my 
houses,  &c.,"  or  **  houses  owned 
by  me,  &c.,"  absolute  certainty 
could  have  been  arrived  at,  because 
the  houses  owned  by  him  could 
have  been  identified.  Colerick  v. 
Hooper,  8  Ind.  316 ;  Lewis  v. 
Reichy»  27  N.  J.  Eq.  240  ;  Lynes  v. 
Hayden,  118  Mass.  482;  Puttman 
V.  Haltey,  24  Iowa,  425.  The  term 
and  duration  of  the  lease,  Myers 
V.  Forbes,  ante,  as  well  as  the 
amount  of  rent,  must  be  definitely 
stated.  Gelston  v.  Sigmund,  27 
Md.  S45. 

« Lester  v.  Foxcraft,  1  Coll.  C. 
C.  108.  In  an  Illinois  case  an 
agreement  to  convey  a  right  of 
way  80  feet  wide,  was  held  to  have 
become  sufficiently  certain  to  be 
enforced,  after  the  grantee,  with 
the  acquiesence  of  the  grantor,  had 
entered  upon  the  land  and  laid  out 
the  way.  Purinton  v.  Northern 
111.  R.  R.  Co.,  46  HI.  297. 

*  And  the  parties  must  both  be 
bound  by  the  contract,  the  one  to 

give  and  the  other  to  take  the  lease, 
ieger  v.  Green,  4  Gill.  (Md.)  472 ; 
Hawralty  v.  Warren,  18  N.  J.  Eq. 
124;  Benedict  v.  Lynch,  1  John. 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  370;  McMurtrie  v. 
Bennett,  Harr.  (Mich.)  124 ;  Jones 
V.  Noble,  3 Bush.  (Ky.)  694;  Bodine 
V.  Glading,  21  Penn.  St.  50.  But 
an  agreement  has  been  held  en- 
forceable in  equity,  when  only 
binding  upon  the  party  sought  to 
be  charged,  Rogers  v.  Saunders, 
16  Me.  9,  and  i)redicated  upon  a 
good  consideration.  Matter  of 
Himter,  1  Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  1 ; 
Hawralty  v.  Warren,  ante. 

*  Muller  V.  Vettel,  25  How.  Pr. 
(N.  Y.)  850.  Only  those  contracts 
wliich  are  fair,  just,  and  reasonable, 
will  be  specifically  enforced  in 
equity.  Andrews  v.  Andrews,  28 
Ala.  432 ;  Thompson  v.  Tod.  Pet. 
C.  Ct.  380;  Gould  v.  Womack,  2 
Ala.  83 ;  Ellis  v.  Burden,  1  Ala. 
Sel.  Cas.  458 ;  Lucas  v.  Burnett,  1 
Greene  (Iowa)  610;  Carberry  v. 
Tannehill,  1  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  224; 
Griffith  V.  Frederick  Coimty  Ban|L. 
6  Gill  <&  J.  (Md.)  424 ;  Waters^ 


C3HAP.  xxrv".]      Specific  Perpoeiiance.  S61 

wise  unobjectionable.  If  there  is  danger  that  the  de- 
fendant will  be  exx>osed  to  expensive  litigation  to  main- 
tain or  ascertain  his  rights  under  the  lease,  the  agree- 
ment will  not  be  enforced,'  nor  if  there  is  any  doubt  as 
to  the  lessor's  title,'  nor  if  there  are  two  or  more  lessors, 
if  the  interests  of  some  of  them  would  be  injuriously 
affected  thereby,'  nor  if  the  building  is  new,  and  shown 
to  be  in  such  an  unsafe  condition  that  it  is  likely  to  sub- 
ject the  tenant  to  an  xmreasonable  or  extraordinary  ex- 
pense for  repairs,  especially  when  its  condition  could  not 
readily  have  been  ascertained  by  inspection,'  but  it  seems 
that  this  rule  does  not  apply  to  an  old  building  or  one 
whose  defects  are  readily  ascertainable."  A  decree  will 
not  be  made  for  the  specific  performance  of  a  contract 
relating  to  stock  or  other  chattels,'  nor  for  the  perform- 

Society,  &c,  v.  Law,  19  N.  J. 

,  IS. 

Tildesly  v.  Clarkson.  80  Beav. 


Howard,  1  Md.  Ch.  112;  Smith 
CrandaU.  20  Ud.  483 ;  Daniel 
Frazer,  40  Hies.  607  ;  Rodman 
Zilley,  1  N.  J.  Eq,  820 ;  Stoulon- 
burg  T,  Tompkins,  9  N.  J.  Eij. 
McWhorter  v.  McMahan,  1  Clark 
(N.  y.)  400;  Leigh  v.  Crump,  1 
Ired.  <N.  C.)  Eq.  388 ;  Cannaday 
V.  Shepard,  3  Jonea  (N.  C),  Eq. 
224:  Fair  v.  Glading,  1  Pliil. 
;  HaU  V.  Rote,  8  Hayw. 
;  Rice  T.  RawlingB, 
.),  496;  Eastland  v. 
8     Bibb    (Ky.)    274; 

_„ .   Fry,   Wright   (Ohio) 

105 ;  McCarty  v.  Kyle,  4  Coldw. 
(Teim.)  848 ;  Smith  v.  Wood,  13 
Wia.  883,  but  where  a  contract  is 
fairly  made  and  without  mistake, 
by  competent  parlies,  upon  good 
eoiMUJeration,  and  unattended  vnth 
any  eirewnatancet  which  make  its 
enforcement    inequitable,    a  mere 


(Penn.)  87 
(N.    C.)  S 
Meigs   rrenn 
YajiarMel, 
Wingate    ' 


41S. 

'  In  Johnson  v.  Smatt,  2  Giff. 
151,  the  house  was  described  as 
substantial  and  convenient,  and 
havingfive  bedrooms.  It  n-aabeld, 
that  a  speciiic  performance  could 
not  be  defeated,  althougb  the  house 
was  out  of  repair,  and  the  wall  in 
some  places  only  a  half  a  brick 
thick,  and  some  of  the  bedrooms 
were  extremelj  Bmall,  and  without 
fire-placea  ;  there  being  no  misde- 
scription. See  also  Cook  T.  Waugh, 
3  Giff.  201.  The  fact  that  the  cir- 
cumstances were  such  as  might 
eadly  hare  led  to  fraud,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  experience  in  such  mat- 
t«rs,  in  the  absence  of  any  actual 
fraud  or  mifirepreseutation  on  the 
part  of  the  plaintiff,  it  has  be^ 
held  insufficient  tfl  prevent  the 
specific  enforcement  of  the  con- 
tract, Ligbtfoot  T.  Heron,  8  You. 
&  C.  &H6,  and  the  same  rule  ia  held 
when  there  is  only  a  misrepresen- 
tation as  lo  the  legal  rights  of  the 
defendant.  Great  WeHtem  R.  R. 
Co.  v.  Criups.  5  Hare.  91  ;  Kendall 
T.  Hill,  «Jur.  N.  8.068. 

'  The  reason  being  that  a  com- 
plete remedy  exists  at  law,  as  the 
party  can  purchase  other  property 
of  the  same  kind  and  recover  the 
difference.  Cuddee  v.  Rutter, 
White  &  Tudor's  L.  C.  640  ;  Rosav. 


S63 


AOREEHEKT. 


[§  187. 


ance  of  a  contract  for  a  tenancy  for  a  single  year  or  from 
year  to  year,'  nor  where  the  term  agreed  upon  has 
expired,  or  would  expire  before  the  decree  could  be 
carried  into  execution,"  nor  where  it  is  shown  that  the 
intended  lessee  has  become  insolvent  and  unable  to  per- 
form the  covenants  agreed  upon.*  Nor  will  it  decree  the 
specific  performance  of  a  contract  for  a  lease,  when  one 
of  the  conditions  is  that  the  lessee  shall  engage  the 
personal  services  of  the. lessor  in  the  business  for  which 
the  premises  are  to  be  used,*  nor  where  the  party  apply- 
ing, has  failed  to  perform  any  of  the  stipulations  in  the 
agreement,  upon  the  performance  of  which  the  making 
of  the  lease  was  conditional,*  nor  where  he  has  been 
guilty  of  fraud  in  inducing  the  other  party  to  enter  into 
the  agreement,*  or  has,  through  misrepresentation  and 
deceit,  inveigled  him  into  the  contract,"  nor  where  he 
has  been  guilty  of  a  fraudulent  concealment  of  important 
facts.*    But,  where  neither  party  knows  of  the  existence 


Union  Pacific  R.  R.  Co.,  1  Wood 
(U.  S.  C.  C.)  26. 

1  Morlat  V.  Lyons,  8  Ir.  Ch,  112 ; 
Clayton  v.  lUin^worth,  10  Hare, 
461. 

«  Nesbit  V.  Meyer,  1  Swanst.  226 ; 
Brassae  v.  Martyn,  11  W.  R.  1020; 
Walters  v.  Coal  Co.,  5  DeG.  M.  & 
G.  629. 

'  Neale  v.  Mackenzie,  1  Keen, 
474.  But  there  must  be  proof  of 
general  insolvency,  and  proof  of  a 
particular  default  in  the  payment 
of  rent  of  other  premises  will  not 
disentitle  him  to  this  remedy.  See 
opinion  of  Lord  Lon(h>ai.e,  M.  R., 
in  the  case  last  cited.  "  As  a  les- 
see remains  liable  to  the  determin- 
ation of  the  term.''  said  Lokd  El- 
don,  in  Buckland  v.  Hall.  8  Ves. 
92,  "  it  is  of  great  importance  to 
the  lessor  to  take  care  that  the  les- 
see shall  be  a  man  of  substance, 
and  insolvency,  therefore  is  a 
weighty  objection  to  a  specific  per- 
formance of  an  agreement  for  a 
lease."  And  in  that  case,  the  plaint- 
iff being  already  in  as  assignee 
imder  a  lease,  the  defendant  had 
agreed  to  grant  him  a  new  lease. 
But  the  defendant  refused  to  per- 
form, and  the  plaintiff  brought  a 
bill  for  specific  performance  and 
obtained  an  injunction  against  the 


defendant  restraining  him  from 
maintaining  ejectment.  After- 
wards the  plaintiff  became  insol- 
vent and  settled  his  debts  for  9«. 
on  the  pound,  and  upon  that  and 
other  grounds  the  injunction  was 
dissolved.  In  Price  v.  Asspeton,  1 
Yo.  &  Coll.  441,  the  court  refused 
to  entertain  a  suit  for  specific  per- 
formance of  a  covenant  in  a  lease 
for  renewal,  upon  the  ground  that 
the  plaintiff  had  become  insolvent, 
the  court  holding  that  it  had  no 
power  to  compel  a  landlord  to  ti^e 
an  insolvent  person  as  lessee. 

*  Ogden  V.  Fossick.  32  L.  J.  Ch. 
78.  The  courts  will  not  enforce 
the  performance  of  contracts  re- 
lating to  the  personal  services  of 
either  party.  Sanquivico  v.  Bene- 
ditti,  1  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  315 ;  De  Riv- 
asinoli  v.  Corsetti,  4  Paige,  Ch.  (N. 
Y.)  270. 

« Jones  V.  Roberts,  6  Call.  (Va.) 
187;  Harvie  v.  Banks,  1  Rand. 
(Va.)  408. 

*  Higgins  V.  Laiirels,  2  Johns.  & 
H.  460 ;  Flight  v.  Booth,  1  Bing. 
N.  C.  370. 

'  Willingham  v.  Joyce,  8  Ves. 
168;  Moxey  v.   Bigwood,  10  Juiw 

N.  s.  597.  ,;•■: 

»  Ellard  v.  Lord  Llundall,  1  B^K 
&  P.  241 ;  Boskomb  v.  Phillififi 


r-,^-      ■ 


CHAP.  XXIV.]      Specific  Pbrformance.  363 

of  objectionable  circumstances,  although  easily  ascertain- 
able by  the  lessor,  as,  of  the  existence  of  a  nuisance  ia 
the  vicinity  of  a  dwelling  that  renders  it  unSt  for  that 
purpose,  yet,  in  the  absence  of  any  representations  as  to 
the  condition  of  the  premises  or  their  surroundings  that 
have  misled  the  lessee  or  thrown  him  off  from  inquiry, 
the  existence  of  such  nuisance  affords  no  ground  for 
refusing  to  enforce  the  agreement. '  Even  a  false  state- 
ment as  to  the  condition  of  premises  made  by  the  plaintiff 
will  not  defeat  this  remedy,  unless  the  statement  was 
the  means  of  inducing  the  bargain.  If,  notwithstand- 
ing the  representation,  the  lessee  examined  the  premises 
for  himself,  and  relied  upon  his  own  judgment,  or  if, 
when  made,  he  knew  the  statements  to  be  false,  he  can- 
not claim  that  he  was  misled  or  deceived  thereby.'  If 
the  agreement  is  hard  and  unconscionable  the  comt  will 
sometimes  refuse  to  enforce  it.'  The  power  of  a  court  of 
equity  to  enforce  the  epecific  performance  of  a  contract 
should  be  exercised  under  the  sound  discretion  of  the 
court,  with  an  eye  to  the  substantial  justice  of  the  case  ; 
and  where  a  corUract  is  hard,  and  destitute  of  all  equity, 
the  court  will  leave  the  parties  to  their  remedy  at  law, 
and  if  such  remedy  has  been  lost  by  negligence,  they 
must  abide  the  consequences.'  But  much  depends  upon 
the  nature  of  the  hardship  and  when  and  how  it  arose.* 
If  the  hardship  arises  from  circumstances  that  occuixed 
after  the  contract  was  entered  into,  equity  cannot  relieve 
the  party,  as,  if  after  the  agreement  is  made  the  build- 
ings are  destroyed  by  fire,  tempest  or  flood,  or  other 
casualty,  the  contract  will  be  enforced.'  So  where  the 
us  V.  Wright,  3  Har.  & 
HamUt0D,4Pet.(tJ.  S.) 


BowrinK,  83 
V.  Haatler,  1 


T.  hamlej,  8  DeG,  &  J. 
a  V.  Walshe,  3  Sch.  & 

Lowder  t,  BlackJord, 
B«veUT.HuBSey,3B&U. 
;  Law  T.  TreufwoU,  13 


864  Agreement.  [§  188. 

tenant  at  the  time  of  entering  into  the  contract  knew 
that  the  premises  were  badly  out  of  repair,  but  by  reason 
of  secret  defects  did  not  know  the  extent  of  their  non- 
repair, and  be  stipulated  that  certain  Bpeciflc  repairs 
should  be  made,  which  was  done,  but  afterwards  it 
turned  out  that  one  of  the  walls  of  the  building  was  so 
defective  as  to  necessitate  its  being  taken  down  and 
rebuilt,  which  would  involve  a  large  expense,  it  was  held, 
that  notwithstanding  this,  the  contract  must  be  enforced. 

Sbc.  188.  illegal  piurposea.— If  the  agreement  contem- 
plates a  use  of  the  premises  for  illegal  purposes,  it  will 
not  be  enforced.'  But  the  mere  fact  that  it  savors  of  il- 
legality, is  not  enough.  It  must,  in  order  to  be  outside 
the  pale  of  equitable  enforcement,  be  either  legal  or  ille- 
gal,' and  it  may  doubtless  be  regarded  as  the  rule,  that, 
unless  the  ofjreement  is  so  tainted  with  illegality,  that,  ai 
law,  the  landlord  could  not  recover  the  rent,  the  contract 
will  be  enforced. 

Sec.  189.  WaiitofauthorltyljymtendedleaBor.— If  the  in- 
tended lessor  had  no  authority  to  let  the  premises,  the 
agreement  cannot  be  enforced,  as,  if  an  agent  enter  into 
a  contract  to  let  premises  for  his  principal,  which  he  had 
DO  authority  to  make,  or  if  a  company  or  corporation  en- 
ters into  a  contract  in  that  respect  which  is  ultra  vires,* 
or  if  a  person  enters  into  a  contract  to  lease  land  to  which 
he  has  no  title,  or  to  which  his  title  is  defective,  'or  if  a 

'  Cook  Y.  Waugh,  2  Oiff.  201.  a  resaon  for  his  refusal.    In  an  ac- 

•Bettswortti  T.  Dean,  &c.,  Bel.  tion  — — -*  ■••-  ' "^ •-  ~' 

Cas.  Ch.  66,  as  the  law  will  notgive  the 

its  aid  to  a  partjr  to  cousununate,  the 

an    illegal    or     immoral     purpose  i3  ] 

or  one  againet  public  policy.    Du-  blaf 

mont  V.  Dufore,  27  Ind.  268 ;   Dob-  (he 

eon  T.  Swan,  3  W.  Va.  611 ;  Evans  thei 

V.  Rittrell,  83  Ala.  449 ;  Parks  v.  alth 

McKaney,  8  Head  {Tenn.)  287.    In  reai 

Cowan  V.  Milboum,  L.  E.  2  Eichq.        ». 

S30,  the   defendaot  agreed  to  let         ' 

rooms  to   the  plaintiff,  but  learn-  StaJ 

ing  afterwards  that  they  were  to  S93. 

be  used  for  lectures   maJntaioing         ' '. 

that  the  character  of  Christ  is  de-  S.  i 

fective  and  his  teachiog  mislead-  taki 

ing,  he  refused  to  allow  the  use  of  can 

the  rooms,  but  did  not  give  this  as  Hi 


CHAP,  xxiv.]      SPEcinc  Pehfobmakce.  365 

trnstee  enters  into  a  contract  to  lease  certain  lands,  and 
the  execution  of  the  agreement  would  involve  a  violation 
of  his  trust,  the  court  vdll  i-efuBe  to  enforce  it,  but  will 
leave  the  parties  to  their  remedy  at  law ; '  and  the  same 
rule  prevails  where  the  performance  of  the  contract  is  im- 
possible,' or  where  the  lessor,  if  compelled  to  perform,  is 
in  danger  of  having  his  estate  in  the  premises  forfeited, 
as,  where  the  lessor  holds  under  a  lease  which  forbids  un- 
derletting and  provides  for  a  forfeiture  for  a  breach  of  any 
of  the  covenants.' 

Sec.  190.  Burprlse,  mlBtake,  flrand.— In  order  to  secure 
theepeciflc  enforcement  of  a  contract,  it  must  be  free  from 
frand,  surprise  and  mistake, 'for  where  thei-e  is  mistake 
there  is  not  that  consent  which  is  essential  to  a  contract  in 
equity  ;  non  videntui  qui  errant  consentire.'  A.  mistake 
of  law,  however,  is  notsuflScient  to  defeat  this  remedy,' 
norof  thelegalconsequencesof  thecontract.'  But,  where 

'  Phillips  T,  Edward,  38  Beav.  predicated  upon  the  BonndeatpriD- 

440 ;  Brron  t.  Acton,  1  Bro.  P.  C.  ciples  of  public  policy  and  of  mor- 

186;  Haywood  v.  Cope,  35  Beav.  ala.    Arts.  Nie.   Eth.  iii.  1  Paecel 

103!  Hftrtnellv.  Yielding,  3  8ch.&  I*"-   Provin.   Let.  4,  and  for  this 

Lef.  649 ;   Sneeaby  v.  Thome,   7  reason  courte  of  equity  nill  neither 

DeO.  H.  A  Q.  899.  set  aside  or  refuse  to  enforce  con- 

'  Green  v.  Smith,  1  Atk.  S73.  bw^s  upon  this  ground.    Marshall 

» Peacock  t,  Penson,   11  Beav.  t,  Collett,  1  Y.  &  C.  Ezchq.  289  j 

355 ;  Helling  v.  Lumley,  8  DeQ.  &  Cocket«ll  v.  Chalmeley,  1 R  &  Hy. 

J.  498.  419 ;  Pullen  v.  Heady,  3  Atk.  687  } 

*  Fry  on  Specific  Performance,  Bilbie  v.    Lumley,  2  Elast,   4S9 ; 

Bee.  475  ;  BradburyT.  White,4Me.  Champlin  t.  Laytm,  IB  Wend.  (N. 

891 ;  UitchellT.  Nicholson,  8  Yerg.  Y.)  409.    See  cases  cited  in  previ- 

(Ten n.)  194  ;  King  t.  Hamilton,  4  ousnote.  "  It  is  a  dangerous  plea," 

Pet.  (U.  S.)  811.  Kent,  C.  J.,  in  Shotwell  v.  Mur- 

'  IMg.  Litt.  BO,  tit.  17  t.  116.  ray,  1  John  Ch.  612.     The  parties, 

'  Croombe  t.  Lediard,  3  My.  &  therefore,  will  not  be  permitted  to 

^    nr.  .  ,-n. ,: t — tj^    jg  Say  that  the  legal  resultof  theircou- 

:ute  V.  tract  is  different  from  what  they 

)od  V.  expected  orintended,     Croombev. 

But  Lediard, ante.    Thus,  whereitwas 

(Ky.)  Admitted   that   the   effect   of   an 

imph.  agreement  was  to  give  an' option 

holm,  to  a  lessee  as  to  the  duration  of  the 

imont  term,  but  it  was  contended  that 

,)600;  this  was  not  in  the  contemplation 

a  mis-  of  the    parties,    the   defense   was 

nt.  overruled.    Price  v.  Dver,  17  Vee, 

Crip-  866.    A  different  doctrine  has  been 

■•"  -"-  held  in  Kentucky,  S.  Carolina  and 
Maryland.  Ekts,  v.  Marvck,  1  Hill 
(S.  C.)  Ch.  257 ;  Pitigerald  v.  Peck. 
4  Litt.  (Ky.)  126 ;  Lament  v.  Kow- 
ley,  ante. 


Iiough 


•'V^ 


see 


Agreement. 


[§  191. 


there  is  a  mistake  of  fact,  as  where  the  agreement  applies 
to  different  premises  than  those  whicn  the  defendant  sup- 
posed they  applied  to,  it  is  a  good  defence  to  a  bill  for 
specific  performance/  but  the  burden  is  upon  the  defend- 
ant to  make  out  the  defence.' 

Sec.  191.  Contract  wm  not  be  varied.— Tlie  court  will  not, 
upon  the  appUcation  of  a  party,  correct  a  mistake,  and 
enforce  a  performance  of  the  contract  as  corrected,  unless 
the  mistake  is  shown  to  be  mutual,  and  is  clearly  estab- 
lished; but  in  the  latter  instance,  our  courts  will  correct 
a  mutual  mistake,  and  enforce  the  contract  as  corrected.' 
But  in  England  a  different  rule  prevails,  and  if  the  con- 
tract omits  any  material  term  or  inaccurately  expresses 
the  real  intention  of  the  parties,  the  court  will  not  enforce 
it  with  a  variation  to  correct  the  mistake/    But  it  must 


>  Austin  V.  Ewell,  25  Tex.  403. 

*  Western  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Babcock, 
6  Met.  (Mass.)  846. 

*  King  V.  Ashworth,  3  Iowa  452 ; 
Mosby  V.  WaU,  23  Miss.  81 ;  Rog- 
ers T.  Atkinson,  1  Ga.  12 ;  Tilton 
V.  Tilton,  9  N.  H.  885;  Coles  v. 
Brown,  10  Paige  (N.  Y.)  Ch.  536; 
Shelley  v.  Smith,  2  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  504;  Smith  v.  Allen,  1  N.  J. 
Eq.  562;  Rhode  Island  v.  Massa- 
chusetts, 15  Pet.  <U.  S.)233;  Coot 
V.  Craig,  2  H.  &  M.  (Va.)  618; 
Chamberlain  v.  Thompson,  10 
Conn.  243. 

*  Fry  on  Specific  Performance, 
Sec.  519,  et  seq,;  Nurse  v.  Sey- 
mour, 13  Beav.  254 ;  Rich  t.  Jack- 
son, 2  Bro.  C.  C.  514;  Da  vies  v. 
Fitton,  2  Dru.  &  W.  265 ;  Roberts 
V.  Collins,  7  Ves.  130 ;  Emmett  v. 
Dewhurst,  8  My.  &  Cr.  587.  Thus 
in  Woolam  v.  Heame,  7  Ves.  211, 
the  plaintiff  alleged  an  agreement 
by  which  the  defendant  was  to 
grant  him  a  lease  of  a  certain 
house  at  £60  rent  per  annum  ;  but 
the  memorandum  of  the  agree- 
ment, either  by  mistake  or  with  a 
fraudulent  purpose,  stated  the  rent 
at  £73  10s.  The  plaintiff  sought  to 
have  the  agreement  corrected  in 
this  respect,  and  enforced  as  cor- 
rected. The  court  were  satisfied 
that  the  plaintiff  was  right  as  to 
the  mistake,  but  held  that  the  evi- 
dence could  not  be  used  to  procure 


a  decree.  See  also  to  same  effect, 
Higginson  v.  Clowes,  15  Ves.  516; 
Winch  V.  Winchester,  1  V.  &  B. 
875;  Clinan  v.  Cooke,  1  Sch.  & 
Lef.  22.  In  Brodie  v.  St.  Paul,  1 
Ves.  Jr.  326,  a  party  agreed  to 
take  a  lease  upon  certain  terms, 
which  were  read  to  him  from  a 
certain  paper,  containing  others 
which  were  not  ready  but  Uie  court 
refused  to  admit  parol  evidence  to 
prove  which  of  the  conditions  had 
been  read,  and  which  had  not. 
See  also  similar  in  effect,  Lawson 
V.  Laude,  1  Dick.  346 ;  Marquis  of 
Townsend  v.  Stangroom,  o  Ves. 
828.  The  courts  proceed  upon  the 
ground  that  the  sidmission  of  such 
evidence  would  open  the  door  to 
eluding  the  Statute  of  Frauds. 
Meres  v.  Ansell,  3  Wils.  275 ;  Sea- 
go  V.  Deane,  4  Bing.  469 ;  Sander- 
son V.  Griffith,  5  B.  &  C.  900;  Pres- 
ton V.  Merceau,  2  W,  Bl.  1249. 
But  it  is  held,  that  the  defendant 
may  avail  himself  of  such  a  mis- 
take in  defence  to  a  bill  for  roecifio 
performance.  Squire  v.  Camp- 
bell, 1  My.  &  Cr.  480;  London, 
Ac,  Co.  V.  Winter,  Cr.  &  Ph.  57, 
and  tliat  the  mistake  may  be  cor- 
rected, and  contract  as  corrected 
enforced,  when  the  answer  admit 
the  mistake.  Attorney-General 
StUwell,  1  Y.  &  C.  Exchq. 
Mr.  Fry,  in  his  work  on  Spej 
Performance,   Sec.   519-34, 


CHAP,  xxrv.]      SPEcmc  Perpormancte.  867 

not  be  understood  that  a  contract  with  a  Tariation  can 
Tiever  be  enforced,  because  the  restriction  does  not  affect 
the  case  of  a  subsequent  collateral  agreement  in  writing, 
because  if  the  variation  be  legally  agreed  for,  it  is  a  part 
of  the  agreement ;  if  not  legally  agreed  for,  it  is  no  part 
of  the  agreement,  and  consequently  no  variation.  The 
real  meaning  of  the  case  is,  that  aparol  agreement  can- 
not be  added  to  an  agreement  in  writing,  and  the  agree- 
ment as  amended  by  parol  enforced.  But  this  rule  is  not 
inflexible,  because  if  there  has  been  such  an  actual  part 
performance  by  the  plaintiff  of  a  parol  variation,  that  it 
■would  be  a  fraud  upon  him  to  execute  the  written  agree- 
ment without  the  parol  variation,  by  analogy  it  would 
seem  that  parol  evidence  of  such  variation  is  admissible 
■with  a  view  to  its  being  specifically  performed.'  Where 
anagreement  in  writing  has  been  materially  v^ied  by 
parol,  and  the  parol  variation  has  been  partly  performed, 
it  may  be  treated  as  a  new  parol  agreement,  and  is  not 
oboxious  in  equity,  to  the  Statue  of  Frauds,  because  partly 
performed.' 

Sec.  192.  Fart7  will  not  be  oompelled  to  accept  lese  tbaa 
he  oontracted  tor-VLaj  elect  to  do  ao,— A  court  of  equity  will 
never  enforce  an  agreement,  when  the  party  seeking  to 
enforce  it  cannot  confer  upon  the  defendant  all  that  he 
contracted  for,  and  all  that  the  contract  calls  for.  Thus, 
if  the  defendant  has  contracted  for  a  term  of  ten  years, 
he  cannot  be  compelled  to  accept  a  lease  for  nine  years, 

m»nta  vvrn-tAv  iinnt,  thU  Hni-ti-ini.  Ves.  819 ;  Oarrard  V.  Grinling,  3 
Swanst.  144 ;  Davles  t.  Fitton,  2 
Dni.  &  W.  225.  But,  as  previous- 
Ij  stated,  these  reasons  have  not 
Kenerally  been  regarded  as  valid 
Byour  courts.  Kisselbrack  t.  LIt- 
ingston,  4  John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  148, 
in  which  Kent,  Ch.  J.,  attacks  the 
Enghah  doctrine.  AUosee  Story's 
Eq.  JuriB.,  3ec.  161,  in  which  that 
eminent  jurist  exposes  its  absurd- 
ity. 

'  Robson  V,  Collins,  7  Vee.  188 ; 

Rich  T.  Jackson,  4  Bro.  C.  C.  516. 

»  Anonymous  5  Vin.  Abr.  B2S,  pi. 


868 


Agreement. 


[§  193. 


or  if  he  has  contracted  for  a  term  of  sixteen  years,  he 
will  not  be  compelled  to  accept  a  lease  for  six  years,  with 
compensation  for  the  deficiency ; '  nor,  if  he  has  contracted 
for  a  lease  in  possession,  will  he  be  compelled  to  accept 
one  in  reversion,'  nor  if  he  has  contracted  for  the  assign- 
ment of  a  lease,  will  he  be  compelled  to  accept  the  as- 
signment of  an  under  lease,'  and  generally,  a  person  can 
be  compelled  to  accept  only  such  a  lease  as  he  contracted 
for.*  But  a  party  may  elect  to  accept  a  lease  different 
from  that  named  in  the  contract,  a:nd,  if  he  files  a  bill 
for  the  specific  performance  of  the  contract,  the  court 
will  not  decree  it,  unless  he  submits  to  such  changes  or 
compensation  as  the  court,  in  view  of  the  circumstances, 
thinks  he  ought  to  submit  to,*  and,  where  the  plaintiff 
in  a  bill  for  specific  performance,  alleges  an  agreement 
with  ijarol  variations  in  favor  of  the  defendant,  the  court 
will  decree  performance  even  though  the  defendant  sets 
up  the  statute  in  defence.*  Where  the  defendant  relies 
on  a  parol  variation  of  a  written  contract  as  a  defence, 
he  must  prove  such  part  performance  of  the  agreement 
as  altered,  as  would  induce  the  cornet  to  enforce  it  as  an 
original,  independent  agreement.' 

Sec.  193.   Where  anything  remains  to  be  fixed  or  decided 


1  In  the  case  last  cited  from 
Viner's  Abr.,  W  leased  a  house  to 
N  for  eleven  years,  and  agreed  that 
£20  might  be  laid  out  on  it  in  re- 
pairs, and  the  agreement  was  put 
m  writing  and  signed  and  sealed 
by  the  j^irties.  N  repaired  the 
house,  and  finding  that  it  would 
take  much  more  tnan  £20  told  W 
the  facts,  and  that  he  would  ^o  on 
and  lay  out  more  money,  if  he 
would  enlarge  the  term  to  twenty 
years,  or  add  fourteen,  or  as  many 
as  N  should  think  fit.  W  replied 
that  they  would  not  fall  out  about 
that ;  and  afterwards  said  that  he 
would  enlarge  the  term,  without 
mentioning  any  certain  term,  and, 
upon  a  question  being  raised  wheth- 
er this  new  agreement  made  by 
parol,  which  varied  from  the  writ- 
ten agreement,  should  be  carried 
into  execution, not witlistanding  the 
Statute  of  Frauds,  the  court  held 


that  it  was  a  new  agreement,  and 
laying  out  the  rnmiey  was  a  part 
performance  of  it,  and  should  be 
carried  into  execution. 

*  Long  V.  Fletcher,  2  Eq.  Cas. 
Abr.  5. 

«  Lineham  v.  Cotter,  7Ir.  Eq.  176. 

^  Darlington  v.  Hamilton,  1  Kay, 
650  ;  Madely  v.  Booth,  2  DeQ.  &  S. 
718 ;  Beeston  v.  Stutley,  27  L.  J. 
Ch.  156. 

*  Browne  v.  Sligo,  10  Ir.  Ch.  1 ; 
Barnard  v.  Cane,  26  Beav.  258; 
Jaynes  v.  Stotham,  8  Atk.  888; 
Paintor  v.  Nimby,  11  Hare,  20; 
Hanbury  v.  Litchfield,  2  My.  &  K. 
629  ;  Cleaton  v.  Gower.  Finch,  164- 

*  Martin  v.  Pycroft,  2  DeG.  M.  & 
G.  785;  Middleton  v.  Greenwood. 
2  DeG.  J.  &  S.  142 

'  Legal  V.  Miller,  2  Ves.  299 ;  Price 
v.  Dyer,  17  Ves.  356,  864  •  RoWn- 
son  V.  Page,  8  Russ.  121 ;  Datrt  V. 
&  P.  669. 


t 
:   h 

i 

■  ti 

I    SI 

;  t< 

'  a] 

St 

d 


11 
tl 
f. 

8 
f 

e 
t 
1 

1 


s 
( 
J 

\ 


■i 


CHAP.  XXIV.]         SPEcmo  Peefoemanck.  869 

by  third  persons.— If  the  amount  of  premium  or  rent  to  be 
paid,  or  any  other  material  point,  is  by  the  agreement 
left  to  be  determined  by  third  persons,  as  by  arbitrators 
or  surveyors,  and  that  has  not  been  done  before  suit,  the 
court  will  not  decree  specific  performance,  having  no 
power  to  compel  such  third  persons  to  perform  their  duty. 
It  therefore  treats  the  contract  as  too  imperfect  to  be  spec- 
ially enforced.'  But  after  such  matter  has  been  so  deter- 
mined the  contract  may  be  enforced  by  decree,  even 
where  the  sum  fixed  appears  to  be  exorbitant,  no  fraud, 
mistake  or  miscarriage  being  proved.'  Thus  B  agreed 
to  grant  a  lease  to  W  as  soon  as  W  should  have  built  a 
house  with  the  npcessary  out-buildings  on  the  land,  of 
the  value  of  l,400i.  at  the  least,  "according  to  a  plan  to 
be  submitted  to  apd  approved  by  B."  W  agreed  to  build 
such  house  and  take  the  lease ;  no  plan  was  submitted 
to  or  approved  by  B,  but  he  was  ready  and  willing  to 
approve  of  any  reasonable  plan ;  under  such  circum- 
stances, a  bill  filed  by  B  for  a  specific  performance,  was 
dismissed  with  costs.' 

Sec.  194.  When  contract  oonditional  on  lessor's  ability.— 
If  a  contract  for  a  lease  is  made  conditional  on 
the  lessor's  ability  to  grant  it,  a  bill  for  a  specific  per- 
formance cannot  be  supported  without  proof  of  the  les- 
sor's ability  ;  or  that  he  has  received  part  of  the  agreed 
premium,  and  interest  on  the  balance,  and  so  in  effect  is 
estopped  himself  from  relying  on  the  condition.*  But 
the  plaintiff  may  be  entitled  to  an  equitable  hen  on  the 
land  for  the  sums  expended  on  the  faith  of  the  agreement, 
J.       with  interest  thereon,  and  to  consequential  relief.* 


S. 


1: 
i; 

8; 
0: 

K. 
i-l- 

in- 
V, 


Sec.  195.     Where  intended  lessor  has  no  sufficient  title.— 
On  the  other  hand,  if  a  party  agrees  to  let  an  estate,  and 

1  Milnes  t.  Grey,  14  Yes.  450 ;  Blackett  v.  Bates,  84  L.  J.  Ch.  615. 

Darby  v.  Whittaker,  4  Drew,  134 ;  *  Brace  v.  Wehnert,  25  B^av.  848. 

Tillettv.  Charing  Cro68  Bridge  Co.,  *  Abbott  v.  Blair,  8  W.  R.  672. 

26  Beav.  419 ;  Fi^,  ss.  215.  See  also  Bauman  v.  Matthews,  4  L.  T.  N. 

Collins  V.  Collins,  28  L.  J.  Ch.  184 ;  S.  783. 

Jackson  y.  Jackson,  1  Sm.  &  GifT.  ^  Middleton  v.   Magnay,  2  H  & 

184.  M.  288  ;  12  W.  R.  706  ;  Hindley  v. 

«  Collier  v.  Mason,  25  Beav.  200 ;  Emery,  L.  R.  1  Eq.  52. 


Ormes    t.    Beadle,    2   Giff.    166; 


24 


370 


Agreement. 


[§  196. 


files  a  bill  for  the  specific  performance  of  the  agreement, 
it  will  be  dismissed  with  costs,  if,  in  the  course  of  the 
suit^  it  should  appear  that  the  intended  lessor  had  a  de- 
fective title ;  even  though  the  objections,  on  which  the 
refusal  to  take  the  lease  was  grounded,  were  frivolous 
and  untenable. '  Where  the  lessor's  consent  or  license  is 
necessary  to  an  assignment  of  a  lease,  it  is  the  vendor's 
duty  to  obtain  it."  If  he  cannot  do  so  before  the  com- 
mencement of  a  suit  for  a  specific  performance,  he  can- 
not maintain  the  suit,"  and,  where  it  appears  from  the 
bill  that  the  plaintiff  if  unable,  from  causes  which  he 
cannot  control^  to  make  a  good  title,  the  plaintiff  cannot 
bring  the  cause  to  a  hearing  upon  the  mere  chance  that 
he  may  by  that  time  be  in  a  situation  to  sue  the  defendant.  * 

Sec.  196.  Where  the  oontxaot  is  unoertaixL.— If  the  con- 
tract is  uncertain,  that  is,  if  it  is  impossible  to  say  pre- 
cisely what  either  party  was  to  do,  or  whether  he  has 
done  it,  it  cannot  be  specifically  enforced.  Thus,  where 
an  agreement  for  a  lease  provided  that  the  defendant 
would  take  the  house  if  put  into  thorough  repair  and  the 
drawing-room  was  "handsomely  decorated-according  to 
the  present  style,"  the  court  held  that  it  waSs  too  uncer- 
tain to  be  specifically  enforced. '  But  if  the  intended  ten- 
ant takes  possession  under  the  agreement  and  brings  a 
bill  for  specific  performance,  the  court  will  decree  per- 
formance, with  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  the  condition 
has  been  performed. 

Sec.  197.  Common  oovenantB.— The  court  will  not  de- 
cree the  specific  performance  of  common  covenants,  as 
husbandry  covenants,'  or  covenants  to  repair,'  except 
under  peculiar  circumstances,*  nor  to  lay  out  a  certain 


>  Bascomb  t.  [Phillips,  29  L.  J. 
Ch.  880. 

*  Long  y.  Bowring,  10  Jur.  N.  S. 
668. 

'  Bermingham  v.  Sheridan,  88 
L.  J.  Ch.  571 ;  Forrer  v.  Nash,  11 
Jut.  N.  S.  789. 

*  Reeves  t.  Greenwich  Tanning 
Ck>.,2H.  &M.  54. 

» Taylor  v.  Partington,  7  DeQ.  M. 


&  G.  828 ;  Jeffrys  v.  Stephens,  6 
Jur.  N.  S.  947. 

•  Saumda  t.  lawf ord,  4  GifF.  42 ; 
Faulkner  v.  Llewellyn,  12  W.  R. 
198 ;  Norris  t.  Jackson,  8  GifF.  896. 

1  Rayner  v.  Stone,  2  Eden.  128. 

•  London  v.  Nash,  1  Ves.  Jr.  12.  J. 

•  Backett  v.  Bates,  2  B.  &  SfJT 
270.  7- 


i 


CHAP.  XXIV.]      Specific  Performance. 


371 


amount  in  buildings/  such  covenants  being  regarded  as 
too  uncertain  and  indefinite  for  the  court  to  carry  them 
out.*  The  rule  is  that  specific  performance  is  decreed 
only  where  the  plaintiff  wants  the  time  in  specie,  and 
cannot  have  it  any  other  way." 

Sec.  198.  Not  of  part  of  a  oontraot.— Ezoeptions.— The 
court  will  not  decree  specific  piBrformance  of  part  of  a 
contract,*  unless  the  residue  has  been  already  performed,* 
or  the  unperformed  part  is  separable  and  divisible  from  the 
the  rest,  and  of  itself  forms  a  complete  contract.  Thus, 
where  the  owner  of  a  plot  of  ground  agi*eed  to  grant  a 
lease  of  it  to  A  as  soon  as  the  latter  had  erected  a  villa 
thereon ;  but  it  was  stipulated  that  if  A  should  not  per- 
form the  agreement  on  his  part,  the  agreement  for  a  lease 
was  to  be  void,  and  that  the  owner  might  re-enter :  A 
was  to  insure  in  a  particular  way,  and  he  was  to  have 
the  option  of  purchasing  the  fee  within  two  years,  upon 
certain  terms.  A  erected  the  villa,  but  insured  ina  wrong 
o£Sce  and  in  a  wrong  name  :  it  was  held,  that  the  con- 
tract for  a  lease  was  independent  of  the  option  to  pur- 
chase, and  that  notwithstanding  the  forfeiture  of  the 
first,  the  latter  still  subsisted,  and  a  specific  performance 
of  the  contract  for  sale  was  decreed.*  In  such  a  case 
the  title  must  be  produced  and  proved  in  the  usual  man- 
ner, in  the  absence  of  any  express  stipulation  to  the 
contrary.^  A  tenant  for  years,  with  an  option  of  pur- 
chasing the  fee,  must  not  only  give  due  notice,  but  also 
on  the  proper  day,  pay  or  tender  the  purchase  money  ; 
that  being  a  condition  precedent.*    Such  a  notice  may 


'  Moeeley  v.  Virgin,  191,  8  Ves. 
184.      . 

'  See  ante,  Sec.  194. 

'Paxton  V.  Newman,  2  Sm.  & 
Giflf.  487;  Errington  v.  Aynesley, 

2  Dick.  692  ;  Lucas  v.  Commerford, 

3  Bro.  C.  C.  186. 

^  Fry  on  Specific  Performance, 
Chap.  XV.;  Ogden  v.  Fossick,  82 
L.  J.  Ch.  78;  Sk^ottish  North-East- 
em  Railw.  Co.  v.  Stewart,  8  Macq. 
(Sc.)  382. 

'Hope  T.   Hope,  22  Beav.  851. 

ae  party  seeking  to  enforce  an 
reement  must  show  that  he  has 


performed,  or  has  offered  to  do  so. 
Thorp  V.  Pettit,  16  N.  J.  Eq.  188; 
Boone  v.  Iron  Co.,  17  How.  (U.  S.) 
840 ;  Tyler  v.  McCurdle,  17  Miss. 
280  ;  Vamum  v.  Bahcock,  18  Iowa 
194 ;  Satterfield  v.  KeUer,  14  La. 
An.  604 ;  or  show  an  excuse  for  his 
failure.  Goodell  v.  Field,  14  Vt. 
448 ;  White  v.  Yaw,  7  id.  867. 

«  Green  v.  Low,  22  Beav.  625. 

'  Welchman  v.  Spinks,  5  L.  T. 
N.  S.  885. 

«  Weston  V.  Collins,  11  Jur,  N.  S. 
190;  Ld.  Ranelagh  v.  Melton,  2 
Dr.  &  Sm.  278. 


ffiS  AOREBUENT.  [§  199. 

be  given  to  the  infant  heir  of  the  lessor,  and  will  con- 
stitute a  vahd  contract,  which  may  be  enforced  in  equity, 
notwithstanding  the  infant  cannot  give  a  discharge  for 
the  purchase  money.' 

Sec.  199.  After  unneoessary  delay  by  plaititiS— Where 
one  party  to  an  agreement  trifles  or  shows  backwardness 
in  performing  his  part  of  it,  equity  will  not  decree  a 
specific  performance  in  his  favor,  especially  if  the  drcum- 
stances  and  situation  of  the  other  party  are  materially 
altered  in  the  mean  time.'  As  a  general  rule,  a  party 
cannot  call  upon  a  court  of  equity  for  this  relief,  unless 
he  has  shown  himself  ready,  desirous,  prompt  and  eager.' 
Where  there  has  been  considerable  unnecessary  delay  on 
the  part  of  the  plaintiff,  specific  performance  will  be 
refused,'  especially  where  the  contract  is  in  anywise 
unilateral.*  "It  would  be  dangerous  to  permit  parties 
to  1^  by,  with  a  view  to  see  whether  the  contract  will 
prove  a  gaining  or  losing  bargain,  and,  according  to  the 
result,  either  abandon  it,  or,  considering  time  as  having 
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter,  to  claim  a  specific  per- 
formance.' But  delay,  even  for  a  long  period,  may  be 
excused,  where  the  tenant  has  entered  into  possession, 
and  paid  rent  under  the  agreement ; '  or  where,  under 
the  circumstances,  a  strict  application  of  the  rule 
would  work  injustice,  the  rule  would  be  relaxed ;'  or 
where  the  objection  on  the  ground  of  delay  has  been 
waived ;'  and,  where  a  person  is  let  into  possession  under 

'  WoodB  T.  Hyde,  81  L.  J.  Ch.  296,  Haan,  9  Hare,  206  ;  Eads  v.  WD- 

*  HajBB  V.  daryll.  1  Bro.  P.  C.  liame,  4  DeG.  M.  &  G.  691 ;  Wal- 

126;  Nonis  t,  Jackson,  IJ.  &  W.  tets  v.  Northern  Coal  Mining  Co., 

819;  Green  v.  Covilland,   10  Cal.  5  DeC    "    °-  "    """  -  "-- ^ 

817;  Ewing  t.  Beauchamp,  6  B.  Than 
Mon,  (Ky.)  422  ;  Nelson  v.  Hager-  «  Fi 
town  Bajik,  27  Md,  51 ;  Johnson  v.        •  Al 

HopMns,  IB  Iowa  40 ;  BoBton,  &c. ,  335 ; 

E.  R.  Co.  V.  Bartlett,  10  Gray  N.  S. 
(MasB.)  384 ;   Pickering  v.  Kcker-         '  81: 

ing.  88  N.  H.  400.  Carto 

'  Milward  t.   Earl  of  Thanet,  S  Clark 
Vea.  ^720,   n.  ;  2    Tudor  L.  C.   Eq.         'VI 

443;  (2ded.).  Jonee 

'Heaphy  -r.  Hill,  2  Sim.  &  Stu.         'Ki 

26 ;  Soulhcomb  v.  Bp.  of  Exeter,  6  Euba 

Hare,    218,  218;    Cnesterman   t.  848. 


CHAP,  XXIV.]      Specific  Performance. 


373 


a  contract,  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  each  party  is  satis- 
fied, until  one  of  them  moves  towards  the  complete 
execution  of  the  contract.*  But  if  a  tenant,  who  has  en- 
tered into  possession  under  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  has 
committed  waste,  or  violated  the  covenants  to  be  con- 
tained in  the  lease,  the  contract  will  be  enforced  upon 
his  application,  particularly  if,  under  the  lease,  the  lessor 
would  be  entitled  to  re-entipr.*  But,  in  order  to  prevent 
a  decree  in  his  favor,  the  breaches  must  be  clearly  and 
satisfactorily  established,'  or  the  court  will  decree  per- 
formance by  the  execution  of  an  ante-dated  lease  and 
leave  the  landlord  to  proceed  at  law  by  ejectment.*  In 
the  case  of  an  agreement  where  the  parties  have  expressly 
made  time  of  the  essence  of  the  contract,*  or  where,  from 
the  conduct  of  the  parties,*  or  from  the  fluctuating 
nature  of  the  property,  it  is  evident  that  the  parties  so 
intended,  the  court  will  regard  time  as  of  the  essence  of 
the  contract,  and  will  refuse  to  enforce  it  upon  the  appli- 
cation of  a  party  who  has  been  guilty  of  laches  in  that 
respect.^ 

Sec.  200.  Oral  agreementpartly  performed,— An  action  at 
law  will  not  lie  in  favor  of  either  party,  upon  an  oral 
contract  for  a  lease  for  a  term  exceeding  that  which  by 
statute  may  be  granted  by  parol  *  which  is  some  of  the 
States  in  one  year  and  in  others  three  years.  But  a  court 
of  equity  will  decree  a  specific  performance  of  such  con- 
tracts, notwithstanding  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  when  there 


1  MiUer  v.  Bear,  8  Paige  Ch.  (N. 
Y.)466 ;  Scarlett  v.  Hunter,  3  Jones 
Eq.  (N.  CO  84  ;  Ashmore  v.  Evans, 
11  N.  J.  Eq.  151 ;  Haflfner  v.  Dick- 
son, 2  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  42. 

*  Weatherall  v.  Geering,  18  Ves. 
504;  Nunn  v.  Truscott,  3  DeG. 
&  S.  304  3  HiU  V.  Barcley,  18  Ves. 
63 ;  Lewis  v.  Bond,  18  Beav.  85 ; 
Kesbitt  y.  Meyer,  1  Swanst.    228. 

'  Pain  V.  Coombs,  3  Sm.  &  Giff. 
449 ;  Blackett  y.  Bates,  2  H.  &  M. 
270. 

*  lilley  y.  Leigh,  3  DeG.  &  J. 
204;  Poyntz  y.  Fortune,  27  Beay. 
393. 

V^Bomier  v.   Caldwell,   8  Mich, 
fib ;  Primm  y.  Barton,  18  Tex.  206. 


•Pennock  y.  Ela,  41  N.  H.  189 
Jones  y.    Robbins,    29  Me.    351 
Younger  y.   Welch,  22  Tex.  417 
Keller  y.  Fisher,  7  Ind.  718 ;  Wal- 
ton y.  Wilson,  80  Miss.  876  ;  Hoff- 
man  y.  Hummer,  17  N.  J.  Eq. 
268. 

'Macbryde  y.  Weekes,  Beay, 
683;  Potter  y.  Tuttle,  22  Conn. 
512 ;  Steele  y.  Biggs,  22  HI.  643 ; 
Baldwin  y.  Van  Vorst,  10  N.  J. 
Eq.  677 ;  Daloret  y.  Rothschild,  1 
Sim.  &  Stu.  690 ;  2  Tudor's  Lead- 
ing Cas.  in  Eq.  458. 

^Clarke  y.  Fuller,  16  C.  B.  N. 
B.  24 ;  Kelly  y.  Webster,  12  C.  B. 
282;  Sayery  v.  Tumley,  6  H.  & 
N.289. 


S74  Aqbubuxnt.  [§  201. 

has  been  svch  a  part  performance  of  the  agreement  that, 
to  refuse  it  would  work  a  fraud  upon  the  party  seeking  its 
specific  execution.'  But  in  order  to  warrant  the  exercise 
of  this  power,  the  contract  must  be  clearly  established  by 
proof,  or  be  admitted  by  the  pleadings,'  and  in  a  case 
where  but  one  witness  testiiied  to  part  performance,  and 
the  agreement  was  denied  by  the  answer,  specific  pei- 
formance  of  a  verbal  agreement  to  convey  lands  was 
denied.*  But  where  there  is  but  one  witness,  yet,  if  his 
evidence  is  supported  by  collateral  circumstances,  it  will 
prevail  against  a  denial  of  the  agreement  by  the  answer  ;* 
but,  where  there  Is  the  testimony  of  only  one  witness  and 
no  corroboration  thereof  by  collateral  circumstances,  and 
the  agreement  is  positively  and  nnqualifledly  denied  by 
the  answer,  a  speciiic  performance  of  the  agreement  will 
not  be  decreed,*  and  particularyisthisthe  case  where  the 
denial  in  the  answer  is  in  any  measure  sustained  by  col- 
lateral circumstances/  and  it  must  also  clearly  appear 
that  the  party  seeking  relief  has  partly  performed  snch 
agreement.' 

Sec.  201.  Wliat  oonetitntea  part  performance.— Questions 
of  this  character  frequently  arise  in  contracts  for  the  sale 
of  lands,  but  may  be  said  to  be  very  imf  requent  in  the 
case  of  agreements  for  leases.  As  an  invariable  rule,  it 
may  be  said  that,  in  order  to  amount  to  part  performance, 
an  act  must  have  been  done  unequivoccUly  referred  to,  and 
resulting  from,  the  agreement,  and  such  that  an  inference 
that  some  agreement  existed  would  result  from  the  very 

'  Dickeraon  v.  Chrieinan,  88  Mo.  Brown,  10  N.  J.  Eg.  808 ;  Bnntmi 

184;   Ham   v.  Goodrich,  88  N.  H.  v.  Smith,  40  N.   H.  8B3;  Willdn- 

32;     Pitzgerald,   Ac.    v.   Britt,  43  bod  t.  WilkinBon,  1  Deeeau  iS.  C) 

Iowa  498;  Oooee  v.  Jones,  73  IlL  201 
608 ;   TeEQple  t.  JohnBon,  71  111.  13 ;         • 

Beeee  v.  Reeee,  41  Md,  654 ;  Smith  (Vi 
V.  CrandaU,  30  Md.  482 ;  Aday  v.         * 

EchalH.  18  Ala.  853 ;   Ejre  v.  Eyre,  80 

19  N.  J.  Ea.  103;    Arquello  v.  Ed-  B, 
iuKOT,   10   Gal.    150;     Johnston   v,         ' 

Johnaton,  6    Watts.  (Penn.)  S70;  ITS 

Steel  V.  Payne,  42  Ga.  207.  Le: 

'  Mortal  T,  Lyons,  8  Ir.  Ch.  118;         • 
Morphett  v.  Jonee,  1  Swanst.  173 ;        ' 

Eyre    v.    Eyre,  ante;    Smith    t.  Nu 
Crandall,  20  Md.  482;  Wallace  v. 


•fcHAP.  XXIV.]      Specific  Pebfobmance. 


876 


fact  that  the  act  tvas  done,^  aifd  then  parol  evidence  is  ad- 
missible to  show  what  the  agreement  is."  Delivery  of  the 
possession  of  the  premises  by  the  landlord,  and  taking 
possession  thereof  by  the  tenant,  and  payment  of  rent, 
has  been  held  sufficient ; "  so  an  entry  and  expenditure  of 
considerable  sums  in  repairs  or  improvements,  with  the 
acquiescence  of  the  landlord,  is  treated  as  part  perform- 
ance within  the  rule.*    But  mere  possession  by  the  ten- 


I . 


5r 


*  Frame  v.  Dawson,  14  Ves.  827 ; 
ex  parte  Hooper,  19  id.  479; 
Morphett  t.  Jones,  1  Swanst.  181. 
T?ie  acts  must  be  such  as  ccndd  have 
been  done  with  no  other  view  or  de- 
sign than  to  perform  Vie  agree- 
ment, and  not  such  a^  are  merely 
introductorv  or  anciUiary  to  it. 
Gunter  v.  Hulse^,  Amb.  58iS.  The 
act  must  unequivocally  refer  to, 
and  result  from,  the  agreement. 
Mofaana  v.  Blunt,  20  Iowa  142; 
Rosenthal  v.  Freehanger,  26  Md. 
75.  And  they  must  not  only  be  ref- 
erable to,  but  consistent  with,  the 
contract.  Tompkinson  v.  Straight, 
17  C.  B.  697 ;  Nunn  v.  Fabian,  L. 
R  1  Ch.  Ap.  441 ;  Powell  v.  Love- 
grove,  8  DeG.  M.  &  G.  857 ;  Price 
T.  Salusbury ,  82  Beav.  446 ;  Faulk- 
ner V.  Llewellyn,  81  L.  J.  Ch.  549. 

'  See  note  to  Sec.  201,  supra, 
>  Li  Kine  v.  Balfe,  2  Pall  &  B. 
848,  where  a  landlord  sought  spe- 
cific performance  of  a  parol  con- 
tract for  a  lease,  against  a  tenant 
who  had  entered  and  paid  rent 
under  it.  Lord  Manners  said; 
**  How  is  it  possible  to  refer  this 
possession  to  any  other  title  but 
this  agreement,  and  what  is  the 
situation  in  which  this  plaintiff  is 
placed  by  the  conduct  of  the  de- 
fendant ?  The  defendant  could  at 
any  time  enforce  this  agreement 
against  the  plaintiff ;  he  would  be 
protected  in  this  court  against  an 
ejectment,  and  from  being  treated 
as  a  trespasser ;  and  the  plaintiff 
was  by  the  contract  and  the  acts  of 
the  defendant,  disabled  from  deal- 
ing with  any  one  else  for  the  land." 
See  also,  Bowens  v.  Cator,  4  Ves. 
91 ;  Boardman  v.  Mastyn.  6  id.  470 ; 
Wills  V.  Stradling,  8  id.  881 ;  Pain 
v.  Coombs,  4  DeG.  &  J.  84. 

*  Shillibeer  v.  Jarvis,  8  DeG.  M. 
&  G.  79 ;  Dunn  v.  Spurrier,  7  Ves. 
^1.  Inorder  to  bring  a  case  within 


the  exemption  ui)on  this  ground, 
it  is  not  necessary  that  the  landlord 
should  have  actively  promoted  the 
lessee's  expenditures  or  improve- 
ments. It  is  enough  if  he  knew 
of  them  and  passively  encouraged 
him  in  making  them  under  an  er- 
roneous impression  that  he  had 
title  under  tne  contract,  when  the 
lessor  must  have  known  that  the 
lessee  would  not  have  made  them 
except  upon  an  expectation  that 
no  objection  would  oe  thrown  in 
the  way  of  his  enjoyment  of  them, 
and  under  such  circumstances  a 
specific  performance  will  be  de- 
creed. Dunn  V.  Spurrier,  7  Ves. 
281 ;  Seagood  v.  Meale,  Prec.  Chan. 
561 ;  Marshall  v.  Queenborough,  1 
Sim.  &  S.  520 ;  Smith  v.  Turner, 
Prec.  Chan.  661 ;  Lester  v.  Fox- 
craft,  CaUes  P.  C.  108;  Gregory  v. 
Mi^eU,  18  Ves.  828  ;  Whitchurch 
V.  Beris,  2  Bro.  C.  C.  566,  and 
merely  **  looking  on,**  is  generally 
as  strong  a  circumstance  as  actKe 
encouragement  if  the  tenant  acted 
upon  it.  Dunn  v.  Spurrier,  ante. 
JxL  Sutherlfimd  v.  Briggs,  IHare, 
26,  the  plaintiff  was  the  lessee  of  a 
house  and  some  cottages  adjoining 
for  a  term  of  thirty-one  years,  at  a 
rent  of  60/.,  and  was  under  a  cov- 
enant to  take  down  two  of  the  cot- 
tages, and  build  a  house  upon  the 
site,  with  suitable  offices.  He  was 
also  tenant  from  year  to  year  of  an 
adjoining  meadow,  belonging  to  a 
different  proprietor,  at  a  rent  of  9/. 
The  lessor  of  the  house  became  the 
purchaser  of  the  meadow,  and  a 
treaty  proceeded  between  him  and 
the  plamtiff  with  regard  to  certain 
proposed  repairs  and  alterations  in 
the  nouse,  in  consequence  of  which, 
the  house  was  made  to  project 
over  the  meadow,  part  of  which 
was  attached  to  the  demised  premi- 
ses, the  costo  and  expenses  far  ex« 


s. 


^*^' 


876 


Agbeemekt. 


[§  201. 


ant,  standing  alone,  is  not  sufficient,  because  his  posses- 
sion may  be  referred  to  the  implied  tenancy  arising  from 


ce#ding  the  sum  he  had  originally 
covenanted  to  lay  out,  being  paid 
by  the  plaintiff  and  lessor  in  nearly 
equal     moieties.    The     following 
memorandum  was  then  drawn  up 
by  lessor,  and  signed  by  the  plaint- 
iff : —  "Mr.  Frampton   having  ad- 
vanced me  the  sum  of  8502.  to- 
wards the  additions  and  improve- 
ments lately   made  by  me  to  the 
house  and  premises  at  Hayes  in  my 
occupation,  in  addition  to  1502.  pre- 
viously allowed  me  for  rebuilain^ 
the  adjoining  cottage,  it  is  agreed 
that  the  rent  of  69/.  now  paid  for 
the  house,  &c.,  and  field,  shall  be 
increased  to  80Z.  a  ye^r,  clear  of  all 
deductions  whatsoever,  commenc- 
ing from  Christmas  last,  dated  the 
8d  day  of  February,  1886.— A.  Suth- 
erland."   An    ejectment  for   the 
meadow    having    been     brought 
against  the  plaintiff,  he  filed  his 
bill,  praying  a  declaration  by  the 
court  that  he  w^as  entitled  to  the 
tenancy  and  occupation  of  it  for 
the  residue  of  the  term  of  thirty- 
one  years  which   he  had  in   the 
house,  and  for  an  injunction  ;  and 
it  was  decreed  accordingly.    The 
Vice  Chancellor  observed,  that  if 
the  act  of  extending  the  house,  in 
which  the  tenant  had  an  interest 
for  a  term  of  years,  into  the  mead- 
ow^  with  the  landlord's  consent, 
was   not   evidence  of  a  contract 
between  them,  he  knew  not  what 
act  on  the  part  of  a  tenant  in  pos- 
session of  property  could  possibly 
be  so  considered ;  and  he  held  that, 
notwithstanding  the  memorandum 
of  the  8d  of  February,  1836,  did 
not  mention  the  term  during  which 
the    plaintiff    was    to   hmd    the 
meadow,  yet  enough  was  proved 
to  support  the   allegation  in  the 
bill,  that  the  time  for  which  he 
"was  to  hold  it  was  to  be  commen- 
surate with  his  lease  of  the  house  ; 
and  that  the  reservation  of  one  en- 
tire rent  of  80/.  for  the  whole  and 
every   part   of    the    consolidated 
property  was  sufficient  to  deter- 
mine the  question,  and  show  that 
the  whole  was  to  endure  for  the 
same  period ;  and  he  further  held, 
that  the  justice  of  the  case  would 
not  be  satisfied  by  giving  to  the 
plaintiff  so  much  of  the  meadow 


as  the  house  stood  upon,  aa  the 
act  of  building  part  of  the  hooae 
upon  it  was  an  act  affecting  the 
wnole    tenement,    namely,     the 
meadow,  and  not  that  pul;  of  it 
odIv  on  which  the  house  stood.     It 
is  almost  needless  to  observe,  that 
if  no  expense  be  incurred  by  the 
lessee,  a  bare  promise  of  a'  lease, 
being  in  direct  contravention  of 
the  statute,  cannot  be   enforced. 
Seagood  v.  Meale,  Prec.  Ch.  561 ; 
Smith  V.  Turner,  cited,  Prec.  Ch. 
661.    Although  courts   of  equity 
are  disposed  to  go  every  possible 
length  to  assist  a  party  m  obtain- 
ing reimbursement  of  expenditure 
upon  another's   property,  of   the 
benefit  of  which  he  may  have  been 
deprived  by  the  exercise  of  a  legal 
right,  as  by  the  determination  of  a 
tenancy  ftom  year  to   year,  yet 
there  is  no  case  in  which  a  lessee, 
either  of  a  term,  or  from  year  to 
year    making   any   improvement 
upon  the  estate  in  his  possession, 
though  which  the  complete  knowl- 
edge  of   the  landlord,  has  been 
held  entitled,  as  against  that  land- 
lord, to  have  his  lease  prolonged 
until   he   shall  obtain  reimburse- 
ment for  the  improvements  he  lias 
made ;  for  he  has  a  title  of  which 
he  knows  the  duration.    He  is  not 
under  a  mistake  with  r^ard  to 
the  nature  of  his  title.    He  may 
perhaps  be  guilty  of  ^eat  impru- 
dence, if  the  expectation  that  hia 
lease  will  be  renewed,  or  his  pos- 
session from  year  to  year  continued, 
prove  unfounded,  but  the  faUure 
of  his  expectations  gives  him  no 
right  either  to  a  new  lease  or  the 
renewal  of  an  old  one.    Pilling  v. 
Armitage,  12  Ves.  65.    But  if  the 
landlord  enters  into  an  arrange- 
ment with  a  tenant  for  improve- 
ments, and  sanctions  them  as  an 
advance  by  the  tenant  upon  a  fu- 
ture term,  equity  will  compel  him 
to  keep  faith  with  the  tenant,  Pil- 
ling V.  Armitage,   ante.    And  it 
seems  that,  even  though  no  specific 
agreement  had  been   made,   one 
would  be  implied  in  his  favcr  until 
he  had  had  the  fair  benefit  of  his  im- 
provements. Sutherland  v.  Briggs, 
ante.    The  effect  of  acquiescence 
on  the  part  of  the  landlord  is  well 


■I 


1  j 


■*> 


CHAP,  xxiv.]        Past  Pebfoemanom. 


877 


an  entry  by  the  landlord's  permission/  nor  does  the  ex- 
penditure of  money  upon  a  farm  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  husbandry,  amount  to  part  performance,  because  it  is 
referable  to  his  implied  tenancy/  nor  does  mere  posses- 
sion retained  by  a  tenant  after  the  expiration  of  a  former 
lease,  amount  to  part  performance  of  a  parol  agreement 
made  by  the  landlord  to  renew ; '  but  if  the  agreement  is 
based,  upon  an  increased  rent/  or  if  the  tenant  goes  on 
and  makes  extensive  improvements  that  are  inconsistent 
with  the  old  relation,  the  rule  is  otherwise.*  And  so  gen- 
erally, possession  and  special  expenditures  by  the  tenant 
on  the  faith  of  a  parol  agreement  to  grant  a  lease  for  a 


illustrated  by  a  Connecticut  case« 
which,  although,  not  involving  a 
discussion  of  the  question  of  part 
performance,  yet  shows  that  the 
landlord  cannot  tacitly  permit  the 
tenant  to  make  large  outlays  for  a 
certain  purpose  and  then  seek  to 
prevent  him  from  availing  him- 
self thereof.  Mallev  V.  Thalheimer. 
44  Conn.  41.  In  tnis  case  a  B  had 
a  power  of  attorney  to  lease  the 
plaintifTs  real  estate,  collect  rents 
and  institute  all  necessary  legal 
proceedings  that  he  should  think 
necessary.  Under  this  power  he 
had  the  care  of  a  certain  premises 
leased  by  the  plaintiff  to  the  de- 
fendant, the  lease  limiting  the  use 
to  the  keeping  of  a  lager  beer  sa- 
loon, and  the  lessee  covenanting  to 
use  the  premises  for  no  other  pur- 
pose. During  the  term  the  defend- 
ant, at  a  considerable  expense, 
built  a  small  kitchen  in  the  rear 
and  fitted  up  a  restaurant  on  the 
premises.  B  knew  of  these  facts 
and  made  no  objections  until  two 
months  after  the  alterations  were 
completed.  He  then  brought  a 
bill  for  an  injunction  against  the 
use  of  the  premises  for  a  restaurant. 
The  court  held,  that  inasmuch  as, 
if  the  plaintiff  personally  had 
known  of  these  facts,  he  would 
have  been  estopped,  he  was  es- 
topped by  the  knowledge  of  B 
from  objecting  to  the  new  use. 

'  Wills  V.  Stradling,  8  Ves.  878 ; 
Morphett  v.  Jones,  1  Swanst.  181. 
But  where  the  entry  is  distinctly 
referable  to  the  agreement,  Ayles- 
ford's  Case,  2  Stra.  788  ;  Atwood 
T,  Barham,  2  Russ.  186 ;  Lacon  v. 


Mertins,  8  Atk.  4;  Boardman  v. 
Mastyn,  6  Ves.  470;  Morphett  v. 
Jones,  1  Wils.  100 ;  Gregory  v. 
Mighell,  18  Ves.  838,  it  has  been 
held  sufficient,  and  delivery  of 
possession  on  the  one  hand  and 
taking  it  upon  the  other  is  a  cer- 
tainly strong  and  marked  circum- 
stance to  take  a  case  out  of  the 
statute.  Wills  v.  Stradling,  8  Ves. 
878,  because  the  tenant  is  protected 
from  liability  as  a  trespasser,  and 
the  landlord  disabled  thereby  from 
dealing  with  any  other  person  in 
reference  to  the  land.  Kine  v. 
Balf  e,  2  Ball  &  B.  848.  But  in  no 
case  will  possession  itself  be 
enough,  untess  taken  under  the 
contract  and  with  a  view  to  its  part 
performaneet  Cole  v.  White,  cited, 
1  Bro.  C.  C,  409  ;  O'Rourke  v.  Per- 
cival,  2  BaU  &  B.  68 ;  Bairdes  v. 
Amhurst,  Free.  Ch.  402,  and  mere- 
ly introductory  or  anciUiary  acts, 
though  attended  with  expense,  are 
not  sufficient.  Whitbread  v. 
Brockhurst,  1  Bro.  C.  C.  412;  Frame 
V.  Dawson,  14  Ves.  886 ;  O'Reiley 
T.  Thompson,  2  Cox,  271 ;  Lindsay 
V.  Lynch,  2  Sch.  &  Lef.  1. 

*  Brennan  v.  Bolton,  2  Dru.  & 
W.  849. 

^Because  in  such  a  case,  his  pos- 
session may  be  referable  to  the  old 
lease,  and  does  not  unequivocally 
refer  to  and  result  from  the  agree- 
ment. Mohana  v.  Blunt,  20  Iowa, 
142 ;  Rosenthal  v.  Freeburgher,  26 
Md.  75. 

-^Nunn  V.  Fabian,  L.  R.  1  Ch. 
App.  85 ;  Wills  v.  Stradling,  ante. 

*  Spalding  v,  Couzelman,  80  Ma 
177. 


S78  AGBESacENTS.  [§  201, 

term,  are  sufficient  to  entitle  him  to  a  specific  perform- 
ance of  the  agreement,  although  the  landlord  denies  the 
agreement,'  as,  where  the  tenant  enters  upon  land  and 
clears  it  up  and  improves  it  to  an  extent  exceeding  the 
value  of  the  yearly  rent,'  or  if  he  enters  and  builds  or 
causes  eacpensive  alterations  to  be  made.  .  Thus,  where  a 
tenant  under  a  parol  agreement  to  execute  a  lease  of  an 
unfinished  house  for  ten  yeare,  the  tenant  to  complete 
the  house  at  his  own  expense,  and  the  tenant  entered 
and  completed  the  house  and  paid  rent  for  some  time,  an 
execution  of  the  lease  was  decreed  by  the  court.'  The 
ground  upon  which  the  court  proceeds  in  these  cases  is, 
that  after  such  acts  have  been  done,  or  expenses  incurred, 
it  would  be  fraudulent  and  inequitable  for  the  landlord 
to  withhold  a  lease.*  But  where  the  acts  done  by  the 
tenant  are  of  an  ordinary  character,  and  such  as  are  inci- ' 
dent  (o  an  ordinary  tenancy,  they  are  referred  to  that 
rather  than  to  the  agreement.  Yet  the  En^sh  courts  have 
gone  farther  in  this  direction  than  our  own,  and  are  not 
entirely  harmonious,  althou^  both  profess  to  be  gov* 
famed  by  the  same  general  rule.  In  at  least  one  English 
case,*  it  has  been  held  that,  possession  of  a  tenant  after 
the  expiration  of  his  term  under  an  agreement  for  a  re- 
newal lease  is  a  sufficient  part  performance  of  the  agree- 
ment ;  while  the  American  cases  hold  that  such  reten- 
tion of  possession  is  referable  to  the  old  tenancy,  and  af- 
fords no  ground  for  the  specific  performance  of  an  agree- 
ment to  renew,'  In  an  English  case,'  something  more 
than  a  retention  of  possession  under  such  an  agreement 
seemed  to  be  held  necessary,  but,  where  the  landlord  ver- 
bally agreed,  before  the  old  term  expired,  to  grant  the 

'  FsrreUo  v.    Davenport,  8  Giff.        '  Lii 

868.  Let.  1 

■  Morrison  v.  Peav,  21  Ark.  110.  886. 

•  Farley  v.  Stokes,   1   Pars.  Sei,        »  Do 

Cas.    (Peui.)    423;     Surcome    v.  945 
Peninger,  3  DeG.  M.  &  O.  071 :        ,  w„ 

SaTase  v.  Forier,  6  Vin.  Abr.  5S4,  n^„ 

SI.  «;  Toole  v.  Medlicott,  1  BaU  ^^^ 

;  B.   383 ;  Willa   v.    Stradline.   3  *"■  „ 

Ves.  878;  Mundy  v.  Joliffe,  5  My.  .  '*>' 

&  Cr.  167  ;  Sutherland  v.  Briggs,  1  Ap.  8( 
Hare,  36. 


CHAP.  XXIV.]        Pabt  Performance.  879 

tenant  a  renewal  term  of  twenty-one  years  of  an  increased 
rent,  but  died  before  the  lease  was  made,  and  the  tenant 
remained  in  possession  and  paid  one  quarter's  rent  at 
such  increased  rate^  it  was  held  such  a  part  performance 
as  entitled  him  to  a  specific  performance  of  the  contract. 
In  another  English  case,  where  an  agreement  in  writing 
for  a  three  years'  tenancy  reseryed  to  the  tenant  the  op- 
tion of  requiring  a  twenty-one  years'  lease  at  the  expira- 
tion of  the  prior  term,  the  Vice  Chancellor  appears  to 
have  considered  that  the  tenant's  verbal  notice  of  an 
intention  to  take  the  new  lease,  accompanied  by  reten- 
tion of  possession,  was  binding  upon  him.'  The  pos- 
session of  a  strai^r  under  an  express  or  implied  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,  is  a  sufficient  part  performance  thereof.' 
But  the  court  will  not  decree  a  specific  performance, 
although  possession  has  been  taken,  unless  the  terms  of 
the  contract  are  clearly  proved ; "  nor  if  any  of  the  terms 
are  uncertain.*  The  doctrine  of  part  performance  of  a 
parol  agreement  is  not  to  be  extended  by  the  court,  and 
it  is  inappUcable  in  a  case  where  a  trustee  has  a  power  to 
lease  at  the  request,  in  writing,  of  a  married  woman, 
which  has  not  been  made."  After  an  offer  had  been 
made  by  a  plaintiff  to  take  a  lease  of  a  farm  from  the 
the  defendant,  a  draft  was  prepared  by  the  defendant's 
solicitors,  and  approved  of  by  the  plaintiff  with  some 
alterations,  and  was  afterwards  altered  by  the  defendant 
himself,  and  left  by  him  with  his  solicitors,  for  the  pur- 
I)ose  of  its  being  ascertained  whether  the  plaintiff  would 
agree  to  the  alterations.  On  their  submitting  it  to  him 
he  agreed  to  the  alterations,  but  no  agreement  was 
signed.  A  part  of  the  terms  were,  that  the  plaintiff  should 
make  certain  repairs  before  the  lease  was  granted. 
The  plaintiff  was  put  into  possession  by  the  direction  of 
the  defendant's  solicitors,   and   made    some  repairs : — 

'  Beatson  t.   Nicholson,  6  Jur.  *  ReynoldB   v.  Waring,  1  You. 

620.  346  ;  Price  t.  Assheton,  1  Y.  &  G 

'Gregory    v.   Mighell,   18    Ves.  441. 

828 ;    Pain  v.   Coombs,  8  Sm.  &  *  Phillips  v.  Edwards,  88  Beav. 

Giff.  449.  440. 

»  Mortal  V.  Lyons,  8  Ir.  Ch.  R. 
112. 


S80  AgBEBUBHTS.  [§  202. 

held,  that  although  the  plaintiff  might  have  been  let  into 
possession  without  authority  from  the  defendant,  there 
was  a  sufficient  part  performance  to  take  the  case  out  of 
the  Statute  of  Frauds,  and  a  specific  performance  was 
decreed.'  A  agreed  to  grant  to  B  a  lease  of  a  public- 
house,  if  he  could  obtain  a  retail  licence  to  sell  spirits  in 
it.  B  entered  into  possession  of  the  premises,  and  a 
licence  was  afterwjirds  obtained,  but  ordy  on  the  verbal  ■ 
undertaking  of  B,  that  "no  excisable  liquors  should  be 
sold  for  consumption  on  the  premises."  B  refused  to 
execute  the  lease  when  tendered  to  him :  and  it  was  held, 
that  a  bill  by  A  for  specific  performance  of  the  agreement 
must  be  dismissed,  but  under  the  circumstances  without 
costs  and  without  prejudice  to  proceedings  at  law.* 
Where  the  plaintiff  and  the  defendant  entered  into  an 
agreement,  that  when  a  certain  house  belonging  to  the 
plaintiff  should  be  completed  and  finished  fit  for  habita- 
tion, the  plaintiff  would  grant  to  the  defendant  a  lease 
thereof  for  twenty-one  years,,  and  the  defendant  took 
possession  before  the  house  was  finished  and  occupied  it 
for  a  year,  but  refused  to  pay  rent  or  execute  the  lease 
imtil  the  house  was  completed  and  finished  fit  for  habita* 
tion  ;  upon  a  bill  brought  for  specific  performance  it  was 
refused  with  costs.'  In  all  cases,  in  order  to  secure  the 
specific  enforcement  of  an  oral  contract,  it  must  be  o£ 
such  a  nature,  so  definite  and  certain  in  all  essential 
details,  that,  if  in  writing,  the  court  would  decree  its  per- 
formance,* 

Sec.  202.  PartiesplBlntiffinaottoiiBfbr.— Defendants.— The 
lessor,  or  his  representatives  in  interest,  or  the  lessee,  or 
his  representatives  in  interest,  are  the  proper  persons  to 
bring  an  action  for  the  specific  pei 
ment  for  a  lease.    In  the  case  of  a  i 
and  the  contingent  remainder-ma 
the  inheritance  in  a  bill  for  specifii 

■  Shillibeer  v.  Jarvia,  S  DeOez.  ■  Fa 
M.  &  a.  7B.  J.  Ch. 

■  Modlen  T.  Snowball,  39  Bear.  *  Th 
Ml.  Caa.  1 


CHAP,  xxiv,]  Acnoira  fob,  881 

their  interesta  are  merely  equitable,  provided  the  issue  of 
the  remainder-maa  will  take,  if  he  fails  to  do  so  by  rea- 
son of  the  contingency,'  find,  if  there  are  no  intervening 
equities  controlling  the  case,  specific  performance  will  be 
decreed  in  favor  of  all  claiming  under  them,  in  a  case 
■where  it  would  be  decreed  between  the  original  parties ; 
and  an  ass^ee  of  the  contract  need  not  join  the  sissignor 
as  a  party  plaintiff  with  him.'  Executors  or  administra- 
tors of  the  intended  lessee  or  lessor,  as  the  case  may  be, 
may  be  either  parties  plaintiff  or  defendant  to  such  pro- 
ceedings,' or  the  heirs  of  the  deceased,  where  the  legal 
estate  vests  in  them.*  An  infant  may  maintain  a  bill  for 
specific  performance  of  a  contract  made  for  him,"  but  can- 
not be  made  a  party  defendant  to  such  a  suit."  A.  feme 
covert  may  bind  her  separate  estate,  but  not  herself  per- 
sonally, by  a  contract  for  a  lease.  She  may  bring  an 
action  for  specific  performance  when  the  statute  gives 
her  authority  to  sue  or  be  sued,  and  she  may  be  compelled 
to  perform  when  she  is  given  by  statute  full  control 
ovei  her  separate  estate."  A  lunatic  may  be  compelled  to 
perform  a  contract  for  a  lease  if  it  was  made  during  a 
lucid  interval.*  But  an  agreement  to  execute  a  lease  to 
one  who  has  committed  a  felony,  will  not  be  enforced.' 
When  premises  are  leased  by  one  partner  for  the  use  of 
the  firm,  tbe  partner  in  wh(we  name  the  lease  is  taken, 
cannot  take  a  renewal  thereof  for  his  own  individu^ 
benefit  and  if  renewed,  the  renewal  will  inure  to  the  benefit 
of  the  firm.'    So  if  an  employee  of  a  firm,  knowing  that 

•  Sohier  v.  Williams,  1  Curt.  (XJ.     Ind.  600.    But  eonfra,  and  hold- 

S,  C.  C.)  479.  ing  that  an  infant  can  neither  Hue 

'  McMorris  v.  Crawford,  15  AJa.     or  be  sued  for  specific  perform- 

271.  snce,  see  Flight  T.BoUand,  4  Ruae. 

'  MiUer  v.  Whittier,  83  Me.  208 ;     388 ;  Haggart  v.  Scott,  1  Russ.  & 

My.  298. 

'»  Flight  V.  Bolland,  ant«, 

•  Murray  v.  Barbe,  My.  &  K. 
300 ;  Gaston  t.  Frankvem,  2  DeO. 
&  S.  601. 

<  Fry  on  Specific  Performance, 
Sec.  161. 

•  WiUiugham  t.  Jiyer,  8  Tes. 
169. 


882  Aqreements.  [§  203. 

a  lease  of  the  premises  occupied  by  the  firm  is  about  to 
expire,  secretly  obtains  a  leass  of  the  premises  in*  his  own 
name,  a  court  of  equity  will  enjoin  him  from  interfering 
with  the  poBSession  of  the  firm.    Thus  in  a  California 
case,'  an  employee  of  a  firm,  whose  lease  was  about  to 
expire,  obtained  a  lease  of  the  premises  with  a  view  to 
carry  on  the  same  business.    It  was  held  that  he  should 
be  enjoined  from  interfeiing  with  the  possession  of  the 
employer.    The  court  said:    "We  understand  it  to  be 
the  duty  of  the  employee  to  devote  his  entire  acts,  so  far 
as  his  acts  may  affect  the  business  of  his  employer,  to 
the  interests  and  service  of  the  employer ;  that  he  can 
engage  in  no  business  detrimental  to  the  business  of  the 
employer ;  and  that  he  should  in  no  case  be  permitted  to 
do  for  his  own  benefit  that  which  would  have  the  effect 
of  destroying  the  business  to  sustain  and  carry  on  which 
his  servicffl  have  been  secured.    An  agent  should  not,  any 
more  than  a  trustee,  adopt  c  course  that  will  operate  as 
an  inducement  to  postpone  the  principal's  interest  to  his 
own.    An  agent  or  subagent  who  uses  the  information 
he  has  obtained  in  the  course  of  his  agency  as  a  means 
of  buying  for  himself,  will  be  compelled  to  convey  to  the 
principal.'    It  may  be  said  timt  Andrew  was  not  the 
ageut  of  plaintiffs  so  far  as  concerns  the  obtaining  a  re- 
newal of  the  lease ;  that  he  was  not  chaiged  with  the 
duty  of  obtaining  a  renewal.    It  must  however  be  said 
that  he  was,  by  virtue  of  bis  employment,  charged  with 
the  duty  of  furthering  their  intereste,  and  with  the  duty 
of  not  usii^  the  information  obi 
employee  to  their  detriment. 
Andrew  desired  to  engage  in  tl: 
emsloyers,  on  his  own  account, 
proper  course  was  open  to  him,  i 
Edl  the  facts,  and  ask  them  to  t 
desired  a  renewal.     By  pursuing  1 
he  gave  to  Hopkins  an  inducen 
plaintiffs  a  renewal  at  a  decreast 
ducement  not  to  renew  at  the  i. 

•  Qower  v,  Andrew,  18  Rep.  48.         • : 


CHAP.  XXIV.] 


Aoaom  FOR. 


pelled  plaintifts  to  have  an  unknown  competitor  who 
based  his  action  upon  knowledge  acquired  by  him  while 
in  their  employ.  We  do  not  think  that  this  is  equitj  or 
good  conscieuce." 


381  Leases.  [§  208. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

8ec.  308.  What  are,  and  of  what  may  be  made. 

Sec.  204.  Reversion  in  lessor. 

Sec.  205.  Essential  requisites  of  a  lease. 

Sec.  206.  Operative  wordfr— Description  of  premises; 

Sec.  207.  The  Premises. 

Sec.  208.  What  passes  as  an  incident  of  the  propertj. 

Sec.  209.  Appurtenances. — ^Whatpassas. 

Sec.  210.  Formalities  required  in  the  several  States. 

Sec.  211.  Leases  not  affected  hj  Statute  of  Frauds. 

Sec.  212.  Leases  by  deed.—What  are. 

Sec.  218.  Seal. 

Sec.  214.  Signing. 

Sec.  215.  Attestation. 

Sec.  216.  Delivery. 

Sec.  217.  Escrow. 

Sec.  218.  Recording. — ^Acknowledgment; 

Sec.  219.  Date. 

Sec.  220.  Entry  of  lessee. 

Sec.  221.  Void  or  voidable  leases. 

Sec.  222.  What  acts  of  the  parties  invalidate  a  lease.    Alteratians, 

erasures,  interlineations,  filling  blanks,  Sec, 

Sec.  228.  License. — Distinction  between,  and  a  lease. 

Sec.  224.  Leases  in  reversion. — winter  esse  termini. 

Sec.  225.  Inter  esse  termini. 

Sec.  226.  Void  or  voidable. 

Sec.  227.  What  avoids  a  lease. 

Sec.  228.  Concurrent  leases. 

Sec.  229.  Estoppel.— Leases  by. 

Sec.  280.  After  purchase  of  estate. 

Sec.  281.  Effect  of  estoppel  on  the  lessor. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


What  Are. 


885 


Sec.  232.  Effect  of  estoppel  on  the  lessee. 

Sec.  233.  ConstrQction. — Leases  by  deed. 

Sec.  234.  Parol  evidence  inadmissible  to  vary  deeds. 

Sec.  235.  Exceptions. 

Seo.  203.  What  are,  and  of  what  may  be  made.— A  lease  is 
a  contract  by  which  one  person  divests  himself  o/,  and 
another  takes  the  possession  of  lands  or  chattels  for  a 
term,  whetJier  long  or  short  "^  or  definite  or  indefinite. 
Thus  if  a  lease  is  given  so  long  as  the  partnership  between 
the  tenants,  continues,  the  lease  expires  when  the  firm 
ceases  to  exist,  without  any  notice  to  quit.'  It  may  be 
made  to  commence  either  from  a  time  past,  at  the  date 
thereof,  or  from  a  future  day, '  and  may  relate  exclusive- 


^  Addison  on  Contracts,  834  ;  Ba- 
con's Abr.  tit.  Leases,  (K.) ;  Reg  v. 
Morrish,  82  L.  J.  M.  C.  245.  In 
Wells  V.  Sheerer,  78  Ala.  142,  A 
writing  under  seal  attested  and  re- 
corded, in  these  words:  "Bjaow 
aU  men  by  these  presents,  that  I 
do  put  into  the  hands  of  A.  J.  W., 
as  collateral  security  for  my  bocu*d 
with  him  for  the  last  three  years 
and  a  half,  my  house  and  lot  in 
the  town  of  M.  ;  and  he  is  further 
authorized  to  control  and  receive 
fihe  rents  and  profits,  if  there  be 
any,  until  the  war  is  over,  and 
some  of  her  children  comes  and 
sees  to  the  payment  of  the  above 
board,  unless  it  should  be  sooner 
paid.  If  the  said  A.  J.  W.  should 
receive  any  rents  or  profits  for  the 
house  and  lot,  he  is  to  give  me 
credit  with  the  amount  on  my  ac- 
count with  him  for  board  ;  and  he 
wiU  also  give  me  credit  with  the 
amount  of  sale-bill  bought  at  Mrs. 
W.'s  sale,  amounting  to  $672," 
operates  in  the  nature  of  a  lease, 
and  was  so  regarded  in  this  case. 
In  Walters  v.  Meyer,  89  Ark.  560, 
A  and  B  executed  a  written 
agreement  by  which  A  sold  to  B 
a  tract  of  land  for  $10,000,  payable 
in  five  annual  installments  of  $2,000 
eacn,  the  first  due  the  first  day  of 
January,  1879;  B  stipulating  to 
pagr  $1,000  rent  for  1878,  and  if  the 
qiB^lment  due  the  first  day  of 
Junary,  1879,  was  paid,  then  the 
ie^  tit  1879  should  be  $800,  and 
'<oi^xiti&ue  at  the  same  rates  until 


25 


all  the  installments  should  be  paid ; 
**  or,  in  other  words,  for  every  $100 
paid  on  the  purchase  price  the  rent 
to  be  reduced  $10 ; "  and  the  resi- 
due remaining  unpaid  at  the  end 
of  five  years  to  bear  interest  at  ten 
per  cent,  per  annum  ;  and  when 
all  was  paid,  A  was  to  make  title 
to  B  for  the  land.  In  an  action 
by  attachment  on  the  crop  for  the 
rent  of  1880,  Hdd:  That  the  con- 
tract was  a  bond  for  title,  and  not 
a  lease.  The  parties  were  vendor 
and  purchaser,  and  not  landlord 
and  tenant,  and  the  stipulation  for 
rent  was  manifestly  an  agreement 
for  interest. 

'  Russell  V.  McCartney,  21  Mo. 
App.  8. 

^  Addison  on  Contracts,  p.  839 ; 
2  Piatt  on  Leases,  50  ;  Enys  v. 
Dannethorne,  2  Burr.  1,190.  By 
the  common  law,  livery  of  seizin, 
or  an  actual  possession  of  the  land, 
was  essential  to  the  completion  of 
all  grants  for  life  or  of  inheritance, 
but  not  for  mere  chattle  interests, 
as  estates  for  years,  or  less  than  for 
life.  But  this  distinction  does  not 
exist  generally  in  the  States  of  this 
coimtry,  the  common  law  rule  hav- 
ing been  abrogated  by  statute  or 
custom,  and  the  estate  vests  upon 
the  delivery  of  the  deed  or  lease, 
but  possession  does  not  vest  until 
actual  entry  ;  but  the  right  of  pos- 
session vests  upon  delivery  of  the 
instrument  creating  the  estate,  un- 
less the  possession,  by  the  instru- 
ment, is  to  commence  at  a  future 


Leases. 


[§ 


ly  to  real  estate,  or  exclusively  to  chattels ; '  or  it  may 
relate  to  both,  as  in  the  case  of  a  mill  and  machinery,  or 
of  a  dweUing-house  and  the  furniture,  *  or  a  farm  and  the 


day,  in  which  case  the  right  at- 
taches when  ''he  day  arrives,  or  if 
dependent  upon  a  contingency, 
when  the  contingency  occurs ;  aod 
if  no  definite  tune  for  the  com- 
mencement of  the  tenancy  is  fixed, 
it  will  commence  when  the  occu- 
pancy, begins.  Co.  Litt.  46  a; 
Church  V.  Oilman,  IB  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  656.  In  Kemp  y.  Derritt,  8 
Camp.  610,  the  defendant  took  cer- 
tain premises  under  an  agreement 
that  "  the  tenant  is  always  to  be 
subject  to  quit  at  three  months' 
notice."  The  Court  held  that  this 
created  a  quarterly  tenancy,  which 
might  be  determmed  by  a  three 
months'  notice  t«  quit,  expiring  at 
the  same  fiiiie  of  the  year  it  com' 
me  need,  or  any  corresponding 
quarter  dav,  and  that  where  the 
tenant,  unaer  such  an  agreement, 
enters  at  tlie  middle  of  one  of  the 
usual  quarterB,  if  there  appears  to 
be  no  agreement  to  the  contrary, 
he  uHll  be  presumed  to  hold  from 
the  dag  he  enters,  and  the  tenancy 
can  be  determined  only  by  a  notice 
expiring  that  day  of  the  year,  or 
some  other  quarter  day  t^culated 
from  thence.  This  is  essentially 
the  case  as  to  parol  leases,  as  no 
interest  exists  until  the  leesee  has 
actually  entered  into  poaaession, 
because  they  are  regarded  as  op- 
posed to  the  spirit,  if  not  the  letter 
of  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  esiwcially 
in  some  of  the  States.  When  the 
tenant  has  not  entered  tmder  a 
parol  lease,  it  is  held  that  the  land- 
lord's only  remedy  is  upon  the 
lease  or  agreement,  and  lai  action 
for  use  and  occupation  does  not 
he.  The  landlord  may  put  an  end 
to  the  lease  in  such  acaae  by  entry, 
or  he  may  let  the  preiniBCs  he  idle 
and  recover  the  agreed  rent.  Tully 
T.  Dunn,  43  Ala.  382.  But  in  In- 
diana it  is  held  that  a  lease  1^ 
parol  for  a  term  not  exceeding  one 
year  is  valid  within  the  Statute  of 
Frauds,  as  well  before  as  after 
entry,  ami  that  the  lessee  may  re- 
cover poaseaaion  according-  to  the 
terms  of  the  lease.  Huffman  v. 
gtarks,  Kl  Ind.  474,  And  a  similar 
dootrine  prevails  in  New  Jersey, 


where  the  statute  20  Car.  2.  Chap. 
8,  Sec,  1,  is  adopted  -aa  to  parol 
leases  for  three  years,  where  the 
rent  reserved  amounts  to  two- 
thirds  the  improved  value  of  the 
thing  demised.  Birckhead  v.  Com- 
mins,  83  N.  J.  L.  44. 
•  Fawcett'sL.  &  T.  1,  2, 
'  Smith  V.  Marrable,  10  M.  &  "W, 
In  Ward  v.  Macaulay.  1  T.  R.  480. 
not  only  was  the  vahditf  of  leases 
of  chattels  recognized,  but  it  was 
also  establiahea  that  the  tenant 
took  such  an  estate  therein  during 
the  existence  of  the  lease  as  de- 
prives the  lessor  of  all  control 
thereover  during  such  period,  and 
as  destroys  his  right  of  action  for 
an  injury  done  thereto,  or  the 
wrongful  taking  thereof  by  a  third 
person  during  the  term ,  6e«i  tise  hi* 
right  of  possession  is  susperuled  so 
long  as  ike  term  ronlinnea  under 
the  lease.  In  thiu  case  the  plaintiff 
was  the  landlord  of  a  house  which 
he  let  ready  furnished  to  Lord 
Montfort.  An  execution  was  is- 
sued against  Lord  Montfort,  and 
the  furniture  belongingto  the  land- 
lord was  taken  tLereon  by  the 
sheriff.  The  landlord  was  held  not 
entitled  to  recover  in  trespass  for 
Ibe  goods  against  the  sheriil,  al- 
though the  Mieriff  liad  notice  that 
the  furniture  was  his  before  he 
seized  it.  Lord  Kenyon  Ch.  J., 
said  that  the  plaintiff's  remedy  was 
in  trover.  But,  in  a  later  case, 
Gordon  v.  Harper,  7  T.  R,  9,  whera 
a  similar  state  of  facta  existed. 
Lord  Kenvon  recalled  his  dicta  in 
the  previous  case,  and  for  the  same 
reason  that,  in  the  previous  case  he 
had  held  that  treqosa  would  not 


^w^mrvi 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


What  Are. 


387 


stock  thereon.  *    At  the  common  law,  not  only  real  estate, 


trover  was  the  proper  remedy,  was 
an  extra-judicial  opinion,  to  which, 
vpanfuriher  considerationf  lean- 
not  subscribe.    The  true  question 
is,  whether;  when   a  person   has 
leased  goods  in  a  house  to  another 
for  a   certain  time,  whereby  he 
parts  with  the  right  of  possession 
during  the  term  to  the  tenant,  and 
has  only  a  reversionary  interest, 
he  can,  notwithstanding,  recover 
tfle  value  of  the  whole  property 
pending  the  existence  of  the  term 
in  an  action  of  trover.    The  very 
statement  of  the  proposition  affords 
an  answer  to  it.    If,  instead  of  the 
household  goods,  the  goods  here 
taken  had  been  machines  used  in 
manufacture     which    had     been 
leased  to  a  tenant,  no  doubt  coidd 
have  been  made  but  that  the  sher- 
iff might  have  seized  them  under 
an  execution  against  the  tenant, 
and  the  creditor  would  have  been 
entitled  to  the  beneficial  use  of  the 
property  during  the  term :  the  dif- 
ference of  the  goods  then  cannot 
vary  the  law.    The  cases  which 
have  been  put  at  the  bar  do  not  ap- 
ply ;  the  one  on  which  the  greatest 
stress  was  laid,  was  that  of  a  ten- 
ant for  years  of  land  whereon  tim- 
ber is  cut  down,  in  which  case  it 
was  truly  said,  that  the  owner  of 
the    inheritance    mieht  maintain 
trover  for  such  timber,  notwith- 
standing the  lease.    But  it  must 
be  remembered,  that  the  only  right 
of  the  tenant  is  to  the  shade  of  the 
tree   when   growing,  and  by  the 
very  act  of  felling  it,  his  ri^ht  is 
absolutely  determmed :  and  even 
then  the  property  does  not  vest  in 
his  immediate  landlord:  for  if  he 
has  only  an  estate  for  life,  it  will 
go  over  to  the  owner  of  the  inher- 
itance.    Here,  however,  the  ten- 
ant's right  of  possession  during  the 
term  cannot  oe  divested  by  any 
wrongful  act,  nor  can  it  thereby  bJe 
revested  in  the  landlord.    I  forbear 
to  deliver  any  opinion  as  to  what 
remedy  the  lanolord  has  in  this 
case,  not  being  at  present  called 
^^an  so  to  do  :  but  it  is  clear  that 
Dftnnotmaiiitain  trover."    AsH- 
J.,  said:  **I  have  always 
Dod  the  rule  of  law  to  he, 
.;!»  order  to  maintain  trover 
tiff  must  have  a  right  of 

4- 


property  in  the  thing  and  a  right 
of  possession,  and  that  unless  both 
these  rights  concur  the  action  will 
not  lie.  Now,  ^ere  it  is  admitted 
that  the  tenant  had  the  right  of 
possession  during  the  continuance 
of  his  term,  and  consequently  one 
of  the  requisites  is  wanting  to  the 
landlord's  right  of  action.  It  is 
true  that  in  the  present  case  it  is 
not  very  probable  that  the  furni- 
ture can  TO  of  any  use  to  any  other 
than  the  actual  tenant  of  theprem. 
ises  ;  but  supposing  the  tnings 
leased  had  been  manuf  acturiue  en- 
gines, there  is  no  reason  why  a 
creditor  seizing  them  under  an 
execution  shomd  not  avail  him- 
self of  the  beneficial  use  of  them 
during  the  term." 

^  '*  After  such  time  as  leases  for 
years  began  to  be  looked  upon  as 
fixed  and  permanent  interests," 
says  Bacon,  4Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases, 
(A.)  **  andthat  the  leases  were  suf- 
ficiently provided  to  defend  them- 
selves and  their  possessions  agaisnt 
the  acts  and  encroachments,  as 
well  of  the  lessor  as  of  strangers, 
men  found  it  their  interest  to  im- 
prove and  encourage  this  sort  of 
property,  and  therefore  extended 
it  to  all  sorts  of  interests  and  pos- 
sessions whatsoever,  being  led 
thereto  by  that  known  rule,  that 
whatsoever  may  be  granted  or 
parted  with  forever,  •  may  be 
granted  or  parted  with  for  a  time ; 
and  therefore  not  only  lands  and 
houses  have  been  let  for  years,  but 
also  goods  and  chattels,  though 
the  interest  of  the  lessee  therein 
differs  from  the  interest  he  hath 
in  lands  or  houses  so  let  for  years : 
for  if  one  lease  for  years  a  stock  of 
live  cattle,  such  lease  is  good,  and 
the  lessee  hath  onl^  the  use  and 
profits  of  them  during  thcv  term ; 
but  yet  the  lessor  hath  not  any 
reversion  in  them  to  grant  over  to 
another,  either  during  the  term  or 
after,  till  the  lessee  hath  rede- 
livered them  to  him,  as  he  would 
have  of  lands  in  case  of  such  lease 
for  years,  for  the  lessor  hath  only 
a  possibility  of  property  in  case 
they  all  outuve  the  term  ;  for  if  any 
of  them  die  during  the  term,  the 
lessor  cannot  have  them  again 
after  the  term;  and  during  the 


^ 


388 


Leases. 


[§  203. 


but  chattels  and  hereditaments,  corporeal  or  incorporeal, 
where  the    subject    of  lease, '   including  advowsons, ' 


term  he  hath  nothing  to  do  with 
them,  and,  consequently,  of  such 
as  die,  the  property  rests  absolutely 
in  the  lessee :  so  whether  they  live 
or  die,  yet  all  the  young  ones 
coming  of  them,  as  lainbs,  calves, 
&c.,  b^ong  absolutely  to  the  lessee 
as  profits  arising  and  severed  from 
the  principal,  smce  otherwise  the 
lessee  would  pay  his  rent  for 
nothing ;  and  therefore  this  differs 
from  a  lease  of  otiier  dead  goods 
and  chattels,  for  there,  if  anything 
be  added  for  the  repairing,  mend- 
ing or  improving  thereof,  me  lessor 
shall  have  the  improvements  and 
additions,  together  with  the  princi- 
pal, after  the  lease  ended,  because 
they  cannot  be  severed  without 
destroying  or  spoiling  the  princi- 
pal; neither  is  the  succession  of 
young  ones,  in  case  any  of  the  old 
ones  die,  to  be  resembled  to  a 
corporation  agnegate,  whereof 
when  any  die,  those  that  succeed 
shall  be  said  part  of  the  same  cor- 
poration, for  the  corporation,  in  its 
pubUc  capacity,  never  dies;  but 
this  being  a  lease  of  such  and  such 
individual  cattle,  when  any  of 
them  die,  the  possibility  of  revert- 
ing "property,  which  was  left  in  the 
lessor.  IS  determined  and  at  an  end. 
litt.  §  71 ;  Co.  Litt.  57  a.  But  the 
lessee  in  such  case  cannot  kill, 
destroy,  sell  or  give  t^em  away, 
during  the  term,  without  being 
subject  to  an  action  of  trespass,  as 
it  should  seem;  but  in  case  of  a 
lease  of  a  house,    together  with 

goods,  it  is  usual  to  make  a  schedule 
lereof,  and  affix  it  to  the  lease, 
and  to  have  a  covenant  from  the 
lessee  to  redeliver  them  at  the  end 
of  the  term,  and  without  such 
covenant  the  lessor  could  have  no 
other  remedy  but  trover  or  det- 
inue for  them  after  the  lease  ended. 
If  one  hath  a  corody  for  life,  he 
may  let  it  to  another,  or  to  the 
grantor  himself ;  so  may  the 
grantee  of  house-bote,  or  hay-bote  ; 
but  in  case  such  lease  be  to  the 
lessor  himself,  rendering  rent,  he 
can  have  them  only  by  way  of  re- 
tainer, bein^  to  arise  out  of  his 
own  provision,  or  his  own  land. 

*  Anonymous,  I>yer,  323  h.  pi.  30. 


Bro.  tit.  Leases,  40.  But  as  to  lands 
or  other  things  of  inheritance,  as 
thev  may  be  granted  or  departed 
with  forever,  so  they  may  for  a 
time,  and  may  be  consequently, 
leased  for  years  in  all  cases  where 
no  inconvenience  or  injury  to  the 
public  is  likely  to  ensue  ;  for  then 
men's  private  interests  must  ^ve 
way  to  the  public,  and  what  might 
otherwise  in  its  own  nature  be 
good  and  allowable,  must  upon, 
that  account  be  disallowed  and 
stand  condenmed  ;  wherefore,  it 
having  been  settled  that  all  leasee 
for  years  were  but  chattels,  and  as 
such  should  go  to  executors  or 
administrators."  RoU.  Abr.  847 ; 
2  Roll  Abr.  158;  Sir  George 
Reynold's  Case,  Cro.  Car.  687 ;  9 
Ck>Ke  97. 

>  Shep!  Touch.  268 ;  1  Piatt  on 
Leases,  24.  The  objects  of  domin- 
ion or  property  are  things  as  con- 
tradistinguished from  persons ; 
things  are  ttoo-fold,  things  real 
and  things  personal;  things  real 
are  such  as  are  permanent,  fixed, 
and  immovable,  as  lands  and  tene- 
ments;  ihxngB  personal  are  goods, 
money,  ana  all  other  movables 
which  may  attend  the  owner's  per- 
son wherever  he  thinks  proper  to 
^o.  Thinfi;8  real  are  distributed 
into  three  divisions  or  classes,  viz. : 
lands,  tenements,  and  heredita^ 
ments.  Of  these  three  divisions, 
the  second  contains  the  first,  and 
the  third  contains  both.  Land 
comprehends  all  things  of  a  per- 
manent and  substantial  nature,  be* 
ing  a  word  of  a  very  extensive  sig- 
nification. Tenement  is  a  word  of 
still  greater  extent,  and  though  in 
its  vulgar  acceptation  it  is  applied 
only  to  houses  and  other  Duild- 
ings,  yet  in  its  original,  proper,  and 
legal  sense,  it  signifies  everything 
that  may  be  holcfen,  provided  it  be 
of  a  permanent  nature,  whether  it 
be  of  a  substantial  and  sensible,  or 
of  an  unsubstantial,  ideal  kind.  2 
Blackstone's  Com.  16.  A  tene- 
ment may  be  said  to  be  any  ho 
land,  rent,  or  other  such 
thing,  that  is  in  any  way 
but  being  a  wa 


CHAP.  XXV,] 


What  Abe. 


corodies, '     estovers, '    femes, '    fisheries, '    ministerial 


laree  and  ambi^ovs  meaning, 
and  not  so  certain  an  meseuage, 
therefore  it  is  not  fit  to  be  used  to 
express  anything  vhich  requires 
a  particular  description.  2  lil. 
Abr.  566.  The  word  tenement  is 
joined  with  the  adjective  frank, 
to  denote  an  estate  in  lands,  offices, 
&c.,  for  life  or  in  fee.  Kitch.  41. 
Thus,  lUyentm  teTiementwm,  frank- 
tenement,  or  freehold,  is  applica- 
ble not  osJf  to  lands  and  other 
solid  objecte,  but  also '  to  offices, 
rents,  commons,  and  the  like ;  ana 
aa  lands  and  houses  are  tenements, 
BO  is  an  advowson  a  tenement ; 
and  a  franchise,  an  office,  a  right 
of  conunon,  a  peerage,  or  other 
propertj  of  the  like  unsuhstantial 
kind,  are  all  of  them,  legally 
Bpeaking,  tMiements.  2  Black. 
Com.  17.  Hereditament,  is  any- 
thing which  may  be  iiiheriled,  or 
may  pass  to  an  neir.  Hisredita- 
menta  signify  all  such  things  im- 
movable, be  they  corporeal  or  in- 
corporeal, as  a  man  may  have  to 
himself  and  his  lieirs  by  way  of  in- 
heritance;— see  32  H.  8  c.  2;  or 
not  being  otherwise  bequeathed, 
do  natuniUy,  and  of  course,  de- 
scend to  him  which  is  next  heir  of 
blood,  and  fall  not  within  the  com- 
pass of  an  executor  or  adminis- 
trator, as  chattels  do.  It  is  a  word 
of  large  extent,  and  much  used  in 
conveyances ;  for  by  the  grant  of 
hereditaments,  isles,  seignories, 
manors,  houses,  and  lands  of  all 
sorts,  charters,  rente,  services,  ad- 
vowBons,  commons,  and  whatever 
may  be  inherited,  will  pass.  Coke 
on  Lit.  fol.  8.  Hrsredittimetit'um 
eiftomne  quod  jure  luereditario  ad 
haredem  trmiaeat.  Cow.  Int. 
Ajt  hereditament,  saysSmE.  Coke, 
is  by  much  the  largest  and  moat 
comprehensive  eipresHion ;  for  it 
includes  not  only  lands  and  tene- 
ments, but  whatsoever  may  be  tn- 
herited,  be  it  corporeal  or  incor- 
poreal, real,  personal,  or  mixed. 
Thus,  an  heir-loom,  or  implement 
of  J^piiture,  which  by  custom  de- 
to  the  heir,  ti^ther  with  a 
is  neither  land  nor  tene- 
but  a  mere  movable ;  yet 


being  inheritable,  is  comprised  un- 
der the  general  word  heredita- 
ment :  and  so  a  condition,  the 
benefit  of  which  may  descend  to  a 
man  From  his  ancestor,  is  also  an 
hereditament.  2  Black,  Com,  17. 
Hereditament,  therefore,  is  the 
most  comprehensive  word  which 
occurs  in  the  English  law  or  lan- 
guage, as  a  designation  or  convey- 
ance of  property.  Hereditaments 
mean  lands,  tenemente,  and  here- 
ditaments, and  are  considered  as 
having  that  comprehending  force, 
not  only  in  pleading  and  convey- 
ancing, but  m  those  acta  af  parlia- 
ment where  the  word  heredita- 
ment is  used  alone;  in  such  cases 
it  includes  everything  which  can 
be  inherited;  that  is,  which  may 
go  to  the  heir,  but  not  to  the  exec- 
utor or  administrator,  and  maj 
be  regarded  as  opposed  to  chatteU, 
and  together  wiui  chattels,  includ- 
ing all  descriptions  of  property ; 
BO  that  all  property  may  admit  of 
one  grand  division,  namely,  either 
an  nerediiament,  or  a  chattel. 
Such  is  the  view  of  the  relative 
import  of  these  three  important 
words,  and  more  especially  here- 
ditament, as  laid  down  in  Black- 
stone,  and  sanctioned  hj  the  pre- 
vious current  of  authorities.  Lord 
Kbnyon,  however,  in  Doe  d. 
SmaU  V.  Allen,  8  T.  H.  487,  508, 
seems  to  vary  the  import  of  the 
word  hereditament,  and  conse- 
quently to  misettte  the  definition 
and  classification  as  given  by 
Blackstono,  wherein  he  says: 
"The  next  point  arises  on  the 
word  hereditament ;  it  is  not  so 
strong  a  word  as  tenement ;  it  ia 
merely  a  description  of  the  thing 
itself,  and  not  of  the  quality  got, 
or  the  iatereat  in  it ;  if  the  word 
'  estate'  had  been  used,  that  would 
have  been  Mufficient  to  cany  the 
fee."  Certainly  this  distinction  of 
Lord  Kenyos  accords  with  the  dif- 
ference taken  between  the  two 
words  lusreditaa  and  TusreAitOr- 
menlum;  namely,  that  the  word 
heeretlitaa  imports  the  estate  which 
a  man  has  in  the  lands ;  but  hceredr 
itamentum  the  land  itself,  which 


Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (A.). 
jAbr.  Tit.  Leases,  40 ;  Ba- 
m  Tit.  Leases  (A.) ;  1  Piatt 


'  Peter  v.  KendaU,  6  B.  &  C.  703  ; 
Hansen  v.  Kintley,  11  Iowa  505. 

*  Duke  of  Somerset  v,  Fogwell,  6 
B.  &  C.  875. 


■       ■  ■ 


390 


Leases. 


[§  203. 


offices,  *  franchises, "  tolls, "  rights  of  common,  *  rights  of 


may  be  inherited,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  implied  to  the  estate  in 
the  land.  Hopewell  v.  Ack,  1 
Ck>m.  R.  164.  Jout  this  difference 
is  taken  only  arguendOy  and  not 
noticed  by  the  court,  and  the  au- 
thorities of  Coke  and  Holt  are 
strong  with  the  definition  given 
by  Blackstone.  Co.  lit.  19,  20; 
Inst.  6.  GoULDiNO,  J.— She  hath 
an  estate  in  fee  simple,  because 
the  word  hereditament  implieth  a 
fee.  Holt,  C.  J.— She  hath  a  fee 
simple  by  reason  of  the  word 
hereditament;  for  if  he  had  in- 
tended t6  have  given  her  only  an 
estate  for  liffe,  the  words  "  all  my 
lands  and  tenements  "  would  liave 
sufficiently  implied  a  freehold 
without  the  Word  **  hereditament," 
and  therefore  that  word  doth 
make  her  have  estate  in  fee ;  for 
Jicereditas  signifieth  an  estate  de- 
scendable^ OS  well  as  that  which 
hath  descended.  Smith  v.  Tyndall, 
Holt,  235.  These  two  great  au- 
thorities support  the  view  taken 
b^  Bku^cstone  on  the  relative  clas- 
sification of  these  three  grand 
terms  in  law,  *' lands,  tenements, 


and  hereditaments,"  with  his  defi- 
nition of  the^ast.  Hereditaments, 
then,  to  use  the  largest  exnression, 
are  of  two  kinds,  corpore^  and  in- 
corporeal ;  corporeal  consists  of 
sucn  as  affect  the  senses  ;  such  as 
may  be  seen  or  handled  by  the 
body;  incorporeal  are  not  the  ob- 
ject of  sensation,  can  neither  be 
seen  nor  handled,  are  creatures  of 
the  mind,  and  exist  only  in  con- 
templation. 2.  'Black.  Com.  17. 
All  corporeal  hereditaments  may 
be  comprehended  under  the  word 
land.  Landy  in  Latin  terra,  in 
French  terre,  and  anciently  writ- 
ten with  a  single  r,  in  that  sense 
included  whatever  might  be 
ploughed,  terra  dicitur  aterendOf 
quia  vomere  teritur,  and  there- 
fore, in  its  restrained  sense,  ex- 
tended only  to  arable  land  ;  but  in 
its  general  and  legal  signification, 
land  is  a  term  most  extended  in 
its  meaning,  and  includes  every 
sort  of  CTound,  as  meadow,  pas- 
ture, arable,  wood,  &c  Terra  est 
nomen  generalissimum  et  compre- 
hendit  omnes  species  terrce,  Land^ 
in  legal  signification,  comprehends 


» Veale  v.  Prior,  Hardr.  851.  All 
offices  of  a  purely  ministerial  char- 
acter, which  did  not  concern  the 
administration  of  justice,  and 
which  required  only  common 
skill  and  diligence,  and  which 
might  be  executed  by  deputy 
without  inconvenience  to  the  pub- 
lic, might  be  granted  at  common 
law.  «Jones  v.  Clerk,  Hardr.  46 ; 
Bellamy  v.  Burroughs^  Farr.  97 ; 
Drummond  v.  Duke  of  St.  Albans, 
5  Yes.  486.  But  an  office  of  trust, 
or  one  requiring  skill  or  capacity 
in  its  execution,  did  not  come  under 
this  head.  Meade  v.  Senthall,  Cro. 
Car.  587  ;  Sutton's  Case,  6  Mod.  67. 
But,  in  Pragers  v.  Phrasier ,  2  Shaw, 
171 ,  Lord  Hale  expressed  the  opin- 
ion that  an  office  of  trust  might  be 
granted ;  and  a  similar  view  was 
adopted  in  Jones  v.  Bird,  Hardr. 
40  ;  and  in  the  latter  case.  Baron 
Nicholas  declared  that  Reynel's 
Case,  9  Coke,  97  a. ,  holding  a  con- 
trary doctrine,  is  not  good  law,  be- 
cause, for  the  same  reason,  that 
the  court  decided  that  in  that  case 
the  office  could  not  be  granted  for 
years,  it  could  not  be  granted  in 


fee.  Offices  that  were  purely  min- 
isterial, were  demisable  to  women* 
Lady  Russell*s  Case,  Oo.  Jac.  17; 
Spel.  Glossary,  497.  A  woman 
was  appointed  governor  of  Chelms- 
ford workhouse.  M.  2  Anne.  Lady 
Broughton  was  keeper  of  the  gate- 
house, 8  Keb.  821 ;  4  Inst.  221,  415. 
Lady  Packington  was  the  return- 
ing officer  for  members  at  Ales- 
borough.  Brady's  History  of  Bor- 
oughs. But  it  will  not  be  profit- 
able to  pursue  this  question  here, 
as  thei*e  is  not  much  likelihood 
that  offices  will  ever  be  granted  in 
this  country,  as  the  scramble  for 
them  b^  the  impecunious  friends 
of  leading  politicians  is  so  great, 
that  even  the  original  incumbent 
generally  holds  by  a  feeble  tenure. 

*  The  Duke  of  Somerset  v.  Fog- 
well,  5  B.  &  C.  875.  Any  franchise 
is  demisable,  except  where  ik  is 
personal.    2  Inst.  221 ,  406. 

*  Harris  v.  Morrice,  10  M. 
260;   Walker  V.  Richardsoi 
882 ;  Brigland  v.  Shafter,  5^ 
Aldragd  v.  Crampton,  4^ 
C.  24. 

*  Luney  v.  Brown,  Lul 


CHAP.  XXV.]  WBAT  Abe.  891 

way, '  rights  of  herbage,'  and  tithes.'  So,  too,  says  Mr. 
Platt,  *  chattels,  such  as  farming  implements  and 
furniture,  may  also  be  demised  ; '  bo  may  a  flock  of  sheep 
or  other  live  animals.*  The  lessee  is  entitled  to  the  use 
and  profit  of  them  during  the  term,  but  he  cannot 
destroy,  kill,  sell,  or  give  them  away,  without  expos* 
ing  himself  to  an  action  of  trespass.'  The  property 
of  such  animals  as  may  die  during  the  term  belongs  to 
the  lessee,  and  hence  the  lessor  has  not  such  a  reversion 
as  can  be  granted  over,  either  during  the  demise  or  in 

maj  ground,  mil,  or  earth,  what-  the  earth,  belonge  to  the  owner  of 
BOTCr  ;  as,  meadows,  pastures,  the  surface;  as  is  every  day's  ex- 
woods,  moors,    waters,  marshes,     perience  in  the  mining  countries. 

« — I  1 — it. .  11 ; — i-.j —  _i —     °- that  the  word  laiwi  1 — '■"' ' 

ly  the  face   of  the 

_   srything   under  it   i 

And  therefore  if  a  man  grants  aU 
his  IsJids,  he  grants  thereby  all  his 
mines  of  metal  and  other  fossils, 
his  woods,  his  waters,  and  his 
houses,  as  well  aa  hie  fields  and 


buildmKB,    for  in  conveying   the 
lands,  the  huildinga  pass  with  it. 


the  language  of   the   law ;    and  HufBcient  lo  pass  them,  except  in 

therefore  I  cannot  bring  an  action  the  instance  of  water  ;  by  a  grant  , 

to  recover  possession  of  a  pool  or  of    which,    nothine  passes  but  ft" 

other  piece  of  water  by  the  name  right  of  fishing  ;  but  the  capital 

of  toater  only ;  either  by  calculate  distinction    is    this :    that   l^  the 

ing  ita  capacity,  as,  for  so  many  name  of  a  castle,  messuage,   toft, 

cubical  jatda  ;    or,   by  sux>erficial  croft,  or  the  like,  nothing  else  will 

measure,    for    twenty     acres    of  pass,  except  what  falls  with   the 

water ;  or,  by  general  description,  utmost  propriety  under  the  term, 

as,  for  a  pond,  a  watercourse,  or  a  made  use  of ;   but  by  the  name  of 

rivulet;  but  I  must  bring  myac-  the  land,  which  is  iKtmenf^eneT-olu- 

tion  for  the  land  that  lies  at  the  timum,  everything  terreetrial  will 

bottom,  aad  must  call  it  twenty  pass.    Co.Litt.4;3Black.  Com.  19. 

acres  of  land  covered  vdth  water.  '  Newmarch    v.     Brandling,     8 

a  Black.  Com.  18.    8o  that  if  a  Swanst.  99 ;  Osbom  v.  Wise,  7  C. 

man  grants  all  his  lands,  he  grants  &  P.  764. 

thereEy  his  castles,  liouses,  and  all  '  Kuny  v.  Brown,  ante ;  Hill  T. 
other   buildings,    "for  they  con-  Barry,  Hay  &  Jo.,  683. 
siet,"  saith  Lord  Coke,    "of  two  'Brewer  v.  Hill,   2  Anst.   418; 
thii^,  land,  which  is  the  founda-  Windsor  v,  Gover,  3  Saund.  303, 
tion,  and  the   structure  thereon  ;  *  2  Platt  on  Leasee,  2^,  7. 
so  that  if  I  convey  the   land  or  '  Collins  v.  Harding,  Cro.  Bliz. 
ground,  the  structure  or  building  606 ;  Newman  t.  Anderson,  2  N. 
Land  hath  also,  R.  234. 

tion,  an  indefi-  ''Spencer's  Case,  S  Coke,  16  b: 

rds  as  well  as  Wood  v.  Foster,  1  Leon,  42;  Wood 

s  est  solum,  ^jas  v.  Ash.Qodf.  112;Bmmattv.  Cole, 

,  is  the  maxim  Cro.  Eliz.  255 ;  BiUingsley  v.  Hei^ 

i ;  therefore,  no  sey,  2  Bulstre,  3. 

ly  building,  or  '  See  cases  cited  in  last   note ; 

bang  another's  also  Lit.  Sec.  71. 

ards,  whatever  '  Wood  v.  FoBter,  ante ;  Wood  t. 

etween  the  sur-  Ash.  ante. 

d  the  centre  of 


893  ■  -  Leases.  [§  204. 

the  interval  between  its  determination  and  the  re-delivery 
of  the  sheep.  He  has  only  a  possibility  of  property  in 
case  they  outlive  the  term.  The  young  belong  absolutely 
to  the  lessee,  as  profits  arising  and  secured  from  the  prin- 
cipal.' The  sum  reserved  for  the  use  of  chattels  is  de- 
nominated rent,  but,  strictly  speaking,  rent  cannot  be  re- 
served out  of  an  incorporeal  hereditament ;  and  although 
it  may  be  recovered  on  the  express  covenants  for  payment 
or  on  the  reddendum,  which  amounts  to  an  implied  cov- 
enant,' yet  a  distress  will  not  lie  therefor,' 

Sec,  204.  Heversioii  in  lessor.— In  order  to  operate  as  a 
lease,  the  lessor  must  convey  a  less  estate  than  he  possesses, 
because  if  he  conveys  his  whole  estate,  it  is  an  assignment, 
and  not  a  lease  ;  and  that  is  the  effect  of  the  instrument, 
whatever  may  be  the  form  of  words  used  in  it,'  for  where 
a  party,  though  professedly  making  an  underlease,  parts 
with  his  whole  term,  that  amounts  to  an  assignment, 
which  is,  in  point  of  law,  merely  the  trausferringand  set- 
ting over  to  another  that  interest,  however  it  came,  which 
the  party  has.'    As  betiveen  the  parties,  however,  such 

>  2  Piatt  on  Leasee,  pp.  36,  27.  it  ie  an  assignment,  and  tliis  case 

*  Lovelace  v.  B^noloa,  Noy.  59 ;  cited  at  the  commencement  of  thie 
Co.  litt.  47  a.;  Gardiner  v.  Wil-  note.  In  equitr,  amerger  may  be 
liamson,  3  B.  &  Ad.  336 ;  Neale  v.  permitted  to  take  effect  or  not,  ac- 
Mttckenzie,  3  C.  M.  &  R.  84.  cording  to  the  apparent  irtent  of 

'  Gardner  v,  Williamson,  ante.  the  parties,  and  the  iuteretle  to  be 
'Lord  Tenterden,  C.  J,,  in  affected  thereby.  Davialioipe  v. 
Thorn  V.  Woolcombe  3  B.  &  Ad.  Porter,  Amb.  600 ;  ThomaiT.Kem- 
695  ;  Barrett  v.  Rolf,  14  M.  &  W.  eya,  3  Vem.  348  ;  St.  Paii  t.  Lord 
848  ;  Ctotterv.  Richardson,  7  Exchq.  Dudley,  15  Ves.  167.  But,  at  law, 
143 ;  Palmer  v.  Edwards,  1  Doug,  the  views  or  beneficial  btereeto  of 
187 ;  Paflcoe  v,  Pascoe,  8  Bine.  N,  parties  do  not  control  the  opera- 
C.  888 ;  Preece  v,  Corrie,  5  Sing,  tion  of  a  deed  creating  a  merger, 
24.  The  fact  that  the  Krantor  uses  explains  Poultney  v.  Holmes,  1 
the  word  "demise,  does  not  Stra.  405,  and  shows  thatareeer- 
chang«  the  effect  of  the  instni'  vation  of  rent  to  the  grantor  doea 
tnent,  because  tliat  word  is  of  gen-  not  affect  the  question.  A  sinilar 
eral  application,  and  imparts  only     doctrine  was  held  in  Parmettr  v. 

some    species  of  conveyaJ —    — ■"      ■'»'-'-'—   i  '" ■■    """-  ■" 

is  applied  to  an  estate,  eitl 
Bimple,  fee  tail,  for  life. 
years.  S  Inst.  483.  If  al 
three  years  demises  it  1 
years,  it  is  in  legal  effec 
signment,  and  not  an  imd 
Hicks  -V,  Downing,  1  Ld.  1 
In  Palmer  v.  Eid wards, 
187  n.,  it  is  laid  down  ai 
that  wherever  the  whole 
is  conveyed  and  no  reven 


CHAP.  XXV.]  I^ESTIAL  EEQDX3ITE3.  893 

an  instrument  may,  for  some  purposes,  be  treated  as  an 
underlease,  when  that  is  necessary  to  carry  into  effect  the 
intent  of  the  parties.' 

Sec.  205.  Essential  reguiBitm  of  e,  lease.— In  order  to  con- 
stitute a  valid  lease,  certain  elements  must  always  con- 
cur :  1st.  There  must  be  a  lessor  who  is  legally  compe- 
tent to  make  a  lease.  2d.  A  lessee  who  is  compe- 
tent ix>  take  the  thing  demised.  3d.  A  subject  matter 
that  is  demisable.  4th.  And  in  all  cases  where  so 
required  by  law,  as  where  the  thing  granted  is  not 
otherwise  grantable,  or  where  the  person  granting 
can  only  grant  by  deed,  the  lease  must  be  by  deed 
containing  a  certain  description  of  the  lessor,  the  lessee, 
and  the  thing  demised,  the  term  granted,  the  rents 
and  covenants,  and  all  the  necessary  formalities,  as 
sealing,  acknowledgment,  delivery,  &c.  5th.  If  the 
lease  is  for  years,  there  must  be  a  certain  com- 
mencement, at  least  when  it  takes  effect  in  interest  or 
possession,  and  a  certain  determination,  either  expressly 
by  stating  the  number  of  years,  or  by  reference  to  a 
certainty  that  is  expressed,  or  by  reducing  it  to  a  cer- 
tainty that  is  expressed,  or  by  reducing  it  to  a  certainty 
upon  some  contingent  event  which  must  happen  before 
the  death  of  the  lessor  or  lessee.  6th,  Where  required, 
there  must  be  all  needful  ceremonies,  as  livery  of  seizin, 
attornment,  &c.,  or  if  any  statutory  requirements  are  im- 

'  In  Pollock  V.  Stacy,  9  Q.  B.,  an  mentB  of  tenna,  the  law  haa  prop- 
action  for  use  and  occupation  was  erly  provided  that  the  relation  of 
sustained  in  favor  of  a  jterRon  who  asaignor  and  asengnee  ehall  not  ba 
had  demised  to  another  the  whole  contracted,  unless  the  intention  is 
of  his  term  in  certain  premiseB  at  proved  by  deed.  But  in  protect- 
a  weekly  rent  Lord  Denhan,  C.  ing  against  imperfect  evidence  of 
J.,BayinK:  "  The  parties  intended  assignment,  there  was  no  need  to 
to  contract  the  relation  of  land-  alter  the  law  of  leasing ;  and  it  au- 
lord  and   tenant,  and  to  pass  the  pears  to  us  to  remain  unchanged. 


Hupportinc  as  a   lease  that   which 

leir  was  intended  to  be  bo,  although  it 

we  nioji  pang  all  the  iesnor'x  intertnt." 

ion  Seealso  Poultney  v.  Holmes,  1  Str. 

at  405  ;  Baker  v.  Gostling,  1  Bing.  N. 

vas  C.   19;   Cotter   -     ^^-^—^ —    " 

Jy.  Exchq.  143 :  Wil 

md  1  E.  &  E.  1040. 


posed,  they  muet  also  be  observed ;  and,  7th,  there  must 
be  an  acceptance  of  the  demise,  and  of  the  estate  by  the 


Sec,  206.  OperatiTd  words.— Desoriptiou  of  premises.— No 
particular  form  of  words  are  requisite  to  make  a  lease  ; 
any  words  that  show  an  intention  on  the  part  of  the  lessor 
to  divest  himself  of  the  possession  of  premises,  and  confer 
it  upon  the  lessee  for  a  term,  whether  long  or  short,  is 
suflScient,  but  the  lessee  also  should  sign  the  lease,  or  in 
some  manner  become  bound  by  such  covenants  as  it  is 
agreed  that  he  shall  perform.  The  usual  words  employed, 
and  what  may  be  denominated  the  operative  words,  are 
"demise  and  lease,"  "hath  leased  and  hereby  doth  lease,*' 
"grant,  demise  and  to  farm  let,"  or  "hath  let,"  or'aw^ 
words  that  amount  to  a  grant  are  sufBcient,*  and  tha^ 

accepted,  and  other  writings,  ehow 
that  thej  Bo  understood  and  re- 
garded it,  or  subsequently  modified 
It,  and  tliat  the  cotton  dehvered 
was  paid  not  as  purchase  money 
hut  as  rent, 

'WoodfftU'B  L.  &  T.  67;  Co. 
Iiitt.  46 ;  Smith  v,  Simons,  1  Boot 
(Conn.),  318;  Jackson  v.  Hughes, 
1  Blackf.  (Ind.)  421.  The  words 
"lagreeto  letand  herehy  do  let" 
are  Bufflcient.  People  v.  Kelaey, 
88  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  2fl9;  Bacon  t. 
Bowdoin,  23  Pick.  (Mass.)  401. 
"A  hath  let,"  held  to  create  a 

wairantj,  the  purchaser  giraie  his     lease.     LJTincston  v.  Eisaelbrock, 

written     obUgationa     to     deUver     10  John.  (N.  Y.)  836,    A  covenant 

twelve  bales  of  cotton  to  the  ven-     "  to  stand  seized, "  if  made  by  the 

dor,  in  annual  inxtnllmente  of  four     owner,  or  a  covenant  for  quiet  en- 
bales  each,  and  a  mort^)^  on  the     ioyment,  Pritchard  v.  Dead,  S  B. 

land  to   secure   their  payment:  a     &  Ad.  689.  is  a  lease.     Basaett  v, 

stipulation    in    the    nmrtgaKC    in     T''"'""''      "    o—      '■<"      '"-    - 

these    words,    "And    in    case 'of     c 

failure  to  maJte  the  first  two  pay-     a 

ments  on  said  land,  then,  'n-e  q^ree     c 

and  hereby  promise  to  pay  said  W,     e 

(vendor)  two  bales  of  cotton  each     h 

year  for  tlio  rent  of  said  lands,"     il 

does  not  of   itself   show   that  the     v 

contract  was   a    conditional  sale     8' 

dependent  on  the  payment  of  the     o 

first  two  obligations  at  maturity     e: 

and  on  default  of  such  payment     E 

operating  only  as  a  lease  from  year     h 

to  year.     But  the  acts  and  conduct     p 

of  the  parties   under  the  contract      « 

as  proved  by  receipts  given  and     v 


'Shep.  Touch.  3fi7;  Woodf all's 
I..  &  T.  88.  In  Wilkinson  v.  Roper, 
T4  Ala.  140  ;  a  contract  may  be  so 
framed  as  to  operate  either  as  a  sale 
ur  as  a  lease— either  a  purchase  or  a 
tenancy  ;  asin  Collins  v.  Wb'gham, 
58  Ala.  488;  where  the  contract 
was  construed  as  giving  the 
option  to  the  purchaser,  in  the  first 
instance,  to  ^eat  it  as  a  purchase 
or  as  a  lease,  and  on  his  failure  to 


CSAP.  XXV.]  Operative  'Wordb.  393 

even  though  mere  words  of  license  or  permission  are  used, 
OS,  in  allcaaes,  whether  a  license  confers  an  interest  in  the 
land,  it  smonnts  to  a  lease.'  A  writing  as  foUowe: 
"Eeceivedof  B  three  doDars  and  fifty  cents  for  the  rent  of 
my  brick  house,  in,  &c.,  for  one  month,  with  theprivUege 
of  keeping  it  six  months  longer  at  the  same  rate,"  and 
signed  by  the  lessor,  was  held  operative  as  a  Iftase  of  the 
premises  forthe  period  named  therein,'  and  a  mere  license 
to  occupy  premises  from  a  certain  day  to  a  certain  day, 
or  for  any  definite  period,  and  giving  exclusive  possession, 
is  a  lease,  and  may  be  t^ead  as  a  lease,  and  possibly  as  a 
license.'  But  in  order  to  make  any  words  operative  as  a 
lease,  it  must  appear  from  the  instrument  that  such  was 
the  intention  of  the  parties,  otherwise  they  only  amount 
to  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  even  though  a  specific  time 
when  possession  shall  be  given,  the  length  of  the  term, 
and  all  the  incidents  to  a  tenancy  are  named  therein.* 
Thus,  where  a  memorandum  of  a  lease  was  drawn  up,  but 
among  the  terms  agreed  upon  was  one  that  the  tenant 
should  bring  a  surety  on  a  future  day  and  sign  the  lease, 
he  having  failed  to  bring  the  surety,  it  was  held  as  mere 

Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  83 ;  Drake  t.  Mun-  newable  forever,  ia  attested  by  but 
dav,  Cro.  Car.  207 ;  Jackson  v.  one  witness,  the  lessee  acquires 
Afdibumer,  5  T.  R.  163 ;  Tisdale  t.  only  an  equitable  title.  Abbott  t. 
Essex,  Hob.  34 ;  Plowden  v.  Cart-  Botsworth,  86  Ohio  St.  605. 
Wright,  1  Burr.  288.  So  "shall  'Hall  v.  Seabrieht,  1  Mod.  42; 
take  and  have  the  profits,"  Anonymous,  11  Mod.  42.  But  a 
Anonymous,  3  Salk.  223,  or  "  shall  contrary  doctrine  was  held  in 
have  we  use  of  &c, ,  and  may  use. "  Wood  v,  lake,  Bay.  3,  and  a  parol 
Anonymous.  11  Mod.  42.  license  from  A  to  B  to  stack  coal 
'  In  Smith  v.  Simonds,  1  Root  on  a  certain  close  for  the  period  of 
(Conn.)  818,  it  is  held  that  a  writ-  seven  years,  B  to  have  the  exclu- 
ine  which,  for  a  valuable  con-  sive  use  of  the  close  for  that  pe- 
sideration,  grants  theri^ht  toplow  riod,  was  held  not  lobe  a  lease,  or 
a  man's  land  for  a  certain  number  to  convey  an  interest  in  the  land, 
of  years,  for  a  certain  considera- .  and  consequently  was  not  within 
tion,  is  a  lease,  and  must  be  re-  the  Statute  of  Frauds.  But  the  doc- 
corded  as  such.  trine  of  this  case  is  wholly  unt«n- 
'  Hunson    v.    Wray,   7   Blackf.  able,  and  does  not   seem   ever  to 

""  '""      '  '                he  have  been  regarded  as  law,  other- 

ine  wise  aU  leases  of  premises,  re- 
ar, atricled  to  a  parfieular  purpose, 
ho  would  be  operative  only  as  licenses. 
ler  '  Bicknefl  v.  Hood,  5  M.  &  W. 
'as  104  ;  Rawson  v.  Eicke,  7  Ad.  &  El. 
by  451 ;  Chapman  v.  Towner,  8  M.  & 
]le  W,  100  ;  Bumell  v.  Curtis,  4  Jur. 
lo.  490 ;  ScuUy  v.  Murray,  84  Mo.  430 ; 
ad  Haughery  v.  Lee,  17  La.  An.  33  ( 
re-  Brewer  v.  Hill,  3  Anst  413. 


Leases. 


[§ 


unaccepted  proposal  for  a  lease.'  A  lease  should  contain 
all  the  incidents  agreed  upon  by  the  parties,  and  the  cov- 
enants, conditions,  exceptions  or  reservations  should  be 
clearly  stated,  bo  as  not  to  be  open  to  misconception  or 
misconstruction,  as  nothing  can  be  added  to  or  taken  from 
a  lease  by  paxol  evidence.  It  will  he  construed  according 
to  the  legal  effect  of  the  language  used,  taking  it  as  a 
whole,'  and  parol  evidence  is  never  admissible  to  detract 
from  or  add  to  it.' 

&  Ad.  733 ;  Doe  T.  Lea,  11  East, 
813.  But  where  the  words  used 
hare  »  flxwi  legal  signification  as 
to  quantity,  quaHty  or  time,  wheo 
used  in  a  lease  with  no  gualif  jing 
words,  it  is  presumed  tnat  they 
were  used  in  their  legal  sense. 
Smith  V.  Wilson,  ante.  So  aome- 
times  parol  evidence  is  admissible 
to  show  the  state  of  the  premises 
when  the  lease  was  made,  and  the 
chwwjterof  the  former  occupancy, 
HaU  V.  Lund,  1  H.  &  C.  676 ;  Os- 
borne V.  Wise,  7  C.  &  P.  761.  If 
the  construction  to  be  given  to  a. 
deed  or  lease  is  doubtful,  the  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  its  exe- 
cution, and  the  subsequent  con- 
duct of  the  parties  as  to  occupa- 
tioa  under  the  deed,  may  be  prop- 
erly considered  in  detenmning 
wt^t  was  int«nded  by  the  partie«. 
Bradford  v.  CresBey.  45  Me.  9.  AU 
the  parts  are  to  be  coiuidered  and 
construed  together.  Every  part 
should,  if  possible,  be  made  to  take 
effect,  and  every  word  to  operate, 
f  by  law  it  may,  according  to  the 
intention  of  the  parties.  If  a  deed. 
oranyportion  of  it, cannot  operate 
in  one  form,  it  shall  operate  in 
that  which  by  law  will  effectuate 
the  intention  of  the  parties ;  and 
every  deed  is  to  be  construed  with 
reference  to    the  actual   rightful 


.  Cartwright,  3  B, 

&  Aid.  328. 

*  It  is  presumed  that  the  writing 
embodies  all  the  terms  agreed 
ui>on,  and  in  the  absence  of  fraud, 
nustake  or  surprise,  verbal  or  other 
extrinsic  evidence  is  not  admissi- 
ble to  contradict  or  control  it.  Ger- 
ard V.  Frankel,  80  Beav.  445; 
"Woolam  T.  Heam,  7  Ves.  318; 
Omerod  v.  Hardman.  S  id.  730,  as 
that  more  or  leas  rent  was  agreed 
upon,  Preston  v,  Morceau,  2  W.  Bl. 
124B,  or  that  it  was  agreed  that  the 
rent  should  commence  at  a  time 
other  than  that  named  in  the  lease, 
Hanson  v.  Cooper,  8  Scott  N,  H. 
48,  or  that  the  rent  is  to  be  net 
rent  Rich  v.  Jackson,  4  Bro.  C. 
C.  614.  But,  unless  expressly  or 
impliedly  excluded  evidence  of  a 
custom  may  be  admitted  to  ei- 

g'ain  a  lease.  In  re  Stroud,  8  C. 
.  502,  and  parol  evidence  may  be 
given  to  explain  a  latent  ambi- 
guity. Oflbom  V.  Wise,  7  C.  P. 
761 ;  Doev.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  701 ;  Co- 
ker  V.  Guy,  2  B.  &  P.  565  ;  Doe  v. 
Hiscock,  5  M.  &  W.  363.  So  where 
technical  words  are  used,  which 
have  a  peculiar  and  special  or  local 
meaning,  understood  by  a  particu- 
lar class,  evidence  of  Bucli  mean- 
ing is  admissible.  3  Starkie  on 
Evidence,  1033.  Thus,  evidence 
baa  been  admittedto  show  that  the 
word  "thousand"  in  a  lease,  by 
local  usage  meant  1200,  Smith  v. 
Wilson,  3  B.  &  Ad.  738,  or.  that 
the  word  " level"  in  a  mining 
lease,  was  not  used  in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  a  horizontal  jplane,  but  in 
a  sense  peculiar  to  mines.  Doe  v. 
Benson,  4  B.  &  Aid.  588.  But  in 
all  cases  it  is  a  question  for  the 
jury  whether  tJie  word  was  used 
in  its  ordinary,  or  in  its  technical 
sense.  Clayton  v,  Gregson,  5  Ad. 
&  El.  303 ;  Smith  v.  Wilson,  3  B. 


CHAP.  XXV.]  The  Premises.  897 

Sec.  207.  The  premiaes.— The_prejntses  of  a  lease — being 
that  part  which  precedes  the  habendum — should  rightly 
name  and  describe  the  parties  to  the  lease,  the  considera- 
tion and  the  thing  demised.'  An  accurate  description  of 
the  premises  is  indispensable,  not  only  for  the  purposes 
of  identification,  but  also  because  nothing  passes  except 
what  is  named  in  the  lease.  Therefore,  the  thing  demised 
should  be  set  forth  with  certainty,  either  by  express  words, 
or  by  reference  to  something,  from  which  it  can  be  reduced 
to  certainty.*  Thus,  a  description  of  premises  as  "being 
the  "building  now  or  lately  occupied  by  Eichard  Roe,"  or 
"the  premises  known  as  the  Warren  farm,"  or  "the 
Phelps  place,"  designating  the  town  in  which  they  are 
located,  is  sufficient,  because  the  lease  furnishes  data  from 
which  the  premises  demised  can  be  identified.'  So  a  de- 
scription of  the  premises  demised,  as  those  conveyed  to 
the  lessor  by  a  certain  person,  and  referring  to  the  deed, 
or  even  without  reference  to  the  deed,  is  good,  as,  "the 
premises  lying,  &c.,  which  were  conveyed  to  me  by  John 
Doe,"  is  good.  Bat  such  descriptions  in  such  general 
terms  are  dangerous,  as,  if  John  Doe  had  conveyed  sev- 
eral parcels  to  the  lessor  by  separate  deeds  even,  the  title 
to  which  still  remained  in  him,  all  the  parcels  lying  in 
the  town  named  would  pass  to  the  lessee,  unless  restricted 
by  the  words  of  the  grant,  although  it  was  not  the  in- 
tention of  the  parties  that  more  than  one  of  them  should 
pass,  and  upon  the  other  hand  if  there  are  any  words  of 
restriction,  although  not  so  intended,  they  will  so  operate, 
as,  if  A  leases  to  B  all  the  premises  conveyed  to  him  by 
C,  lying  in  the  town  of  Woodstock,  when  a  part  of  the 
land  lies  in  Pomfret,  only  the  land  lying  in  Woodstock 
will  pass,  although  it  was  the  intention  of  the  parties  to 
embrace  the  premises  in  both  towns,  in  the  lease;'  but 

Tger,  bounds,  giren  are  applicable  to  an- 

ittinft  other  lot  (No.  4),  which  the  lessor 

jr  or  did  not  own.  is  valid  as  a  lease  of 

,  SUl-  No.   2,  especially  if   posseBsion  of 
No.  3  ia  taken  under  it.     Lusk  t. 

Tex.  Dnise,  4  Wend.     (N.  Y.)  818. 

Me.  '  a  Preston's  Conveyancing,  449 ; 

ly  de-  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  28. 

t  No.  *  Hall  V.  Combs,  Cro.  Eliz.  868. 

I  and  A  conveyance  of  lands  suppoeed  to 


898  Leases.  [§  207. 

if  the  land  ib  described  as  being  in  two  towns,  when  it  is 
really  in  but  one,  the  lease  will  be  good,  and  all  the  land 
in  either  of  the  towns  will  pass,  upon  the  principal  that 
the  greater  includes  the  le^.'  If  a  lease  is  made  of  a  farm 
now  in  the  possession  of  A,  the  lease  will  pass  no  more 
of  the  estate  than  A  was  in  possession  of  when  the  lease 
was  made,  and  if  any  part  of  the  farm  was  reserved  from 
A's  lease,  it  will  not  pass  to  the  lessee,  although  no  such 
reservation  was  made  in  the  lease  to  him,  and  although 
no  such  reservation  was  intended  by  the  pailies.'  It  is 
a  general  rule  that  there  must  be  sufficient  certainty  of 
the  premises  granted,  and  if  there  is  an  uncertainty  re- 
specting the  parcels,  the  lease,  as  to  such  parcels,  will  be 
void ; '  but  it  is  immaterial  whether  the  certainty  is  in 
the  deed,  as  a  substantial  or  independent  description, 
or  depends  upon  some  other  deeds  or  facts  referred  to 
therein,'  for  in  such  cases,  the  maxim  id  certum 
est  quod  certum  reddipotest  justly  applies."'    Another 

lie  in  H  count;,  described  6b  begin-  ta    an    ejectment.     Emerick    t. 

ning  on  the  O  county  line  but  in  Kohler.  2»  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  IBS, 

fact  beginning  a  half  mile  within  *  1    Preeton    on    Conveyancing, 

Gcountj.paaaesallthelandH  lying  184;  2  id.  448,  461;  Shep.  Touch. 

in   H  county.     Hale  t.   Hord,  11  S44;  Bacon's   Tracta,    102,    105;   4 

Hink.  <Tenn.)233.  Cruise's  Dig.  317;  Bacon's  Maxims, 

'  Anonymous,  Clayt.  123,  pL  218.  No.  13,  p.  25  ;  Feyram  v.  Newman, 

'  Bartlett  v.  Wright,  Cro.   Eiiz.  54  Miaa.  «12. 

808.  'Camley  v.   Stanfield,   10   Tei. 

■  2  Preston's  Conveyancing,  461.  548,  and  an  evident  o    '    ' 


Descriptions  of  premiaea  in  deeds  ^  

or  leases  are  to  be  construed  liber-  tion,  but  only  when  the  words  usea 

ally,  according  to  the  intent  of  the  warrant  it,    HoSman  v.  Riehl,  27 

parties,  and  it  is  only  necessary  to  Mo.    554,   or    inconsistent    matter 


the  validity  of  a  description,  that  may    be    rejected.      Prescott 

after  subjecting  it  to  every  modifi-  Hayes,  43  N.  H.  583.     When  the 

cation  which  the  actual  cojiditum  court,  by  a  knowled^  of  the  facts 

of  Uie  preminea  may  require,  there  eTiating,  and  the  situation  of  the 

must  be  left  some  sM/gtantiai  de»ig-  parties  at  the  time  when  a  deed 

tuition  of  the  thing  to  be  conv^a,  was  made,  can  ascertain  the  inten- 

80  that  the  court  ean  see,  looking  tion  of  the  grantor,  they  will  con- 

at  the  property  in  the  condition  in  strue  the  deed  so  as  to  give  effect 

•teiiieh  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  to  that  intention,  when  they  can 

deed,  that  the  description  can  be  find 

fitted  to  it,  and  uvu  intended  by  aftei 

the  parties  to  relate  to  it.    Peck  v.  in  w 

MallMus,  10  N.  Y.  509.    Where  the  iden 

description    clearly   designates    a  son, 

Siece  of  land  as  that  conveyed,  the  intei 

escription  cannot  be  changed  by  the 

parol    evidence  of    intent,  or    of  ecrij 

acquiescence  in  another  boundary  cott 

line,  anlefiu  such  an  adverse  posses-  to  t 

Bion  be  shown  as  is  in  itself  a  bar  ^u 


CSHAF.  XXV.] 


The  Premises. 


899 


well  settled  general  rule  is,  that  where  the  first  words 
of  a  grant  are  suflBciently  certain  in  themselves,  words 
of  additional  erroneous  description  will  not  vitiate 
the  grant,'  but  will  be  I'ejected   as    surplusage;    and 


executed  by  the  agent  of  a  corpo- 
ration, the  general  intention  is 
apparent  that  the  corporation  make 
the  grant  or  contract,  and  any  ex- 
pression is  used  wliich  is  inconsist- 
ent with  tliat  intention,  and  if 
literally  construed  would  defeat 
the  deed,  it  is  to  be  rejected. 
Tenney  v.  East  Warren,  &c.,  CJo., 
43  N.  H.  343.  See  also  upon  the 
rejection  of  erroneous  description 
and  holding  that  the  court  will  up- 
hold the  conveyance  if  practicable 
by  reconciling  or  rejecting  errone- 
ous particulars.  Wing  v.  Burgis, 
12  Me.  Ill ;  Hall  v.  Foster,  7  Vt. 
100 ;  Harvey  v.  MitcheU,  81  N.  H. 
576;  Wright  v.  Cochran,  3  Iowa 
507 ;  Smith  v.  Chatham,  14  Tex. 
822.  A  deed  describing  lands  as 
''adjoining  the  lands  of  A  and  B, 
containing  twentv  acres  more  or 
less  "  was  held  to  be  void  for  uncer- 
tainty. Dickens  v.  Barnes,  79  N. 
C.480. 

^  See  previous  note,  also  Jackson 
V.  Delaney,  11  John.  (N.  Y.)  865. 
The  general  rule  is,  that  if  the  de- 
scription of  the  premises  given  in 
a  deed  affords  sufficient  means  of 
ascertaining  and  identifying  the 
land  intended  to  be  conveyed,  after 
rejecting  that  which  is  false,  this 
is  sufficient  to  sustain  the  convey- 
ance, notwithstanding  there  may 
be  error  or  inconsistency  in  some 
of  the  particulars.  Vose  v.  Brad- 
street,  27  Me.  156;  Bosworth  v. 
Sturtevant,  2  Cush.  (Mass.)  892; 
Lyman  v.  Loomis,  5  N.  H.  408; 
Mason  v.  White,  11  Barb.  (K  Y.) 
173 ;  Eggleston  v.  Braford,  10  Ohio 
312;  Andrews  v.  Murphy,  12  Ga. 
431 ;  Berry  v.  Wright,  14  Tex.  270 ; 
English  V.  Roche,  6  Ind.  62 ;  Cam- 
bey  V.  Stanfield,  10  Tex.  546 ;  Bird 
V.  Bird,  40  Me.  398  ;  Banks  v.  Am- 
nion, 27  Penn.  St.  172.  It  is  a 
sound  rule  of  construction  that  in 
the  construction  of  a  deed,  a  de- 
scription which  fully  ascertains 
the  corpus  of  the  property  is  not 
defeated  by  the  addition  of  a  f ur- 
ler  false  description.  Uncertain- 
[and  defects  will  be  rejected,  and 
if  enough  remains  to  point 


with  reasonable  certainty  to  the 
estate  granted,  the  conveyance  will 
be  upheld.  In  Hall  v.  Foster,  7 
Vt.  100,  the  description  began :  On 
the  north  of  a  certain  stream,  and 
by  following  the  courses  and  dis- 
tances to  another  point  on  the 
same  side  of  the  stream,''  conclud- 
ed, *' thence  on  the  south  side  to 
the  bounds  begun  at."  It  was 
held,  that  the  words  **  on  the  south 
side,'*  being  inconsistent  with  the 
intent  of  the  parties  gathered  from 
the  rest  of  the  deed,  should  be  re- 
jected. Johnson  v.  Simpson,  36  N. 
H.  91 ;  Bond  v.  Fay,  12  Allen 
(Mass.)  86;  Crosby  v.  Bradbury, 
SO  Me.  61 ;  Myers  v.  Ladd,  26  lU. 
415 ;  White  v.  Guy,  9  N.  H.  126. 
A  soldier  indorsed,  a  conveyance 
on  his  discharge,  in  which  he  de- 
scribed the  premises  as  follows: 
**The  six  hundred  acres  of  land, 
due  from  the  public,  as  a  soldier, 
in  Colonel  Lamb's  regiment  of  ar- 
tillery," when  in  fact  he  was  not 
in  that  regiment.  It  was  held, 
that  the  words,  "in  Colonel  Lamb's 
regiment  of  artillery,"  might  be  re- 
g:arded  as  surplusage,  the  descrip- 
tion being  sufficient  without  them. 
Jackson  v.  Root,  18  Johns.  fN".  Y.) 
60.  See  Jackson  v.  Loomis,  id.  81 ; 
Jackson  v.  Kansom,  id.  107. 
Where  the  premises  in  a  deed  were 
described  as  lot  No,  51,  in  the  sec- 
ond division  of  a  patent,  **as  fol- 
lows," &c.,  and  it  was  proved  that 
the  grantor  at  the  time  owned  lot 
No.  50,  in  the  same  i)atent,  the 
boundaries  of  which  exactly  cor- 
responded with  those  in  the 
deed,— Held,  that  **lot  No.  51" 
might  be  reiected  as  surplusage 
the  description  being  sufficiently 
certain  without  those  words. 
Loomis  V,  Jackson,  19  Johns.  (N. 
Y.)  449 ;  and  generally,  an  errone- 
ous description  of  lands  by  num- 
bers, will  not  vitiate  the  lease,  if 
there  are  other  sufficient  descrip- 
tive particulars  to  identify  the 
property  intended  to  be  demised. 
Bradshaw  v.  Bradbury,  64  Mo. 
884;  Montgomery  v.  Johnson,  81 
Ark.  61. 


400 


Leases. 


[§  2or. 


if,  after  such  rejection,  enough  remains  to  point  with 
reasonable  certainty  to  the  estate  granted,  the  con- 
veyance will  be  upheld,'  otherwise  it  will  be  wholly 
void.*  Where  the  description  of  premises  is  certain,  it 
will  control  a  statement  as  to  the  quantity.  Thus,  if  a 
lease  is  made  of  "my  farm  in^  &c.,  containing  ten 
acres,"  the  whole  premises  embraced  in  the  farm  will  be 
conveyed,  although  the  number  of  acres  is  largely  in 
excess  of  ten,*  and  the  same  rule  prevails  although  the 
quantity  stated  is  much  less.*    The  words  more  or  less 


'Kruse  v.  Wilson,  79  HI.  283; 
Weill  V.  Lucerne  Mining  Co.,  11 
Nev.  200 ;  Ex  parte  Branch,  72 
N.  C.  106 ;  Thayer  v.  Torrey,  87  N. 
J.  L.  889 ;  Armstrong  v.  Colby,  47 
Vt.  860,  and  where  words  of  addi- 
tion are  mistaken,  and  contrary 
to  the  near  fact,  they  will  not 
even  operate  as  a  restriction  on 
the  preceding  words.  Swift  v. 
Eyres,  Cro.  Car.  546.  But,  while 
it  is  true  that  where  a  thing  is 
certainly  described  at  first,  the 
addition  of  another  certain  de- 
scription will  be  rejected,  yet  it  is 
otherwise  where  the  thing  first  de- 
scribed is  uncertain,  and  in  the 
latter  case,  it  has  been  held  that 
the  conveyance  is  void.  Dowtie's 
Case,  3  Coke,  9  6. ;  Harris  v, 
Greathead,  8  East,  91.  Ebccept 
where  the  case  absolutely  requires 
it,  it  is  not  best  to  accumulate  de- 
scription upon  description,  or  to 
particularize  too  minutely  all  the 
various  circumstances  of  name, 
place,  locality,  boundaries  and 
occupation ;  such  only  as  are 
sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  identi- 
fication should  be  introduced.  If, 
for  instance,  the  identity  can  be 
perfectly  established  by  inserting 
the  name  of  the  premises,  and  the 
town  and  county,  the  other 
particulars  should  be  omitted. 
Where  numerous  circumstances 
are  referred  to,  questions  frequent- 
ly arise  how  far  they  must  concur 
in  distinguishing  the  demised 
premises,  and  to  what  extent  words 
of  particular  explanation  may 
(^uahfy  words  of  general  descrip- 
tion, and  needless  and  expensive 
litigation  is  thus  entailed  upon  the 
parties.  Bartlett  v.  Wright,  Cro. 
Eliz.  299 ;  Dowtie's  Case,  3  Coke, 
9  &.    See  opinion  of  Pabee,  J.,  in 


Smith  v.  Galloway,  5  B.  &  Ad.  43, 
as  to  the  rule  in  cases  of  partial 
false  description.  But,  when  there 
is  nothing  that  can  be  fixed  upon 
with  certainty,  from  the  descrip- 
tion itself,  the  conveyance  is  void. 
Dickens  v.  Barnes,  ante. 

«  Proctor  V.  Pool,  4  Dev.  (N.  C.) 
L.  870. 

'Dawson  v.  Bell,  8  Ir.  L.  Rep. 
140;  Large  v.  Penn,  6  S.  &  K. 
(Penn.)  488 ;  Piene  v.  Faunce,  87 
Me.  63 ;  Hatch  v.  Gurza,  22  Tex. 
176;  Hack  v.  Runka,  47  Md.,  68 
Tex.  879 ;  Mizell  v.  Simmons,  79 
N.  C.  182 ;  Lewis  v.  Oakley,  10 
Hick.  (Tenn.)  488. 

*  AUen  V.  Allen,  14  Me.  887.  It 
is  a  general  rule  of  construction  of 
grants  and  devises  that,  where 
there  is  sufficient  certainty  before, 
by  way  of  description  of  me  thing 
granted,  as  by  giving  to  a  close  a 
particular  name,  &c. ,  a  subsequent 
mistake,  as  in  the  tenant*s  name, 
the  number  of  acres,  &c.,  will  not 
restrict  or  invalidate  it.  2  Rolle's 
Abr.  52,  54.  But  where  the 
description  is  general,  and  after- 
wards a  particular  description  is 
added,  it  will  restrict  the  general 
description.  1  List.  6  a. ;  2  id.  240 ; 
In  Fletcher  v.  Clark,  48  Vt.  211, 
the  rule  generally  recognized  was 
aptly  expressed,  that  when  a 
general  description  is  followed  by 
a  particular  one,  the  latter  must 
control,  and  that  parol  evidence 
that  gives  to  the  general  descrip- 
tion a  more  comprehensive  extent 
than  the  particular  description  is 
not  admissible,  because  it  tends  to 
contradict  the  deed.  Gano  v, 
Aldridge,  27  Ind.  294;  McEwea 
V.  Lewis,  26  N.  J.  L.  541.  ^^ 
where  premises  are  described  " 


where  premises  are  described  Mgf 
'*all  the  glebe  land  lying  in  iL,^ 


M  >'»■**.■ 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


The  Premises. 


401 


i 


in  a  deed  or  lease  must  be  confined  to  a  reasonable 
quantity. ' 

As  to  the  proper  mode  of  describing  the  premises,  it 
may  be  said  that  '*  corporeal  hereditaments  consist  whoUy 
of  substantial  and  permanent  objects,  and  may  all  be 
comprehended  under  the  general  denomination  of  land 
only;  for  land  comprehends,  in  its  legal  sense,  any 
ground,  soil  or  earth  whatsoever,  so  the  word  land 
includes  not  only  the  face  of  the  earth,  but  everything 
over  or  under  it;^  and  therefore  if  a  man  grants  all  his 
lands,  he  grants  thereby  all  his  mines  of  metal  and  other 
fossils,  his  woods,  his  waters  and  his  houses,  as  well  as 
his  fields  and  meadows ;  not  but  that  the  particular 
name  of  the  things  is  suflftcient  to  pass  them,  except  in 
the  instance  of  water,  by  a  grant  of  which  nothing  passes 
but  a  right  of  fishing ;  and  to  recover  the  land  at  the 
bottom  of  which,  it  must  be  called  so  many  acres  of  land 
covered  with  water.  But  the  capital  distinction  is  this, 
that  by  the  name  of  the  thing  demised  nothing  else  will 
pass,  except  what  falls  with  the  utmost  propriety  under 
the  term  made  use  of ;  but  by  the  name  of  land,  which 


viz. :  78  acres  of  land,  all  which 
was  lately  in  the  pNoesession  of  B, " 
the  description  is  good,  even 
though  the  lands  were  never  in 
B's  possession;  for  the  words  all 
whidi  are  not  words  of  restriction, 
but  of  explanation  only,  unless 
the  cause  is  general  and  the  sen- 
tence entire.  Swift  v.  Eyres,  Cro. 
C^.  548.  So  a  conveyance  cor- 
rectly describing  land  by  its 
quantitv  and  occupiers,  has  been 
held  sufficient,  although  described 
as  being  in  a  town  or  parish  in 
which  no  part  of  it  was  situated. 
Lamb  v.  Keaston,  5  Taunt.  207 ;  3 
Preston's  Abstracts,  206,  210. 

»  Dav  V.  IVnn,  1  Esp.  229 ;  Cross 
V.  Eglln,  2  B.  &  Ad.  106. 

•  But  the  maxim  ciijus  et  solum, 
&c. ,  like  all  other  maxims,  is  sub- 
ject to  many  exceptions,  and  a 
failure  to  bear  this  fact  in  vnind 
often  leads  to  serious  errors,  and 
its  application  is  often  mistaken, 
aad  especially  is  this  the  case  in 
populous  towns  and  cities.  **It 
lAims  to  me,"  says  Ashurst,  J.,  in 
Jifcilmd  V.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  703,  "  that 

•V  m 


the  construction  of  all  deeds  must 
be  made  with  reference  to  their 
subject  matter,  and  it  may  be  nec- 
essary to  put  a  different  construc- 
tion on  leases  made  in  populous 
cities,  from  that  on  those  made  in 
the  county.  We  know  that  in 
London  different  persons  may  have 
several  freeholds  over  the  same 
spot,  different  parts  of  the  same 
house  are  let  out  to  different 
people.  This  is  the  case  in  the  inns 
of  court.  Now  it  would  be  very 
extraordinary  to  contend  that  if  a 
person  purchased  a  set  of  chambers 
then  leased  them,  and  afterwards 
purchased  another  set  under  them, 
the  after-purchased  chambers 
would  pass  with  the  lease.  In  the 
present  case,  considering  the  nature 
of  the  {property,  it  was  proper  to 
let  in  evidence  to  show  the  state  and 
condition  of  it,  at  the  time  when 
the  lease  was  granted.  PHma 
facice  indeed,  the  property  in  the 
cellar  would  pass  by  the  demise, 
hut  that  might  be  regulated  and 
explained  by  circumstances,^^ 


26 


403  LeaSSS.  [§  208. 

nomengeneraiissimum,  everything /erresiWaZ  will  pass."' 
But  if  a  particular  kind  of  land  ifl  conveyed,  as  "  meadow 
land,"  "tillable  land,"  "mining  land,"  "pasture land," 
&c. ,  the  lease  or  conveyance  will  be  confined  to  land  of  the 
description  named,  and  in  general,  where  meadow  land, 
pastureland,  tillable  land,  &c.,  is  described,  it  must  be  un- 
derstood as  referring  to  lands  that  were  devoted  to  such 
purposes  attbetime  when  the  lease  was  made.*  If  a  certain 
lot  isdemisedjaUerectionsthereon  will  pass,  andeconverso 
if  a  certain  building  is  leased,  the  land  on  which  it  stands 
and  approaches  thereto  will  also  pass. 

Sec.  208.  What  passes  as  an  incident  of  the  property.— 
Whatever  constitutes  the  essence  of  the  iking  granted,  or 
is  parcel  of  it,  will  pass  with  it,  although  at  the  time  of 
the  making  of  the  lease  it  is  accidentally  severed.  The 
word  '  '•  furniture  "  employed  in  a  lease  of  "  a  hotel  with  the 
furniture  therein, "  includes  that  which  furnishes,  or  with 
whichanythingis famished  or  supplied.  Whatevermust 
be  supplied  to  a  house,  aroom,  or  thelike,  to  make  it  hab- 
itable, convenient  or  agreeable ;  goods,  vessels,  utensils 
and  other  appendages  nec^sary  or  convenient  for  house- 
keeping ;  whatever  is  added  to  the  interior  of  a  house  or 
apartment  for  use  or  convenience  ;*  and  the  same  defini. 
tion  is  applicable  to  the  word  as  applied  to  a  dwelling- 
house,  office,  store,  &c.,  reference  being  had,  in  its  appli- 
cation, to  the  nature  of  the  thing  demised,  the  use  to 
which  it  is  to  be  applied,  the  social  condition  of  the  ten- 
ant and  all  the  attendant  circumstances,  to  ascertain  the 
quality  and  character  of  the  furniture  intended  to  be  sup- 
plied, if  any,  as  well  as  what  is  included  in  the  term  in 
the  particular  demise,  and  the  rights  of  parties  under  a 


„  V.  GunninK,  2  Shaw,  Whi 

8;  Tresham  t.  Lamb,  2  BrowaJ,  scril 

46.  ber 

•BcU  V.  Gtolding,  27  Ind.  178.    A  an  i 

platform  covering  the  outlet  to  eel-  to  tl 

br  stepB  was  not  mentioned  in  a  not  i 

lease  of  the  cellar,  and  its  use  was  on  t 

not    necessaiT  to  the  reasonable  boU 

use  of  the  cellar,  and  it  was  held  as  c 

that  the  tenant  could  not  claim  hav 

tiiem  as  appurtenant  to  the  cellar,  v.  K 


-  -»  » i     »- 


rrsTiTRpir- 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


403 


lease,  and  the  effect  that  is  to  be  given  to  the  language 
used,  so  far  as  the  incidents  of  the  estates  are  concerned, 
are  to  be  ascertained  as  well  from  the  la^guage  used  as 
from  the  manner  in  which  the  property  is  occupied. 
Thus,  a  tenant  of  the  whole  of  an  upper  floor  of  a  build- 
ing would  have  an  exclusive  right  to  the  use  of  the  stairs, 
as  an  incident  of  the  state  demised ;  but  the  tenant  of 
one  room,  or  of  only  a  part  of  an  upper  floor,  would  not 
take  such  an  implied  right,  because,  unless  expressly 
granted,  the  reservation  of  a  right  to  use  the  stairs  for 
access  to,  and  the  covenient  occupancy  of,  the  remaining 
portion  of  the  upper  floor,  is  imphed.  So  where  there 
are  several  tenants  in  a  building,  entrance  to  which  is 
obtained  through  a  single  door  and  hall,  although  the 
lease  is  silent  upon  that  point,  each  by  impUcation  has, 
as  incident  to  the  estate  demised,  a  right  to  use  the 
door  and  hall  as  a  means  of  access  to  his  part  of  the 
building,  but  no  one  of  the  tenants  has  an  exclusive  right 
to  such  use.'  Where  a  tenant  hires  a  room  in  a  building, 
or  a  floor,  fronting  on  the  street,  for  a  term,  the  lease 
embraces  the  outside  wall,*  and  gives  the  tenant  the  ex- 
clusive right  to  hang  signs  upon  the  outer  wall  of  that 
portion  of  the  building  leased  by  him,  and,  if  he  permits 
another  person  to  occupy  a  portion  of  the  space,  with  a 
sign,  it  is  a  mere  license,  and  does  not  operate  as  d  breach 
of  a  covenant  not  to  sublet. '    So  where  a  house  is  demised 


» Peny  v.  Skiimer,  116  Maes.  129. 

'ThuB  in  a  recent  Massachusetts 
case,  Lowell  v.  Strahan,  decided 
June  80th,  1887,  this  question 
arose,  and  Allen,  J,,  said:  **A 
lease  of  the  first  floor  of  a  build- 
ing includes  the  front  wall  of 
that  part  of  the  building,  as  parcel 
of  the  leased  premises,  and  gives 
the  lessee  the  right  to  the  exclu- 
eive  use  thereof  for  signs,  and  an 
agreement  made  by  a  lessee  with 
a  third  person,  to  allow  his  busi- 
ness sign  to  remain  upon  the  out- 
side wall  of  the  leased  premises,  in 
consideration  of  an  annual  pay- 
ment, is  a  Ucense,  and  not  a  lease, 
and  does  not  constitute  a  breach 
of  a  covenant  against  under-let- 
ting. If  the  language  had  been 
used  in  a  conveyance  in  fee-simple, 


no  question  could  have  been  made 
that  the  walls  of  the  building  were 
included.  Undoubtedly  the  owner 
of  a  building  might,  in  conveying 
the  lower  and  upper  portions  of 
it  to  different  grantees,  except  the 
outside  of  the  walls  as  he  might 
do  in  conveying  the  whole  build- 
ing to  one  g^rantee.  In  every '  case 
it  IS  a  question  of  intention,  found 
in  the  language  used  as  applied  to 
the  subject-matter,  and  'construed 
in  connection  with  the  whole  in- 
strument. A  lease  for  years  by 
indenture  differs  from  a  deed  in 
fee-simple,  not  only  in  the  nature 
of  the  estate  created,  but  also  in 
the  fact  that  the  instrument  of 
demise  is  an  agreement  between 
the  parties,  containing  mutual 
covenants  a^ecting  their  rights  in 


\ 


404 


Leases. 


[§  208. 


bounded  upon  a  public  street,  the  lessee,  by  implication 


the  premises.  The  words  of  de- 
scription used  shojild  he  construed 
in  view  of  these  considerations, 
which  might  require  a  different 
meaning  to  be  given  to  them  than 
would  be  given  to  similar  words 
in  a  conveyance  in  fee.  The  words 
"first  floor  in"  the  building  are 
equivalent  to  first  story  of  the 
building,  and  naturally  include  the 
walls.  The  apparent  intention  is 
to  separate  a  section  of  the  build- 
ing as  a  distinct  tenement.  The 
words  "first  floor"  define  the 
lower  and  upper  boundaries  of  this, 
but  there  is  nothing  to  fix  the  lat- 
eral boundaries  except  the  bound- 
aries of  the  building.  In  this  re- 
spect the  words  differ  somewhat 
^m  the  word  *  *  room. "  * '  Floor  " 
means  a  section  of  the  building 
between  horizontal  planes;  the 
words  "in  a  building  show  that 
the  section  is  of  the  whole  build- 
ing, and  not  a  part  of  it.  The 
word  "room"  includes  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  perpendicular  as  well 
as  of  the  horizontal  planes  which 
bound  the  parcel  of  the  house 
described  by  it,  and  excludes  the 
outside  of  lateral  walls,  at  least 
when  they  constitute  the  walls  of 
another  room,  as  clearly  as  the 
words  "first  fioor"  exclude  the 
flooring  of  the  story  above  it. 
Under  what  circumstances  a  lease 
of  a  story  of  a  building  would  in- 
clude a  space  be^rond  the  building, 
over  lana  belonging  to  it,  need  not 
be  considered.  In  this  case  the 
building  adjoins  the  sidewalk,  and 
the  "lower  floor  in  the  builjiing" 
in  the  lease  must  beheld  to  include 
the  entire  front  wall  of  that  part 
of  the  building,  unless  there  is 
sometliing  to  control  the  natural 
meaning  of  the  language.  That 
the  outside  of  the  front  wall  would 
be  valuable  to  the  lessee  as  a  part 
of  the  premises,  and  that  the  lease 
gives  him  the  right  to  use  it  for 
some  purposes,  such  as  putting  out 
signs  ana  displaying  gCKxls,  is  not 
disputed ;  but  it  is  contended  that 
the  right  is  a  privilege  or  easement, 
appurtenant  to  the  leased  premises 
in  a  part  of  the  building  not  parcel 
to  them.  The  defendant  contends, 
on  the  other  hand,  that  the  out- 
side of  the  front  wall  is  parcel  of 
the  leased  promises,  it  often 
occurs  in  leases  of  part  of  a  build- 


ing that  rights  in  other  parts,  or  in 
land  not  parcel  of  the  premises,  as 
in  entries,  passage-ways  and 
yards,  pass  as  appurtenant  to 
them.  The  question  in  such 
cases  jgeneraUy  is  not  what  is  par- 
cel of  the  demised  premises,  but 
what  is  incident  to  tnem.  In  gen- 
eral a  deed  or  lease  of  a  house  or 
store  will  include  the  land  under 
it.  In  Stockwell  v.  Hunter,  11 
Mete.  (Mass.)  448,  and  Shawmut 
Nat.  Bank  v.  City  of  Boston,  IIS 
Mass.  125,  it  was  held  that  the  land 
under  a  building  would  not  pass  as 
parcel  of  the  premises  in  a  lease  of 
the  basement  of  a  building,  the 
upper  stories  of  which  were  let  to 
other  tenants.  In  the  case  at  bar 
the  words  of  description  naturally 
include  t6e  premises  in  question, 
the  outer  wall.  It  is  plain  that  the 
lease  grants  an  interest  in  them, 
not  merely  like  the  incidental  right 
of  support  or  shelter  which  it 
grants  m  the  land  and  other  parts 
of  the  house,  but  the  right  to  use 
and  enjoy,  as  leased  premises,  for 
the  purposes  of  business.  That 
right  is  exclusive.  The  landlord 
has  no  right  to  use  or  to  let  it  for 
such  purposes.  From  the  mere  de- 
mise, without  regard  to  special 
provisions  of  the  lease,  there  is  no 
reason  that  the  landlord  should  be 
regarded  as  having  rights  in  the 
outside  different  from  what  he  has 
in  the  inside  of  the  wall.  As  owner 
of  the  upper  tenement,  he  has  a 
right  in  the  whole  wall  for  sup- 
port, but  that  right  would  not  op- 
erate to  exempt  the  walls,  by  im- 
plication, from  a  deed  in  fee  of  the 
lower  tenement,  or  from  a  grant 
of  it  for  jrears.  The  occasions  that 
the  reversioner  would  have  to  enter 
upon  the  wall  of  the  demised  tene- 
ment must  be  few  and  extraordi- 
nary, and  it  could  not  be  inferred, 
from  the  fact  that  the  right  was 
not  expressly  reserved  in  the  lease, 
that  the  wall  was  excepted  from  it. 
We  can  see  nothing  therefore  in 
the  nature  of  the  estate  granted, 
that  should  prevent  the  outer  wall 
from  being  included  as  parcel  of 
the  demised  premises.  Qn  the  con- 
trary, the  fact  that  it  is  of  value 
to  the  tenant  for  the  use  for  which 
the  premises  may  be  occupied,  and 
of  no  value  for  use  to  the  landlord, 
would  indicate  that  it  was  part  of 


1&A 


■msir 


CHAP.   XXV.] 


Appitetenances. 


405 


and  as  an  incident  to  the  estate,  acquires  an  exclusive 
right  to  the  use  of  the  lands  in  front  of  the  house  and 
between  it  and  the  street,  and  an  exclusive  right,  except 
so  far  as  it  is  qualified  by  the  right  to  its  reasonable  use 
for  the  purposes  of  pubhc  travel,  to  all  such  land,  to  the 
centre  of  the  street,  if  the  title  thereto  is  in  his  landlord. 


the  pFemisefl  if  the  description  was 
doubtf  uL  If  it  did  not  pass  by  the 
lease  in  this  case,  it  would  seem 
that  the  right  which  the  plaintiff 
claims  could  be  maintained.  The 
only  right  of  the  tenant  would  be 
to  make  such  use  of  it  as  would  be 
incident  to  his  grant  of  the  adioin- 
ing  premises,  and  the  right  of  the 
landlord  would  be  to  enter  upon 
it,  and  make  any  use  of  it  not  in- 
consistent with  the  incidental 
rij^hts  to  use  it  of  the  tenant.  He 
might  not  have  a  right  to  take 
down  the  tenant's  sign,  but  he 
would  have  the  possession  ■  of  the 
wall,  and  the  right  to  enter  upon 
it,  and  to  use  any  of  it  not  actually 
used  by  the  tenant  for  any  purpose 
not  inconsistent  with  the  use  by 
the  tenant  of  the  leased  premises. 
It  is  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
this  was  the  intention  of  either 
party.  The  actual  possession  and 
use  of  the  wall  by  the  tenant  which 
the  parties  obviously  intended  is 
substantially  that  of  leased  premi- 
ses, and  it  would  be  very  difficult 
to  define  or  fix  the  respective 
rights  of  the  parties  in  it,  except 
on  the  assumption  that  it  is  a  part 
of  the  demised  premises.  Riddle 
V.  Littlefleld,  63  N.  H.,  and  503 
Baldwin  v.  Morgan,  48  Hun.  355, 
are  directly  in  favor  of  the  con- 
clusion we  have  reached.  The 
agreement  of  the  defendant  to  al- 
low the  sign  of  a  stranger,  in  con- 
sideration of  an  annual  payment 
b^  him,  to  remain  upon  the  out- 
side wall  demised,  was  permission 
to  do  a  particular  act,  to  affix  a 
sign  to  the  wall,  and  gave  no  au- 
thority to  do  any  other  act  upon 
the  premises.  The  facts  that  the 
permission  was  paid  for,  and  that 
the  act  permitted  was  a  continu- 
ing one,  are  ordinary  elements  of  a 
license.  Every  license  to  do  an  act 
upon  land  involves  the  exclusive 
occupation  of  the  land  by  the  li- 
censee, so  far  as  is  necessary  to  do 
the  act,  and  no  further,  A  lease 
gives  the  right  of  possession  of  the 


land,  and  the  exclusive  occupation 
of  it  for  all  purposes  not  prohib- 
ited by  its  terms.  It  is  clear  in 
this  case  that  the  intention  was 
that  the  licensee  should  have  no 
other  right  in  the  premises  than 
to  affix  his  si^  to  them,  and  that 
every  other  right  should  remain  in 
the  defendant.  An  agreement  6f 
this  nature  cannot  be  construed  as 
a  lease.  It  must  create  either  a 
license  or  an  easement.  We  have 
not  been  referred  to  any  case  in 
which  the  question  here  presented, 
or  any  closely  resembUng  it,  has 
arisen.  Numerous  cases  have 
arisen  in  England  where  the  ques- 
tion was  whether  persons  occupy- 
ing land  under  particular  agree- 
ments were  liable  to*  be  rated  as 
occupiers.  See  Cory  v.  Bristow, 
2  App.  Cas.  262;  Electric  Tel. 
Co.  V.  Overseers  of  Salford, 
11  Exchq.  181;  Lancashire  Tel. 
Co.  V.  Overseers  of  Man- 
chester, 14  Q.  B.  Div.  267 ;  Wat^ 
kins  V.  Overseers  of  Milton-next- 
Gravesend,  L.  R.,  3  Q.  B.  Div.  850; 
Forest  v.  Overseers  of  Greenwich, 
8  El.  &  Bl.  890.  In  Selby  v.  Greaves, 
L.  R.,  8  C.  P.  594,  the  letting  of  a 
defined  portion  of  a  room  in  a  fac- 
tory, with  steam-power  for  work- 
ing lace-machines,  was  held  to  be 
a  demise  ;  and  in  Hancock  v.  Aus- 
tin 14  C.  B.  (N.  S.)  634,  permission 
to  place  lace-machines  in  a  room 
in  a  factory,  and  to  work  them 
with  steam-power  furnished  bv  the 
owner  of  the  factory,  was  held  to 
be  a  license,  and  to  create  no  de- 
mise. The  case  last  cited  ap- 
proaches nearer  to  the  case  at  bar 
than  any  that  we  have  seen,  and  in 
that  the  reasons  for  regarding  the 
transaction  as  a  lease,  are  obvi- 
ously stronger  than  in  this  case. 
That  was  permission  to  occupy, 
with  fixed  machines,  a  portion  of 
the  floor,  and  space  above  it ;  that 
is  permission  to  insert  fastenings 
in  the  outer  wall,  from  which  to 
suspend  a  sign  in  proximity  to, 
but  outside  of  the  building." 


1 


406 


1j£  ASES  • 


[§  208, 


So  where  lands  bordering  on  an  unnavigable  stream  are 
leased,  the  tenant,  in  the  absence  of  restrictive  word,  im- 
pliedly takes  to  the  centre  of  the  stream,'  but  if  the  estate 
borders  upon  a  navigable  stream,  in  which  the  tide  ebbs 
and  flows,  he  takes  only  to  high  water  mark,  because  by 
law  the  landlord's  title  ends  there.*  The  demise  of  a 
"  house  '*  without  the  use  of  words  to  qualify  or  extend  the 
meaning  of  the  parties,  will  pads  no  more  land  than  is 
necessary  for  its  complete  enjoyment,"  including,  however 
all  the  land  that  is  covered  by  the  building  and  the  eaves 
thereof  if  the  landlord  owns  the  land,^  but  not  adjoining 
buildings,  although  necessary^  and  used  with  the  build- 
ing. *  But,  as  buildings  are  an  incident  of  land,  a  lease  of 
land  will  carry  with  it  ail  the  buildings  thereon,  whether 
necessary  to  its  enjoyment  or  not,  and,  although  it  de- 
scribes the  premises  as  a  certain  farm,  and  the  farm  house 
thereon.*  So  by  the  grant  of  a  mill  the  millstones  pass, 
although  severed  at  the  time  of  the  grant.  So  by  the 
grant  of  a  house  the  doors,  windows,  sashes,  locks,  keys, 
bolts,  and  all  fixtures  pass,  although  not  in  their  proper 
places  f  but,  generally,  imless  they  have  previously  been 


*  Jackson  v.  Laxm,  12  John.  (N. 
Y.)  252  ;  Halsey  v.  McCormick,  13 
N.  Y.  296. 

•Gould  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  6  N.  Y. 
622  :  WiswaU  v.  HaU,  8  Paige  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  818. 

'Bennett  t.  Bittle,  4  Rawle 
(Penn.)  389. 

^Shennan  v.  Wilkins,  118  Mass. 
481.  A  owned  two  lots  of  land, 
one  fronting  on  £.  street  and  the 
other  adjoining  the  first  in  the 
rear.  Both  lots  were  bounded  on 
one  side  by  M.  street.  Before  A 
acquired  title,  a  building  had  been 
erected,  three  stories  in  height, 
covering  both  lots,  and  having  a 
partition  waU,  through  which 
there  was  no  passageway  between 
the  two  on  the  line  of  the  two  lots. 
A  took  down  the  partition  wall  on 
the  first  floor,  thus  making  one 
large  room,  but  did  not  alter  the 
partition  wall  above.  The  en- 
trance to  this  room,  and  to  the 
rooms  above  on  the  front  of  the 
building  was  from  E.  street.  The 
rooms  in  the  rear  on  the  two  upper 
floors  were  reached  by  an  outside 


staircase,  in  the  rear  of  the  build- 
ing from  M.  street.  A  then  made 
a  fease  to  B,  in  which  the  building 
was  described  only  by  its  number 
on  £.  street.  It  was  held  that  the 
rooms  in  the  rear  in  the  upper 
stories  were  not  included  in  the 
lease.  Houghton  t.  Moore,  141 
Mass.  437. 

BQgden  V.  Jennings,  <t3  K  T. 
58. 

*Hay  v.  Cumberland,  25  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  594. 

^  Chambers,  800.  An  iron  grat- 
ing in  front  of  a  city  building 
which  protects  the  windows,  ana 
admits  light  and  air  into  the  base- 
ment, is  an  incident  of  the  tenan- 
cy of  the  basement,  and  necessary 
to  the  beneflcial  enjoyment  of  it, 
and  if  it  is  obstructed,  an  action 
lies  in  the  name  of  the  tenant, 
therefor.  Spies  v.  Domm,  54 
How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  298.  The  rule  as 
stated  in  the  text  has  been  adopted 
in  construing  and  applying  a  poli- 
cy of  insurance  on  machinery,  and 
the  same  rule  prevails  in  Uie  con- 
struction of  a  lease.    As  to  what 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


407 


annexed  to  the  freehold,  they  have  not  become  a  part 
hereof,  and  do  not  pass.  Thus,  materials  collected  for  the 
purpose  of  building,  but  which  have  not  been  actually 
used  for  that  purpose,  do  not  pass."  In  determining 
whether  or  not  a  chattel  is  so  annexed  to  the  freehold,  or 
has  been  so  annexed  thereto  as  to  become  a  fixture,  refer- 
ence must  be  had  to  the  stature  of  the  chattel  itself,  the 
position  to  the  premises  of  the  party  placing  it  there,  and 
his  probable  intention  in  doing  so,'  and,  therefore,  is 
always  a  matter  of  evidence.' 

A  demise  of  premises  described  as  premises  ^^  late  in  the 
occupation  of  A,"  part  of  which  is  a  yard,  will  not  pass  a 
cellar  under  that  yard,  which  was  then  in  the  occupancy 
of  B,  another  tenant  of  the  lessor;  because,  although 
prima  facie,  the  property  in  the  cellar  would  pass  by  the 
demise,  yet,  the  demise  is  liable  to  be  regulated  and 
explained  by  circumstances  showing  the  situation  of  the 


constitutes  rruichinery  is  a  question 
of  law  for  the  court,  and  not  a 

Question  of  fact  for  the  jury, 
tuchanan  v.  Exchange  Ins.  Co.,  61 
N.  Y.  26.  A  policy  covering  **naa- 
chineiy"  will  be  construed  to  cov- 
er all  instruments  used,  or  intend- 
ed to  be  o^rated  exclusively  by 
machinery  in  the  business  of  the 
assured,  and  which  are  so  operat- 
ed from  time  to  time  in  the  regu- 
lar and  ordinary  prosecution  of 
the  business  described  or  referred 
to  in  the  policy,  although  such 
instruments  are  not  a  part  of  any 
particular  machine,  but  are  used 
in  connection  with  the  machinery 
as  occasion  requires,  in  the  ^ose- 
cution  of  the  business.  Thus, 
where  the  plaintiffs  procured  a 
I>olicy  upon  *' their  engine  and 
machinery  ♦  ♦  for  the  manu- 
facture of  tin-ware,  sheet-iron, 
jappaned  ware,  and  fancy  plated 
ware, "  it  was  held  that  the  policy 
covered  dies  (642  in  number)  which 
were  used  to  give  form  to  various 
utensils  manufactured  in  the 
prosecution  of  the  business, 
although  such  dies  were  not  a  part 
of  any  particular  machine,  and 
when  not  in  use  were  deposited 
upon  shelves  apart  from  the 
machines  or  presses  in  which  thev 
Tfrereused.    Beavey  v.  Central  M. 


F.  Ins.''Co.,  Ill  Mass.  540.  So  the 
wheels  of  a  polishing  machine, 
although  detached  therefrom,  are 
treated  as  machinery  within  the 
meaning  of  the  term,  and  generally 
it  may  be  said  that  any  implement 
or  contrivance  used  in  connection 
with  machinery,  although  not  a 
part  of  it,  in  the  prosecution  of 
the  business,  is  covered  by  a  policy 
upon  machinery  used  in  that  busi- 
ness. Pierce  v.  Greorge,  108  Mass. 
78.  In  Thropp  v.  Field,  26  N.  J. 
L.  82,  it  was  held  that  where,  by 
the  terms  of  a  lease,  the  landlord 
is  to  furnish  power  for  machinery 
used  in  a  leased  building,  a  blast 
on  the  lessor's  premises  and  con- 
nected with  the  machinery  is  em- 
braced in  the  demise. 

1  Beard  v.  Durald,  22  La.  An. 
284. 

'  Richardson  v.  Borden,  42  Miss. 
71 ;  Voorhees  v.  McQinnis,  48  N. 
Y.  278 ;  Piatt  v.  New  Jersey,  &c., 
Arms  Co.,  14  N.  J.  L.  395 ;  Per- 
kins V.  Swank,  43  Miss.  849; 
Brown  v.  Lillie,  6  Nev.  244. 
Whether  the  thing  claimed  as  ap- 
purtenant be  parcel  or  not,  and 
the  intention  of  the  parties,  are 
the  rules  by  which  to  judge  in 
such  cases.  Bryan  v.  weather- 
head,  Cro.  Car.  17. 

•Doe  V.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  700. 


^w; 


uB^  n 


408 


Leases. 


[§  208. 


premises  and  the  parties  at  the  time  when  it  was  made.' 
A  person  may  demise  a  farm,  which  may  comprehend  a 
messuage,  and  all  the  land  and  buildings  connected  or 
used  therewith,  and  this,  even  though  the  land  is  detached 
and  consists  of  several  parcels  not  adjoining.  Thus,  if  A 
lets  to  B  a  farm,  as  follows  ;  '*  My  farm  situate  in,  &c," 
this  will  pass  all  the  land,  wherever  situated  in  the  town 
named,  occupied  and  used  by  A  at  the  time  when  the 
lease  was  made,  as  a  part  of  his  farm.  The  word  farm 
properly  signifies  a  capital  or  principal  messuage,  and  a 
quantity  of  land  thereto  appertaining.'  So,  by  the  name 
of  messuage,'  only  the  dwelling-house  and  outhouses 
immediately  adjoining  ;  and  the  orchard,  garden  or  cur- 
tilage, a  dove  house,  and  a  shop  or  mill,  lying  near  and 
usually  enjoyed  with  the  messuage,  will  pass,*  or  any- 
thing that  would  ordinarily  pass  by  that  name/  By  the 
demise  of  a  dwelling-house,  together  with  all  the  rooms 
and  chambers  thereto  belonging  or  appertaining,  is  to  be 
understood  only  what  has  been  occupied  together,  as  the 
entire  dwelling-house  at  one  time.  Where,  therefore, 
the  lease  was  of  a  house,  with  all  rooms  and  chambers 
thereto  belonging  and  appertaining,  it  was  held  not  to 
comprehend  a  room  which  had  been  separated  from  it  by 


J  Doe  V.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  701. 

*  Shep.  Touch,  93 ;  Portman  v. 
MHI,  8  Jur.  356 ;  Goodtitle  v.  Paul, 
2  Burr.  1089 ;  Goodtitle  v.  South- 
ern, 1  M.  &  S.  298. 

•  There  is  no  distinction  between 
a  messuage  and  a  dwelling-house, 
and  whatever  will  pass  by  the  use 
of  the  term  messuage  will  also  pass 
by  the  use  of  the  word  dwellmg- 
house.    Doe  v.  Collins,  2  T.  R.  498. 

♦Smithson  v.  Cage,  Gro.  Jac. 
S26 ;  Shep.  Touch.  112 ;  Norton  v. 
Webster,  12  Ad.  &  El.  442 ;  Cole  v. 
West  London,  &c.,  Co.,  27  Beav. 
242. 

*Grosvenor  v.  Hempstead,  &c., 
R.  R.  Co.,  1  DeG.  &  J.  446 ;  Steele 
V.  Midland,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  L.  R.  1 
Ch.  App.  275 ;  Hanson  v.  South- 
western R.  Co.,  8  W.  R.  467,  in- 
cluding a  cellar,  chamber,  a  cot- 
tage or  toft.  Shep.  Touch.  94.  A 
curtilage  is  defined  to  be  a  little 
garden,  yard,  field,  or  piece  of  void 
ground,    lying   near  a   dwelling- 


house,  and  it  is  said  that  a  grant 
of  a  cottage  may  include  a  curtilage 
and  a  garden.  Finlay's  L.  &  T.  31. 
A  cottage  was  formerly  regarded 
as  a  nest  for  idle  persons,  thieves, 
stealers  of  wood,  ttc,  and  so  prej- 
udicial to  public  morals,  that,  b^ 
the  statute  18  Eliz.,  chap.  7,  their 
erection  was  prohibited,  unless 
four  acres  of  land  were  annexed 
to,  to  be  used  with  it,  and  heavy- 
penalties  were  provided  for  a  viola- 
tion of  the  statute.  So  by  the 
same  statute  the  occupancy  of  ^ 
cottage  by  more  than  one  family 
was  prohibited.  Prior  to  that  stat- 
ute, the  legal  signification  of  the 
term  was  **  a  little  house  or  habita- 
tion without  any  land  belonging  to 
it,"  but  after  the  statute  came  into 
force,  its  legal  sense  was,  a  small 
house  with  four  acres  of  land  be- 
longing thereto.  Wood's  Inst.  468. 
Hence  arises  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  incidents  of  the  demise 
of  a  cottage  and  dwelling-house* 


CHAP.  3XV.]  APPtrBTENANOES.  409 

meaos  of  a  partition,  and  had  not  been  occupied  with  it 
for  many  years  previous  to  the  demise.'  A  lease 
of  "dwelling-house "or other  *' buildings," cd^eB  with 
with  it  the  land  under  the  eaves  and  projections,  if 
the  land  is  owned  hy  the  lessor,'  upon  the  principle 
that  a  grant  of  the  principal  carries  all  the  incidents,  by 
implication,  whether  they  are  named  or  the  word  appurt- 
enances is  used  or  not,  unless  expressly  reserved.  *  Where 
a  tenant  has  previously  occupied  the  premises  mider  a 
lease  for  the  same  purposes  and  with  the  same  privil^;e8 
demised  to  him  by  the  new  lease,  the  character  of  his 
former  ocxjupancy  may  beahown,  for  the  purpose  of  deter- 
mining whether  a  certain  privilege  passes  as  an  incident 
of  the  grant.  Thus,  where  a  landlord  leased  by  indent- 
ure to  histenantaportion  of  abuilding,  apart  of  which  was 
occupied  by  himself,  and  in  which  was  a  steam  engine, 
and  agreed  to  give  to  the  lessee  one-half  of  the  steam 
power ;  and  it  appeared  that  the  tenant  had  occupied  the 
the  same  premises  previously,  under  written  and  oral 
leases,  and  had  used  the  exhaust  steam  from  the  engine, 
by  means  of  a  pipe  connected  with  the  exhaust  pipe  to  a 
steamer,  used  in  and  necessary  for  carryii^  on  his  busi- 
ness, and  was  so  using  it  when  the  lease  was  executed  ; 
it  was  held,  in  an  action  gainst  the  lessor  for  cutting 
away  this  pipe,  and  depriving  the  lessee  of  the  exhaust 
stream,  that  the  right  to  use  such  stream  passed  to  the 
lessee  as  an  "appurtenant."'    Where  a  lease  is  made 

I  2  Starkie'e  Nisi  PriuB,  t.  Rand,  39  Me,  863 ;  Van  Wagner 
'Shermanv.  Williama,  llSMaag.  v.   Van  Noetrand,   19    Iowa,   433; 
481,  and  it  the  legBor  oonsenta  to  Roberts  v.  Levy,  3  Abb,  (N.  Y.)  Pr, 
tlie  erection  of  a  wall  thereon,  or  N.  S.  911,  and  all  necettary  ease- 
any  use  thereof  by  another,  it  is  a  ments,  such  as  rights  of  way.  Breed 
breach  of  the  covenant  tai  quiet  v.  Cunningham,  3  Cal.  861 ;  Grant 
eniorment.     Id.  v.   Chase,   17   Mass.   448;   Walker 
*SkuU  V.  Gleniiiter,  16  C.  B.  N.  v.  Pierce,  S8  Vt.  «4 ;    Brown  v. 
8.  61 ;  Boad  v.  N.  Y..  &c.,  R.  R.  Thissell.  6  Cush.  (M^.)  254,  and 
,,    .     ,■..,.,  nn ,  p^ttjgon  jjU  other  necessary  incidents,  as  a 
'47.    Tliua  right  against  the  lessor  to  have  the 
covenants  light  and  air  come  through  a  cer- 
Redwine  tain    window    which   was    unob- 
unaccrued  structed  when  the  lease  was  made. 
it  diecon-  Dovle  v.  Lord,  64  N.  Y.  433.    Bee 
o  as  to  be-  Bean  v.  Coleman,  44  N.  E.  439,  as 
remedies  to  what  passes  as  an  incident  to 
)s  under  a  the  grant  of  an  pasement. 
,  Winalow        *  Thomas  v.  Wiggers,  41  III.  471. 


410  Leases.  [§  208. 

of  certain  lands,  "beiqg  all  that  part  of  the  park  called 
B,  situate  and  being  in  the  county  of  O,  and  now  in  the 
occupation  of  S,"  lying  within  certain  specified  abuttals, 
"with  all  houses,  &c.,  now  in  the  occupation  of  S,"  a 
house  within  the  abuttals,  butnotin  the  occupation  of  S, 
passes  under  the  lease  ; '  but,  where  lands  are  described 
generally,  as  being  in  the  possession  of  a  certain  person, 
and  there  is  no  other  or  more  particular  description,  no 
mOTe  of  the  premises  will  pass  than  were  in  such  per- 
son's possession,  although  a  part,  not  in  his  possession, 
had,  from  time  outof  mind,  been  parcel  of  the  land.'  But, 
unedr  such  a  description,  land  and  hous^  will  pass, 
although  at  the  time  when  the  lease  was  made  a  part  of  the 
premises  were  in  the  possession  of  an  under-tenant,  under 
the  person  in  whose  possession  the  premises  are  de- 
scribed as  being.'  The  fact)  that  in  a  lease  of  a  farm  or  of 
land  generally  certain  buildings  are  specified,  does  not 
exclude  from  the  lease  other  buildings  upon  the  premises 
leased,  but  not  named  therein.'  If  a  mill  and  its  appurte- 
nances are  let,  a  race  and  dam  connected  therewith  pre- 
sumably pass  with  it ;  *  so  a  lease  of  a  mine  would  carry 
with  it  two  such  ditches  as  had  been  cut  to  convey  wat^ 
to  it ; '  so  where  premises  adjoining  a  mill  pond  are  con- 
veyed to  a  person  with  a  clauser  ' '  and  as  incident  to  such 
conveyance  *  *  exclusive  right  to  take  ice  from  the  pond" 
a  lease  of  such  premises  with  all  the  appurtenences 
thereto  belonging "  would  undoubtly  carry  with  it  the 
right  to  take  the  ice  from  the  pond.*    Where  a  person  who 

'  Jack  T.  Mclntyre,  13  CI.  &  F.  aa  it  was  in.  the  tenure  of  Jnzmi, 

]G1 ;  Hay  v.  Cumberland,  3S  Barb,  although  it  waa  afterwards  built 

(N.  Y.)  594.  upon,  passed  under  the  lease,  for 

*  B^lett  \.  Wright,  Cro.  Eliz.  tbe  leaeor  did  not  take  knowledge 
300.  of  what  was  done  bj  an  assignee, 

•  In  Burton  v.  Brown,  Cro.  Jac.  and 
643,  a  piece  of  grotind,  or  a  garden  leasee 
plot,  was  let  to  one  Juxon,  who  misec 
assigned  it  to  one  Ireland  who  that 
built  two  hoiiaes  upon  a  part  of  it,  Aouse 
leaving  the  re«t  as  a  garden.  The  *  H 
landlord  subaequentlj  leased  the  (N.  Y 
premiseB  to  the  plaintiff,  deecrib-  *  Ci 
ing  them  as  "  oU  that  garden  plot  Jacki 
or  piece  of  ground  late  in  the  ten-  '  Vi 
ure  of  Juxon  and  now  in  the  ten-  '  H 
vre  or  occupation  of  Ireland."  The  304  ; 
court  held  that  all  the  garden  plot. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


411 


has  the  right  to  fasten  a  boom  to  his  neighbor's  land  con- 
veys his  own  land  "together  with  all  the  booms  and 
piers  thereon  and  privileges  thereto  appertaining  as  here- 
tofore used  by  me, "  carries  the  right  of  fastening  the  boom 
on  the  neighbor's  land/  But  a  conveyance  of  land  with 
the  buildiiigs  thereon  and  appurtenances  "  which  makes 
no  mention  of  water  rights,  does  not  convey  the  grantor's 
rights  to  bring  water  from  a  stream  on  other  land,  by 
a  pipe  terminating  at  a  house  on  the  land  granted.* 
Parol  evidence  is  not  admissible  to  show  that  land  which, 
according  to  the  description  of  the  boundaries  in  the  lease, 
is  included  in  the  demise,  is  not  so  in  point  of  fact.' 
There  are  some  words  which  signify  more  than  at  first 
sight  they  seem  to  import.  By  the  demise  of  a  house, 
for  instance,  a  garden  will  pass,  as  it  is  considered  to  be 
parcel  of  a  house,  So,  a  demise  of  a  house,  together  with 
garden  and  shed  or  privy  at  the  further  end  thereof  passes 
the  use  of  all  the  garden,  and  not  the  use  only  to  pass  to 
the  shed  or  privy ;  and,  therefore,  the  lessor  cannot  build 
on  part  of  the  garden."    Improvements  of,  and  addi- 


«  Hoekins  v.  Brown,  76  Me.  68. 

•Williams  v.  Wadsworth,  61 
Conn.  271.  Upon  the  general  ques- 
tion as  to  wnat  passes  as  an  ap- 
purtenance. See  Griffiths  v.  Mor- 
rison, 86  Hun.  (N.  Y.)  887  ;  Ewing 
V,  Sandanal,  &c.  Ckxd  Co.,  110  UI. 
290.  Land  cannot  pass  as  appur- 
tenant to  land.  St.  Louis  Bridge 
Co.  V.  Curtis,  108  111.  410. 

'  l^ee  v.  BurtcheU,  Arms,  Mac. 
&  Og.  95  ;  Birch  y.  Stephenson,  8 
Taunt.  469. 

*  Kidder  v.  West,  8  Lev.  167  ; 
Smith  Y.  Martin,  2  Sund.  400 ;  Bet- 
tisworth^s  Case,  2  Co.  82  a ;  Co. 
Litt.  5  &.  A  garden  is  parcel  of  a 
house,  and  wiU  pass  hy  grant  either 
with  or  without  the  use  of  the 
word  **  appurtenances."  Shep. 
Touch.  94  ;  Clements  v.  Collins,  2 
T.  R.  502.  But  a  demise  or  devise 
of  a  house  "with  the  appurte- 
nances thereto,  or  in  any  manner 
belonging,"  will  not  pass  land  at  a 
distance,  though  used  and  occu- 
pied by  the  nuntor  or  testator  with 
the  lease.  Ueam  v.  Allen,  Cro. 
Car.  57.  But  the  question  as  to 
what  shall  be  said  to  pass  under 


such  general  terms  as  "  house"  or 
** messuage"  is  purely  one  of  in- 
tention to  be  collected,  as  in  other 
cases  of  intention,  from  the  whole 
instrument.  Gulliver  v.  Poyntz,  8 
Wils.  141.  "Where  a  testator  being 
tenant  fo)r  years  of  a  house,  gar- 
den, stables  and  coal  bin,  be- 
queathed them  asfoUows :  **I  give 
tine  house  I  live  in  and  garden  to 
B,"  it  was  held  that  the  stables  and 
coal  bin  occupied  bv  the  testator, 
together  with  the  house,  passed, 
though  not  expressly  named,  and 
although  the  testator  used  them 
for  the  purposes  of  trade,  as  well 
as  for  the  convenience  of  his  house. 
Clements  v.  Collins,  ante ;  Doe  v. 
Martin,  2  Bl.  1148.  But,  unless  it 
clearly  appears  that  the  testator 
or  grantor  intended  to  extend  the 
word  "appurtenances"  beyond  its 
technical  sense,  lands  usually  oc- 
cupied with  a  house  will  not  pass 
under  a  devise  or  demise  of  a  house 
"with  the  appurtenances."  Buck 
V.  Norton,  1  B.  &  P.  58 ;  Dell  v. 
I^ott,  1  Moore,  274 ;  Belaryse  v. 
Lucan,  9  East,  458. 


■W^l 


412  Leases.  [§  208. 

tional  buildings'on,  the  premises  instantly  become  parcel 
of  the  property  demised.*  Generally  speaking,  a  demise 
of  the  use  of  a  thing  is  a  demise  of  the  thing  itself ;  but 
where  certain  parts  of  a  house,  divided  from  a  portion 
occupied  by  the  lessor,  were  leased  by  him  with  certain 
easements  belonging  to  the  same ;  with  a  covenant,  during 
the  term,  to  permit  the  lessee  to  have  free  ingress,  &c. , 
through  the  gate  at  the  bottom  of  the  yard,  and  use  of 
the  pump  in  the  said  yard  jointly  with  the  lessor,  while 
the  same  should  remain  there  paying  half  the  expenses 
of  keeping  it  in  repair  ;  it  was  held,  that  an  action  would 
not  Me  against  the  lessor  for  removing  the  pump,  how- 
ever capricious  or  unreasonable  his  motive  might  be  for 
doing  so  ;  for  the  pump  itself  was  not  a  specific  subject 
of  the  demise,  and  the  words  **  whilst  the  same  should 
remain  there  "  give  the  lessor  an  option  of  removing  it ; 
nor  did  the  court  think  such  a  construction  inconsistent 
with  the  provision  that  the  lessee  should  bear  a  moiety  of 
the  charge  for  repairs."  A  lease  of  the  products  of  land 
will  sometimes  pass  the  land  itself,  as  a  lease  of  ^  ^  the  issues 
and  profits."*  So  a  grant  of  a  forest,  chase,  or  warren, 
carries  the  land  with  it.*  So,  by  the  custom  of  the  country, 
the  soil  may  pass  with  the  grant  of  a  sheep-walk,  or  a 
fold  course.*  So,  the  lease  of  a  fishery  of  a  pond,  with 
the  spear  sedge  and  the  flags  and  rushes  growing  in  and 
about  the  same,  has  been  held  to  pass  the  soil.*  A  ten- 
ant however,  who  goes  into  possession  under  an  ordinary 
lease  for  the  use  of  the  premises  for  ordinary  purposes, 
does  not  acquire  any  property  interest  in  anything  which 
exists  under  the  soil.  The  owner  of  the  land  by  part- 
ing with  the  possession  for  a  term,  does  not,  in  the 
absence  of  any  provision  in  the  lease  to  that  eff'ect,  part 
with  any  rights  of  property  in  any  thing  which  the  soil 

>  Hoby    V.    Roebuck,    7  Taunt.  ^Unless  the  soil  and  the  privilege 

157  ;  S.  C.  2  Marsh.  433.  have  been  disconnected  so  that  the 

'  Rhodes  v.  Bullard,  7  East,  116 ;  title  is  not  in  the  grantor.    Crom- 

Pomfret  v.  Ricroft,  1  Saund.  321.  well's  Case,  Dyer,  169  6. 

•"Because,"  as  the  courts  say,  'Huddlestone  v.   Woodrosse,  8 

"  to  have  the  profits  of  land,  is  the  Rolle,  61. 

same  thing  as  to  have  the  land  it-  •  Rex  v.  Old  Arlesford,  1  T.  B. 

self."    Parker  v.   Plummer,  Cro.  858. 
EUz.  190. 


Chap,  xxv.] 


Appurtenances. 


413 


may  conceal.  Thus,  in  an  English  case  *  in  land  demised 
by  the  plaintiff  to  a  gas  company  there  was  found  an 
ancient  boat  of  rude  construction,  stated  to  be  two  thou- 
sand years  old,  which  having  been  abandoned  or  left  der- 
elict by  the  original  owners  on  the  bank  of  a  river, became, 
by  the  operation  of  natural  causes,  buried  in  the  earth, 
and  so  remained  for  many  centuries,  until  discovered 
and  excavated  by  the  gas  company."    When  discovered 


*  Ewees  v.  Brigg  Gaa  CJo.,  55  L. 
T.  Rep.  881. 

*  Chltty  J.,  tsaid:  In  support  of 
the  contention  that  it  was  a  miner- 
al, reference  was  made  to  the 
case  of  Hext  v.  Qill,  and  to  the 
statement  in  the  judgment  of  Mel- 
lish,  L.  J.  (with  which  James,  L. 
J. ,  concurred),  that  the  term '  min- 
erals' includes  every  substance 
which  can  be  eot  from  underneath 
the  earth  for  the  purpose  of  profit. 
The  terms  of  this  aefinition  are 
wide  enough  to  include  the  boat, 
but  I  am  not  aware  that  the  term 
'  minerals  *  has  ever  been  held  to 
include  anything  but  that  which 
is  part  of  the  natural  soil.  Un- 
questionably coal  is  deemed  in  law 
a  part  of  the  natural  soil  without 
regard  to  what  geologists  may 
show  to  have  been  its  origin.  In 
law  the  natural  processes  by 
which  the  trees  of  a  forest  have 
become  coal  are  not  investigated, 
the  result  only  is  considered.  But 
the  boat  has  not  become  petrified  or 
fossilized  ;  it  always  has  been  dis- 
twiishable  from  the  natural  soil  it- 
self. If  therefore  I  was  required 
to  decide  the  question  I  should  hold 
that  it  was  not  a  mineral.  In  sup- 
port of  the  contention  that  it  ought 
to  be  deemed  in  law  as'  part  of  the 
soil  in  which  it  was  unbedded, 
reference  was  made  to  the  principle 
embodied  in  the  maxim,  quicquid 
ptantatuvy  or  as  it  is  somtunes 
stated  (see  Broom*s  Legal  Maxims, 
6th  ed.,  p.  876,  n.,  and  the  Judg- 
ment in  Climie  v.  Wood.  18  L.  TT, 
Rep.(N.a)609L.  Rep..8Exchq.257), 
fixatur  solo,  solo  cedit  This  prin- 
ciple IS  an  absolute  rule  of  law  not 
depending  on  intention;  for  in- 
stsmce,  if  a  man  digs  in  the  land  of 
another  and  permanently  fixes  in 
the  soil  stones  or  bricks  or  the  like 
as  the  foundation  of  a  house,  the 
Atones  or  bricks  become  the  prop- 


erty of  the  owner  of  the  soil,  what- 
ever may  have  been  the  intention 
of  the  person  who  so  placed  them 
there,  and  even  agamst  his  de- 
clared intention  that  they  should 
remain  his  property.  Nor  does  it 
appear  to  me  to  be  material  that 
the  things  should  have  been  placed 
there  by  the  hand  of  man ;  it 
would  seem  to  be  sufficient  if 
they  have  become  permanently 
fixed  in  the  soil  by  tne  operation 
of  natural  causes.  In  support  of 
the  contention  that  the  boat  al- 
ways remained  a  chatel,  it  was  or 
may  be  urged  that  though  imbed- 
ded in  the  soil,  it  always  was  dis- 
tinguishable from  the  soil  itself, 
and  preserved  its  original  charac* 
ter  of  a  chattel,  which  it  certain- 
ty now  is.  Not  long  ago  there  was 
aiscovered,  in  the  course  of  mak- 
ing excavation  in  Hampshire,  a  jar 
containing  Roman  coins,  not  gold 
or  silver  coins,  and  therefore  not 
fallinfi"  within  the  Royal  preroga- 
tive of  treasure  trove ;  apparently 
the  coins  formed  the  small  change 
of  the  treasure  of  a  Roman  legion. 
Could  it  be  said  that  the  jar  or  the 
coins  were  part  of  the  soil  within  the 
principle  referred  to?  Similarly 
a  short  time  since  there  was  found 
beneath  the  soil  (I  believe  in  Dev- 
onshire) a  Roman  lamp  of  ingen- 
ious construction  made  of  lead, 
and  in  excellent  State  of  preserva- 
tion. A  similar  question  mav  be 
asked  of  the  lamp.  But,  as  I  have 
said,  it  is  not  necessary  to  decide 
these  or  the  like  interesting  ques- 
tions in  the  present  case.  The  first 
question  which  does. actually  arise 
in  this  case  is  whether  the  boat  be- 
longed to  the  plaintiff  at  the  time 
of  the  granting  of  the  lease.  I 
hold  that  it  did,  whether  it  ought 
to  be  regarded  as  a  mineral,  or  as 
part  of  the  soil  within  the  maxim 
above  cited,  or  as  a  chatteL  If  it  was 


411 


[§208. 


the  boat  was  lyiog  embedded  in  the  clay  at  a  depth  from  the 
sm-foce  of  four  feet  at  one  end  and  six  feet  at  the  other. 
It  was  about  forty-five  feet  in  length,  hollowed  out  of  a 
single  oak  tree ;  the  wood  hod  not  become  petrified  or 
fossilized,  but  retained  the  properties  of  wood.  The  lease 
to  the  company  contained  a  reservation  of  mines  and 
minerals,  and  the  lessees  were  authorized,  under  inspec- 
tion of  the  lessor's  surveyor,  and  according  to  plans  pre- 
viously approved;  to  erect  a  gas-holder  and  other  build- 
ings, and  it  was  in  the  course  of  excavating  for  the  foun- 
dations of  the  works  that  the  boat  was  found.  It  was 
held  that  the  boat,  whether  considered  as  a  mineral,  or  as 
p£irt  of  the  soil  in  which  it  was  embedded,  or  as  still 
retaining  the  character  of  a  chattel,  was  the  property  of 
the  lessor  and  not  of  the  lessees.  If  the  premises  leased 
are  bounded  on  a  non-navigable  stream  by  the  "present 
bank,"  the  tenant  stands  in  the  same  relation  thereto, 

a  minerat  or  part  of  tbe  soil  in  the 
sense  above  indicated ,  thee  itclearly 
belonged  to  the  owners  of  the  inher- 
itance as  part  of  the  inherit&nee  it- 
self. But  if  it  ought  to  be  regard- 
ed oa  a  chattel,  1  hold  the  nropert  j 
in  the  cliattel  was  vested  in  the 
plaintiff  for  the  following  reasona : 
Being  entitled  to  the  inheritance 
under  the  settlement  of  1S5S,  and 
in  lawful  poeseesion,  he  was  in 
poBsession  of  the  ground,  not  mere- 
ly of  tbe  surface,  but  of  every 
thing  that  la;  beneath  the  surface 
down  to  the  center  of  the  earth, 
and  conseouently  in  pceseesion  of 
tbe  boat.  The  principal  of  the  de- 
cision of  the  court  in  Keg.  v.  Howe 
(Bell's  C.  C.  93)  appears  to  me  to 
apply.  There  the  question  was 
whether  the  property  in  some 
iron  lying  at  the  bottom  of  a  canal 
was  well  laid  in  tbe  indictment  in 
the  canal  company.  The  water 
bad  been  taken  out  for  the  purpose 
of  cleaning  the  canal,  and  the  pris- 
oner was  indicted  for  stealing  the 
iron  which  had  been  dropped  into 
tbe  canal  by  the  owner.  TTie  coiut 
held  that  the  canal  company  had  a 
sufficient  property  in  and  posses- 
eion  of  the  iron  to  support  the  in- 
i^ctment.  If  the  fact  of  the  iron 
having  been  left  on  the  surface  of 
the  ground  covered  by  n-ater  was 


sofflcient  to  give  in  l_    ,  ^ 

of  tbe  chattel  to  the  person  in  poe- 
eeseionof  the  land,  it  appears  to  fal- 
low d  fortiori  that  the  faetttof  this 
case  Justify  me  In  holding  that  the 

C'ntiS  was  in  possession  of  the 
t.  For  the  boat  was  imbedded 
in  the  land ;  a  mere  treapaner 
could  not  have  taken  poasessioit  of 
it,  he  could  only  have  come  at  it 
by  further  acts  of  treapaes  involv- 
ing spoil  and  waste  of  the  inherit- 
ance. Blades  v.  Hi^B,  12  L.  T. 
Rep.  (N.  S^  6t5;  11  H.  of  L.  Cas. 
621  ;  and  Hohnea'  Common  Law, 
title  '  Possession,'  p.  22S.  The 
plaintiff  then  being  m  the  poKiee- 
sion  of  the  chattel  it  follows  that 
the  property  in  the  chattel  was 
vested  in  bim.  Obviously  the 
right  of  the  original  on-ner  could 
not  be  established  ;  it  had  fcr  cen- 
turies been  lost  or  barred,  even 
Buppoaing  that  the  property  bsd 
not  heen  abandoned  when  tlie  boat 


^    r^r 


1  ■■^*»"i- 


CHAP.   XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


415 


that  a  grantor  of  the  premises  would  stand,  and  is  enti- 
tled to  all  accretions  to  the  land  by  the  receding  of  the 
stream.' 


Sec.  209.  Appurtenanoes— What  pass  as.— The  word 
^^appurtenances, "  so  generally  used  in  deeds  and  leases, 
is  derived  from  the  French  word  appartenirj  to  belong  to, 
and  signifies  anything  corporeal  or  incorporeal  that  is  an 
incident  of,  and  belongs  to  some  other  thing  as  principal. 
It  was  formerly  thought  that  this  word  was  of  great  im- 
portance in  a  conveyance,  and  that,  without  its  use,  the 
principal,  only,  would  pass ;  but  latterly,  it  has  been  held 
that  its  presence  or  absence  in  a  deed  or  lease  will  not 
materially  affect  the  grant,  and  that,  as  well  without  as 
with  it,  everything  that  appertains  or  belongs  to  the  prin- 
cipal will  pass,'  and  the  true  test  as  to  whether  a  thing  is 


>  Cobb  V.  LavaUe,  89  Bl.  881, 
81  Am.  Rep.  91;  Middleton  v. 
Pritchard,  8  Dl.  510 ;  Lombard  v. 
Kenzie,  78  Bl.  446 ;  Chicago  &c.  R. 
R.  Co.  V.  Stein,  76  UL  41 ;  Brazon 
T.  Brealer,  64  lU.  448. 

«Ogden  V.  Jemiings,  62  N.  Y. 
526;  Pyer  v.  Carter,  1  H.  &  N. 
916 ;  Pearson  v.  Spencer  ;  Warth- 
ington  V.  Gimson,  2  E.  &  E.  618  ; 
Polden  V.  Bastard,  4  B.  <Sb  S..  258. 
Tet,  it  is  a  word  of  large  significa- 
tion, and  it  would  be  impracticable 
to  omit  it  from  a  grant,  as  it  may 
sometimes  be  regarded  as  showing 
an  intention  to  extend  and  enlar^ 
its  meaning^  and  scope  beyond  its 
usual  signification.  Hisjgins  v. 
Grant,  Cro.  Eliz.  18  ;  Huneston  v. 
Woodrosse,  Cro.  Jac,  579 ;  Anony- 
mous, Owen,  81.  In  the  case 
last  cited,  it  was  held  that  by  a 
lease  of  a  manor,  "with  all  the 
lands  to  the  said  manor  appurte- 
nant," the  demesne  land  passes; 
but  nothing  but  the  manor  place 
p  asses  when  the  wordsaxe,  "  with 
all  the  lands  appertaining  to  the 
said  site.*'  So,  an  advowson  ap- 
pendant to  a  manor  will  pass 
under  a  demise  of  a  manor,  with 
the  appurtenances.  Higgins  t. 
Grant,  Cro.  Eliz.  18;  Hurleston 
V.  Woodrosse,  Cro.  Jac.  519. 
Though  by  a  demise  of  a  preb- 
end, together  with  all  comjnodi- 
iftee,  emoluments,  profits,  and  ad- 


vantages, with  the  appurtenances, 
an  advowson  belonging  to  the  preb- 
end will  not  pass,  as  the  words 
commodities,  emoluments,  profits, 
and  advantages,  imply  things  gain- 
ful, which  are  contrary  to  tne  nat- 
ure of  an  advowson  genersdlj. 
London  v.  The  Chapter  of  the  Vu:- 
gin  St.  Mary  of  Southwell,  Hob. 
w)3.  It  is  observable  that  the 
court  made  no  allusion  to  the  effect 
of  the  word  "  appurtenances."  A 
way  not  strictly  appurtenant  will 
not  pass  by  the  words  *'with  all 
ways,  roads,  rights  of  road,  paths, 
passages,  &c.,  to  the  premises  be- 
longing, or  in  anywise  appertain^ 
ing"  unless  the  i)arties  appear  to 
have  intended  to  use  those  words 
in  a  sense  larger  than  their  ordi- 
nary legal  import.  Barlow  v. 
Rhodes,  1  C.  &  M.  489 ;  see  also 
Hinchcliffe  v.  Earl  of  Kin- 
noul,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  1.  Hence  it 
has  become  usual  to  insert  the 
words  *' therewith  used  and  en- 
Morris  V.  Edgington,  8 
kunt.  27 ;  Barlow  v.  Rhodes,  1 
Cr.  &  M.  489,  which,  according  to 
Kooystra  v.  Lucas,  5  B.  &  Aid. 
880 ;  Harding  v.  Wilson,  2  B.  &  C. 
96;  would  pass  a  right  of  way 
used,  at  the  time  of  granting  the 
lease,  with  any  part  oi  the  demised 
premises.  The  word  **  belonging  " 
IS  construed  as  having  the  same 
sense  as  the  word  *'  appertaining  " 


joyed, 
Taunt 


416  Leases.  [§  209. 

an  incident  or  appurtenance,  seems  to  to  be  the  propriety 
of  relation  between  theprincipcU  and  the  adjunct,  whidi 
is  to  be  ascertained  by  considering  whether  they  agree  in 
nature  and  quality,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  union,  without 
incongruity,'  and  is  actually  and  directly  necessary  to  the 
full  enjoyment  of  the  property.  "Upon  the  grant  of  a 
mill,  every  right  necessary  to  its  free  and  full  enjoyment 
passes  as  an  incident  of  the  grant,  and  the  necessity 
measures  the  extent  and  duration  of  the  right.    When  the 

-when  it  immediate!;  precedes  or  sarj  to  carry  the  intention  of  the 

follows  it.     Barlow  v,  Rhodes,  1  mrties  into  effect.    Hill  v.  Grange, 

C.  M.  439,  445.     But  where  a  lease  Plow.   170 ;   Morris  v.  Edgington. 

voB    made    of    a  building,    with  ante ;    Jamea    v.    Plant,   ante :    1 

all  the  rooms  and  chambers,  with  Shep.    Touch.      94;     Oneley    v. 

the  appurtenancea  belonging,  or  in  Chambers,  1  Bing.  483.   In  Uigham 

anywise    appertaining    thereto,  it  t.  Baker,  Cro.  Eliz.  16,  Akdekson 

was  held,  that  a  room  formerly  says:    "That  land    shiall  pass  as 

occupied  with  the  rest  of  the  house,  pertaining  to  a  house   which  haa 

and  with  which  it  had  communi-  been  occupied  withitfor  the  space 

cated  by  means   of  a  door,    but  of  ten  or  ^s-elve  years,  for  by  that 

which    communication   had   been  time  it   has   gained  the  name    of 

stopped  by  a  wooden  partition  for  parcel  or  belonging,  and  shall  jaaas 

many  years  before  the  time  of  the  with  the  house  by  that  name  m  a 

demise,  did  not  pass.     Keralake  v.  will  or  lease. "    See,  also,  Norton 

White,  3  Stark.  508  ;   Pattison  v.  v.  Webster,  13  Ad.  &  El.  443.     But 

Hall,  9  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  747  ;   Rood  v.  where  there  is   any   restriction  of 

N.  Y.  &  Erie  R,  R.  Co.,   18  Barb,  the    application    of    the    general 

(N.  Y.)80.  words,     the     rule     is    otherwise. 

'Inst.   121   6.(7);    id.   207,   {17).  Meyrick  v.  Meyrick,  2  C,  &  J.  283; 

The  word   "appurtcnanceJt"   will  Gore  v.  langton,  3  B.  &  Ad.  680. 

paas  only  things  which  have  been  Really,  wliether  or  not,  anything 

used  together  with   the  house  or  is  an  appurtenance,  is  a  matter  of 

land    demised,    or   vhich    are  re-  evidence.      Clonoent  v.  Burt,  1  T. 

puted  or  accept^,  as  parcel  there-  R.  70J.     So,  a  house,  a  curtilage, 

of.      Smith  V.  Ridgeway,  4  H.  &  and  a  gardeo,  may  pass  as  a)^ur- 

C.    87:    Bryan  v.    Weatherhead,  tenant.        Bettisworth's    Case,     % 

Cro.  Car.  17 ;  Maitland  v.  Mackin-  Coke,  83  a. ,  or  a  right  of  turbarv, 

noQ,  1  H.  &  C.  607.     But  the  mere  Salme  v.  BuUock,  3  Lev.  165,  but, 

factthat  a  thing, as  astable,  which  generally,   land  will  not.     Heam 

has  no  open  communication  with  v,  Allen,   Cro,   Car.  57 ;  Buck  t, 

any  other  premises,  has  been  used  Norton,  1  B.  &  P.  .53.     With  land, 

inconnectionwithcertain premises  asheeg-walk,  Hurleston  v.  Wood- 

for  a  great  Dumber  of  years,  does  roeee.  Cro.  Jac.  S19,  a  right  of  way, 

not  necessarily  make  it  a  part  of  &c.,  Morris  v.' Edgington,  3  Taunt 

the  premises  so  as  to  pass  as  an  30 ;  Harding  v,    Wtlson,  3  B.  & 

appurtenance,  nor  under  the  words  C.    96;  Hinchcliffe  v,  Kinnoul.  5 

"  stables  belonging. "    In  order  to  Bing.  N,  0.  1 ;  Skull  v.  Olennlster. 

have  that  effect,  it  must  distinctly  16  C 

appear  that  the  stables  are  parcel  men 

of  the  estate.    Pollock,  C.  B,  in  whi( 

Maitland     v,    Mackinnon,     ante,  law. 

Land  cannot  be  appurtenant  to  a  ship, 

building,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  794 : 

t«rm,  but  the  word  appurtenance  M.   '. 

may,  in  some  cases,  when  used  in  Buls 

a  devise    or    lease,    be   read    as  1  Ta' 

"usually  held,  usually  occupied  or  Moo, 
eigoyed  therewith, "  when  neces- 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


417 


necessity  ceases,  the  rights  resulting  from  it,  cease.  A 
mere  convenience  is  not  sufficient  to  convey  a  right  or 
easement,  or  impose  burdens  upon  land  other  than  those 
granted  as  incident  to  the  grant.*  The  term  '^appurte- 
nances "  does  not  carry  with  it  any  right  or  interest  in  the 
lessor's  premises  outside  the  premises  leased.'    In  a  Mis- 


*  Allen,  J.,  in  Offden  v.  Jen- 
nings, 62  N.  Y.  531 ;  Holmes  v. 
Seeley.  19  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  507; 
Nicholas  V.  Chamberlain,  Cro.  Jac. 
121 ;  Pierce  v.  Sellick,  18  C.  B.  321 ; 
Oaklev  v.  Stanley,  5  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
523 ;  Voorhees  v.  Burchard,  55  N. 
Y.  98;  Tabor  v.  Bradley,  18  id. 
109;  Wilson  t.  Hunter,  14  Wis. 
688.  In  Tyrringham's  Case,  4  Coke, 
87  a.,  the  rule  in  such  cases  was 
aptly  expressed  in  the  first  resolu- 
tion of  tne  court,  that  **  prescrip- 
tion doth  not  make  a  thing  append- 
ant, unless  the  thing  which  shall 
be  appendant  agrees  in  quality 
and  nature  to  the  thing  to  whicn 
it  shall  be  appendant ^  as  a  thing 
corporate  cannot  be  appendant  to 
a  thing  corporate."  HilFs  Case, 
Plowd.  168  a.  And,  under  this 
rule,  land  cannot  be  appendant  to 
land,  or  meadow  to  a  messuage. 
Rollers  Abr.  230 ;  Cole  v.  Haynes, 
22  Vt.  588 ;  Smith  v.  Martin,  3 
Saund.  400;  Ogden  v.  Jennings, 
ante.  Neither  can  a  meadow  De 
appurtenant  to  a  pasture,  Comyn's 
Dig.  Tit.  Appenaant  (C);  Rolle's 
Abr.  280,  nor  a  pasture  to  a  wood 
or  forest.  Id.  But  a  thing  incor- 
porate, as  an  advowson,  may  be 
appmlenant  to  a  thing  corporate, 
as,  to  a  manor,  but  it  is  appendant 
to  the  demesnes  of  the  manor,  and 
not  to  the  rent  or  service.  Dyer, 
706. ;  Comyn's  Dig.  Tit.  Appendant, 
B.  1,8,  and  a  thing  corporate  may 
be  appurtenant  to  a  thing  incorpo- 
rate. Viner's  Abr.  Tit.  Appendant 
(B.)  pi.  8.  Thus,  if  a  grant  is  made 
of  an  office,  to  which  a  house  or 
lands  belong,  the  house  or  lands 
pass  with  the  office.  1  Inst.  49  a. ; 
Comyn's  Digest,  Appendant  (B.) ;  1 
id.  354 .  Viner's  Abr.  Appendant  B. 
pi.  8.  But  from  this,  it  must  not  be 
understood  that  everything  incor- 
porate can  be  appendant  to  ct  thing 


corporate.    Thus,  common  of  tur- 
bary, (the  right   of   digging  turf 
from  a  common,  or  another's  land,) 
cannot  be  appendant  to  land,  but 
only  to  a  house,   "for,"  say  the 
coiirt,    in   Tyrringham's    Case,  4 
Coke,  37  a.,   "the  thing  which  is 
appendant  ought  to  agree  with  the 
nature  and  quality  of  the  thing  to 
which  it  is  appendant,  and  turf  are 
to  be  spent  m  a  house,"  and  not 
upon  land,  Wilson  v.  W^illis,  7  East, 
124;  Comyn's  Digest,  Appendant 
(B.)  1 ;  2  Chitty's  Pleading,  890  w., 
and  is  confined  to  such  a  quantity, 
as  is  sufficient  for  the  house   to 
which  the  right  is  appendant,  and 
it  cannot  be  dug  for  sale,  Valentino 
V.  Penny,  Nov.   145,  or  to  repair 
banks,  Wilson  v.  Willis,  ante,  or 
for  making  grass  plots,  Wilson  v. 
Willis,  ante  ;  and  by  a  grant  of  a 
house   to   which  a  richt  of  tur- 
bary is  annexed,  the  turbary  passes. 
Bacon's   Abr.    Common,   (A).    A 
right  of   common  cannot  be  ap- 
pendant to  a  church  or  chapel,  for 
they  are  of  several  natures,  and  so, 
generally,  as  stated  in  the  text, there 
can  be  no  appurtenance  to  a  thing 
unless  the  thing  and  the  appur- 
tenance agree  in  nature  and  qual- 
ity ;  and  not  only  must  they  agree 
in  quality  and  nature,  but  there 
must  also  be  a  necessity  for  the  ap- 
purtenance, to  the  comfortable  or 
proper  enjoyment  of  the  premises 
granted,  and  they  must  also  he  con- 
nected unth  each  other.    The  fact 
that  a  certain  thing  is  necessary  to 
the  full  enjoyment  of  the  premises, 
and  has  alwavs  been  used  as  a  part 
of  them,  will  not  make  it  an  ajv 
purtenance  to  the  premises,  unless 
it  is  parcel  thereof.    Thus,  in  Og- 
den V.   Jennings,   62    N.   Y.   526, 
which  is  a  well  considered  case,  an 
action   of  trespass    was   brought 
against  the  defendants  for  tearing 


« Bolton  V.  Bolton,  11  Ch.  Div. 
968 ;  Leonard  v.  White,  7  Mass.  6  ; 
WlB^  V.  Draha,  6  Neb.  1 ;  29  Am. 


Rep.  358 ;  Grant  v.  Chase,  17  Mass. 
44£ 

27 


418 

Bouri  case '  it  was  held  that  in  a  lease  of  a  hotel,  a  kettle  sit- 
down  a  fence,  under  the  circnin-  to  the  ordjiury  and  rational  use  of 
stanceshoreaitordetailed.  Thede-  the  propertv  actually  conveyed, 
fendants  set  up  title  to  the  locus  in  and  fe  clearly  within  the  deacrip- 
qtio,  in  the  trustees  and  inhabit-  tion,  then  it  went  with  it  and  be- 
ante  of  School  District  No.  14,  in  longs  to  the  ecbool-houee.  The 
the  town  of  Virgil,  and  that  they  coi^  declined  to  instruct  the  jury, 
entered  apd  tore  down  the  fence  as  a  matter  of  law,  that  the  con- 
by  order  of  one  of  the  truetees.  veyance  passed  only  the  land  on 
It  appeared  that  prior  to  1839,  the  which  the  school-bouse  stood,  and 
ftchool-house  had  be«n  erected,  ad-  the  other  buildings  belonging  there- 
joining  a  highway.  A  rail  fence  to,  and  not  the  und  in  quo,  or  the 
had  been  construct«d,  commenc-  use  of  it  as  a  play-ground.  TTie 
ing  on  the  line  of  the  highway,  defendants  had  a  Terdict,  which 
tlurty-Qve  rods  north  of  ttie  school  was  sustained  in  consequence  of 
and  gradually  diverging  from  the  the  plaintiffs  title,  under  the  evi- 
highway,  passing  in  the  rear  of  the  dence,  being  insufficient  to  enable 
Bcnool-nouse  to  a  point  ten  rods  him  to  maintain  the  action.  Oth- 
Bouth  of  the  achool-nouse.  At  the  erwise  the  judgment  would  have 
north  end  of  the  school-house  this  been  reversed,  as  is  evident  frooi 
fence  was  thirty-two  feet  distant  the  <^inion  of  Allen,  J.,  the  por- 
from  the  line  of  the  highway,  tion  of  which  bearing  upon  this 
This  strip  of  land  between  the  question  is  subjoined.  He  said : 
highway  and  the  fence  was  unen-  "  If  this  play-ground  wag  not  in- 
closed. In  1889,  one  Jennings,  duded  tmthin  the  deseription  of 
who  owned  the  land,  executed  to  the,  preminea  nranted,  the  grant 
the  trustees  of  the  district  a  lease,  coum  not  be  enlarged  by  the  neee»- 
a  perpetual  lease,  of  "  all  that  cer-  $itieii,  aciuoZ  or  supposed,  of  the 
tarn  piece  or  parcel  of  land,  situate  grantee.  It  is  ur^d  th^  if  the 
and  being  on  lot  697,  in  tJie  town  reasonable  necessity  of  theee 
of  Virgil,  and  on  the  ground  now  grounds  was  eetablidied,  the  case 
occupied  by  the  present  school-dis-  would  be  within  the  familiar  rule, 
trict,  for  tue  sole  and  express  pur-  that  by  the  grant  or  demise  of  a 
pose  of  a  school-house,  to  have  and  house  or  messuage,  without  further 
to  hold  the  said  piece  or  parcel  of  description,  the  curtilage  and  gar- 
land unto  the  said  trustees,"  etc.  den  belonging  to  it  passes  with  it 
In  1864,  plaintiff,  owning  the  ad-  as  part  and  parcel  of  it,  and  as 
joining  land,  and  claiming  to  own  embraced  within  the  more  worthy 
the  unenclosed  strip  north  of  the  name  of  the  principal  thing  grant- 
school-house,  built  a  fence  along  ed  or  demised.  But  only  the  gar- 
ths line  of  the  highway  to  near  the  den,  curtilage  and  close  adjoining 
north  line  of  the  school-bouse,  and  to  the  house,  and  on  which  the 
from  that  point  to  the  old  fence,  house  is  built,  passes  under  the 
The  defendants,  inhabitants  of  the  general  description.  Other  land*, 
district,  by  the  direction  of  one  of  although  occupied  icitli  the  house, 
the  trustees,  tore  down  this  fence,  tciU  not  pass  except  partictdariy 
which  waathe  treapasa  complained  described.  Smith  v.  Martin,  2 
of.  Itappearedby  theevidencethat  Saund.  400,andn.S.  A  devise  of 
the  school  children  had  been  in  the  a  house,  with  its  appurtenances  or 
habit  of  using  the  unenclosed  strip  lands  appertaining  thereto,  may 
—  portions  thereof,  as  a  play-  have  a  more  extensive  effect  and 
-       ■       ""               ■      ■           Ithe  

Ihein  to  determine  whether  the 
locus  in   quo  was  intended  to  be 

r  was  conveyed,  as  a 

cident  to  the  convey- 
ance of  the  site  of  the  school-house. 
That,  if  the  property  was  necessary 


■TT' 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


APPUBTBa^ANCES. 


419 


uated  on  the  lessor's  adjacent  property  and  used  by  him  in 
connection  with  the  hotel  did  not  pass  as  an  appurtenant, 
when  not  appurtenant  to  the  hotel.  *  A  water  right,  granted 
in  gross,  does  not  become  technically  appurtenant  to  land 
and  a  mill  upon  and  for  which  it  is  subsequently  used  by 
the  grantee  thereof ;  but  where  such  water-power  is  taken 


of  the  word  "appurtenances" 
will  not  vary  the  effect  of 
the  grant  or  extend  it  so  as  to  in- 
clude other  lands  not  parcel  of  the 
house  and  close  mentioned.  Bet* 
tisworth's  Case,  2  Coke,  516.  The 
rule  stated  does  not  result  from 
the  necessity  of  a  garden  or  curti- 
lage to  the  reasonable  occupation 
and  enjoyment  of  the  house,  but 
from  the  fact  that  they  are  regard- 
ed as  in  fact  and  in  law  parcel  oj 
itf  and  as  technically  within  the 
grant  and  the  description  of  the 
thmg  granted.  If  a  ^nt  is  made 
of  a  house,  and  there  is  no  garden, 
curtilage,  or  close,  annexed  to  and 
a  part  of  it,  the  grantee  cannot 
claim,  as  incident  to  the  grant,  a 
garden  and  curtilage,  such  as 
twelve  men  may  say  is  reasonably 
necessary  to  the  proper  occupation 
and  enjojrment  of  the  house  as  a 
dwelling.  Whether  a  garden  is 
or  is  not  necessary  to  a  dwelling 
IB  wholly  immaterial  in  interpret- 
ing and  giving  effect  to  a  ^ant 
of  the  messuage,  and  determming 
what  lands  pass  by  the  convey- 
ance. So  here,  whether  any  or 
what  extent  of  play-ground  was 
convenient  or  necessary  in  connec- 
tion with  a  school-house,  was  en- 
tirely immaterial  in  construing 
and  determining  the  boundaries  of 
the  grant.  It  is  also  urged  that,  by 
reason  of  the  reasonable  necessity 
for  these  lands  as  a  play-ground 
for  the  pupils,  the  title  passed  as 
"appiul^nant,"  and  under  the 
clause  ^^eum  pertinantes"  in  the 
deed  ;  and  the  cases  in  which  ease- 
ments **of  necessity"  have  been 
sustained,  are  referred  to  by  the 
court  below,  and  the  learned  coun- 
sel for  the  respjondents.  The  prin- 
ciple was  carried  in  this  case  be- 
yond the  creation  of  a  mere  ease- 
ment, and  was  made  to  effect  a 
change  of  title  to  lands  other  than 
those  included  within  the  grant. 
^  is  well  settled  that,  in  a  deed, 
BB  word  appurtenances  will  not 
W|B  any  corporeal  real  property, 


or  title  to  lands,  but  merely  incor- 
poreal easements,  or  rights  and 
privileges.  It  cannot  include  a 
strip  of  land  adjacent  to  that 
granted.  A  title  to  land  will  not 
pass  by  implication.  Jackson  v. 
Striker,  1  John.  (N.  Y.)  Ch.  284  ; 
Jackson  v.  Hathaway,  15  John. 
(N.  Y.)  447;  Buszard  v.  Chapel, 
S  B.  &  C.  141 ;  8.  C.  6  Bing.  150. 
The  necessity  of  a  proper  head  of 
water  for  the  profitable  operation 
of  a  mill,  a  millyard  to  a  saw-mill, 
of  a  way  of  access  in  order  to  the 
occupation  of  any  granted  prem- 
ises;, IS  palpable,  but  the  necessity 
of  a  play-ground  or  an  open  court, 
except  for  light  and  air,  about  a 
school-house,  is  not  apparent. 
There  was  no  evidence  that 
appurtenances  of  that  char- 
acter were  either  usual  or  nec- 
essary for  any  purpose  connected 
with  the  proper  conduct  of  the 
school,  or  to  tne  health  or  welfare 
of  the  children.  That  such  ap- 
pendages are  not  a  universal  neces- 
sity is  very  evident.  Indeed,  there 
was  no  evidence  that  a  space  for  a 
playground  was  even  a  conven- 
ience for  any  proper  school  pur- 
I>ose.  It,  douDtless,  may  be  a 
source  of  pleasure  to  the  chil- 
dren, but  that  will  not  sufiSce  to 
create  an  easement  by  implication, 
or  as  appiirtenant  to  the  granted 
lands.  The  law  will  not  imply 
that  a  space  of  ground  set  apart 
for  the  exercise  and  diversion  of 
the  cliildren  is  a  necessity  for  a 
country  school-house,  or  that  for 
aU  recognized  school  purposes  the 
district  may  not  have  and  enjoy 
the  school-house  and  premises  fully 
without  such  an  adjunct,  and  it 
would  require  very  cogent  evi- 
dence to  establish  a  right  to  such 
g^rounds,  as  passing  by  imputa- 
tion, and  as  an  mcident  to  n 
conveyance  of  a  school-house." 

*  Spalding  v.  Abbott,  55  I^,  H, 
423 ;  Ogden  v.  Jennings,  62  N.  Y, 
526;  Johnson  v,  Jordan,  2  M^t« 
(Mass.)  284. 


M 


^l)  Leases.  [§  209. 

and  applied  to  run  a  mill  belonging  to  the  owner  of  the 
power,  and  afterward,  while  the  water-power  is  so  being 
used,  the  owner  conveys  tlie  premises  by  metes  and 
bounds  without  mentioning  the  water  right,  the  right 
may  pass  therewith,  as  parcel  thereof,  if  such  appears  to 
have  been  the  intention  of  the  parties.  Thus  in  1 864  a  water 
right  was  granted  by  the  owner  of  the  basin  at  Oregon 
City,  in  gross  ;  and  in  1866  the  same  was  taken  and  ap- 
plied to  the  use  of  a  paper  mill  and  machine  shop  on  block 
2,  in  said  town ;  and  in  1867,  the  same  being  the  property 
of  the  owners  of  the  water-power,  they  converted  it  into 
a  flour  mill  and  applied  such  water-power  to  the  use  there- 
of, continuously  and  exclusively,  until  187S,  when  the 
owner  of  the  mill  and  power  conveyed  the  mill,  describ- 
ing the  property  by  metes  and  bounds  only,  and  without 
any  express  mention  of  said  water  right,  to  secure  a  loan 
of  $20,000,  payable  in  two  yeai-s,  with  interest  at  the  rate 
of  one  cent  per  month ;  the  said  property,  including  said 
■water  right  being  then  worth  not  to  exceed  $25,000,  of 
which  sum  the  water  right  was  worth  one-third.  It  was 
held  that  upon  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case,  it 
satisfactorily  appeared  that  it  was  the  intention  of  the 
parties  that  the  water  right  should  pass  with  the  land 
and  mill,  and  being  then  used  in  connection  therewith,  it 
did  so  pass  as  parcel  thereof.' 

A  demise  of  a  house  and  garden  described  the  premises 
by  boundaries  which  strictly  would  include  a  portion  of  a 
piece  of  ground  at  the  back  and  adjoining  the  garden, 
which  was  laid  out  as  a  common  walk  for  a  row  of 
houses;  it  was  held,  that  this  portion  of  the  com- 
mon walk  was  included  in  the  premises  demised,  though 
by  the  lease  a  right  was  granted  to  the  lessee  of  the  use 
of  the  whole  of  the  common  walk.' 

'  Bank  of  BritiBh  North  America  8  Hd 

T,  Miller,  8   Fed.  Rep.  545;    Hart  Stal 

V.  Curtis,  7  Met.  (Maaa.)  94  ;  Linth-  C.)  J 

icum  V.  Kay,  B  "WaU.  {U.  3.)  242  ;  (Ma 

Ackroyd  v.  Smith,  16  C.  B.    1&4  ;  &R 

Dewitt  T.  Harvev,  4  Gray.  (Mass.)  Coo 

487;  Garrion  v.  feudd,  19  DJ.  558  ;  Rep 

Goodrich    v.   Burlmnk,   13   Allen,  (U. 

(Mam.)  459  ;  Nicholas  t.  Chamber-  '  ( 

lain,  8Cro.  131 ;  Whitney  v.  Ohiey,  173. 


CHAP.  XXV.]  Appurtenances  .  421 

The  demise  of  a  house  *^with  the  appurtenances" 
will  pass  the  house,  with  the  orchards,  yards  and 
curtilage  and  gardens,  but  not  the  land,  espec- 
ially if  it  be  at  a  distance,  though  occupied  with 
the  house:  so  the  demise  of  a  house  '* appurte- 
nances" will  not  pass  an  adjoining  building  not  ac- 
counted parcel  of  the  house,  although  held  with  it  for 
thirty  years.*  So  a  stable  wiU  not  pass  under  the  re- 
newed lease  of  a  messuage  with  the  appurtenances,  which 
was  not  originally  demised  therewith  and  actually  forms 
no  part  thereof.'  In  one  case  it  was  held,  that  a  grant  of 
a  house  with  the  appurtenances  would  pass  land  that  was 
occupied  with  the  house ;  it  should  not,  however,  be  over- 
looked that  the  point  arose  on  a  special  verdict,  in  which 
the  house  and  land  were  found  to  he  all  one.*  Gener- 
ally speaking,  land  will  not  pass  as  appurtenant  to  a  houses 
but  it  may  sometimes  do  so,  to  effectuate  the  obvious  in- 
tention of  the  parties*  Whether  the  thing  claimed  as 
appurtenant  is  a  part  of  the  premises  or  not  must  be 
gathered  from  the  evidence  :  thus,  where  there  is  a  con- 
veyance in  general  terms  of  all  that  acre  called  Blackacre, 
everything  which  belongs  to  Blackacre  passes  with  it ; 
but  whether  parcel  or  not  of  the  thing  demised  is  always 
matter  of  evidence  :  *  so  a  demise  of  premises,  late  in  the 
occupation  of  A  (particularly  describing  them),  pai-t  of 
which  was  a  yard,  was  held  not  to  pass  a  cellar  situate 
under  the  yard,  which  was  then  occupied  by  B,  another 
tenant  of  the  lessor  ;  for  though  prima  facie  the  property 
in  the  cellar  would  pass  by  the  demise,  yet  that  might  be 
regulated  and  explained  by  circumstances.*  Under  a  de- 
mise of  a  building,  with  all  rooms  and  chambers,  and  the 
appurtenances  thereto  belonging,  is  to  be  understood  all 
that  is  occupied  together  as  an  entire  building  at  one  and 

\                     » Bryan   v.    Wetherhead,    Cro.  Walker  v.  Walker,  3  B.  &  P.  875 ; 

Car.  17.  Buck  d.  Whalley  v.  Nuiton,  1  B. 

«Maitland  v.  Mackinnon,  1  H.  &  P.  63,  cited  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  463. 

&  C.  607.  There  are    cases  both  ways,  per 

*Gennmgs  v.   Lake,  Cro.  Car.  Williams,  J.,  7  C.  B.  714, 

169.  "ColeEjec.  240. 

^Hill  V.   Grange,  Dyer,   130  h\  «Freeland  v.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  701; 

Baudeley  v.  Brook,  Cro.  Jac.  189 ;  Press  v.  Parker,  2  Bing.  456. 
Searn  v.    Allen,    Cro.   Car.    57 ; 


422 


Leases. 


[§  209. 


the  same  time ;  therefore^  such  a  demise  will  not  compre- 
hend a  room  which  had  once  formed  part  of  the  building, 
but  which  had  been  separated  from  it  by  means  of  a 
wooden  partition,  and  had  not  been  occupied  with  it  for 
many  years  previous  to  the  demise**  A  right  of  way  or 
other  easement  (as  to  cut  turf,  &c.),  wiH  pass  by  a  demise 
with  the  appurtenances/  Where  premises  are  granted 
or  leased/  with  windows  opening  out  upon  a^  vacant  lot 


1  Kerslake  v.  White,  2  Stark.  508. 

•  Dobbyn  v.  Somers,  18  Ir.  C.  L. 
298 ;  Skull  v.  Glenister,  16  C.  B. 
N.  S.  81. 

*  Myers  v.  Gemmel,  10  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  587 ;  Mullen  v.  StrickleT,  19 
Ohio  St.  185  ;  Wood  on  Nuisances, 
p.  158,  et  seq.  There  are  instances 
in  which  a  right  to  have  the  light 
and  air  enter  the  windows  of  a 
building  over  an  adjoining  lot,  may 
exist:  I<^rst,  by  express  grant, 
Hills  V.  Miller,  8  Paige's  Oh.  (N.  Y.) 
254  ;  Western  v.  McDermott,  1  L. 
R.  (Eg.  Ca.)  499 ;  Jones  v.  Jenkins, 
84  Md.  1 ;  Thurston  v.  Mink,  82  id. 
487  ;  Brooks  v.  Reynolds,  106  Mass. 
81 ;  Morrison  v.  Marquardt,  ^  24 
Iowa  35;  Boyce  v.  Guggenheim, 
106  Mass.  201 ;  United  States  v. 
Appleton,  1  Sumn.  (U.  S.)  492; 
Kent's  Com.,  vol.  8,  p.  448,  and 
secondly ,  by  implied  grant.  Thurs- 
ton V.  Mink,  82  Md.  487 ;  Jones  v. 
Jenkins,  84  id.  1 ;  Lampman  v. 
Milks,  21  N.  Y.  505 ;  Oregon  Iron 
Co.  V.  Trullinger,  8  Oregon  1 ; 
Story  V.  Odin,  12  Mass.  157 ;  Mor- 
rison V.  Marquardt,  24  Iowa,  85. 
Where  a  landowner  erects  a  house 
with  windows  opening  upon  the 
portion  of  his  lot  adjoining,  and 
sells  the  house  and  the  lot  upon 
which  it  stands,  and  by  the  terms 
of  the  conveyance  covenants  not 
to  make  any  erection  upon  the  ad- 
joining lot  that  will  hide  either  the 
light  or  prospect,  this  will  create 
a  right  in  the  owner  of  the  house 
and  his  guarantees  against  the 
grantor  and  his  grantees  to  such 
light  and  prospect,  and  any  in- 
fringement thereof  would  be  a  nui- 
sance. Hills  V.  Miller,  8  Paige's 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  254.  So,  too,  when  the 
grant  by  fair  construction  can  be 
ext-ended  to  cover  such  rights.  In 
Hills  V.  Miller,  ante,  the  plaintiff 
purchased  of  the  defendant  a  part 
of  a  village  lot  of  four  acres  in 


the  village  of  Auburn,  and  erected 
a  valuablo  dwelling-house  thereon. 
The  defendant  MiBer  retained  the 
bldance  of '  the  lot.  I^filler  pur- 
chased the  premises  of  one  Boet- 
wick,  and  at  the  time  of  the  con- 
veyance to  Miller,  Bostwick  agreed 
with  him  that  no  building  should 
ever  be  erected  upon  a  small  trian- 
gular piece  of  land  owned  by  him 
•  on  the  east  side  of  Hotel  street,  at 
the  junction  of  that  and  South 
street,  and  directly  opposite  the 
lot  conveyed,  and  executed  a  bond 
to  Miller  w^ith  a  penalty,  for  the 
faithful  performance  of  the  agree- 
ment. Miller  caused  both  the  deed 
and  bond  to  be  recorded,  and  af- 
terward sold  a  part  of  the  premi- 
ses to  th^plaintifiF,  informing  him, 
before  the  purchase,  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  bond  and  its  provis- 
ions. Eight  years  after  the  pur- 
chase by  the  plaintiff,  the  defend- 
ant, and  the  Executors  of  Bost- 
wick^s  estate,  gave  a  quit-claim 
deed  of  this  triangular  piece  of 
land  to  the  Baptist  Church  and 
Society,  who  proceeded  to  extend 
their  church  over  the  same.  Wal- 
worth, C,  in  disposing  of  the 
question,  held  that  the  execution 
of  the  bond  at  the  same  time  the 
deed  was  executed  was,  to  all  in- 
tents and  purposes,  one  transac- 
tion, and  had  the  same  effect  as 
though  expressed  in  the  same  con- 
veyance, and,  that  thereby  a  ser- 
vitude was  imposed  upon  the  tri- 
angular strip  of  land,  which  in- 
ured to  the  benefit  of  any  pur- 
chaser under  Miller*s  title,  and 
that  this  servitude  could  not  be 
removed  by  Miller,  as  against  his 
grantees.  Easements  to  Ught,  by 
unplied  grant,  may  be  acquirea, 
but  the  doctrine,  in  the  different 
Stat^,  seems  to  be  very  conflict- 
ing. In  some  States  the  right  is 
wholly  denied.    Mullen  v.  Strick* 


CHAP.  XSY.] 


Appurtenances. 


423 


detached  from  the  premises,  a  grant  of  the  right  to  have 
the  hght  and  air  enter  the  premises  through  them,  is  not 


lerpl9  Ohio  St.  185,  while  in  oth- 
ers it  IB  made  to  depend  upon  the 
question  of  necessity,  Oregon  Iron 
Co.  V.  Trullinger,  1 ;  Morrison  v. 
Marquardt,   24  Iowa,  86;    Lamp- 
man  V.  Milks,  21  N.  Y.  505 ;  Story 
V.  Odin,  12  Mass.  157,  and  in  none 
of  them  is  the  right  upheld  as  a 
mere  convenience  of   the  granted 
premises.     Washburn     on    Ease- 
ments, 618.   The  weight  of  author- 
ity would  seem  to  support  the  doc- 
trine, that,    where    A,  being  the 
owner  of    land,    erects    a  house 
thereon    with    windows    opening 
upon  his  vacant    land  adjoining, 
and  sells  the  house,  reserving  the 
adjoining   lot,  that  this  does  not 
create  an  easement  in  the  purchas- 
er of  the  house  to  have  the  li^ht 
and  air  come  through  those  win- 
dows,   unless   the     easement     is 
necessary   to    supply    the   build- 
ing  with  Hght,  and  to  its  com- 
fortable enjoyment.    Currier's  Co. 
V.    CJorbet,   2  D.  &    S.  360;  Bid- 
die    V.    A!sh,    2    Ashm.    (Penn.) 
311 ;  Booth  V.  Alcock,  8  L.  K.  (Eq. 
Ca.)  693  ;  Durel  v.  Boisblanc,  1  La, 
An.    407;    Jackson    v.    Duke  of 
Granville,  3  DeG.  J.  &  S.  275.    The 
ground   upon    which    this    ease- 
ment by  unplied  grant  is  predi- 
cated,* is   analogous   to   that   by 
which  a  right  of  way  by  necessity 
is  created.    If  there  is  no  other 
mode  of   suppl3dng  light   to  the 
building,   as  constructed  by   the 
vendor,  except  through  those  win- 
dows, and  it  is  essential  to  its  rea- 
sonable enjoyment  that  the  light 
and  air  should  come  through  them 
over  the  adjoining  lot,  the  law  will 
raise  an  easement  to  that  extent  in 
favor  of  the  grantee  of  the  house, 
against  the  grantor  and  his  assigns. 
if.  S.    V.    Appleton,    1    Sum.  (U. 
S.)  492.    So,  too,  where    from  a 
fair  construction  of  the  grant,  such 
an  easement  can  be  implied,  the 
law  will  sustain  it  as  incident  to 
the  land,  but  the  mere  fact  that 
the  grantor  of  premises  is  also  the 
owner  of  the  adjacent  land  upon 
which  the  windows  of  the  granted 

§  remises  open,  is  not,  of  itself,  suf- 
cientto  create  or  uphold  such  an 
easement,  unless  it  is  necessary  to 
the  comfortable  and  reasonable  en- 
joyment of  the  premises.    Paine 


V.  Barton,  4   Allen   (Mass.)   169; 
Brooks  V.  Reynolds,  106  Mass.  81 ; 
Carrig  V.  Dee,  14  Gray  (Mass.),  588  ; 
Curry  v.  Stein,  11  Md.  1 ;  Napier 
V.  Bulwinkle,  5  Rich.  (S.  C.)  811 ; 
Lampman  v.  Milks,  21  N.  Y.  505 ; 
Biddle  v.  Ash,  2  Ashm.  (Penn,) 
211.    As  to  whisit  language  or  con- 
dition of  things  will  raise  such  an 
easement  by  implication,  must  ne- 
cessarily depend  upon  the  circum- 
stances of  each  case.    In  Collier  v. 
Pierce,    7   Gray   (Mass.)    18,    the 
premises  of  the  plaintiff  and  de- 
fendant were  sold  at  auction  the 
same  day.    The  plaintiff's  lot  was 
bid  off  first,    and   his   deed  was 
prior  in  point  of  time  to  that  of  the 
aefendant.     The  piece  purchased 
by  the  plaintiff  had  a  house  upon 
it,  with  windows  opening  upon  the 
lot  purchased  by  the  defendant, 
and   received  light  and  air  over 
that  lot.    There  was  no  reserva- 
tion of,  or  reference  to,  light  and 
air  in  either  conveyance.    The  de- 
fendant  darkened  the   plaintiff's 
windows.      In  an  action  therefor 
the  court  held  that  the  sale  by  auc- 
tion could  not  be  treated  as  a  grant 
by  a  proprietor  of  his  estate,  re- 
taining  to  himself  another  part, 
but  was  rather  in  the  nature  of  a 
partition,  and,  as  it  did  not  ap- 
pear that  the  light   through    the 
windows  in  question  was   neces-* 
sarytothe  convenient  enjovment  of 
the  plaintiff's  premises,  the  ease- 
ment could  not   be   regarded   as 
passing  by  construction.  SeeRoyce 
V.  Guggenheim,  106  Mass.  201.    In 
Myers  v.  Gemmel,  10  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
587,  the  defendant  leased  to  the 
plaintiff  a  dwelling  house  opening 
out  upon  a  vacant  lot,  also  belong- 
ing to  him,  over  which  the  light 
and  air   had  been  accustomed  to 
come  into  the  house.    While  the 
tenant  was  in  possession  of   the 

E remises,  the  defendant  erected  a 
uilding  upon  this  vacant  lot,  oc- 
cupying the  whole  space  between 
the  lot  and  the  dwelling,  and  dark- 
ening all  the  windows  on  that 
side  of  the  house.  The  court  held 
that  this  was  not  an  action- 
able injury,  and  was  not  in  dero- 
gation to  the  defendant's  grant,  be- 
cause the  law  does  not  attach  a 
right  of  enjoyment  of  light  as  an 


T- 


424 


Leases. 


[§  209, 


implied ;  but  it  has  recently  been  held  by  the  Court  of 
Appeals  in  New  York,  that  where  a  lease  is  made  of  a 
part  of  a  building,  with  a  window  opening  into  a  y^:*l 
connected  with  the  building,  so  that  if  the  lessee  had 
leased  the  whole  building  the  yard  would  have  passed  as 
an  appurtenance  to  the  building,  the  tenant  acquires  a 
right  to  have  the  window  left  unobstructed,  at  least 
when  it  is  necessary  for  the  use  of  the  premises  for  the 
puiposes  for  which  they  were  let.  * 


incident  to  the  occupation  of  a 
house,  unless  it  exists  in  the  form 
of  dedication  to  groups  or  collec- 
tions of  houses  so  as  to  partake  of 
the  nature  of  a  public  easement. 
But  the  court  intimates  that  if 
houses  were  erected  around  a  court, 
with  an  open  space  for  light  and 
air,  with  a  common  entrance,  and 
open  for  all  the  tenants,  that  this 
would  be  held  as  a  dedication  for  the 
benefit  of  all  the  tenants.  In  May- 
nardv.  Eshler,  17  Penn.  St.  222,  the 
court  held  that  where  two  estates 
are  conveyed  at  the  same  time,  to 
different  {>urchaser8,  no  easement  is 
acquired  in  favor  of  either  estate 
for  the  passage  of  light  and  air ;  but, 
tliat  a  person  selling  a  house  which 
opens  out  upon  a  vacant  lot,  also  be«> 
longing  to  him,  would  be  estopped 
from  making  an  erection  upon 
the  lot  that  would  obstruct  the  pas- 
sage of  Ught  and  air  to  the  dwel- 
ling. In  Morrison  v.  Marquardt, 
24  Iowa  35,  the  court  held  tnat  an 
easement  of  this  character  cannot 
be  imposed  upon  an  adjoining  lot 
of  the  grantor,  by  implication. 
Tliat  in  order  to  set  up  such  an 
easement,  it  must  arise  from  ex- 
press grant,  yet,  the  court  inti- 
mated tliat  a  condition  of  things 
might  exist,  from  which  such  an 
easement  might  be  implied.  In  Mul- 
len V.  Strickler,  19  Ohio  St.  135, 
the  plaintiff  and  defendant  were 
the  owners  of  adjoining  houses 
8ei)arated  by  a  narrow  strip  of  land 
five  feet  in  width,  both  deriving 
titlQ  from  the  same  source,  and 
upon  the  same  dav,  the  plaintiff's 
conveyance  being  first  in  point  of 
time.  The  windows  of  the  plaint- 
iff's house  opened  out  upon  tliis 
space,  and  the  house  received  all 
its  light  therefrom,  although  it  ap- 
peared that    windows    might  be 


placed  in  other  parts  of  the  house, 
and  light  thus  obtained,  but  that 
the  expense  would  be  considerable. 
The  plaintiff's  title  extended  only 
to  the  outer  wall  of  his  house  on 
this  space  ;  and  the  defendant  pro- 
ceeded to  fill  in  the  space  and  com- 
pletely shut  off  the  hght  from  the 
plaintiff's  windows,  and  darkened 
his  house.  In  an  action  to  recover 
for  the  injury,  the  court  held  that 
no  action  would  lie.  That  in  the 
absence  of  an  express  grant,  no 
easement  existed  m  favor  of  the 
plaintiff's  house  to  the  light  and 
air  over  this  space.  That  stich  an 
easeTnent  coula  not  be  implied.  In 
Ma^land,  Jones  v.  Jenkins,  84  Md. 
1 ;  Thurston,  v.  Mink,  82  id.  487, 
such  an  easement  is  raised  by  im- 
plication, and  the  rights  oi  the 
parties  are  treated  as  fixed  at  the 
time  of  severance,  and  all  appar- 
ent and  continuous  easements,  of 
which  light  is  held  to  be  one,  are 
treated  as  passing  by  implication, 
unless  excluded  in  the  grant  itself. 
From  what  has  been  said,  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  question  as  to 
whether  a  right  to  have  the  light 
and  air  enter  through  the  win- 
dows of  a  house  passes  by  implica- 
tion is  not  uniformly  settled. 

>  Doj'le  V.  Lloyd,  64  N.  Y.  432. 
In  this  case  it  appeared  tliat  on 
the  26th  day  of  July,  1870,  Ann 
Gillett  owned  a  building,  No.  85, 
on  Forsyth  street,  in  the  city  of 
New  York,  five  stories  high, 
twenty-five  feet  wide  on  the  street, 
and  fifty-one  feet  deep,  upon  a  lot 
twenty-five  feet  wide  and  seventy 
feet  deep.  The  lower  story  was 
then  occupied  as  a  store,  and  the 
upper  stories  by  famihes.  The 
space  of  nineteen  feet  in  the  re^r 
of  the  building  was  a  vacant  yard, 
with  the  exception  of  privies  there* 


k. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appuetbnances* 


425 


When  the  right  to  have  the  light  and  air  enter  the 


on,  having  no  commnnication  with 
any  street,  and  then,  apparently, 
iifief ul  for  no  purpose  except  as  ap- 
purtenant to  the  building.  There 
was  a  hall-way  on  the  southerly 
side  of  the  building,  extending  the 
whole  length  thereof,  with  a  door 
at  each  end,  giving  access  to  the 
yard  ;  and  there  was  then  a  door 
from  the  lower  story  into  this  hall- 
way, and  also  in  the  rear  of  the 
store  into  the  yard.  There  were 
also  two  windows  in  the  rear  of 
the  store,  from  which  light  and  air 
entered  the  store.  The  privies  were 
manifestly  built  to  be  used  with 
the  building,  and  for  the  accom- 
modation of  its  tenants;  and  we 
must  assume,  if  it  is  material,  as 
plaintiffs  offered  to  prove  it  upon 
the  trial,  that  the  tenants  had  ac- 
cess to  the  vacant  space  and  to  the 
privies.  "While  the  privies  were  in 
this  condition,  on  the  day  above 
mentioned,  Mrs.  Gillett  rented  the 
store  on  the  first  floor,  with  the  ap- 
purtenances, to  the  plaintiffs,  to  Be 
occupied  as  a  dry  goods  store  for 
the  term  of  five  years  from  the  Ist 
day  of  May,  1871.  The  plaintiffs 
then  bought  out  the  prior  tenant, 
and  immediately  took  possession, 
and  continued  in  the  possession  of 
the  store  down  to  the  trial  of  this 
action.  At  the  time  of  the  lease, 
the  plaintiffs  occupied  a  store  on 
the  southerly  side  of  Grand  street, 
a  street  running  east  and  west,  at 
right  angles  with  Forsyth  street, 
and  the^ear  of  that  store  butted 
against  the  rear  half  of  the  north- 
erly wall  of  the  Gillett  store,  and 
it  was  agreed  that  the  doors  open- 
ing from  the  store  into  the  nail- 
way  and  yard  should  be  bricked 
up  to  make  place  for  shelves  in 
the  store,  and  that  an  opening 
should  be  made  in  the  northerly 
-wall  of  the  Gillett  store  and  the 
rear  wall  of  plaintiffs'  store,  so  as 
to  make  a  communication  between 
the  two  stores.  The  plaintiffs  did 
not  use  the  privies  on  the  Gillett 
lot,  as  they  had  one  in  their  own 
store  convenient  for  use  for  both 
stores.  On  the  1st  day  of  May, 
1874,  the  defendants  took  a  lease 
of  the  whole  building  and  lot  No. 
85,  Forsyth  street,  for  ten  years, 
subject  to  plaintiffs'  lease,-  and 
commenced   to   excavate   in   the 


yard  for  the  purpose  of  building 
thereon,  and  then  plaintiffs  com- 
menced this  action  to  restrain 
them.  "If,"  said  Earl,  J.,  in  a 
very  able  opinion,  "  the  plaintiffs 
had  hired  the  whole  building  with 
the  appurtenances,  their  right  to 
the  ^ard  could  not  have  been 
questioned.  The  yard  belonged 
to  the  building,  and  was  appro- 
priated to  its  use,  and  would  pass 
under  a  lease  of  the  building  as  a 
part  of  the  premises  demised.  The 
lease  would  have  such  effect,  be- 
cause it  would  be  the  presumed 
intention  of  the  paities.  In 
She|)pard's  Touchstone  (94)  it 
is  said  that  the  grant  of  a  messu- 
age, or  a  messuage  with  the  ap- 
purtenances, will  pass  the  dwel- 
ling-house, barn,  adjoining  build- 
ings, orchard,  curtilage  and 
garden.  In  Comyn's  Digest  (title. 
Grant,  E.  6)  it  is  said  *  by  the  grant 
of  a  messuage  or  house,  the 
garden,  orchard  or  curtilage  pass.  * 
In  "Whitney  v.  Olney,  3  Mas.  (U. 
S.  C.  C.)  208,  it  was  held  that  a. 
devise  of  a  mill  with  api>urten- 
ances,  conveyed  not  the  buildings 
merelv,  but  the  land  under  and 
adjouiikg  which  is  necessary  to 
the  use,  and  actually  used  with  it. 
In  United  States  v.  Appleton,  1 
Sum.  (U.  S.)  492,  Judge  Story 
said :  *  The  general  rule  of  law  is, 
that  where  a  house  or  store  is  con- 
veyed by  the  owner  thereof,  every- 
thing then  belonging  to  and  in  use 
for  the  house  or  store,  as  an  in- 
cident or  appurtenance,  passes  by 
the  grant.  It  is  implied  from  the 
nature  of  the  grant,  unless  it  con- 
tains some  restriction,  that  the 
grantee  shall  possess  the  house  in 
the  manner  and  with  the  same 
beneficial  rights  as  were  then  in 
and  belonged  to  it.  *  In  the  case 
supposed,  the  yard  would  have 
passed  with  the  store,  not  by  force 
of  the  word  'appurtenances,'  but 
as  portions  of  the  premises  de- 
mised. Riddle  v.  Litchfield,  63  N. 
H.  503.  If  all  the  rooms  in  the 
building  had  at  the  same  time  been 
rented  to  different  tenants,  each 
taking  his  room  with  the  appur- 
tenances, and  no  mention  had 
been  made  of  the  yard,  a  different 
case  would  have  "been  presented.. 
The  demise  of  a  room  in  the  build- 


■^ 


426 


Leases. 


[§209. 


premises  through  certain  windows,  exists,  any  interfer- 


ing would  pass  no  portion  of  the 
yard.  Eacn  tenant  would  take 
only  the  room  which  he  hired, 
and  would  take  no  other  portion 
of  the  premises.  Whatever  else 
he  took  would  he  by  virtue  of  the 
word  *  appurtenances. '  That  word 
would  give  him  whatever  was 
attached  to  or  used  with  the 
j)remjses,  as  ^ri/^^**"^  tiifindn,  «nl 
umwmMCBt  nr  essential  to  the 
beneficial  use  and  enjoyment 
thereof,  and  he  would  take  any 
easement  or  servitude  used  or  en- 
joyed with  the  demised  premises. 
2  Wash,  on  Real  Prop.  667  ;  Wash, 
on  Ess.  82;  Sheets  v.  Selden's 
Lessee,  2  Wall.  (U.  S.)  177 ;  Riddle 
V.  Litchfield,  supra ;  Voorhees  v. 
Burchard,  55  N.  Y.  98 ;  Hutte- 
meier  v.  Albro,  18  id.  48.  It 
would  not  give  him  an  interest  in 
the  yard  as  a  portion  of  land 
demised,  because  land  cannot  pass 
as  appiirtenant  to  land»  but  it 
would  give  him  em  easement  in 
the  yard  in  common  with  all  the 
other  tenants,  for  all  pmrposes  for 
which  it  could  be  used  in  common 
— for  access  to  the  privies,  for 
playrground  for  children)  and  for 
light  and  air  for  rooms  in  the  rear 
or  the  building.  If  the  different 
rooms  in  the  building  were  leased 
at  different  times  with  the  appur- 
tenances, the  same  result  would 
follow.  Each  tenant  would  have 
an  easement  in  the  yard.  Such,  in 
the  absence  of  restrictive  words, 
would  be  the  manifest  intention  of 
the  parties,  and  no  rule  of  law 
stands  in  the  way  of  giving  effect 
to  such  intention.  The  yard  was 
attached  to  and  appropriated  for 
the  use  of  the  buildmg.  The 
privies  were  built  for  the  use  of 
the  occupants  of  the  building,  and 
the  yard  was  essential  to  the 
beneficial  use  thereof,  and  as  the 
building  was  occupied  when  plaint- 
tiffs  t(K>k  the  lease,  no  tenant 
thereof  could  well  disuse  with 
the  use  of  the  yard.  The  building 
was  so  constructed  and  arranged 
that  all  the  tenants  had  access  to 
the  yard,  and  there  was  no  other 
apparent  purpose  to  which  the 
yard  could  be  subjected.  Hence, 
within  every  authority  to  which 
our  attention  has  been  called,  the 
plaintiffs,  when  they  took  their 


lease,  acquired  an  easement  in  the 
yard,  xmless  facts  to  which  I  will 
now  call  attention,  deprive  them 
thereof.      It  was  agreed  between 
them  and  their  lessor  at  the  time 
they  took    their    lease,  as  abov9 
stated,  that  the  ilnni  ri  UiiMiim^  fnwn 
their  store  inio  tbe  yard  and  into 
the  iwli-w&y  should  be  closed  up 
nt  the  expense  of  the  lessor.    This 
l^eement  was  not  for  the  benefit 
<x  the  lessor,  and  was  not  made  to 
cut  off  any  rights  which  the  lessees 
would  otherwise  have,  but  it  was 
made  at  the  request  of  the  lessees 
and  for  their  benefit,  to  give  them 
more  room  for  shelves.    Having  a 
privy  in  their  own  store  on  Grand 
street,  so  long  as  they  used  the  two 
stores  together,  they  did  not  need 
the  use  of  a  privy  in  the  yard. 
But  the^  did  nothing^  and  agreed 
to  nothing  depriving  themselves 
of  the  right  to  use   the  privies. 
They  still  had  access  to  the  yard. 
There  was  the  hall  running  the 
whole  length  of  the  south  side  of 
the  building,  with  a  door  opening 
into   the  yard    at  the  rear  end. 
This  was  a  wav  leading  into  the 
yard,  and  in  the  absence  of  any 
restriction  all  the  tenants  had  tbe 
right  to  use  it  for  access  to  the 
jaxd.    The  plaintiffs  could  at  any 
time  have  had  access  to  the  yard 
and  privies  through  this  hall,  and 
could  have  used  them  in  common 
with  the  other  tenants.    But  even 
if  it  should  be  held  that  the  fact 
of  closing  up  the  doors,  and  the 
fact  that  plaintiffs  had  a  privy  of 
their  own,  showed  that  it  was  not 
the  intention  by  the  lease  to  give 
them  access  to  the  yard,  yet  there 
is  nothing  to  indicate  tnat  they 
were  to  be  deprived  of  the  light  ana 
air  from  the  yard.     They  hired 
the  lower  story  for  a  store  and  the 
windows  were  the  only  means  to 
procure  light  (except  artificial)  for 
the  proper  transaction  of  the  busi- 
ness of  the  store.    The  light  pass- 
ing  into  the  vyindows  from  the 
yard,  tvas  essential  to  the  beneficicd 
VM  of  the  store,  and  it  was  clearly 
the  intention  at  the  time  the  lease 
was  made  that  the  plaintiff  should 
have  it.     To  this  extent,  in  any 
view   of  the    case,   the  plaintiffs 
toere  entitled  to  enjoy  an  easement 
in  the  yard. " 


!■■»■  U    -W  - 


'^F' 


<SAP.  XXV.] 


JLppubienakces. 


427 


ence  therewith  or  obstruction  that  causes  material  incon- 
venienoe  to  the  lessee,  m  the  ordinary  occupations  of  hf  e, 
is  actionable.'  Under  a  lease  of  premises,  ''together 
with  all  ways  appertaining  or  with  any  parts  thereof  used 
or  enjoyed,^^  any  way  na&i  tvUh  the  premises  will  pass, 
whether  expressly  mentioned  or  not.'    Bui,  generally,  a 


I  Clarke  t.  Clarke,  L.  R.  1  Eq. 
Cas.  295 ;  Johnson  v.  Wyatt,  2  De- 
G.  J.  &  S.  18 ;  Isenberg  v.  East 
India  Co. ,  13  W.  R.  450.  Slight  in- 
convenience is  not  actionable.  '*  I 
should  not  think,"  says  Cran- 
WORTH,  L.  C,  in  Yates  v.  Jack,  L. 
R,  1  Eq.  Cas.  298,  *'that  the  de- 
fendant had  established  his  de- 
fence, unless  he  had  shown  that 
for  whatever  purpose  the  plaintitf 
might  wish  to  employ  the  light, 
thSre  would  he  no  material  inter- 
ference with  it"  Where,  however, 
such  a  right  is  acquired,  whether 
by  grant  or  otherwise,  the  fact 
that,  by  reason  of  changes  in  the 
situation  of  surrounding  property, 
enough  light  is  received,  so  that 
the  light  coming  over  the  servient 
estate  can  be  dispensed  with,  does 
not  in  any  measure  affect  the  right 
of  the  owner  of  the  dominant  es- 
tate to  have  the  light  come  to  him 
over  the  servient  estate.  Wood  on 
Nuisances,  159.  He  is  entitled  to 
the  light  from  that  point  in  addi- 
tion thereto.  The  rule  is,  that  the 
owner  of  the  servient  estate  can- 
not interfere  with  the  rights  of 
the  owner  of  the  dominant  estate 
in  any  manner  so  that  thelight  ivill 
be  essentially  diminished  from  that 
quarter  J  without  any  re^rence  to 
the  increase  of  light  by  changes  in 
other  surrounding  property.  Dy- 
er's Co.  V.  King,Xi.  R.,  9  Eq.  Cas. 
488  ;  Strught  v.  Bum,  L.  R.,  5Eq. 
Cas.  16.  See  Wood  on  Nuisances, 
pp.  151-159,  for  a  full  review  of  the 
c^^es 

» WhaDey  v.  Thompson,  1  B.  & 
P.  871 ;  Barlow  v.  Rhodes,  ICr.  & 
M.  480  ;  Koagstree  v.  Lucas,  5  B. 
&  Aid.  880  ;  Breed  v.  Cunningham, 
2  Cal.  861 ;  KermuUer  v.  Pratz,  18 
Iowa,  852 ;  Brown  v.  Thissell,  6 
Cush.  (Mass.)  254 ;  Gayetty  v. 
Bethune,  14  Mass.  49;  Grant  v. 
Chase,  17  Mass.  448  ;  Combs  v. 
Stewart,  10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  468; 
Dubuque  v.  Maloney,  4  Iowa  450 ; 
Wilson  V.  iBagshaw,  5  M.  &  K.  448; 


Morris  v.  Edgington,  8  Tannt.  M  ; 
Worthington  v.  Gimson,  2  E.  & 
E.  624 ;  Crisp  v.  Price,  5  id.  548 ; 
Staple  V.  Heydon,  6  Mod.  1.    In 
James  v.  Plant,  4  Ad.  &  EL  749, 
the  court  held  that  the  words  '*  be- 
longing or  appertaining  or  there- 
with lisuaJly  heUi,  used^  occupied 
or  enjoyed,    *    *    and  their  ap- 
purtenance"  were    sufficient    to 
embrace   and  convey   a  right  of 
way  which  had  been  usually  held, 
&c.,   with   the    principal   estate. 
SeeBro.  Abr.  Tit.  Extinguishment, 
pi.  15,  as  to  the  revival  of  an  ease- 
ment that  had  been  extinguished 
by  a  unity  of  possession   of  the 
dominant  and   servient   estate  in 
the  same  person,  upon  severance  ; 
also  Thompson  v.   whalley,  1  B. 
&  P.  871,  where  a  way  had  been 
enjoyed  from  close  A  over  close  B, 
the  same  person  being   seized  of 
both.  He  devised  his  estate  in  close 
A  **  with  the  appurtenances";  and 
it  was  held  that  the  right  of  way 
did  not  thereby  pass,  for  that  the 
word  **  appurtenances  "  in  the  will 
had  nothmg  to  operate  upon.    The 
words  of   the  will  there  did  not 
testify  the  intention  to  pass  the 
ri^ht  of    way.    But,  *'if  a  man 
seized  of  Blackacre  and  Whiteacre, 
uses  a  way  through  Wliiteacre  to 
Blackacre,      afterwards      grants 
Blackacre,  with  all  Mrays,  &c.,  this 
way  through  Whiteacre  shall  pass 
to  the  grantee."  Com.  Dig.  Chimin. 
(H  8).    In  Clements  v.  Lambert, 
1  Taunt.  205,  where  common  ap- 
purtenant to  premises   had   been 
extinguished  by   unity  of  posses- 
sion, the  party  seized  conveyed  the 
premises  with  all  common  and  ap- 
purtenances thereto  belonging  or 
m  anywise  appertaining  ;  and  this 
was  held  not  to  convey  a  new  right 
of  common ;  but  it  seems  admitted 
there  that,  if  the  deed  had  con- 
tained such  words  as  *'  used  with 
the  said  messuage,"  the  common, 
if  shown  to  have  been  in  fact  so 
used,  would  have  passed.    MoiTia 


428 


Leases. 


[§  209. 


right  of  way  does  not  pass  under  the  trord  "appurte- 
nances," *  except  it  be  a  way  of  necessity."    Under  an 


V.  Edgington,  8  Taunt.  24.  Where 
the  landlord  demised  part  of 
his  premises,  with  certain  rights 
of  mgress,  &c.,  and  "all  other 
ways  and  easements  to  the  said 
demised  premises  belonging  and 
appertainmg "  ;  and  these  latter 
words  were  held  to  pass  a  right 
of    way   on    the     grantor's   own 

Premises,  which  the  grantor  had 
imself  used  for  access  to  the 
premises  demised,  Mansfield,  C. 
J . ,  relying  upon  the  intent  of  the 
grantor  as  shown  by  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case.  The  principle, 
that  in  such  a  case  the  intent  must 
be  considted,  was  recognized  in 
Barlow  v.  Rhodes,  3  Tryw.  280. 
In  Thompson  v.  Waterlow,  L.  R., 
6  Eq.  Gas.  86,  the  doctrine  of 
James  v.  Plant,  ante,  was  re- 
viewed by  the  Master  of  the  Rolls 
omder  the  following  state  of  facts : 
Tlie  grantor  owned  two  adjacent 
lots,  A  and  B,  and  had  been  ac- 
customed to  cross  B  for  agriculr 
tural  purposes  to  reach  A,  in  a 
way  wnicn  was  indicated  by  use, 
and  had  gates  for  entering  and 
leaving  the  close  B.  He  then  sold 
A,  "with  all  ways  now  or  hereto- 
fore occupied  or  enjoyed,"  &c. 
The  purchaser,  under  the  ruling 
in  James  v.  Plant,  claimed  a  right 
of  way  across  B  as  appurtenant  to 
the  close  A.  But  the  court  held 
that,  in  the  present  case,  as  both 
lots  had  always  belonged  to  the 
grantor  until  the  sale  made,  there 
never  could  have  been  a  technical 
right  of  way  in  favor  of  one  lot 
over  the  other.  And  the  distinc- 
tion between  the  cases  was,  that, 
in  the  one,  there  had  once  existed 
a  right  of  way  in  favor  of  one  par- 
cel over  the  other,  which  had  oeen 
suspended  or  merged  by  the  unity 
of  both  parcels  in  the  same  owner, 
and  when  he  conveyed  the  former 
dominant  parcel  with  "  ways  here- 
tofore occupied,  &c. ,"  he  spoke  of 
something  which  haid  existed,  and 
intended  to  revive  it  by  his  grant. 
Whereas  in  the  present  case,  if 
these  words  were  held  to  create  a 
new  right,  and  such  a  right  as  the 
grantor  himself  had,  it  would  give 
the  owner  a  right  to  go  wherever 
he   pleased  over  ana  across   the 


close  B.  But  where  the  easement 
of  a  way  over  an  estate  in  favor  of 
another  is  extinguished  by  the 
unity  of  title  of  the  two  in  the  same 
owner,  and  he  then  devised  what 
had  been  the  dominant  estate, 
** tnth  it8  appurtenances"  it  was 
held  not  to  revive  the  way  over 
the  other  estate,  because  by  **  ap- 
purtenances" must  be  understood 
existing  rights. 

*  Plimpton  V.  Converse,  42  Vt. 
712  ;  Worthington  v.  Gimson,  2  E. 
Sc  E.  618  ;  Clements  v.  Lambert,  1 
Taunt.  205;  Grant  v.  Chase,  17 
Mass.  443 ;  Pheysey  v.  Vicary,  16 
M.  &  W.  448 ;  Ackroyd  v.  Smith, 
9  C.  B.  689.  In  Motes  v.  Bates,  74 
Ala.  874,  the  lessee  of  rented  Is^ds 
which  are  accessible  from  the  pub- 
lic road,  has  no  right  to  use  a 
shorter  route  across  uie  other  kmds 
of  the  lessor  without  his  permis- 
sion, express  or  implied;  and  if 
such  permission  can  be  implied 
from  his  use  of  the  shorter  route 
without  objection,  it  is  only  a 
parol  license  and  revocable  at 
pleasure ;  and  after  revocation  by 
express  prohibition  or  warning,  the 
further  use  of  the  shorter  route  by 
either  the  lessee  or  his  tenants  and 
servants,  is  a  trespass. 

« Pheysey  v.  Vicary,  ante ;  Hinch- 
cliffe  V.  Kmnoul,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  1. 
**  The  only  thing  that  would  pass,*' 
said  Parke,  B.,  in  the  case  first 
cited,  **  by  the  word  appurtenances, 
ss  used  in  this  will,  would  be  a  way 
of  necessity,"  and  on  a  previous 
page,  494,  he  says:  "I  find  no 
authority  to  show  that  the  word 
appurtenances  in  a  will  has  a  dif- 
ferent meaning  from  that  term  in 
a  deed. "  See  also  Plimpton  v.  Con- 
verse, ante ;  Piatt  v.  James,  5  B. 
&  Aid.  880.  Appurtenances  as  ap- 
plied to  easements,  which  pass  by 
grant  as  an  adjunct  of  the  princi- 
pal estate,  are  either  old  existing 
rights  or  such  as  have  been  create? 
by  express  grant.  In  Polden  v. 
Bastard,  4  B.  &  S.  264,  Crompton, 
J.,  in  reference  to  a  claim  of  an 
easement  in  a  pump  upon  one  es- 
tate in  favor  of  another,  said: 
"This  is  not  a  continuous  ease- 
ment, nor  an  easement  belonging 
to  the  cottage,  but  a  mere  enjoy« 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


429 


under-lease  which  described  the  road  demised  and  the 
ways  demised  as  **all  ways  thereunto  appertaining,"  it 
was  held,  that  this  did  not  pass  a  right  of  way  over  the 
original  lessor's  soil.'  There  is  a  distinction  between 
easements  that  are  continuous  in  their  nature  and  appar- 
ent ^  and  those  which  are  not  so.  The  former  pass  by  a 
demise  or  conveyance,  whether  named  or  not,  while  the 
latter  do  not.*    Thus  the  right  to  use  a  drain,  or  a  pump 


ment  for  two  years  by  the  tenant, 
of  the  privilege  of  using  the  pump. 
Jf  this  had  been  an  old  easement 
attached  to  the  cottage  it  would 
pass  by  the  words  ''appertaining 
and  belonging/'-otherwise,  in  order 
to  pass  it,  it  should  have  been  ex- 
pressly conveyed.  See  also  Coch- 
eco  Mfg.  Go.  V.  Whittier,  10  N.  H. 
a05. 

1  Harding  v.  Wilson,  2  B.  &  C. 
96. 

*  Pearson  v.  Spencer,  IB.  &  S. 
571 ;  Polden  v.  Bastard,  4  B.  &  S. 
258.  In  the  one  case,  the  right  de- 
pends upon  a  positive  grant  of  the 
soil,  and  in  the  other  upon  a  pre- 
sumed grant.  In  the  case  of  a 
^rant  of  the  soil,  the  conveyance, 
if  unqualified,  carries  with  it  all 
that  is  annexed  thereto,  as  well  as 
all  easements  necessary  to  the  pro- 
per enjoyment  of  the  property, 
which  are  apparent,  or  of  such  a 
character  as  to  be  discerned  upon 
an  inspection  of  the  property, 
while  in  the  case  of  a  presumed 
grant,  nothing  is  acquired  what  is 
strictly  in  accordance  with  the 
uses  with  whicli  it  is  claimed,  and 
this  presumption  never  attaches, 
except  when  it  finds  reason- 
able support  from  all  the  cir- 
cumstances attendant,  ,not  only 
upon  the  user,  but  upon 'the  thing 
cmimed.  In  Pyer  v.  Carter,  1  H. 
&  N.  916,  the  plaintiff  and  defend- 
ant were  the  owners  of  adjoining 
tenements  which  had  formerly  be- 
longed to  one  person,  and  been 
used  as  one  house,  but  which  he 
divided  and  made  into  two.  In 
In  July,  1853,  the  owner  of  the 
whole  tenement  conveyed  the  de- 
fendant's house  to  him  in  fee,  and 
in  September  of  the  same  year  con- 
veyed the  plaintiffs  house  to  him. 
No  reservation  of  an  easement  was 
contained  in  either  conveyance. 
At  the  time  of  the  conveyance  a 


xlrain  or  sewer  ran  under  the  plaint- 
iff's house  and  thence  tmder  the 
defendant's  house,  and  discharged 
itself  into  a  common  sewer.  The 
defendant  obstructed  this  drain, 
and  wholly  prevented  the  flow  of 
waters  through  it  where  it  entered 
lus  house,  and  as  a  consequence  in 
every  rain  storm  the  defendant's 
house  was  flooded.  The  defend- 
ant was  not  aware  of  the  existence 
of  the  drain  at  the  time  of  the 
conveyance  to  him,  and  the  plaint- 
iff might  have  constructed  a  new 
drain  from  lus  house  to  the  com- 
mon sewer  for  a  small  cost.  Upon 
these  facts  a  verdict  was  entered 
for  the  plaintiff  by  the  direction  of 
the  court,  and  upon  hearing  in  Ex- 
chequer the  verdict  was  sustained, 
and  as  the  case  is  one  of  import- 
ance and  of  general  interest  to  the 
profession,  and  not  readily  accessi- 
ble, I  give  the  opinion  of  Watson, 
B.,  in  full.  He  said :  *'  This  was 
an  action  for  stopping  a  drain  that 
ran  under  both  the  plaintiff's  and 
defendant's  houses,  taking  the  wa- 
ter from  both.  The  cause  was 
tried  at  Liverpool,  before  Baron 
Bramwell,  wnen  a  verdict  was 
entered  for  the  plaintiff,  and  a  mo- 
tion was  made  to  enter  a  verdict 
for  defendant  in  pursuance  of 
leave  reserved  at  the  trial.  The 
plaintiff's  and  defendant's  houses 
adjoined  each  other.  They  had 
formerly  been  one  house,  were  con- 
verted into  two  houses  by  the 
owner  of  the  whole  property.  Sub- 
sequently the  defendant's  house 
was  conveyed  to  him,  and  after 
that  conveyance  the  plaintiff  took 
a  conveyance  of  his  house.  At 
the  time  of  the  respective  convey- 
ances, the  drain  ran  under  the 
pl£untiff's  house,  and  then  under 
the  defendant's  house,  and  then  dis- 
charged itself  into  the  common 
sewer.    Water  from  the  eaves  of 


480 


Leases. 


[§209. 


upon  the  premises,  passes  without  any  words  conveying 


the  defendant's  booae  fell  on  the 
plamtifTa  house,  and  then  ran  into 
the  drain  on  plaintiiTs  premisea, 
and  thence  throv^h  the  drain  into 
the  conunoD  sevrer.  The  plaint- 
iff's house  waa  drained  through 
tliifl  drain,  it  was  proved  that  by 
the  expenditure  of  6l.  the  plaintiff 
might  atop  the  drain,  and  drain 
directly  from  his  own  land  into  the 
common  sewer.  It  was  not  proved 
that  the  defendant  at  the  time  of 
bis  purchase  knew  of  the  position 
of  the  drains.  Under  theee  cir- 
cumatances  we  are  of  opinion, 
upon  reason  and  upon  antnority, 
that  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  our 
judgment.  We  think  that  the 
owners  of  theplaintifrs  bouses  are, 
tn-  implied  grant,  entitled  to  have 
the  use  of  ^ia  drain  for  the  pur- 
poee  of  conveying  the  water  from 
his  house,  as  it  was  used  at  the 
time  of  the  defendant's  purchase. 
It  seems  in  accordance  with  rea- 
son that  where  the  owner  of  two 
or  more  adjoining  houses  sella  and 
conveys  one  of  the  houses  to  a 
purchaser,  that  such  house  in  his 
nands  should  be  entitled  to  the 
benefit  of  all  the  drains  from  hia 
house,  and  subject  to  all  the  drains 
thus  neceeearily  used  for  the  en~ 
joyment  of  the  adjoining  house, 
and  that  without  express  reserva- 
tion or  srant,  inasmuch  as  he  pur- 
chaaea  the  house  such  as  it  is.  If 
that  were  not  so,  the  inconven- 
iences and  nuisances  in  towns 
would  be  very  great.  Where  the 
owner  of  severaJ  adjoining  bouses 
conveyed  them  separately,  it  would 
enable  the  vendee  of  any  one  house 
to  atop  up  the  ayatem  of  drainage 
made  for  the  benefit  and  necessary 
occupation  of  the  whole.  The  au- 
tbonties  are  strong  on  this  subject. 
In  Nicholas  v.  Chambertoin,  Cro. 
Jac.  131,  it  was  held  by  all  the 
court  that  '  it  one  erects  a  house 
and  builds  a  conduit  thereto  in 
another  part  of  his  land,  and  con- 
veys water  by  pipes  to  his  house, 
and  afterwards  sells  the  house 
with  the  appurtenances,  excepting 
the  land,  or  sella  the  land  to  an- 
other, reserving  to  ^limself  tlie 
house,  the  conduit  and  pipes  paaa 
with  the  bouse,  because  it  is  nec- 
essary and  qtiaai  appendant 
thereto,  and  be  ehaU  have  hberty 


by  law  to  dig  in  the  land  for  amend- 
ing the  pipes  or  makingthem  new, 
new,  aa  the  case  requires.  So  if  a 
lessee  for  years  of  a  house  and  land 
erects  a  conduit  upon  the  land ,  and 
after  the  term  the  lessor  occupies 
them  together  for  a  time,  and  af- 
terwards sells  the  bouse  with  the 
appurtenances  to  one,  and  the  laud 
to  another,  the  vendee  shall  have 
the  conduit  and  the  pipes,  and 
the  Uberty  to  amend  them.' 
Shury  v.  Pigott,  Popham,  IM ; 
S.  C,  8  Bulet,  839  ;  and  the  case 
of  Coppy  V,  I  de  B.,  11  Hen.  7  ;  25 
PI.  6,  support  this  view  of  the 
case,  that  where  ^  gutter  exists  at 
the  time  of  the  unity  of  seiun  of 
adjoining  houses  it  remaina  when 
they  are  aliened  by  separate  con- 
veyances, as  an  easement  of  neces- 
sity. It  was  contended,  on  the 
part  of  the  defendant,  that  thia 
pipe  was  not  of  necesaity.  as  the 
plaintiff    might     have     obtained 


We  think  that  the  amount  to  be 
expended  in  the  alteration  of  the 
drainage,  or  in  the  constructing  a 
new  ayatem  of  drainage,  is  not  to 
be  taken  into  consideration,  for 
the  meaning  of  the  word  '  necessi- 
ty '  in  the  cases  above  cited  and  in 
Pennington  v.Galland,  9Exchq.  1, 
is  to  be  understood  the  necessity 
at  the  time  of  the  conveyance,  and 
as  matters  then  stood,  without  al- 
teration ;  and  whether  or  not,  at 
the  time  of  the  conveyance,  there 
was  any  other  outlet  for  the  drain- 
age water,  and  matters  as  they 
then  stood. must  be  looked  for  at  the 
necessity  of  the  drainage.  It  was 
tirged  tbat  there  could  be  no  im- 
phed  agreement  unless  the  ease- 
ment was  apparent  and  continu- 
ous. The  defendant  stated  he  was 
not  aware  of  this  drain  at  the  time 
of  I  he  conveyance  to  hitn  ;  but  it 


-t  * 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Appurtenances. 


431 


the  right,  but  the  right  to  use  a  pump,  or  a  way  of  adjoin- 
ing  grounds,  does  not  pass  unless  expressly  named.'  As 
to  easements,  what  are,  and  what  pass  under  a  lease,  see 
'^Easements." 


Sec.  210.  Formalities  required  in  the  several  States.~In 
most  of  the  States,  provision  is  made  by  statute  for  the 
leasing  of  lands,  both  as  to  the  necessity  of  a  deed  or  other 
writing  and  the  formalities  to  be  observed  in  their  execu- 
tion, and  in  all  cases  these  requirements  must  he  observed 
or  the  lease  will  be  inoperative  to  convey  the  estate  des- 
ignated. But,  even  where  an  instrument  is  inoperative, 
or  void  as  a  lease,  it  may  operate  in  equity  as  an  agree- 
ment for  a  lease,*  and  even  at  law  it  may  operate  as  a 
contract  with  respect  to  any  stipulations  contained  there- 
in,' as,  except  in  Maine  and  Massachusetts  (where  a  ten- 
ally  in  Butterworth  v.  Crawford, 
ante ;  and  in  Scott  t.  Bental,  28 
Grat.  (Va.)  1.  But  it  should  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  lareest  lat- 
itude ^ven,  as  announced  in  this 
case,  mcludes  only  those  ease- 
ments ^*  which  may  be  seen  or 
known  upon  a  careful  inspection 
bjr  a  person  ordinarily  conversant 
with  the  subject."  Indeed,  the 
court  say,  in  justification  of  the 
judgment,  that  **  it  is  clear  that  he 
mu8t  have  known,  or  ought  to 
have  known  that  some  drainage 
then  existed,  and  if  he  had  inquired 
he  would  have  known  of  this 
drain."  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  doctrine  is  only  intended  to  ap- 
ply to  such  necessary  eaisements  oa, 
although  not  api)arent,  toould  naU 
uraUyoe  the  subject  ofinquiry, 

>  Pyer  v.  Carter,  1  H.  &  N.  916. 
See  also  as  to  a  way,  Grant  v. 
Chase,  17  Mass.  448.  Unless  it  is 
an  old  easement,  in  which  case  it 
seems  it  would  pass  under  the 
words  "appertainmg  and  belong- 
ing, "  Ceompton,  J.,  in  Bastard  v. 
Polden,  4  B.  &  S.  264. 

*  Parker  v.  Taswell,  2  DeG.  &  J. 
559 ;  Cowen  v.  Phillips,  88  Beav. 
18. 

*Hayne  v.  Cummings,  16  C.  B. 
N.  S.  421 ;  Bond  v.  RosUng,  1  B. 
&  S.  871 ;  Tidey  v.  MaUett,  16  C. 
B.  N.  S.  298 ;  RollaBon  v.  Leon,  7 
H.  &  N.  78. 


derstood  not  only  those  which 
must  necessarily  be  seen,  but  those 
which  may  be  seen  or  known  on  a 
careful  inspection  by  a  person  or- 
dinarily conversant  with  the  sub- 
ject. We  think  that  it  was  the 
defendant's  own  fault  that  he  did 
not  ascertain  what  easements  the 
owner  of  the  adjoining  house  ex- 
ercised at  the  time  of  his  purchase ; 
and  therefore  we  think  the  rule 
must  be  discharged.''  The  doc- 
trine announced  m  this  case,  is  a 
marked  innovation  upon  the  law 
of  easements  by  implied  grant. 
Tet  its  apparent  equity  commends 
it,  and  it  nas  been  favorably  com- 
mented upon  in  numerous  cases 
both  in  this  country  and  England. 
Curtis  V,  Ayrault,  47  N.  Y.  78; 
Huttemier  v.  Albro,  18  id.  52 ;  Mc- 
Carty  v.  Kitchenman,  47  Penn.  St. 
248 ;  Dodd  v.  Burchell,  1  H.  &  C. 
121 ;  Glove  v.  Hardmg,  8  H.  &  N. 
944;  Cro6sly  v,  ligh  tower,  L.  R., 
2  Ch.  Ap.  478 ;  Polden  v.  Bastard. 
4B.&S.  258;  Ewart v. Cochrane,  1 
H.  &  C.  681 ;  Worthington  v.  Gim- 
Bon,  2  E.  &  E.  618 ;  Butterworth  v. 
Crawford,  46  N.  Y.  849  ;  Seymour 
V.  Lewis,  13  N.  J.  Eq.  489 ;  Dunk- 
lee  V.  Wilton,  R.  R.,  24  N.  H.  489 ; 
HaU  V.  Lund,  1  H.  &  C.  676, 
Questioned  in  Phillbrick  v.  Ewing, 
97  Mass.  188 ;  Carbray  v.  Willis,  7 
Allen  (Mass.)  869 ;  Randall  v.  Mc- 
Laughlin, 10  id.  866;  Warren  v. 
Blake,  54  Me.  276 ;  and  condition- 


«■ 


432 


■I  jKASE. 


[§211. 


ancy  from  year  to  year,  except  when  expressly  created 
in  writing,  is  unknown)  if  the  tenant  enters  into  posses- 
sion and  pays  rent  under  a  void  lease,  he  becomes  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  subject  to  all  the  tenns  of  the  lease 
applicable  to  such  a  tenancy,*  and  determinable  only  by 
six  months'  notice  to  quit,  at  the  end  of  any  year  of  the 
time,  except  where  otherwise  provided  by  statute ; '  but, 
upon  the  expiration  of  the  term  named  in  the  lease  the 
term  expires  by  its  own  limitation,  and  without  any  pre- 
vious notice  to  quit.*  But,  unless  the  tenant  enters  into 
possession  under  the  lease,  he  will  not  be  liable  for  the 
rent  of  the  premises,  nor  for  not  taking  possession,*  nor 
will  the  lessor  be  liable  for  not  giving  possession.* 

Sec.  211.  Leases  not  afibcted  by  statute  of  frauds.— In  all 
the  States  except  Maine  and  Massachusetts,  a  parol  lease 
for  one  year  is  good,  and  in  many  of  the  States  for  three 
years,  and  in  some  for  seven,  but  leases  for  a  longer  term 
are  generally  required  to  be  by  deed,  executed  according 
to  the  direction  of  the  statute. 

Sec.  212.  Leases  by  deed -What  are.— A  deed  is  a  writ- 
ing sealed  and  delivered  by  the  parties  thereto,  and  is 
either  an  indenture  or  a  deed  poll.  An  indenture  is  an 
instrument,  or  rather  a  series  of  instiniments  under  seal, 
of  which  each  party  holds  a  copy,  executed  the  same  as 
the  original,  and  which  is  cut  or  indented  on  the  top  or 
side  to  correspond  with  the  other,*  and  unless  the  paper 


'Cooch  V.  Goodman,  2  Q.  B. 
680 ;  Riggs  v.  BeU,  5  T.  R.  472 ; 
People  V.  Rickert,  8  Cow,  (N.  Y.) 
226 ;  Taggard  v.  Rosevelt,  2  E.  D. 
S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  100;  Strong  v. 
Crosbv,  21  Conn.  898;  Schuyler  v. 
Leggett,  2  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  660; 
Thomas  v.  Wright,  9  S.  &.  R. 
(Penn,)87;  Richardson  v.  Qifford, 
1  Ad.  &  £1. 52 ;  Warner  v.  Browne, 

8  E^t,  165;  Thompson  v.  Amey, 
12  Ad.  &  El.  479 ;  Pistor  v.  Cator, 

9  M.  &  W.  815 ;  Berry  v.  Lindley, 
8  M.  &  Gr.  498 ;  Tress  v.  Savage, 
4  E.  &  B.  36 ;  Lee  v.  Smith,  9 
Exchq.  662;  Pennington  v. 
Taniere,  12  Q.  B.  998 ;  Loughran 
V.  Smith,  11  Hun  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  811. 

«Hager  v.   Dibble,   8   Rich.  (S. 


C.)  222;    Lesley  v.    Randolph,  4 
Rawle  (Penn.),  128. 

» Tress  v.  Savage,  ante ;  Cole  on 
Ejectment,  221 ,  444. 

*  Edge  V.  Straflford,  1  C.  &  J.  391 ; 
Inman  v.  Stamp,  1  Stark.  12. 

*Drury  v.  Macnamara,  5  E.  & 
B.  612,  Jinks  v.  Edwards,  11 
Exchq.  775. 

•  1  Inst.  171 ;  2  Blackstone's 
Com.  295 ;  Styles,  459.  An  in- 
denture is  preferable  to  a  deed  poU 
because  it  possesses  many  ad- 
vantages over  the  latter,  as  it  may 
operate  by  estoppel,  and  contain 
covenants  on  the  lessee's  part 
w^hich  cannot  be  attained  by  a 
deed  poll,  which  is,  strictly  speak- 
ing, a  unilateral  deed.    Ind^  it 


OH^P.  XXV.] 


By  Deed. 


433 


or  parchment  is  cut  or  indented  as  previously  stated, 
except  where  the  statute  has  done  away  with  this  form- 
ality, the  fact  that  it  begins  *'This  Indenture,"  &c.,  does 
not  make  it  an  indenture,  because  no  words  of  the  par- 
ties can  dispense  with  this  formality ;  for,  although  there 
may  be  an  indenture  where  there  are  no  words  declaring 
it  so,  yet  without  indenting,  no  words  can  make  it  an  in 
denture/  The  peculiarity  of  an  indenture  is,  that  all  the 
parts  make  but  one  deed,  and  each  part  has  the  same 
effect  and  force  as  all  the  parts  together,  as  they  are  re- 
garded as  the  mutual  acts  of  the  parties  thereto,  each  of 
whom  is  bound  by  either  part  of  the  same,  for  the  words  of 
the  indenture  are  the  words  of  each  party.*  In  legal 
effect,  each  part  is  an  original,  but  in  practice,  the  part 
executed  by  the  grantor  is  the  original,  and  the  rest  dup- 
licates or  counterparts,'  and  these  counterparts  cannot  be 
disputed  or  impeached  by  the  lessee,  and  are  primary 
evidence  against  him  and  his  grantees  or  assignees  of  the 
execution  and  contents  of  the  lease.*  Every  lease  is  pre- 
sumed to  be  by  deed  until  the  contrary  is  shown,  and 
whenever  a  deed  is  referred  to  in  the  pleadings  it  is  pre- 
sumed to  be  a  deed  poll,  unless  it  is  alleged  to  be  indent- 
ed.* Leases  required  to  be  by  deed  must  be  written  or 
printed  upon  parchment  or  paper,  and  they  cannot  be 
exemplified  upon  cloth,  leather,  wood  or  the  like,  for  the 


was  formerly  called  Charta  de 
una  parte.  Locke  v.  Wright,  1 
Stra.  571 ;  Pordage  v.  Cole,  1 
Baund.  819.  It  (a  deed  poll)  may 
be  said  to  be  a  aeclaration  ov  the 
paiiy  executing  it  of  an  act  done, 
or  intended  to  be  performed  by 
him  for  a  third  person.  The 
lessee^s  acceptance  of  an  interest 
under  the  deed — ^which  is  implied 
until  he  expressly  dissents — 
Thompson  v.  Leach,  2  Vent.  198  ; 

Gorton  v. ,  2  Roll's  Abr.  787, 

may  render  him  liable  to  a  distress 
or  an  action  of  debt,  for  non-pay- 
ment of  rent ;  but  not  to  an  action 
of  covenant.  Cross  v.  Powell,  Cro. 
Eliz.  488;  Chancellor  v.  Poole,  2 
Doug.  764 ;  Wilkins  v.  Fry,  1  Mer. 
266,  as  a  covenant  cannot  generally 
be  created  except  by  deed  executed 


by  the  covenantor.  By  the  cus- 
tom of  London,  Fitzherbert*s  Nsr 
tursB  Brevium,  146 ;  Comyn*s  Dig. 
Tit.  London  (N.)  1  of  Bristol ;  Wade 
V.  Benham,  1  Leon  2,  and  in  the 
case  of  a  lessee  of  the  government, 
by  patent,  it  is  held  that  the  ac- 
ceptance of  a  lease  by  a  deed  binds 
the  lessee  to  the  covenants  therein. 
Ewre  V.  Strickland,  Cro.  Jac.  240, 
See  also  Brown  v.  McFarren,  5 
Ir.  Rep.  212. 

J  Co.  Litt.  229. 

« Litt,  Sec.  870;  Plowden,  184, 42X. 

s  2  Blackstone's  Com.  296. 

*  Paul  V.  Meek,  2  Y.  &  J.  116 
Hughes  V.  Clark,  10  C.  B.  905 
Burleigh  v.  Stibbs,  5  T.  R.  465 
Homes  v.  Pearce,  1  F.  &  F.  288 
West  V.  Davis,  7  East,  363. 

»  Spark  V.  Spark,  Cro.  Eliz.  658 

28' 


^■H 


484 


Leases. 


[§  212. 


reason  that  parchment  and  paper  are  regardecT  as  most 
durable^  and  the  writing  or  printing  upon  them  is  less 
liable  to  be  vitiated,  altered  or  corrupted,  or  become  illeg- 
ible, than  upon  other  substances.  It  may  be  in  any  char- 
acter or  language  which  is  susceptible  of  translation  or 
accurate  interpretation. '  The  estate  or  interest  in  the  land 
is  derived  from  the  lessor,  and  the  lease  is  only  evidence 
of  the  legal  conveyance  of  the  estate  or  interest.  There- 
fore, if,  after  the  lease  has  been  executed  and  delivered, 
it  is  lost  or  cancelled,  if  the  lessee  can  prove  the  existence 
of  the  term  he  does  not  lose  his  estate  in  the  land.*  If 
the  lease  is  required  to  be,  and  has  been,  recorded,  pro- 
vision is  generally  made  by  statute  that  it  may  be  proved 


>  2  Blackstone*8  Com.  297. 

«  Ward  V.  Lumley,  5  H.  &  N.  87 ; 
Reed  v.  Brookman,  8  T.  R  151. 
The  cancellation  of  a  lease  does  not 
operate  as  the  surrender  of  it.  It 
destroys  the  deed  and  avoids  the 
covenants,  but  it  does  not  divest 
the  estate.  Actions  founded  on 
the  privity  of  contract  are  gone, 
but  actions  founded  on  the  privity 
of  estate  remain  so  long  as  the  term 
lasts;  and  so  long  as  a  reversion 
remains  in  the  lessor,  the  rent  con- 
tinues as  an  incident  thereof.  At 
the  common  law,  an  assignee  of 
the  reversion  may  sue  the  lessee  in 
debt  upon  the  demise,  becatise  of 
his  privity  of  estate^  but  he  cannot 
sue  upon  the  covenants,  because 
there  is  no  privity  of  contract  See 
Strong  V.  Crosby,  21  Conn.  8»8. 
It  may  be  said  that,  where  an  es- 
tate  Jias  actually  passed  under  a 
deed,  the  cancellation  or  destruc- 
tion thereof  does  not  divest  the  es- 
tate, although  theparties,  by  parol, 
have  agreeato  that  effect,  to  Bol- 
ton V.  Carlisle,  2  H.  Bl.  260,  Eyre, 
C.  J.,  said,  **  I  hold  clearly  that  the 
cancelling  of  a  deed  will  not  divest 
property  which  has  once  passed  by 
transmission  of  possession;  and  1 
would  go  further  and  say  that  the 
law  is  the  same  as  to  things  which 
lie  in  grant."  Berkley  v.  York,  6 
East,  86 ;  Lewis  v.  Bingham,  4  B. 
&  Aid.  672;  Perrott  v.  Perrot,  14 
East,  428.  Where  the  action  is 
predicated  ui>on  the  privity  of  es- 
tate, it  is  entirely  independent  of 
the  contract  which  the  parties  en- 
tered into  by  the  lease,  Falmouth 


V.  Roberts,  9  M.  &  W.  469,  and 
notwithstanding  the  cancelling  of 
the  lease,  it  may  be  given  in  evi* 
dence  to  show  that,  and  what  es- 
tate passed.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Fitzgerald, 
16  Q.  B.  432.  Na  debet  wherever 
the  old  system  of  pleading  exists 
is  a  good  plea  to  an  action  for  rent 
reserved  upon  a  lease  by  deed,  Wil- 
son  V. ,   Hard.    332,  and  the 

reason  is,  that  the  demise  is  the 
foundation  of  the  action,  and  the 
deed  is  only  evidence  of  the  de- 
mise. Warren  v.  Causett,  8  Mod. 
107,  In  Atty.-Qenl.  v.  Parrish,  1 
B.  Sc  P.  104,  Sir  J.  Mansfield,  C. 
J.,  said  that  the  case  of  debt  for 
rent  is  an  exception  to  the  general 
rule  that,  if  a  contract  be  entered 
into  by  deed,  the  deed  must  be 
declared  upon ;  and  he  said,  "  that 
exception,  nowever,  seems  to  have 
proceeded  on  the  ground  that,  by 
the  devise,  an  interest  has  passed 
in  the  land."  See  also  1  Wm. 
Saund.  276  n. ;  Southwel  v.  Brown, 
Cro.  Eliz.  571,  where  it  is  stated 
that  the  distinction  is  that  where 
a  lease  for  years  by  indenture  is 
the  gist  and  foundation  of  the  ac- 
tion, as  where  debt  or  covenant  is 
brought  therein,  it  is  necessary  to 
state  that  the  demise  was  by  deed, 
and  to  set  out  so  much  thereof  as 
is  necessary  to  support  the  action 
and  no  more.  Elliott  v.  Blake,  1 
Lev.  88;  Dundas  v.  Weymouth, 
Comp.  665.  But  where  the  lease  is 
only  inducement  to  the  action,  it 
is  only  necessary  to  state  generally 
that  the  lessor  demised  the  prena. 
ises  for  a  certain  term,  withou^ 


f"«J^ 


I 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Seal. 


485 


by  a  copy  from  the  records,  duly  certified  by  the  proper 
recording  oflficer.  If  the  other  party  has  a  counterpart 
of  the  lease,  the  plaintiff,  in  an  action  predicated  thereon, 
may  compel  its  production,  or,  in  default  of  its  produc- 
tion, may  prove  its  contents  by  parol. 

Sec.  218.  Seal.— At  the  common  law  aU  freehold  estates 
were  required  to  be  conveyed  either  by  deed  or  by  livery 
of  seizin  without  writing,  but  by  the  Statute  of  Frauds  in 
England,  and  in  most  of  the  States  of  this  country,  the 
only  mode  of  conveyance  of  a  freehold  is  by  deed.  In 
Vermont,  Massachusetts,  and  South  Carohna,  all  con- 
veyances of  freeholds  are  required  to  be  by  deed.  Even 
though  conveyances  by  statute  are  not  required  to  be 
under  seal,  yet,  the  common  law  rule  is  adopted,  and  a 
seal  is  made  necessary  to  give  to  the  instrument  the  char- 
acter of  a  deed.*  At  the  common  law,  a  seal  is  an  im- 
pression upon  wax  or  wafer  or  other  substance  that  will 
bear  and  hold  an  impression.*  But  in  the  New  Eng- 
land States,  and  in  New  York,  New  Jersey  and  North 


saying  that  it  was  by  indenture, 
but  quod  cum  diminuset  is  gen- 
erally sufficient.  In  1  Wm.  Baund. 
241  n.,  it  is  said,  "An  assignee  of 
a  reversion  may  also  have  an  ac- 
tion of  debt  for  rent  a^inst  the 
lessee,  and  the  action  being  found- 
ed, not  upon  any  privity  of  con- 
tract, but  upon  priority  of  estate, 
is  locaL  The  action  of  debt  lays 
for  the  assignee  of  the  reversion  at 
the  common  law,  for  the  rent  be- 
ing incident  to  the  reversion,  and 
the  lessee  being  in  possession  of 
the  lands,  and  in  perception  of  the 
profits,  the  law  creates  such  a 
privity  between  them  as  will  sup- 
port an  action  for  rent  1  RoD. 
Abr.  (B)  pi.  2 ;  Walker's  Case,  8 
Coke,  22;  Glover  v.  Cope,  4  Mod. 
81 ;  Barker  v.  Damer,  8  Modk  887. 
These  cases  illustrate  the  rule  that 
an  action  for  rent  is  pot  founded 
on  the  deed,  but  on  the  demise ;  and 
that,  though  a  deed  be  cancelled 
by  the  consent  or  agreement  of  the 
parties  will  annul  all  actions  in 
which  it  is  necessary  to  declare  on 
the  deed  itself,  yet  it  does  not  di- 
Test  the  ei^te  of  the  lessee  or 


destroy  the  lessor's  right  of  action 
for  the  rent  which  is  foimded  on 
the  privity  of  esstate,  and  act  upon 
privity  of  contract. 

^  8  Inst.  169 ;  2B]ackstone's  Com. 
297. 

«  8  Inst.  169 ;  Warren  v.  Lynch, 
5  John  (N.  Y.)  239 ;  Beardsley  v. 
Knight,  4  Vt.  471 ;  Ross  v.  BedeU, 
5  Duer  (N.  Y.  Supr.  Ct.),  462; 
Hughes  V.  Debnam,  8  Jones  (N. 
C.X  L.  127 ;  Pease  v.  Lawson,  83 
Mo.  85  ;  Tasker  v.  Bartlett,  5  Cush. 
(Mass.)  859.  And  a  seal  by  stamp- 
ing on  the  paper  is  not  sufficient 
except  it  is  so  provided  by  statute,, 
Bank  of  Rochester  v.  Gray„  2  Hill 
(N.  Y.),  227 ;  Farmers*  Bank  v. 
Haight,  8  id.  498 ;  and  a  scroll  of 
ink  or  other  device  is  notsufficient. 
Warren  v.  Lynch,  ia;ite;  Perrine 
V.  Cheeseman,  11  N.  J.  174^  But 
see  Force  v.  Craig,  7  id.  272^  where 
a  flourish  or  scroll  against  the  sig- 
nature of  a  signer  to  a  note  was 
held  sufficient  to  enable  the  jury 
to  £nd  that  he  intended  to  execute 
a  sealed  instrument,  and  that  it 
was  sealed  and  delivered 


I  •■   ■■■V 


486 


Leasbs. 


[§  213. 


Carolina^  the  practice  is  to  attach  to  the  deed  or  in- 
strument another  piece  of  paper  without  any  im- 
pression whatever  and  it  is  usually  attached  to  the 
instrument  with  *mucilage/  instead  of  with  wax  or  a 
wafer,  and  an  instrument  not  sealed  is  not  a  deed.*  In 
most  if  not  all,  the  other  States,  a  mere  scroll  or  flourish 
of  the  pen  at  the  end  of  the  signature  is  held  to  be  a  seal, 
if  the  parties  intended  it  as  such.*  Mere  words  cannot 
dispense  with  a  seal,  as  "witness  my  hand  and  seal,*^ 
when  no  seal  or  scroll  is  appended  to  the  signature;* 
and  in  Virginia,  Indiana,  Louisiana,  Missouri,  Iowa,  Del- 
aware and  Alabama,  it  is  held  that  a  writing  with  a  scroll 


>  Gillespie  v.  Brooks,  2  Bedf /(N. 
Y.  Surrogate)  849 ;  Turner  v.  Held, 
44  Mo.  882. 

'  And  this  is  the  rule  even  in 
those  States  where  a  scroU  is  treated 
as  a  seal.  Therefore,  unless  an  in- 
strument is  aealed  according  to  the 
method  adapted  in  the  State  where 
executed,  or  where  the  land  lies, 
it  is  not  a  deed.  Jones  t.  Craw- 
ford, 1  McMulL  (a  G.)  878  ;  Taylor 
Y.  Morton,  5  Dana(Ky.)  885 ;  Davis 
Y.  Brandon,  2  Miss.  154 ;  Arms  v. 
Burt,  1  Vt.  806  ;  Killman  v.  Brown, 
4  Mass.  448,  and  passes  no  title. 
8hortridge  v.  Gatlett,  1  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  587;  Hurley  v.  Ramsey,  49 
Mo,  809 ;  Pratt  v.  Clemens,  4  W. 
Va.  448.  But  if  an  instrument  has 
once  been  sealed,  it  is  not  avoided 
bv  a  removal  of  the  seals  by  the 
obligor  or  by  their  accidental  re- 
mo^.  Colts  V.  United  States,  1 
QbH.  (U.  S.)  89.  An  agent  who 
executes  an  instrument  under  seal 
must  be  authorized  under  seal. 
Worral  v.  Munn,  5  N.  Y.  229.  In 
Mississippi,  however,  it  is  held  in 
equity  that  a  deed  executed  and 
signed  bv  a  person  asagent  is  good 
as  a  deed,  even  though  the  deed  is 
not  sealed  by  him.  McCaleb  v. 
Pralat,  25  Miss.  857.  Where  an  in- 
43trument  is  required  to  be  record- 
•ed,  and  the  law  provides  that  none 
but  sealed  instruments  shall  be 
recorded,  the  fact  that  the  record 
fails  to  diow  that  a  seal  was  at- 
tached to  t^e  instrument,  will  not 
overcome  the  presumption  that 
the  law  raises,  that  the  instrument 
was  sealed,  or  the  recording  officer 
would  not  have  recorded  it.  Stark- 


weather V.  Martin,  28  Mich.  471. 

»  Relph  V.  Gist,  4  McCord  {3.  C) 
267 ;  Jones  v.  Logwood,  1  Wash, 
(Va.)  42 ;  Stahter  v.  Cowman,  7  G. 
&  J.  (Md.)  284 ;  Bohannan  v. 
Hough,  1  Miss.  461 ;  Long  v.  Bam- 
say,  1  S.  &R.  (Penn.)  72;  Fleming 
V.  Powell,  2  Tex.  225;  Smith  v. 
Baker,  Ga.  Dec.  Part  L,  126; 
Scruggs  V.  Brackin,  4  Yerg.  rfenn.) 
528 ;  Lindsay  v.  State,  15  AJa.  48 ; 
Bertrand  v.  Burd,  4  Ark.  195; 
Hastings  v.  Vaughn,  5  CaL  315 ; 
Comerford  v.  Cobb,  2  Fla.  418; 
Bradfield  v.  McCormick,  8  Blackf  . 
(Ind.)  161.  The  word  seal  writ- 
ten against  the  signature  of  a 
party  to  an  instrument  is  treated 
as  a  seal  in  Mississippi.  Hudson  v. 
Poindexter,  42  Miss.  804;  Whit- 
tinzton  V.  Clarke,  16  Miss.  480; 
ana  it  would  seem  that  it  should 
be  so  regarded  in  all  these  States 
where  a  scroll  is  treated  as  a  seal, 
because  the  word  clearly  imimrta 
the  intention  of  the  party  to  exe- 
cute a  sealed  instrument.  Whittey 
V.  Davis,  1  Swan  (Tenn.)  888.  But 
in  Virginia  and  Indiana  this  has 
been  held  insufficient,  and  an  in- 
strument conoluding  *'  witness  our 
hands  "  with  a  scroll  annexed,  and 
the  word  "seal"  written  therein, 
was  held  to  be  only  a  simple  can- 
tract.  Jenkins  v.  Hart,  2  Rand. 
(Va.)  446;  Deming  v.  Billit,  1 
Blackf.  (Ind.)  241.  See  also  jMSt 
p.  828  for  instances  where  a  sinular 
rule  is  held  in  other  States. 

*  Vance  V.  Funk,  8  m.  268 ;  Wil- 
liams V.  Young,  8  Ala.  145 ;  Moovo 
Y,  Leseur.  18  id.  606.^ 


sr-ij»— ^ 


OHAP.  XXV.] 


Sbal. 


437 


annexed  and  the  word  "seal**  written  therein,  but  hav- 
ing no  expression  in  the  body  of  the  instrument  denoting 
that  it  is  sealed,  is  not  a  sealed  instrument/    But  in  Ten- 
nessee and  Mississippi  a  contrary  doctrine  is  held,  and  a 
scroll  is  treated  as  a  seal  whenever,  from  the  body  of  the 
instrument  or  the  word  "  seal "  written  in  the  scroll,  it 
appears  that  the  parties  intended  to  execute  a  sealed  in- 
strument ;'  and  in  Missouri  the  word  "seal'*  written  at 
the  end  of  the  name  of  the  party,  and  referred  to  and 
adopted  in  the  testimonium  dausey  is  held  to  be  a  suf- 
ficient sealing ; '  and  in  Pennsylvania  an  instrument  with 
the  attesting  clause  "witness  my  hand,"  signed  by  the 
party  sought  to  be  charged,  with  a  seal  annexed  to  his 
name,  is  held  to  be  evidence  from  which  a  jury  may  pre- 
sume a  sealing  and  delivery ;  *  and  in  all  cases  where  a 
sealy  within  the  common  law  rule,  is  annexed  to  the 
name  of  a  party  to^an  instrument,  although  the  word 
"seal"  is  not  used  in  the  instrument,  the  instrument  is  a 
specialty/    A  sUt  in  a  parchment  with  a  ribbon  through 
it  is  not  a  seal,'  nor  is  a  mere  impression  or  stamping 
upon  the  paper  upon  which  the  instrument  is  written,'' 
except  in  the  case  of  corporations  where  the  statute  so 
provides,  or  a  different  rule  has  been  estabUshed  by  cus- 
tom.'    Whether  a  sealpnwfed,  but  not  impressed  upon 
the  paper  upon  which  the  instrument  is  written,  is  suf- 
ficient in  the  case  of  a  corporation  is  not  dear.    It  has 
been  held  sufficient  in  Maine,'  and  not  sufficient  in  Mas- 
sachusetts."   In  the  case  of  a  corporation  when  the  com- 


>  Moore  v.  Leseur,  18  Ala.  606 ; 
Bell  V.  Keefe,  18  La.  An.  624; 
Boynton  v.  Reynolds,  8  Mo.  79 ; 
Lone  V.  Long,  1  Morr.  (Iowa)  48 ; 
Walker  v.  Keile,  8  Mo.  801  ;  Arm- 
etronp:  v.  Pearce,  5  Harr.  (Del.)  851 ; 
Jenkins  v.  Hunt,  2  Rand.  (Va.) 
446;  Deming  v.  BiUit,  1  Blackf. 
(Ind.)  241. 

^  Hudson  v.  Poindezter,  42  Miss. 
804;  Whitney  v.  Davis,  1  Swan 
Tenn.  888. 

»  Gomer  v.  Smith,  49  Mo.  818. 

*  Miller  v.  Blinder,  28  Penn.  St. 
489. 

^  An  instrument  having  a  seal 
affixed  thereto  is  a  deed,  though 


the  affixing  of  the  seal  is  not  men- 
tioned in  it.  Taylor  v.  Glazer,  2 
S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  502;  Wing  v. 
Chase,  85  Me.  260 ;  Ashman  v.  Ay- 
ers,  4  Gratt.  (Va.)  288. 

"  Duncan  v.  Duncan,  1  Watts. 
(Penn.)  822. 

''  Bank  of  Rochester  v.  Gray,  2 
HiUjN.  Y.)  227. 

^  Mender  v.  Pinkerton,  14  Allen 
(Mass.)  881 ;  Curtis  v.  Leavitt,  15 
N.  Y.  89. 

•  Woodman  v.  York,  &c.,  R.  R. 
Co.  50  Me.  549. 

•«  Bates  V.  B.  &  N.  Y.  R.  R.  Co., 
10  Allen  (Mass.)  251. 


-J 


•PVMB^ 


: 


438 


Leases. 


[§214. 


mon  seal  appears  upon  an  instrument  it  is  presumed  to 
have  been  placed  there  by  authority/  and  in  Ohio  a  con- 
veyance by  a  corporation  under  tJie  corporate  seal  is  valid 
without  signature,  and  the  seal  is  presumed  to  have  been 
affixed  with  authority.'  Several  persons  may  bind 
themselves  by  owe  seal  if  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that 
such  was  not  their  intention.*  Prima  fode^  where  sev- 
eral names  are  signed  to  an  instrument,  and  a  seal  is  af- 
fixed to  but  one,  it  will  be  presumed  to  be  the  seal  of  the 
party  to  whose  name  it  is  affixed,  but  this  presumption 
may  be  overcome  by  proof  that  it  is  attached  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  others,  in  which  case  it  will  be  the  seal  of 
all/  Where  a  lease  is  under  seal,  a  change  in  its  terms, 
cannot  be  made  by  parol '  even  though  made  upon  a  suf- 
ficient consideration.  But  the  terms  may  be  changed 
by  an  endorsement  on  the  lease.* 

An  endorsement  upon  a  sealed  instrument  mode  at  tJie 
time  of  its  execution  becomes  a  part  thereof,^  and  does 
not  change  the  character  of  the  instrument ;  but  an  en- 
dorsement not  under  seal,  subsequently  made,  referring 
to  the  lease  for  an  explanation  of  its  terms  and  varying 
any  of  the  terms  of  the  instrument,  reduces  it  to  a  parol 
contract,  so  that  assumpsit  and  not  covenant  becomes  the 
proper  remedy  for  the  recovery  of  rent  under,  or  for  the 
breach  of  any  of  its  conditions.* 

!  Sec.  214«  signing.— A  lease  or  deed  may  be  signed  for 
the  grantor  by  a  third  person  in  his  presence  and  by  his 


1  Musser  v.  Johnston,  42  Mo.  74 ; 
Sheehan  v.  Davis,  17  Ohio  St.  671. 

«  Sheehan  v.  Davis,  17  Ohio  St. 
671. 

«Yale  V.  Flanders,  4  VTis.  96; 
Mackay  v.  Bloodgood,  9  John.  (N. 
Y.)  286;  Larsden  v.  Sharp,  9 
Humph.  (Tenn.)  224;  Carter  v. 
Cfaardron,  21  Ala.  72-  Bank  v. 
Bugbee,  19  Me.  27;  Williams  v. 
Greer,  12  Ga.  469 ;  Bank  v.  Bailey, 
4  Ark.  468;  Bowman  v.  Robb,  6 
Penn  St.  802 ;  Flood  v.  Yandee,  1 
Blackf.  (Ihd.)  102 ;  Banhannon  v. 
Lewis,  3  T.  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  376. 

^Lunsford  v.  LaMotte  Lead  Co., 

.  54  Mo.  426 ;  Van  Alstyne  v.  Van- 

filyck,  10  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  883 ;  Davis 


V.  Burton,  4  BL  41 ;  Yojong^ 
borough  V.  Mondey,  2  Dev.  (N.  C.) 
L.  3. 

« Smith  V.  Nurr,  83  Hun  (N.  Y.) 
667. 

*  Gaffney  v.  Greenbaum,  64  Iowa 
492. 

''Linsley  v.  Tibbals,  40  Comu 
522 ;  Hetts  v.  Miller,  8  Paige  Ch. 
(N.  Y0254 ;  Emmeroon v.  Wimj, 
4  N.  H.  171;  Flint  v.  Brandon,  4 
B.  &  P.  73;  Lyman  v.  Warring- 
ton, 1  Starkie,  162. 

sHydevilleCo.  v.  Eagle  R  R.  & 
Slate  Co.,  44  Yt.  896.  But  see 
Williams  V.  Handley,  3  Bibb.  (Ky.) 
10 ;  Russell  v.  Scott,  4  Cow.  Al. 
Y.)  279 ;  Goodright  v.  Mark,  4  M. 


k 


NVI 


WUl.    !•-■■• 


■»«T- 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


SioNnra. 


489 


> 


direction,'  and  this  is  frequently  done  when  the  lessor  or 
grantor  is  an  illiterate  person,  and  unable  to  write  his 
name,  but  in  such  cases  the  instrument  must  be  sealed 
and  delivered  by  the  grantor,'  and,  although  in  the  case 
last  cited  it  was  held  that  the  instrument  need  not  be 
read  over  to  him  unless  he  required  it,  yet  it  is  more 
prudent  to  do  so,  and  in  some  of  the  States,  at  least,  it  is, 
held  to  be  indispensable,  when  the  grantor  cannot  read. 
A  lease  or  other  conveyance  may  be  executed  by  the 
grantor  making  his  mark,  the  practice  being  in  such 
cases  for  some  third  person  to  write  his  name  and  for  the 
grantor  to  make  a  cross  either  between  the  names  or  at 
either  end  thereof ;  but  any  mark  made  by  him  which  is 
intended  as  a  signature  hy  hiniy  is  sufficient,^  but  the 
signature  so  made  should  be  witnessed  even  though  the  exe- 
cution of  such  instruments  is  not  required  to  be  witnessed 
by  statute.  A  lease  may  be  signed  by  a  third  person  for  the 
lessor  as  follows  :  John  Doe  by  Eichard  Boe,  and  if  done  in 
his  presence,  and  by  his  direction,  and  attested  by  a  wit- 
ness, it  is  valid  to  "pass  the  estate.  *  A  deed  or  lease  executed 
by  an  agent  or  attorney  in  this  form,  "John  Doe  for 
lUchard  Eoe,'*  is  sufficient,  if  John  Doe  was  duly  author- 
ized to  execute  such  instruments  for  Bichard  Boe.*  But, 
when  a  conveyance  is  executed  by  a  third  person,  it 
must  be  shown  affirmatively  that  he  had  authority  to  do 
so,  and  in  some  of  the  Stat^  his  authority  must  not  only 
be  in  vmting  under  seal,^  but  must  also  be  recorded  with 


&  S.  80,  where  such  an  indorse' 
ment  was  held  inoperative  to  con- 
vey any  interest. 

>  Jansen  v.  McCahill,  22  Cal.  668. 

»  Rex  V.  Longnor,  1  N.  &  M.  577. 

•Suffem  V.  Sutter,  18  N.  J.  Eq. 
220. 


V. 


-,  8  Atk.  869. 


i  Gardner  v.  Gardner,  5  Cush. 
(Mass.)  488.  But  where  a  deed  pur- 
ports to  be  or  is  made  by  an  agent 
or  attorney  it  must  be  made  in  the 
name  of  the  principal.  Love  v. 
Sierra  Nevada,  &c.,  Co.,  82  Cal. 
680.  But,  if  it  is  signed  by  the 
agent  or  attorney  in  ms  own  name 
only,  yet,  if  enough  appears  upon 
the  face  of  the  instrument  to  show 
that  he  was  acting  as  attorney  and 


not  as  principal,  it  is  a  good  execu- 
tion. Tenant  v.  Blacker,  27  Ga. 
418 ;  Yideau  v.  Griffin,  21  CaL  889; 
and  when  there  has  been  such  a 
lapse  of  time  as  will  bar  a  writ  of 
right,  it  will  be  presumed  that  the 
attorney  was  authorized  to  make 
the  conveyance.  Goodwin  v.  Mo- 
Clure,  8  Qratt.  (Va.)  291. 

•  Mussey  v.  Scott,  7  Cush.  (Mass.) 
815. 

^  In  Vermont,  by  statute,  the  in- 
strument must  be  recorded,  and  in 
New  Jersey  and  Tennessee  the  au- 
thority must  be  conferred  by  deed. 
Tai)pan  v.  Redfield,  5  N.  J,  Eq.  889 ; 
Smith  V.  Dickerson,  6  Humph. 
(TeimO  261. 


440 


Leases* 


[§314. 


the  instrument. '  The  fact  that  the  name  of  the  grantor  is 
mis-spelt  does  not  invalidate  the  deed/  and^  even  though 
he  signs  by  a  different  name  than  that  recited  in  the 
instrument  his  identity  may  be  proved,  and  the  deed 
thereupon  is  operative,*  and  where  he  signs  by  a  wrong 
name,  yet,  if  he  is  designated  by  his  true  name  in  the 
lease,  it  will  be  good  ;  *  but  a  deed  executed  without  the 
name  of  a  grantee  is  void/  A  lease  or  deed  by  a  cor- 
poration should  be  in  its  corporate  name  and  under  its 
corporate  seal,*  although  it  has  been  held  in  Ohio,  that 
a  conveyance  by  a  corporation  under  its  corporate  seal  is 
good,  although  not  signed,*  and  in  England  it  is  doubted 
whether,  under  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  leases  by  deed  are 
required  to  be  signed.*  When  a  lease  or  deed  is  executed 
by  a  third  person  without  authority,  it  may  be  vaUdated 
by  a  subsequent  oral  ratification.*  But,  unless  ratified 
by  the  principal,  a  lease  executed  without  authority,  or 
in  the  name  of  the  agent  alone,  is  void,  and  inoperative 
to  convey  any  estate  or  interest  in  the  premises  demised."* 
Indeed,  an  instrument  purporting  to  convey  a  term,  by 
one  not  having  apparent  authority  to  make  it,  is  not, 
and  cannot  be  a  lease,"  unless  the  principal  afterwards 
deUvers  it,  in  which  case  he  thereby  adopts  the  sealing 
and  makes  it  his  own  deed."    A  lessee  entering  and  hold- 


«  Videau  v.  Griffin,  21  Cal.  889 ; 
Waggener  v.  Waggener,  8  T.  K 
Mon,  (Ky.)  542. 

*0'Meara  v.  No.  American,  & 
Co.,2Nev.  112. 

»  Tustin  V,  Faut,  28CaL  287.  The 
rule  18,  in  accordance  with  the 
Tnaxim  nihil  facit  error  nominis 
cum  de  corpore  constat  that  mis- 
takes in  the  description  of  tibe  par- 
ties, imless  very  gross,  will  not 
vitiate  the  deed.  If  the  descrip- 
tion, however  imperfect,  clearly  dis- 
tinguishes the  person  described 
from  all  others,  it  is  sufficient, 
Shep.  Touch.  288 ;  unless,  however, 
the  lessor  signs  the  instrument,  it 
wUl  not  amount  to  a  lease,  Mar- 
low  V.  Wiggins,  4  Q.  B.  867  ;  and 
if  there  be  two  or  more  granting 
parties,  all  should  sign,  and  if  only 
one  or  two  or  more  joint  tenants 
or  tenants  in  common  sign,  no 
more  than  the  interest  ot  the  one 
igning  vnUpass,  Jackson  v.  Stan- 


ford, 190a.  14 ;  Go.  litt  192  a,  and 
if ,  in  an  action  upon  the  lease,  it  is 
alleged  that  aU  demised,  and  upon 
its  production  it  appears  that  it 
was  executed  only  py  one,  the  va- 
riance is  fatal.  Wilson  v.  Woolf- 
ryes,6M.  &S.841. 
«  Middleton  v.  Findla,  25  CaL  76. 

•  Chase  v.  Palmer,  29  m.  806. 

•  Hitch  V.  Barr,  1  Ohio,  890. 

V  Sheehan  v.  Davis,  17  Ohio  St 
671. 

*Ckxxshv.  Qoodman,  2  Q.  B.  680 ; 
Aveline  v.  Whisson,  4  M.  &  Gr.  801. 

•  Mclntvre  v.  Park,  1 1  Gray 
(Mass.)  102 ;  Gunter  v.  Williams, 
40  Ala.  561. 

»« Post  V.  Martius,  17  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  149;  Conmiercial  Bank  v. 
Warren,  15  N.  Y.  577 ;  Dean  v. 
Raesler,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  420. 

"  Hayard  V.  Haswell,  6  Ad.  &  £1. 
265. 

"  Tupper  V.  Fonlkes,  9  C.  B.  K 
S.  797. 


CHAP.  XrV.] 


Attestation*. 


441 


ing  under  a  lease  not  executed  by  his  landlord,  is  not 
estopped,  in  an  action  by  the  assignee  of  the  lessor,  from 
showing  such  non-execution ; '  and  under  such  circum- 
stances, although  the  lease  is  executed  by  the  lessee,  if 
it  is  not  executed  by  the  lessor  the  lessee  is  not  liable 
upon  the  covenants  therein,  for,  the  lease  being  void, 
there  is  no  consideration  for  his  covenants,'  even  though 
he  occupies  during  the  entire  term.*  But,  although  not 
liable  in  covenant,  upon  the  covenants,  he  is  liable  upon 
an  implied  tenancy  subject  to  th^  like  terms  and  con- 
ditions contained  in  the  lease,  so  far  as  they  are  appli- 
cable to  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year/ 

Sec.  216.  Attestation.— In  all  the  States  except  New 
York,  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  Kentucky  and  Arr 
kansas,  one  or  more  subscribing  witnesses  are  necessary 
to  the  valid  execution  of  a  deed,  but  in  those  States 
where  the  deed  is  properly  acknowledged  no  attesting 
witnesses  are  necessary,  but,  where  it  is  not  acknowl- 
edged before  deUvery,  at  least  one  attesting  witness  is 
necessary   in   New  York.*     In  South  Carolina,    New 


1  Hose  v.  Poulton,  2  B.  &  Ad. 
822 ;  Cardwell  v.  Lucas,  2  M.  & 
W.  Ill ;  Soprani  v.  Skurro,  Yelv. 
19. 

'  Swatman  v.  Ambler,  8  Exchq. 
72 ;  Pitman  v.  Woodbury,  8  Exchq. 
4 ;  Knipe  v.  Palmer,  2  Wils.  182 ; 
Waller  v.  Dean,  Ac,  Ow.  186.  In 
Soprani  v.  Skurro,  Yelv.  18,  it  is 
held  that  if  one  party  executes  his 
part  of  the  deed  it  shall  be  his 
aeed,  though  not  executed  by  the 
other.  S^  (Domyn's  Dig.  (Fact 
Op.))  2,  or  Cooch  v.  Goodman,  2  Q. 
B.  580,  contra^  and  holding  that 
covenant  will  lie. 

*  Pitman  v.    Woodbury,    ante 
Swatman  v.  Ambler,  ante. 

^Loughran  v.  Smith,  11  Hun.^ 
fN.  Y.  S.  C.)  818.  In  this  case 
GnjBERT,  J. ,  says :  '*  It  is  laid  down 
in  Soprani  v.  Skurro,  Yelv.  18,  that 
a  lease  executed  by  the  lessee  and 
not  by  the  lessor  is  Inoperative 
both  as  regards'  the  interests  and 
the  covenants,  because  the  cove- 
nants depend  upon  the  lease,  and 
if  there  be  no  lease  there  can  be  no 
covenants.  But  this  proposition 
was  over-ruled  in  Cooch  v.  Good- 


man, 2  Q.  B.  680,  in  which  the 
court  were  clearly  of  opinion  that 
if  a  lease  be  executed  by  the  lessee, 
and  he  enters  and  enjoys  the  land 
demised,  he  is  liable  to  an  action 
of  covenant  by  the  lessor,  though 
he,  the  lessor,  did  not  execute  the 
deed.  They  consider  the  case  as 
falling  witmn  the  general  rule  laid 
down  in  Comyn's  Digest,  Fact  (C), 
2,  that  if  one  party  executes  his 
part  of  the  indenture,  it  shall  be 
his  deed  though  the  other  does  not 
execute  his  part."  But  the  doc- 
trine of  Cooch  V.  Goodman,  ante, 
is  not  accepted  as  good  law,  and 
Mr.  WooDFAix,  in  his  Landlord 
and  Tenant,  140,  lays  down  a 
contrary  rule,  and  a  contrary  doc- 
trine is  held  in  Pitoian  v.  Wood- 
bury, 8  Exchq.  4,  and  in  Swatman 
V.  Ambler,  8  Exchq.  72.  Espec- 
ially is  it  obnoxious  to  criticism, 
when  the  agreement  is  for  a  term 
within  the  Statute  of  Frauds,  and, 
consequently,  not  binding  upon 
the  lessor.  Loughran  v.  Smith, 
ante. 

^.Genter  v.  Morrison,  81  Barb, 
(N.  Y.)  166. 


44'a 


1  jKA8Wh» 


[§  216. 


Hampshire,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  Vermont,  Maryland, 
Ehode  Island,  Tennessee,  Ohio,  Delaware,  Illinois,  Indi- 
ana and  Connecticut,  two  attesting  witnesses  are  neces- 
sary where  the  deed  is  to  be  proved  by  witnesses,  and  in 
all  the  others,  one.  The  subscribing  witnesses  are  neces- 
sary to  enable  the  other  party  thereto  to  inquire  into  the 
circumstances  of  the  sealing  and  delivery,*  consequently 
they  should  be  persons  who  are  competent  to  testify  to 
the  facts,  and  who  labor  under  no  disability  that  dis- 
qualifies them  from  testifying  to  the  facts,  in  an  action 
between  the  parties  thereto,  or  generally.  Thus,  neither 
the  wife  of  the  grantor  or  grantee  are  competent,  nor  can 
one  grantor  or  grantee  be  a  witness  to  the  signature  of  a 
co-grantor,'  nor,  in  those  States  where  interest  disquali- 
fies, can  an  interested  party  be  a  witness,'  but  if  the 
witness  had  no  interest  at  the  time  when  the  deed  was 
execute^)  the  fact  that  he  had  subsequently  acquired  one 
does  not  invalidate  the  deed/  No  witnesses  are  required 
to  a  parol  lease. 

Sec.  216.  Delivery  .—Delivery  is  essential  to  the  validity 
of  a  deed,  and  proof  of  execution,  without  delivery,  is  of 
no  avail,*  but  it  may  be  actual  or  verbal.  If  it  is  shown 
that  there  was  an  intention  or  assent  of  the  mind  of 
the  grantor  to  treat  the  instrument  as  a  deed,  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  clothe  it  with  the  attributes  of  a  valid  legal  instru- 
ment.' But  it  is  necessary  that  the  grantor  should  put 
himself  in  such  a  position  in  reference  to  the  instrument 
that  he  cannot  recall  it,  and  that  aU  the  legal  formalities 
should  have  been  complied  with,"  or  it  will  not  be  opera- 


'  Morkley  v.  Swartzlander,  8  W. 
&  S.  (Penn.)  173. 

*Town8end  V.  Downer,  27  Vt.  119 : 
Corbett  v.  Noicroee,  85  N.  H.  99. 

'  Winsted,  &c.,  Bank  v.  Spenser, 
26  Conn.  195. 

*Carley  v.  Carter,  23  Ala.  «12. 

*  Armstrong  v.  Stovall,  26  Miss. 
275 ;  Oliver  v.  Stone,  24  Ga.  68 ; 
Stiles  V.  Brown,  16  Vt.  668  ;  Hatch 
V.  Hatch,  9  Mass.  807 ;  Porter  v. 
Buckingham,  2  Harr.  (Del.)  197 ; 
Herbert  v.  Herbert,  1  Dl.  278 ; 
Clarke  v.  Reg',  1  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  818 ; 
Jackson  y.  Sheldon,  22  Me.  669. 


'Thompson  v.  Hammond,  1 
Edw.  (N.  Y.)  Ch.  497 ;  Farrar  v. 
Bridge,  5  Humph.  (Tenn.)  44 ; 
Crawford  v.  Berthalf ,  1  N.  J.  Da. 
458;  Bjers'Y.  McClanahan,  6  G. 
&  J.  (Md.)  250  ;  Fisher  v.  HaU,  41 
N.  Y.  46. 

''Brevard  v.  Nieley,  4  Sneed. 
(Tenn.)  824.  It  must  be  under- 
stood by  the  parties  that  the  in- 
strument is  completed  and  ready 
for  delivery,  in  order  to  have  a 
placing  of  it  in  the  hands  of  the 
grantee  constitute  a  delivery.  If 
it  is  merely  left  with  him  for  ex- 


^ 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Delivebt. 


US 


i 


tive.'  The  grantor  must  do  some  act  putting  it  beyond 
his  power  to  revoke  it.  There  can  be  no  delivery  so  long 
as  it  is  in  his  custody  or  subject  to  his  control ; '  until 
he  has  parted  with  the  instrument,  or  tJie  right  of  control 
over  it,  he  may  recall  or  destroy  it.*  It  is  not  necessary 
to  prove  a  formal  delivery :  it  may  be  inferred  from  the 
acts  of  the  party  without  words,  or  from  words  alone, 
or  from  both  combined.*  The  question  of  delivery  is  one 
of  intention,"  therefore,  although  possession  thereof  by 
the  grantee,  or  the  fact  that  it  has  been  recorded,  is 
prima  facie  evidence  of  a  delivery ;  *  yet,  this  presump- 
tion may  be  overcome  by  proof  that  there  was  no  intent 
to  convey,  and  that  the  lease  was  to  be  returned  to  the 
grantor  again ;  ^  but  the  grantor  or  those  claiming  imder 
him  take  the  burden  of  proving  non-delivery,'  which  he 
must  show  affirmatively  and  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt, 
and  if  the  matter  is  left  in  doubt  upon  the  whole  proof, 


amination,  or  if  anything  more  re- 
mains to  be  done  to  perfect  it,  it  is 
not  a  delivery.  Stiles  v.  Probat, 
69  HI.  882 ;  Graves  v.  Dudley,  20 
N.  Y.  76. 

1  Reid  V.  Butt,  25  Oa.  28. 

*Duer  V.  James,  42  Md.  492; 
Jackson  v.  Dunlap,  1  John.  (N. 
Y.)  Gas.  114 ;  Fisher  v.  Hall,  41 
N.  Y.  416. 

3  Reid  V.  Butt,  25  Ga.  28 ;  Ck)ok 
V.  Brown,  34  N.  H.  460 ;  Johnson 
V.  Farey,  45  id.  505. 

*  Duer  V.  James,  42  Md.  492.  In 
Farrar  v.  Bridges,  ante,  the  court 
say :  '*  A  formal  delivery  of  a  deed 
is  not  necessary  to  give  it  effect; 
and,  though  left  in  the  possession 
of  the  grantor,  it  will  pass  the 
propertv  embraced  by  it,  if  it  ap- 
pears that  it  was  executed  wuh 
mat  intent.  But  in  such  a  case,  it 
is  apprehended  that  the  grantee 
must  he  shown  to  have  had  posses- 
sion of  the  instrument,  fully  exe- 
cuted, and  with  the  assent  of  the 
grantor,  and  that  it  was  left  with 
uie  grantor  by  him  for  safe  keeping 
or  other  purpose,  so  that  the  pow- 
er of  recalling  it  by  the  grantor  is 
lost,  Hammell  v.  Hammell,  19 
Ohio  17;  Clark  v.  Gifford,  10 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  810 ;  Sauverbye  v. 
Arden,  1  John.  (N.  Y.)  Ch.  240 ; 
Austin  V.  Feridall,  2  McArthur  (U. 


S.  C.  0.)  862,  or  that  a  fixed  inten- 
tion should  be  shown  on  the  part 
of  the  grantor,  that  the  title  xmder 
the  conveyance  should  vest  in  the 
grantor.  Newton  v.  Bealer,  41 
Iowa  884;  Ward  v.  Ward,  2  Hayw. 
(N.  C.)  226.  But  if  the  grantor 
holds  the  deed  untU  some  condition 
is  performed  by  the  arantee,  there 
is  no.  delivery,  and  the  deed  is  in- 

rrative ;  and  especially  is  this  so  if 
grantor  subsequently  deals  with 
the  land  in  a  manner  mconsistent 
with  the  idea  that  he  intended  the 
deed  to  be  operative.  Jackson  v. 
Dunlap,  1  John,  (N.  Y.)  Gas.  114. 

*  Steele  v.  Miller,  40  Iowa  402 ; 
Harris  v.  Sanders,  2  Strobh.  (S.  C.) 
Eq,  870 ;  McQure  v.  Calclough,  17 
Ala.  89;  Dayton  v.  Newman,  19 
Penn.  St.  194 ;  Rivard  v.  Walker, 
89  m.  418 ;  Lloyd  v.  Taylor,  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  L.  475 ;  Warren  v.  Sweet, 
81  N.  H.  882 ;  Stevens  v.  Hatch,  6 
Minn.  64. 

•Billings  V.  Stark,  15  Fla.  297; 
Kille  V.  Ege,  79  Penn.  St.  15 ;  Gould 
V.  Day,  94  U.  S.  405 ;  Games  v. 
Piatt,  41  N.  Y.  Superior  a.  485. 

'  Steele  v.  Miller,  41  Iowa  402 ; 
as  that  it  was  delivered  to  a 
stranger  in  escrow,  and  wrongf  ullv 
delivered  to  the  grantee.  Nicholls 
V.  Nicholls,  28  Vt.  228. 

>  Black  V.  Shreens,  18  N.  J.  Eq.  455. 


444 


LEASEBi 


[§  217. 


the  doubt  will  be  resolved  in  favor  of  delivery.'  The 
delivery  of  a  deed  to  a  stranger  for  the  grantee  is  a  good 
delivery  if  the  grantee  subsequently  assents  thereto,*  or 
if  it  be  left  with  such  third  person  at  the  grantee's 
request.'  But,  in  order  to  make  a  delivery  to  a  third 
person  operative,  it  must  either  be  shown  that  it  was  left 
with  him  at  the  grantee's  request^  or  that  he  subse- 
quently assented  thereto.*  The  acceptance  of  the  convey- 
ance by  the  grantee  is  an  indispensable  requisite,  and  a 
deed  executed  and  procured  to  be  recorded  by  the  grantor 
is  inoperative  as  against  third  persons  unless  the 
grantee's  assent  is  established.*  But  such  assent  is  es- 
tablished by  showing  that  he  subsequently  had  posses- 
sion of  the  conveyance ;  *  and,  where  the  deed  is  bene- 
ficial to  him,  from  that  fact  assent  is  presumed,  although 
recorded  without  his  knowledge."  Sending  a  deed  by 
mail,  or  depositing  it  in  the  post-office,'  or  leaving  it  in 
the  recorder's  office  by  direction  of  the  grantee,  is  a 
delivery/ 

Sec.  217.  EBorow.— A  deed  may  be  delivered  in  escrow. ' 
That  is,  delivered  to  a  third  person,  to  be  held  by  him 
until  some  condition  is  performed,  and,  until  such 
event  occurs,  the  title  remains  in  the  grantor ; "  but  upon 


"  Games  v.  Piatt,  41  N.  Y.  Supr. 
a.  435. 

» Brown  v.  Austin,  85  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  341 ;  Fisher  v.  HaU,  41  N.  Y. 
416. 

*Eckman  ▼.  Eckman,  55  Penn. 
St.  269 ;  Hatch  v.  Bates,  64  Me. 
186 ;  Morrison  v.  Kelly,  22  Dl.  610 ; 
Peavey  v.  Tilton,  18  N.  H.  151: 
Oincinnatti,  &c.,  K.  R.  Ck).  v.  Biff, 
18  Ohio  St.  285 ;  Church  v.  Oilman, 
15  Wend.  (N.  Y^  656 ;  Guest  v. 
Buson,  2  Houst.  (Del.)  246 ;  Fewell 
v.  Kessler,  80  Ind.  195. 

*Coneff  V.  Piatt,  88  How.  Pr.  (N. 
Y.)  100 ;  Fewell  v.  Kessler,  ante. 

^Maynard  v.  Maynard,  10  Mass. 
456;  Derry  Bank  v.  Webster,  44 
N.  H.  264 ;  Jones  v.  Bush,  4  Harr. 
(Del.)  1.  It  will  be  good  against 
the  grantor.  Kerr  v.  Bimel,  25 
Ark.  225. 

'Maynard  v.  Maynard,  ante; 
Dawson  v.  Dawson,   Rice  (S.  0.) 


Eq.  248 ;  Woodbury  v.  Fisher,  20 
Ind.  887. 

^Tibbals  v.  Jacobs,  81  Conn.  428 ; 
Church  V.  Oilman,  15  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  656 ;  Renfro  v.  Harrison,  10 
Mo.  411 ;  Mitchell  v.  Ryan,  8  Ohio 
St.  877. 

^McEIinney  v.  Rhoades,  5  Watts 
(Penn.)  84. 

•  Kemp  V,  Walker,  16  Ohio  118. 

10  Johnson  v.  Branch,  11  Humph. 
(Tenn.)  521 ;  Louhat  v.  Kipp,  9 
Pla.  60 ;  Millett  v.  Parker,  2  Met. 
(KyO  608 ;  Hathaway  v.  Payne,  84 
N.  Y.  92 ;  Granes  v.  Tucker,  18 
Miss.  0;  Dyson  v.  Bradshaw,  28 
CaL  528 ;  Smith  v.  So.  Royalton 
Bank,  82  Vt.  841 ;  Cair  v.  Hoxie, 
5  Mas.  (U.  S.)  60 ;  Jackson  ▼.  Bow- 
land,  6  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  696.  And 
it  makes  no  difference  whether 
the  parties  call  it  an  escrow  or  not. 
State  Bank  v.  Evans,  15  N.  J.  L. 
155. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


IlECORDraa. 


445 


performance  of  the  condition  the  title  vests  in  the 
grantee.*  But,  where  a  deed  or  other  conveyance  is  left 
in  escrow,  if  the  depositary  delivers  it  before  the  condi- 
tion upon  which  delivery  is  predicated  is  performed,  it  is 
a  nullity  in  the  hands  of  the  grantee.'  The  general  rule 
is,  that  an  instrument  delivered  as  an  escrow  does  not 
take  effect  so  as  to  divest  the  title  until  the  delivery  to 
the  grantee,  but  that  the  second  delivery  derives  its  val- 
idity from  the  first,  of  which  it  is  the  full  execution  and 
consummation.  But  if  a  strict  equity  requires  it,  the 
second  delivery  will  be  made  to  relate  back  to  the  first,  so 
as  to  protect  the  grantee  against  intervening  claims.'  A 
deed  cannot  be  held  as  an  escrow,  either  by  the  grantor 
or  grantee.  If  it  is  intended  to  operate  as  such,  it  must 
be  delivered  to  a  third  person,  to  be  delivered  to  the 
grantee,  when  a  certain  condition  is  performed.*  But  if 
it  is  delivered  to  the  grantee  to  be  delivered  to  a  third 
person  to  be  held  until  the  grantee  performs  certain  con- 
ditions, it  operates  as  an  escrow,  whether  he  delivers  it  to 
such  person  or  not.* 

Sec.  218.  Becording.  Acknowledgment.— In  all  the 
States,  leases  for  a  term  exceeding  that  which,  under  the 
statute,  may  be  granted  by  parol,  must  be  acknowledged 
or  proved  and  recorded  in  the  county,  and  in  some  of  the 
States,  in  the  town  where  the  premises  are  situated,  or  it 
is  inoperative,  except  as  against  the  grantor,  and  those 
having  notice  of  the  lease,  and  subsequent  bona  fide  pur- 
chasers of  the  premises,  or  persons  takmg  mortgages 
upon,  or  leases  of  them,  or  creditors  attaching  them, 
will,  as  against  the  grantee  or  lessee,  acquire  a  good 
estate.*    But  actual  notice  by  a  subsequent,  purchaser  or 


'Peck  V.  Goodwin,  Kirby 
(Conn.)  64;  Beekman  v.  Frost,  18 
John.  (N.  Y.)  544 ;  Rejan  v.  Howe, 
121  Mass.  424. 

*  Everts  v.  Agnes, '4  Wis.  848; 
Dyson  v.  BradsfaAw,  ante.  Abbott 
V.  Alsdorf ,  19  Mieh.  157. 

*  Simpson  v.  McGlatheny,  52 
Miss.  728. 

^Ebu^good  y.  Harley,  8  Rich.  (S. 
C.)  825 ;  Jordan  y.  Follock,  14  Ga. 


145;  Braman  y.  Bingham,  26  N. 
T.  488 ;  Granes  y.  Tucker,  18  Miss. 
9. 

•Brown  y.  Reynolds,  5  Sneed 
(Tenn.)  869. 

•  Mallory  y.  Stodder,  6  Ala.  801 ; 
Wallis  Y.  Rhea,  12  id.  646 ;  Scott 
y.  Doe,  1  Hempst.  (Ark.)  275 ;  Staf- 
ford V.  lick,  7  Cal.  479  ;  Bissell  y. 
Nooney,  38  Ck)nn.  411  ;  Hemdon  y. 
Kimball,  7  Ga.  482;  Doey.  Reed, 


U6 


Leases. 


[§  218. 


attaching  creditor  is  equivalent  to  registration/  and  lae 


8  m.  815;   Orth  y.    Jennings,    8 
Blackf.  (Ind.)420  ;  Chilesv.  Coalej, 
2  Dana  (Kj.)  21 ;  Moore  v.  Jour- 
dan,   14  La.  An.    414;  Curtis   v. 
Deeviny,  12  Me.  499 ;   Salmon  v. 
Claggett,  8  Bland  Ch.  (Md.)  125  ; 
Somes  V.  Skinner,  8  Pick.  (Mass.) 
52 ;  Bloomer  v.  Henderson,  8  Mich. 
895;  Wilder  v.  Brooks,  10  Minn. 
50  ;  Parmalee  v.  Simpson,  5  Wall. 
OJ.  S.)  81 ;  Whittemore  v.  Bean,  6 
N.  H.  47 ;  McCamont  y.  Patterson, 
89  Mo.  100  ;  Den  v.  Richman,  13  N. 
J.    L.  48 ;  Jackson  v.   Walsh,  14 
John.  (N.   Y.)  407 ;  Blake  v.  Gra- 
ham, 6  Ohio  St.  680 ;  Thompson  v. 
Bullock,  1  Bay  (S.  C.)  864 ;  Harris 
y.  Arnold,  1 R.  J.  126 ;  McCullough 
y.  Endlay,    8  Yerg.    (Tenn.)  846; 
Ayres  y.  Duprey,  27  Tex.  698 ;  Mor- 
rison y.  Shattuck,  1  N.  Chip.  (Vt.) 
42;  Hart  y.  Farmers*,  &c..  Bank, 
88  (Vt.)  262 ;  WUcox  y.  Colloway,  1 
Wash.  (Va.)  88  ;  Casgray  y.  Core,  2 
W.  Va.  863;  Ely  y.    Wilcox,    20 
Wis.  523.    In  some  of  the  States  a 
certain  period  is  idlowed,  as  thirty 
days  in  Alabama,  WaUis  y.  Rhea, 
12  Ala.  646  ;    twelye    months  in 
G^rgia,  Delaware  and  Tennessee 
and  Indiana,  Anderson  y.  Dugas, 
29  Ga.  440 ;  Cains  y.  Jones,  5  Yer^. 
rienn.)  249  ;  and  eight  months  m 
Virgiaia,    Eppes    y.    Randolph,  2 
Call  (Va.)  125  ;  six  months  in  New 
Jersey,  Den  y.  Richman,  18  N.  J. 
L.    43,    Pennsylyania,    Maryland, 
Ridgeley  y.   McLaughlin,  8  H.  & 
M.^d.)  220,  Illinois,  Ohio,  North 
Carolina  and  South  Carolina,  Leger 
y.  Doyle,  11  Rich.  (S.  C.)  109 ;  and 
three  months   in    Mississippi  and 
Missouri,  and  in  the    others,   no 
time  is  limited,  but   instruments 
requiring  to  be  recorded   become 
operatiye  according  to  the  order 
in  which  they  are  '*  filed"  in  the 
recorder's  office,  or  "  recorded  "  ac- 
cording to*the  language  of  the  stat- 
ute. 

>  CJorliss  y.  Corliss,  8  Vt.  473-, 
Smith  y.  Hull,  28  id.  864 ;  Jackson 
y.  West,  10  John.  (N.  Y.)  466  ;  New- 
man y.  CHiapman,  2  Rand.  (Va.) 
93 ;  Watkins  y.  Edward,  23  Tex. 
448 ;  Knots  y.  Qeiger,  4  Rich.  (S. 
C.)  32 ;  Blake  y.  Graham,  6  Ohio 
St.  580 ;  Schutt  y.  Lang,  6  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  873  ;  Den  y.  M'Night,  13  N. 
J.  L.  43  ;  Rogers  y.  Jones,  8  N.  H. 
264;  Trull  y.  Bip:olow,    16   Mass. 


406 ;  Hudson  y.  Warner,  2  H.  & 
G.  (Md.)  415  ;  Porter  y.  Seayey,  43 
Me.  519 ;  Stewart  y.    HaU,   3  B. 
Mon.  (Ky.)  218.    In  Missouri,  Wal- 
do y.  Russell,  5  Mo.  887,  and  in 
Tennessee,  Butler   y.  Mauray,   10 
Humph.  (Tenn.)  420,  and  Virginia, 
actual  notice  to  subsequent  attach- 
ing creditors  does  not  affect  prior 
rights  nor  defeat  their  attachment 
or  liens.    Guerrant  y.  Anderson   4 
Rand.  (Va.)  208.    When  a  party,  is 
put  on  inquiry  as  to  the  existence 
of  a  prior  unregistered  deed,  the 
question  whether  he  has  made  due 
inquiry  is  one  of  fact,  to  be  deter- 
mined by  the  jury  under  the  in- 
structions of  the  court ;  the  infor- 
mation  obtained    by    him    from 
proper  sources    may   be   proyed, 
though  it  cannot  be  used  to  bear 
upon  the  question  whether  or  not 
there  has  been  such  a  deed.    Nute 
y.  Nute,  41  N.  H.  60.    Mere  rumor 
or  suspicion  of  defect  in  the  title, 
or   an  outstanding    interest  in  a 
third  person,  is  not  sufficient  to 
operate  as  constructiye  notice ;  but 
where  the  land  is  claimed  under  a 
deed,   the    guarantee     in    which 
openly  affects  to  control  it  as  his 
property,  and  pays  the  taxes  as- 
sessed upon  it.    one    buying   the 
property  with  knowledge  of  these 
circumstances  is  chaijgeable  with 
notice.  The  presumption  of  notice 
is  an  inference  of  fact  merely,  and 
may  be  repelled  hj  proof  that  the 
purchaser,  exercismg  proper  dili- 
gjence,  failed  to  discoyer  the  prior 
right.    Williamson  y.  Brown,   15 
N.  Y.  354.    Possession  is  sudi  a 
notice  of  title  in  land  that  an  ad- 
yerse  claimant  gains  no  adyantage 
oyer  him  in  possession  bygettin^ 
his  deed  first  on  record.    Wyatt  y . 
Elam,  19  Ga.  885.    It  is  not  m  law 
actual  notice  of  title  to  land  as  an 
equivalent  forr^stry  of  the  deed, 
but  evidence  of  notice,  to  be  re- 
ferred  to  the  jury.    Vaughn   v. 
y.  Tracy,  22  Mis.  415.    The  notice 
is  merely  an  inference  which  may 
not  arise  in  some  cases,  and  in. 
others  may  be  repelled  or  restricted 
to  some  particular  title  or  claim. 
Where  the  entire  estate  and  title 
of  the  owner  in  fee   of  certain 
lands  had  been  sold  under  a  judg- 
ment, and  he  remained  in  posses- 
sion as  before,  without  any  appaiw 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Date. 


447 


} 


same  rule  applies  where  the  purchaser  or  creditor  has 
knowledge  of  such  facts  as  ought  to  put  him  on  inquiry; ' 
and  whether  possession  by  a  tenant  is  of  such  a  charac- 
ter as  ought  to  put  a  subsequent  purchaser  upon  inquiry 
is  a  question  of  fact  for  the  jury/  As  between  the  lessor 
and  lessee,  an  unrecorded  lease  is  as  valid  as  though 
recorded."  The  acknowledgment  of  a  deed  must  be  sub- 
stantially in  conformity  to  the  statute,  or  the  instrument 
will  not  be  operative  as  against  third  persons.  Slight 
and  immaterial  variations  will  not  affect  the  validity  of 
the  instrument ;  biit  maiericU  variations  will  be  fatal/ 
even  though  the  instrument  is  recorded/ but  it  is  good 
between  the  parties/ 

Sec.  219.  Date.— The  date  of  a  lease  is  not  material,  as, 
unless  otherwise  expressly  provided  in  the  instrument 


ent  change  in  the  character  of  his 
possession,  it  was  held  that  the 
legal  presumption  was  that  he  was 
in  by  a  title  derived  from  the  pur- 
chaser under  the  judgment,  and 
that  he  and  those  claiming  imder 
him  were  estopped  from  setting  up 
another  title  to  the  prenuses. 
Cook  V.  Travis,  22  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
838.  If  the  purchaser  of  lands 
knew  that  they  are  in  possession 
of  a  third  party,  and  is  snown  cer- 
tain agreements  respecting  the 
land  between  the  vendor  and  oc- 
cupant, and  is  assured  by  the  for- 
mer that  the  latter  has  no  claim  to 
the  land  in  law  or  equity,  these 
facts  will  in  equity  amount  to  full 
notice  of  any  claim  which  such 
occupant  really  has.  Hull  v.  No- 
ble, 40  Me.  459. 

» Parks  V.  Willard,  1  Tex.  850 ; 
Watkins  v.  Edwards,  23  Tex.  619  ; 
Ck>leman  v.  Barklew,  27  N.  J.  L. 
857 ;  £nmions  v.  Murray,  16  N.  H. 
885 ;  Harper  v.  Reno,  1  Freem.  Ch. 
(Miss.)  823 ;  Sigoumey  v.  Munn,  7 
Conn.  824. 

»  Ponton  V.  Ballard,  24  Tex.  619 ; 
Watkins  v.  Edwards,  ante  ;  Traup 
V.  Hurlburt,  10  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  854  ; 
Jacques  v.  Short,  20  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
269;  Stockton  v.  Briscoe,  1  La. 
An.  249;  Morgan  v.  Morgan,  3 
Stew.  (Ala.)  883 ;  Taylor  v.  Eck- 
ford,  19  Miss.  21 ;  Murrill  v.  Ire- 
land, 40  Me.  569.    Implied  notice 


of  a  prior  unrecorded  deed  may  be 
equally  effective  with  direct  and 
positive  notice.  Possession  of  the 
grantee  may  be  constructive 
notice.  But  it  must  be  actual, 
distinct,  and  unequivocal,  visible 
and  manifested  by  notorious  acts 
of  ownership,  such  as  would  natu- 
rally be  known  and  observed  by 
others.  The  mere  using  for  pas- 
ture by  the  grimteeand  others  of 
land  on  which  there  are  no  build- 
ings, is  not  such  i)OB8ession.  Cole- 
man. V.  Barklew,  27  N.  J.  L.  857 ; 
Holmes  v;  Stout,  10  N.  J.  Ex.  419. 
•Culeson  v.  Blxmton,  8  Hayw. 
(Tenn.)  152;  Turner  v.  Stip,  1 
Wash.  (Va.)  38 ;  Cooper  v.  Day,  I 
Rich.  (S.  C.)  26  ;  Steams  v.  Morse, 
47  N.  H.  582.  The  purpose  of  the 
registry  laws  is,  to  give  notice  as 
between  prior  and  subsequent  pur- 
chasers from  the  same  grantor^  and 
not  for  the  purpose  of  notice  to  the 
grantor  and  grantee.  Oalpen  v. 
Abbott,  6  Mich.  17 ;  Lawry  v.  Wil- 
liams,  2  Me.  281. 

*  Henderson  v.  Grewell,  8  Cal. 
581  ;Pippsv.  McGehee,5Port(Ala.) 
413 ;  Stanton  v.  Button,  7  Conn. 
527  ;  Vance  v.  Schuyler,  6  HI.  160 ; 
Dauar  v.    Cardwell,  27  Ihd.  478. 

•Van  Cortland  v.  Tozer,  20 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  428;  AUen  v. 
Moses,  27  Mo.  354;  Odiome  v. 
Mason,  9  N.  H.  24. 

*  Odiome  v.  Mason,  ante. 


448 


Leiases. 


[§  219. 


itself,  it  takes  effect  from  its  delivery,  but  the  date  is 
prima  facie  evidence  of  the  time  when  it  was  executed.' 
And  it  wUl  be  presumed  that  it  was  delivered  at  that 
time,  unless  the  contrary  is  proved.*  The  date  is  not 
essential  to  its  vahdity  and  may  be  contradicted.'  If  the 
date  is  false  or  impossible,  proof  of  the  delivery  ascer- 
tains the  time  of  it.*  If  Uiere  is  no  date,  it  may  be 
shown  by  parol  that  it  was  not  to  take  effect  from  de- 
livery, but  from  a  future  uncertain  period.'  An  actual 
mftrmnl  investiture  is  not  necessary  in  order  to  constitute 
a  delivery,  but  the  due  execution  of  the  lease  and 
delivery  to  a  third  person  for  the  use  of  the  lessee,*  or 
any  words  or  acts  tiiat  evince  an  inteniion  that  the  leaae 
shall  be  considered  as  executed  and  the  title  parted  with, 
is  sufficient.'  Until  the  lease  is  delivered  to  the  tenant 
there  is  no  acceptance  of  it  by  him  and  he  is  not  bound 


'Colquhoun  t.  Atlcmson,  6 
Mimf.  ?Va.)  550 ;  Meech  r.  Fow- 
ler, 14  Axk.  39 ;  Newlin  t.  Osborne, 
4  Jones.  (N.  C.)  L.  157 ;  Coetigiut 
T.  Glould,  6  Dem.  (N.  Y.)  290. 

'Co.  litt.  86;  8  Blttckstone'a 
Com.  807;  Barrie  v.  Norton,  16 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  364 ;  Jayne  v.  Gregg, 
42  m.  413  ;  Ford  v.  Qregory.  10  B. 
Mon.  (Ky.)  175;  Kobinsoa  t. 
Oould,  36  Iowa  87 ;  Sweeteer  v. 
lAmell,  83  Me.  440 ;  but  deliverr 
is  a  question  of  intention,  and  al- 
most any  manifestation  of  the 
p^y's  intention  to  deliver,  if  ac- 
oompanied  by  ait  act  importing 
the  BBJDe,  will  constitute  a  de- 
livery, Woodfall'a  L.  &  T.  140-1, 
and  is  essentially  a  question  for 


10  Hd.  10.  If  the  lease  is  executed 
by  several  lesMws  upon  different 
dates,  the  presumption  that  it  whs 
delivered  on  the  day  of  its  dat«  is 
destroyed.  Henderson  t.  Mayor, 
&a.,  8  Md.  8G3. 

>  Blake  V.  Foeh,  44  El.  203. 

*Carterv.  Stnipham,  Cowp.  201 ; 
Murray  v.  Stair,  a  B.  &  C.  83; 
Hare  v.  Eorton,  5  B.  &  C.  671 ; 
Bawkec  v.  Buldikin,  11  M.  A  W. 
138. 

'  Davis  V,  Jones,  17  C.  B.  635. 

*  St«pbenB  T.  Hum,  54  Fenn.  St. 
30  ;  Turner  v,   Whidden,   S3  Me. 


131 ;  Reid  v.  Marble,  10  Paige  Cb. 
(N.  Y.)  409;  Kane  y.  Machiu,  17 
Miss.  887  ;  R.  E.  Co.  T,  Iliff,  18 
Ohio  St  285. 

'McQure  v.  Colclongh,  14  Ab. 
89;  Floyd  v.  Taylor,  12  Ired.  (N. 
C.)  L.  47  ■.  Rinard  v.  Walker,  89 
III.  413.  A  formal  delivery  is  not 
necessary  to  give  effect  to  it ;  and 
though  left  in  the  possession  of  the 
bai^ainer,  it  will  wtas  the  proper^ 
embraced  by  it,  if  it  appear  that  it 
was  executed  vnih  such  intent. 
Fsirar    v.     Bridges,    6    Humph. 

genu.)  44.  In  Ward  v.  Ward,  8 
ayw.  (N.  C-l  32«,  a  father  in  his 
lifetime,  made  a  deed  of  land  to 
his  son,  but  it  did  not  appear  that 
the  deed  was  ever  delivered,  and 
it  remained  in  the  possession  of 
the  father  until  after  his  death, 
when  the  grantee  therein  obtained 
poaseseian  of  it.  The  father  by  his 
will,  disposed  of  the  &me  land, 
and  thoee  claiming  under  the  wiU 
filed  their  bill  to  have  the  deed 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Entry  of  Lessee. 


449 


by  it ;  as,  where  the  lease  is  executed  and  delivered  to  a 
third  person  to  be  delivered  to  the  tenant  when  he  pays 
the  first  month's  rent,  which  he  does  not  do,*  because, 
when  a  condition  is  attached  to  the  delivery,  until  such 
condition  is  performed  by  the  tenant,  or  waived  by  the 
landlord,  no  liability  under  the  lease  can  attach  to  the 
tenant,  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  landlord  has  evinced 
any  intention  to  part  with  the  title. 

Sec.  220.  Entry  of  lessee.— By  the  common  law,  Uvery 
of  seizin  or  an  actual  possession  of  the  land,  was  neces- 
sary to  complete  every  grant  of  an  estate  of  inheritance, 
or  for  life ;  but  in  England,'  as  well  as  in  most  of  the 
States  of  this  countiy,  a  lease  duly  executed,  acknowl- 
edged and  recorded,  is  equivalent  to,  and  dispenses  with, 
livery  of  seizin.'  Before  entry,  a  lessee  at  common  law 
has  only  an  inter  esse  termini^  and  no  possession,  and, 
before  entry,  cannot  maintain  trespass;*  but  he  may 
maintain  ejectment  whenever  the  legal  estate  vests  in' 
him  with  a  right  to  immediate  possession,'  or  he  may 
assign  his  interest,  and  thus  invest  his  assignee  with  this 


« Witthaus  V.  Stavin,  12  Daly  (N. 
Y.  C.  P.)  226 ;  Jackson^  v.  Phipps, 
12  John  (N.  Y.)  418. 

«  By  8  &  9  Vict.  Chap.  106,  Sec. 
2. 

» Flint  V.  Sheldon,  13  Mass.  443  ; 
Higher  v.  Rice,  5  id.  844;  Mat- 
thews V.  Ward,  10  G.  &  J.  (Md.) 
443;  Biyan  v.  Bradley,  16  Conn. 
474. 

*Co.  Litt.  296  b;  Harrison  v. 
Blackburn,  17  C.  B.  N.  S.  678 ; 
Wheeler  v.  Montefiore,  2  Q.  B.  188. 
In  Co.  Litt.  296  h ;  Comyn's  Digest, 
Trespass  (B.),  and  in  4  Bacon's  Abr. 
Tit.  Leases,  &c.,  (M.)  it  is  laid  down 
as  a  settled  rule  that  a  person  can- 
not maintain  trespass  quare 
dausum  if  he  has  not  the  actual 
possession,  even  though  he  has  the 
freehold.  Therefore  neither  a 
grantee,  bargainee  or  lessee  of 
mnds,  not  in  possession,  can  main- 
tain the  action.  See  also  Cook  v. 
Harris,  1  Ld.  Rayd.  867 ;  Patridge 
V.  Bere,  5  B.  &  Ad.  604 ;  Hitchman 
V.  Walton,  4  M.  &  W.  409.  There 
must  be  possession  and  a  right  of 
possession    as     against    the   de- 


fendant. Shepard  v.  Pratt,  15 
Pick.  (Mass.)  82 ;  Austin  v.  Sawyer, 
9  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  39;  Bigelow  v. 
Lehr,  4  Watts  (Penn.)  377; 
Chatham  v.  Brainerd,  11  Conn.  60 ; 
Brandon  v,  Grimke,  1  N.  &  Mc. 
(S.  C.)  856 ;  Rowland  v.  Rowland, 
8  Ohio  40 ;  Richardson  v.  Milbum, 
11  Md.  840;  Cann  v.  Warren,  1 
Houst.  (Del.)  188;  Bartlett  v. 
.Perkins,  18  Me.  87;  Payne  v. 
Clark,  20  Conn.  80. 

^Laurissini  v.  Doe,  25  Miss.  177 ; 
Parsley  v.  Day,  2  Q.  B.  156 ;  Ryan 
V.  Clark,  14  id.  73 ;  Cole  on  Eject- 
ment, 72,  287.  To  entitle  the  ten- 
ant to  maintain  the  action,  how- 
ever, his  lessor  must  have  had  title 
at  the  date  of  the  demise,  Whitoey 
V.  Bramble,  9  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  143 
Buxton  V.  Carter,  11  Mo.  481 
Wood  V.  Morton,  11  lU.  647 
Smith  V.  McCann,  24  How.  (U,  S.) 
398;  Jackson  v.  Huges,  1  Blackf. 
(Ind.)  421 ;  Scissor  v.  McLaws,  12 
Ga.  166,  and  the  lessee  must  estab- 
lish his  title  and  right  of  posses- 
sion at  the  time  when  the  action 
was     commenced.     Layman    y. 

29 


J 


"^ 
•^K- 


450  LEABE3.  [g  220. 

ri^t,  as  the  person  having  the  better  title  can  put  the 
other  on  his  defence. '  K  the  lessor  had  not  the  right  to 
the  possession  of  all  the  premises  demised  so  that  the 
tenant  could  get  possession  of  only  part,  as,  if  he  had 
previously  sold  a  part  of  them,  or  leased  them  for  a  term 
then  unexpired,  the  lease,  as  to  such  part,  is  wholly  void, 
and,  although  the  tenant  enters  and  enjoys  the  part 
thereof  which  the  lessor  had  the  power  to  lease,  the  rent 
is  not  apportionable,  and  cannot  be  distrained  for,  the 
impediment  of  the  lessee  to  getting  possession  being  anal- 
ogous to  an  eviction  from  a  part  by  an  elder  title '  nor 
will  covenant  he  against  him  for  the  rent  because  it  can- 
not be  apportioned.'  But  it  would  seem  that  if  a  lease 
is  made  of  premises  by  deed  poU  or  indenture,  for  five 
years,  and  there  is  an  outstanding  term  of  a  part  of  the 
premises  for  two  years,  the  lease  will  be  void  as  to  the 
two  years,  and  valid  for  the  remaining  three  years,  if  the 
lessee  so  elects  to  treat  it.*    The  tenant's  remedy  in  such 

"Whitney,  80   Barb.  (N.  Y.)  659;  Kenyon,  1  M.  *  W.  page  759), 

PitkiD  V.  Yaw,  18  IIL  251 ;  Burton  that  learned  jurist  says  :  "  If  one 

■V.  Austin,  4  Vt.  105 ;  Kite  v.  Tub-  makes  a  lease  to  A  for  ten  jears, 

les,  sa  CaL  883.    Title  and  seizin  and  the  same  day  makes  a  parol 

arepresumed  to  be  united  until  the  lease  to  B  for  ten  years  of   the 

contran'  is  ehown.     Doe  t.  Butler,  eame  lands,  this  second  lease  is  ab- 

8  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  149.     A  legal  title,  solutely  void,  and  can  never  take 

unless  tiie  person  in  whom  it  is  veet  effect  either  be  a  future  inferewe 

ed   is  estopped   from  asserting  it,  termini,  or  as  a  reveisionary  int^r- 

entitles  the    plaintiff    to  recover,  est  though  the  first  leasee  should 

whatever  may  be  the  equities  of  forfeit  or  otherwise  determine  his 

the  parties,  Mitchell  t.  Robertson,  estate,  or  though  the  first  lease 

15  AJft.  413 ;  Winn  v.  Cole,  1  MisB.  were  on  cxindition,  and  the  condi- 

119;  Clark  t.   Lockwood,  31   Cal.  tion  broken  within  the  ten  years; 

330 ;  Allen   v.   Smith,    Q   Blackf .  neither  shall  the  lessor  bave  the 

(Ind.)  537,  no  matter  how  it  was  rent  reserved   upon  such  second, 

acquired.     N.  Y.  Dry  Ekwks  Co.  lease,  but  such  second  lease  is  ab- 

V.  Hicks,  S  McLean  (U.  S.)  111.  solutely  void,  as  if  none  such  had 

■  Buseniua  v.  Caffer,  14  Cal.  91  ;  been   made.     Plow.  431  b,  433  6  ; 

Mather   v.    Munster,  8  S.  &   R.  Bendl.    pi.    348;  Cro.    Ehz.    160; 

(Penn.)  609.    Only  a  title  superior  Plow.  432, 521 ;  Hut.  105  ;  Bro.  Tit. 

to  the  defendant's  is  required,  Gar-  Leases,    48;  Moor,    185,    pL    839; 

rett  \.  Lyer,  21  Ala.  586;  Cancey  Dv~     ""    -'     ">     '^" 

V.  Cummings,  13  La.  An.  748.  with  wl 

an  immediate  ri^t  of  possession  be 
as  against  him.    Batterton  t.  Yoa- 


to 


747. 

'Holgate  T.  Kay,  1  C.  &  K.  34. 

^  In  4  Bacon's  Abr.  lit.  Leases 
(N).  which  is  said  to  have  been 
written  by  LoBt>  CnicF  Jcbtice 
QiLB£BT    (see    opinion    of    Lokd 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Entry  of  Lessee. 


451 


a  case  is  against  the  landlord  for  not  giving  him  posses- 
sion of  the  premises,  and  although  he  is  not  liable  upon 


terest  during  that  time ;    and  his 
forfeiture  or   determination  of  it 
sooner,  which  was  perfectly  con- 
tingent and  accidental,  shall  never 
make  good  the  second  lease  as  a 
future  tJiteresse  termini^  when  at 
the  time  of  making  thereof  it  was 
absolutely  void,  for  want  of  power 
in  the  lessor  to  contract  for  it ;  and 
as  a  reversionary  interest  it  can- 
not be  good,  for  want  of  a  deed ; 
for  a   reversion,    whether  it    be 
panted  for  life  or  years,  not  be- 
ing capable  of  executing  either  by 
livery  of  seizin  or  entry  and  trans- 
mutation of  the  possession,  there 
can  be  no  evidence  of  the  creation 
or  existence  of  such  a  grant,  with- 
out a  deed  to  ascertain  it ;  iEuid 
therefore  a  deed  in  such  a  case  is 
as  essential  to  the  making  good 
the  grant,  as  livery  of  seizin  or 
entry  in  the  other  cases,  where 
they  deal  for  the  possession  ;   and 
by  consequence,  tnis  second  lease 
not  being  good,  either  as  a  future 
interesae  termini  or  a  reversion, 
must    be   absolutely   void.      But 
now  if  such  second  lease  had  been 
made  for  twenty  years,   then  it 
had  been  good  as  a  future  intereaae 
termini  for  the  last  ten  years,  and 
yoid  for  the  first  ten  years,  for  the 
reasons  before  given.    For  the  last 
ten  years  it  had  been  good ;  be- 
cause  when   the   first   ten  years 
were  elapsed,   the  second   lessee 
might  then  execute,  and  reduce 
into  possession  by  entry,  as  well  as 
if  it  h^  been  at  first  made  in  pos- 
session ;  for  it  had  been  good  for 
the  whole  twenty  years  if  the  first 
lease  had  not  stood  in  the  way, 
and  that  can  staud  in  the  way  no 
longer  than  it  continues,  and  there- 
fore by  its  determination  lets  in  the 
second  lease.    But  as  a  grant  of 
the  reversion  such   second   lease 
could  not  be  good,  for  want  of  a 
deed,  for  the  reasons  before  given ; 
neither  could  any  attornment  help 
it,  or  let  in  the  second  lease  till  the 
first  ten  years  run  out  by  e£9uxion 
of  time.    But  if  such  second  lease 
had  been  made  by  deed  poll,  tiien 
it  might  well  enure  as  a  grant  of 
the  reversion,  and  draw  after  it 
the  rents  and  services  of  the  first 
^        lessee,  if  he  would  consent  to  at- 
-^.      ,tom,  and  by  consequence,  when- 


ever  the  first  lease  determined  by 
surrender,  forfeiture,  or  otherwise, 
such  second  lessee  having  the  im- 
mediate reversion  must  come  in 
for  the  residue  of  his  terin  ;  but 
without  such  attornment  to  make 
it  operate  as  a  grant  of  the  rever- 
sion, this  second  lease,  thoush  by 
deed  poll,    would   be   absolutely 
void,  as  if  it  were  made  only  by 
parol,  because  during  the  first  ten 
years  the  lessor  had  no  power  to 
contract  for  the  possession;  and 
therefore  if  this  grant  could  not 
take  effect  as  a  grant  of  the  rever- 
sion, which  was  all  the  lessor  had 
a  power  of,  it  must  likevnse  be  ab- 
solutely void.    But  if  such  second ' 
lease  by  deed  poU  had  been  for 
twenty  y^ears,  then   with  attorn- 
ment this  would  be  a  good  grant 
of  the  reversion  presently,  to  take 
effect  in  possession  whenever  the 
first  lease  determined  ;  or  if  no  at- 
tornment  could   be   had,   yet   it 
would  enure  as  a  future  interease 
termini  for  the  last  ten  jesxB,  and 
would  be  absolutely  void  for  the 
first  ten  years,  as  much  as  if  it  had 
been  made  by  parol.    But  if  such 
second  lease  for  ten  years  had  been 
made  by  indenture  or  fine,  then 
this  would  have  been  good  as  a 
present  lease,  by  reason  of  the  es^ 
toppel  to  both  parties  by  the  in- 
denture  or    fine,    and   therefore 
whensoever  the    first   lease    de^ 
termined,  the  second  lease  should 
commence  in  possession;  and  in 
the  meantime  the  second  lessee, 
by  reason  of  the  estoppel,  would 
be  obliged  to  pay  the  rent  reserved 
in  an  action  of  debt.    And  if  such 
second  lessee  could  prevail  for  an 
attornment,  then  this  lease  would 
enure  as  a  grant  of  the  reversion, 
and  draw  after  it  the  rents  and 
services  of  the   first  lessee,  and 
would  take  effect  in  jKxasession 
whenever  that  determmed;   but 
without  such  attornment,  though 
the  second  lease  would  be  good  h&- 
tween  the  parties,  by  reason  of  the 
estoppel,  yet  not  as  a  reversion : 
and  therefore  such  second  lessee 
could  have   no  remedy   for  the 
rents  and   services    of  the   first 
lessee."    This  view  is  sustained  by 
Lord  Kenton  in  Neale  y.  Mac^ 
kenzie,  1  M.  &  W.  758. 


462  Leases.  [§  231. 

his  covenants  in  the  lease,  for  the  rent,  he  is  liable  for 
use  and  occupation.'  The  rent  may  be  released  by  the 
lessor  before  the  lessee  has  entered,  and  the  lessee  may, 
even  before  entry,  assign  his  term.  If  the  lessor  dies, 
the  right  of  entry  remains  in  the  lessee,  and  if  the  lessee 
dies,  his  heirs  or  representatives  may  enter,  because  by 
the  lease  they  presently  have  an  interest  in  the  premises ; 
and  if  the  lease  is  made  to  two,  and  one  dies,  his  interest 
survives,*  and  this  interesse  termini  is  in  the  lessee 
whether  the  lease  commences  presently  or  at  a  future 
period. ' 

Sec.  221.  Void  or  voidable  leases.— A  lease  may  be  void 
at  the  election  of  the  lessor,  and  good  as  a^inst  the 
lessee,  or  voidable  at  the  election  of  the  lessee  and  good 
figainst  the  lessor,  and  vice  versa;*  as,  where  a  lease  con- 
tains a  condition  that,  for  breach  of  any  of  the  covenants 
by  the  lessee  the  "lease  shall  cease  and  determine  and 
be  utterly  void,"  the  courts  hold  that,  upon  breach  of  a 
condition,  the  lease  does  not  eo  instanter  and  absolutely 
become  void,  but  only  upon  the  election  of  the  lessor,  or 
some  person  in  privity  with  him,  because,  to  hold  other- 
wise, would  place  it  in  the  power  of  a  lessee,  at  any  time 
to  put  an  end  to  his  term  against  the  will  of  the  lessor, 
by  'his  own  wrong ; '  and  the  rule  applies  as  well  to  a 

'Tomlinson  v.  Daj;,  S  Moore,  t.  Bancks,  4  B.  &  Aid.  401,  a  ten- 
B58 ;  Lord  Kenton  in  Neale  v.  ant  attempted  to  ineiBt  upon  a  (ot- 
Uackeczie,  1  M.  &  W.  7G4.  feiture  created  bj  his  own  flbt,  and 

'  Co.  Litt.  46  b,  270  b,  thereby  to  convert  the  term  into  a 

'  Lock  V.  Furze,  19  C.  B.  N.  S,  yearly  tenancy,  but  the  court  held 
96;  Comyn'a  Digeet,  Tit.  Estates  that  the  lease  did  not  become  void, 
(G),  14.  unless  tlie  lessor  elected  to  treat  it 

*  Dumpor'a  Case,  4  Coke,  119  b ;  so,  and  that  having  received  sub- 
Boberts  v,  Davey,  4  B.  &  Ad.  667  ;  sequently  accruing  rent,  he  must 
Rughee  t.  Palmer,  19  C.  B.  N.  S.  be  treated  as  having  elected  to 
893.  treat  the  lease  as  valid  and  subeist- 

'  In  Amsbv  v.  Woodward.  6  B.  ft  inn'.  A  similar  doctrine  was  held 
C.  019,  there 
try  superadc 
avoidance,  i 
both  were  to 
as  amountii 
determining 
and  that  a  i 
of  rent  accr 
breach  was 
lease  as  still 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Vom  OR  Voidable. 


453 


lease  for  years  as  for  life.*  When  the  lessor  or  his 
assignees  or  grantees  elects  to  treat  such  a  lease  as  void 
for  a  breach  of  any  of  the  covenants,  the  lease  is  not 
avoided  from  the  date  of  the  breach,  but  only  from  the 
date  of  the  election^  The  lessor  need  not  re-enter  in 
order  to  determine  the  lease,  hut  he  must  do  som^  une- 
quivocal act  that  signifies  to  the  lessee  his  election  to 
determine  it,^  Upon  electing  to  treat  the  lease  as  void 
for  a  breach,  the  landlord  does  not  lose  his  right  to  sue 
for  rent  previously  accrued,*  or  for  a  breach  of  a  cove- 
nant to  repair/  When  a  lease  does  not  provide  for  a  re- 
entry upon  a  breach  of  a  condition,  and  there  is  no 
agreement  that  a  failure  to  perform  shall  operate  as  a 
forfeiture  or  termination  of  the  lease,  the  tenant  cannot 
for  such  cause  be  said  to  hold  over  contrary  to  the  terms 
of  the  lease.*  If  the  lessor  parts  with  the  reversion  after 
a  breach,  he  cannot  re-enter  nor  avoid  the  lease,  ^  nor  can 


mitted  to  take  advant^e  of  his 
own  defatdt.  Rude  v.  Farr,  ante, 
This  subject  is  treated  fully  in  the 
chanter  on  Rent« 

^  Koberts  v.  Davey,  ante.  It  was 
formerly  supposed  that  a  distinc- 
tion existed  between  leases  for  lives 
and  for  years,  in  respect  to  the 
necessity  of  an  entry  to  avoid  the 
lease,  but,  whatever  may  have  for- 
merly been  the  rule,  there  is  now 
no  distinction,  and  in  order  to  avoid 
a  lease  for  a  breach,  containing  a 
provision  rendering  the  lease  void 
for  that  cause,  it  is  only  necessary 
that  ^e  lessor,  or  some  one  in 
privity  with  him,  shoidd  re-enter, 
or  do  some  decisive  act  showing  his 
intention  to  determine  the  lease^ 
and  until  such  act  is  done  the  lease 
remains  in  force.  Lobd  Denhan, 
C.  J.,  in  Roberts  v.  Davey,  ante; 
also  opinion  of  Pabee,  J.,  in  the 
same  case.  See  also  Baylis  v. 
IieGroB,4  C.  B.  N.  S.  537;  Mat- 
thews V.  Smart,  12  East,  444; 
Reed  v.  Tuttle,  85  Conn.  25 ;  Bow- 
man V.  Foot,  29  Ckmn.  831. 

*  Atty.-Genl.  v.  Cox,  3  H.  L.  Cas. 
240;  Hartshome  v.  Watson,  4 
Bing.  N.  C.  178 ;  Johns  v.  Whittey, 
3  Wils.  127 ;  Load  v.  Green,  15  M. 
&  W.  216 ;  Franklin  v.  Carter,  1  C. 
B.  750 ;  Selby  v.  Browne,  7  Q.  B. 
620. 


«Reed  v.  Tuttle,  85  Conn.  25; 
Bowman  v.  Foot,  29  Conn.  831. 
He  may  brin^  ejectment  without 
having  previously  signified  his 
election,  Myde  v.  Watts,  12  M.  & 
W.  254,  except  in  the  case  of  a 
lease  for  life  or  lives.    Co.  Litt.  218. 

*  Hartshome  v.  Watson,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  178  ;  Selby  v.  Browne,  7  Q. 
B.  620 ;  Waddilove  v.  Bamett,  2 
Bing.  N.  C.  588;  Partington  v. 
Woodcock,  6  Ad.  &  El.  670. 

•Davis  V.  Underwood,  2  H.  & 
N.  573 ;  Woolcock  v.  Dew,  1  F.  & 
F.  337  ;  Maddock  v.  MuUett,  12  Ir. 
C  L   173 

•  Pickardt  v.  Kleis,  56  Mich.  604. 
'Prior  V.  Ongley,  10  C.  B.  25; 

Matthews  v.  Smart,  12  East,  441 ; 
Marriott  v.  Edwards,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
1065.  A  landlord,  accepting  rent 
from  the  assigtiee  of  a  tenant,  is  a 
waiver  of  any  forfeiture  because 
of  an  assignment  without  consent. 
Church  V.  Wabash,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co., 
22  Mo.  App.  315.  The  plaintiffs 
had  demised  certain  premises  at  H 
to  the  defendants,  and  had  brought 
an  action  of  ejectment  to  recover 
possession  of  them ;  and  alleged 
m  their  statement  of  claim  wat 
breaches  of  covenant  entailing  for- 
feiture had  been  committed  by  the 
lessees.  The  defendants  contended 
in  their  statement  of  defense  that 


'it 


4M 


Leiases. 


[§  221. 


the  assiguee  or  grantee  of  the  reversiou  avoid  the  lease 
for  a  breach  or  forfeiture  committed  before  the  reversion 
waa  conveyed  to  him.'    Nor  can  an  entry  be  made  after 


the  acts  complained  of  (the  aUeee_ 
breaches)  the  lessees  were  liable 
to  paj  only  an  extra  or  penal  rent. 
The  plainufE  demmred  to  the  de- 
fendants' statement  of  defense.  It 
waa  held,  on  demuiTer,  that  the 
remedy  of  the  plaintiffs  was  alter- 
native, and  that  the  right  of  the 
plaintiffs  to  re-enter  for  breaches 
of  covenant  contemplated  by  the 
lease  was  not  inconsistent  wiOi  the 
proviso  for  the  payment  of  such 
extra  rent  by  the  defendants,  and 
that  the  demurrer  must  be  allowed, 
Weetoa  v.  Metropolitan  Asylunu 
Board,  46  L.  T.  Rep.  (N.  S.)  16fl. 

'  HaMhewB  v.  Smart,  ante.  Lit 
TLETON,  Sec,  847  :  Co.  Litt.  214  6, 
says  that  no  entry  nor  reentry 
(which  is  the  same  thing)  may  be 
reserved  or  given  to  any  person 
but  only  to  the  donor  or  lessor,  or 
to  their  heirt,  and  such  re-entry 
cannot  be  given  to  any  other  per- 
son. And  then  be  pute  the  case, 
if  one  lets  to  another  for  life  by  in- 
denture rendering  rent ;  and  for 
default  of  payment,  a  re-entry, 
&c.,  if  the  rent  be  behind,  the 
grantee  of  the  reversioa  may  dis- 
train for  it,  but  may  not  enterajid 
oust  the  tenant,  as  the  lessor  or  his 
heita  might  have  done  if  the  rever- 
sion had  continued  in  them.  Ajtd 
in  thig  case  the  right  of  re-entry  is 
taken  aroay  forever,  for  the  grantee 
cannot  enter  caiisH  qud  stiprd ;  and 
the  lessor  or  his  heirs  cannot  enter ; 
for  if  the  lessor  might  enter,  then 
he  ought  to  be  in  his  former  state, 
&c. ,  and  this  may  not  be  because 
he  hath  aliened  fr&m  him  the  re- 


advantage  of  the  condition,  in  law, 
broken  in  hts  own  time.  Entry  for 
a  forfeiture  ought  to  be  by  him 
who  is  next  in  reversion  or  re- 
mainder after  the  forfeited  estate ; 
as,  if  a  tenant  for  life  or  years 
commit  a  forfeiture,  he  who  has 
the  immediate  remainder  ought  to 
enter,  &c."  Comyn's  Digest,  Tit. 
Forfeiture  (A.)  6  &  7.  "  But  he  in 
the  next  remainder  ■ 


shall  not  enter  for  the  forfeiture  if 
his   estate  do   not  continue."      1 

RoUe's  Abr.  857  L  45,  50,  858  LB. 
In  a  word,  he  who  bad  the  estate 
at  the  time  of  the  breach,  or  his 
heirs,  only,  can  enter  for  that 
breach.  Johns  v.  "Whittey,  X  Wils. 
127-140 ;  Montague's  Case,  Cro. 
Jac.  801.  In  Qoodright  v.  For- 
rester, 8  East,  652,  it  was  held  that 
a  right  of  entry  for  a  forfeiture  is 
not  devisable,  and  by  parity  of 
reasoning  it  ia  not  demisable ;  and 
Lord  Ellehborocgh  in  that  case 
says :  "  It  is  made  a  question  in 
the  books,  who  may  enter,  but  it 
must  now  he  taken  to  be  him  tcho  ' 
has  the  right  to  enter."  In  Co. 
Cop.,  Sec.  60,  it  is  said  ;  *'  Remi- 
larly  it  is  true  that  none  can  t^ks 
the  benefit  of  a  forfeiture  but  he 
that  ia  lord  of  the  manor  at  the 
time  of  the  forfeiture ;  and  there- 
fore if  a  copy-holder  niaketh  a 
feoffment  ana  then  the  lord 
aUeneth,  neither  tlie  grantor  nor 
the  grantee  can  take  benefit  of  the 
forfeiture,  for  neither  a  right  of 
entry  nor  a  right  of  action  can  be 
transferred  from  one  to  another.'" 
In  New  York,  under  the  statute 
(Revised  Statutes  748,  §g  23,  99),  it 
IS  held  that  the  grantee  or  aasiKnee 
of  the  lessor  is  entitled  to  ail  tAe 
remedien  which  the  lessor  had 
when  he  parted  urith  the  rever- 
sion. Van  Kensselaer  v.  Bar- 
ringer,  80  N.  Y.  9 ;  Van  Benase- 
laer  v.  Slingerland,  20  id.  586.  So 
in  New  Jersey,  by  statute  of  1851. 
Southard  v.  E.  H.  Co.,  26  N.  J.  L. 
IS.  But  at  the  common  law,  none 
but  the  lessor  and  his  heirs  or  legal 
representatives  can  tabead vantage 
of  the  breach,  and  this  rule  gener- 
ally prevails  in  this  country.     Noi^ 

Bra 


iW3«rwi 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Von)  OR  Voidable. 


455 


forfeiture  has  been  waived,"  but  an  entry  may  be  made 
at  any  time  after  a  breach,  and  before  a  waiver.*  Bring- 
ing an  action  of  ejectment  is  equivalent  to  entry,  and  is 
an  election  to  determine  the  term,  so  that  from  the  time 


signee.  Johnston  v.  Bates,  48  N. 
Y.  Supr.  Ct.  180.  If,  in  defence 
to  one%  action  s^ainst  his  lessee's 
tenant  for  rent,  the  lease  is  set  up, 
the  plaintiff  m&j  allege  in  reply, 
and  prove  a  recission  of  the  lease. 
Moberly  v.  Peek,  67  Ala.  845.  Be- 
tween a  landlord  and  his  tenant's 
sub-tenant  there  is  neither  such 
privity  of  estate  nor  of  contract, 
as  to  entitle  the  landlord  to  collect 
by  distress  warrant,  against  prod- 
uce raised  by  the  sub-tenant,  rent 
due  imder  a  contract  between  the 
latter  and  the  tenant.  Gibson  v. 
Mullican,  58  Tex.  480.  A  pur- 
chaser at  sherifTs  sale  of  the  unex- 
pired term  of  a  lease  takes  the 
leasee's  place  under  the  lease,  and 
therefore  becomes  liable  for  taxes 
on  improvements  placed  on  the 
land,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
original  lessee  would  have  been 
liable.  In  Be  Huddell,  16  Fed. 
Eep.  373. 

» Baylis  v.  Le  Gros,  4  C.  B.  N.  S. 
537 ;  Griffith  v.  Pritchard,  5  B.  & 
Ad.  765 ;  Davis  v.  Burrell,  10  C.  B. 
821 ;  Arnsby  v.  Woodward,  6  B.  & 
C.  519.  As  to  what  constitutes  a 
waiver,  see  post  Forfeiture.  Al- 
though a  lessor  accepting  rent 
after  the  failure  of  the  lessee  to 
pay  taxes  waives  his  right  to  claim 
a  forfeiture  for  such  failure,  the 
continued  failure  to  pay  the  taxes 
within  a  reasonable  tune  after  the 
receipt  of  the  rent  by  the  lessor  oc- 
casions a  new  forfeiture.  Conger 
V.  Duryee,  24  Hun  (N.  Y.)  617. 
An  agreement,  by  a  tenant,  to  con- 
vey a  greater  interest  than  his' 
lease  gives  him,  does  not  work  a 
forfeiture.  Griffin  v.  Fellows,  81* 
Pa.  St.  114. 

*  Davis  V.  Burrell,  ante.  No  in- 
timation of  an  election  on  the  part 
of  the  lessor  is  necessary  as  a  pre- 
liminary to  bringing  ejectment, 
Hyde  v.  Watts,  12  M.  &  W.  254 ; 
nor  can  the  lessor  elect  to  put  an 
end  to  the  lease  after  he  has  waived 
the  forfeitures.  Griffith  v.  Pritch- 
ard, 5  B.  &  Ad.  765.  Where  the 
landlord  brings  an  action  for  the 
rent,  Dendy  v.  Nicholl,  4  C.  B.  N. 


S.  876,  or  a  distress.  Doe  v.  Peck,  1 
B.  &  Ad.  428 ;  McKildoe  v.  Durrar 
cott,  18  Gratt.  (Va.)  278,  or  accepts 
rent  accruing  subsequent  to  the 
breach,  Doe  v.  Rees,  4  Bing.  N.  C. 
848 ;  Griffith  v.  Pritchard,  ante,  he 
waives  the  forfeiture  as  a  matter 
of  law,  and  no  words  of  his  at  the 
time  of  receiving  the  rent  can  pre- 
vent such  legal  effect.  Croft  v. 
Lumley,  5  E.  &  B.  648.  But  ac- 
ceptance of  rent  accruing  before 
the  forfeiture  was  incurred,  or 
after  ejectment  brought,  does  not 
amount  to  a  waiver.  Price  v. 
Worward,  1  H.  &  N.  512 ;  Jones  v. 
jCarter,  15  M.  &  W.  718.  An  abso- 
lute and  unqualified  demand  of 
rent  due  after  a  forfeiture  made 
either  by  the  landlord  or  a  person 
authorized  by  him  to  make  it,  oper- 
ates as  a  waiver,  Nash  v.  Birch,  1 
M.  &  W.  408,  opinion  of  Pabke, 
B.,  and  an  acceptance  of  rent  ac- 
cruing after  the  forfeiture,  even 
after  the  landlord  has  re-entered^ 
lias  been  held  to  operate  as  a 
waiver.  Coon  v.  Brickett,  2  N. 
H.  164.  In  order  to  operate  as  a 
waiver,  not  only  must  it  be  shown 
that  rent  accrmng  after  the  breach 
was  received  by  the  landlord,  but 
also,  that  he  received  it  knowing 
of  the  breach,  Jackson  v.  Allen,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  220;  Jackson  V.  Bron- 
son,  7  John.  (N.  Y.)227,  and  where 
it  was  paid  to  an  agent,  it  was  held 
that  his  knowledge  of  the  breach 
was  not  enough.  Jackson  v. 
Schutz,  18  John.  (N.  Y.)  174.  An 
agreement  by  the  landlord  to  grant 
a  new  lease  after  the  expiration  of 
the  term  in  respect  of  which  the 
forfeiture  was  inured.  Ward  v. 
Day,  5  B.  &  S.  859,  or  advising  a 
third  person  to  buy  the  lease  of  9ie 
lessee,  the  landlord  knowingof  the 
forfeiture,  is  a  waiver.  Doe  v. 
Eykins,  1  C.  &  P.  154.  Where  the 
breach  is  continuous,  the  receipt 
of  rent  or  other  acknowledgment 
of  tenancy  will  not  preclude  the 
landlord  &om  taking  advantage  of 
a  forfeiture  incurred  subsequently. 
Doe  V.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  498 ;  Doe  v. 
Woodbridge,  9  B.  &  C.  876. 


i 


456 


Leases. 


[§  222. 


of  its  commencement  the  rent  ceases/  Where  a  tenant 
goes  into  possession  under  a  void  lease,  or  agreement 
for  a  lease,  and  pays  rent,  he  becomes  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year  upon  such  of  the  terms  of  the 
lease,  or  agreement  for  a  lease,  as  are  consistent 
with  such  a  tenancy,*  and  the  tenancy  so  implied  will  ter- 
minate without  notice  to  quit,  at  the  end  of  the  term 
named  in  such  void  instrument.  *  Actual  payment  of  rent 
is  not  indispensable  to  convert  an  occupancy  imder  a  void 
lease  into  a  tenancy  from  year  to  year.  It  is  enough  if  the 
tenant  recognizes  his  liability  to  pay,  and  the  rent  is  per- 
mitted to  stand  over  by  mutual  consent,*  as  payment  of  rent 
does  not  create,  but  is  merely  evidence  of  such  a  tenancy,* 
and  the  presumption  arising  from  such  payment  may  be 
rebutted."  Of  course,  if  the  lessee  does  not  enter  tmder 
a  void  lease,  no  action  lies  against  him  for  the  rent  or  for 
not  taking  possession,'  nor  against  the  landlord  for  refus- 
ing to  let  the  tenant  into  possession." 

Sec.  222.  What  acts  of  the  parties  invalidate  a  lease.    Al- 
terations, erasures,  interlineatioDS,  filling  blanks,  &o.— A  lease 


*  Jones  V.  Carter,  15  M.  &  W. 
718 ;  Franklin  v.  Carter,  1  C.  B. 
750. 

«Lee  V.  Smith,  9  Exchq.  665; 
Cumberland  v.  Glavis,  15  C.  B. 
848 ;  Bolton  v.  Tomlin,  5  Ad.  &  El. 
866 ;  De  Medina  v.  Palson,  Holt, 
N.  ]?.  47 ;  Waukley  v.  Bucknell, 
Cowp.  473 ;  Mann  v.  Lovejoy,  1  Ad. 
&  El.  52  ;  Beale  V.  Sanders,  8Bing. 
N.  C.  a56 ;  Riggs  v.  Bell,  5  T.  R. 
471 ;  Doe  v.  Amey,  12  Ad.  &  EL 
476;  Cox  v.  Bent,  5  Bing.  185; 
Knight  V.  Bennett,  8  id.  861 ;  Ben- 
nett V.  Ireland,  8  E.  B.  &  E.  336 ; 
Clayton  v.  Blakely,  8  T.  R.  8 ;  Doe 
V.  watts,  7  id.  88 ;  Braythwaite  v. 
Hitchcock,  10  M.  &  W.  404 ;  Doe  v. 
Foster,  8  C.  B.  215 ;  Doe  v.  Col- 
lings,  7  C.  B.  989  ;  Doe  v.  Smith,  11 
M.  &  Ry .  137 ;  Chapman  v.  Towner, 
6  M.  &  W.  100;  Doe  v.  Taniere,  12 
Q.  B.  998. 

"Tress  v.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  36; 
Doe  V.  Stratton,  3  C.  &  P.  164  ;  Doe 
F.  Moffatt,  15  Q.  B.  257. 

♦Vincent  v.  Godson,  34  L.  J.  Ch, 
122:  Cox  V.  Bent,  ante. 

» Knlay  v.  Bristol,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co., 


7  Exchq.  415;  Jones  v.  Shears,  4 
Ad.  &  El.  832. 

•Lordv.Crago,6C.B.90.  When 
the  issue  is  whether  the  defendant 
ever  promised  to  pay  rent  to  the 
plaintiff,  and  the  evidence  on  the 
question  is  conflicting,  the  defend- 
ant cannot  adduce  evidence  of  cir- 
cumstances tending  to  e^ow  that  it 
was  neither  reasonable  nor  probable 
that  he  would  make  such  promise ; 
consequently  a  charge  reauested 
by  him,  asserting  that  if  ne  had 
been  in  open  and  uninterrupted 
possession  of  the  premises  for  more 
than  ten  years,  claiming  them  as 
his  own  under  a  verbal  gift,  and 
paying  rent  to  no  one,  "  the  Jury 
may  look  to  this  fact,  in  conne&on 
witn  all  the  other  evidence  in  the 
case,  in  order  to  determine  whether 
he  promised  to  pay  rent  to  plaint- 
iff,^ is  erroneous.  Swann  v.  Kiddp 
78  Ala.  178. 

'  Edge  V.  Strafford,  1 C.  &  J.  391 ; 
Iman  v.  Stamp,  1  Stark.  12. 

B  Jinks  y.  Edwards^  11  Exchq. 
775. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


What  Invalidatb. 


467 


by  deed  may  be  invalidated  by  unauthorized  or  fraudu- 
lent ei^asure,  interlineation  or  alteration  therein  in  any 
material  respect,  *  but  not  by  one  made  before  delivery  or  by 
the  consent  of  all  the  parties^  simply  to  express  what  was 


^  Bat  a  destruotion  of  the  lease 
by   the    lessee,  or   a   fraudulent 
aiteradon  in  an  immaterial  respect, 
will  not  defeat  his  estate,  Barrett 
V.  Thomdike,  1  Me.  78;  Doe  v. 
Bingham,  4  B.  &  Aid.  677 ;  Wood- 
ward V.  Aston,  1  Vent.  297 ;  nor  if 
it  is  altered    by  consent  of   the 
parties ;  but  upon  redeUvery  it  is 
good  without  re-cu^knowledgment. 
Bassett  v.  Bassett,  55  Me.  125.  But 
an  unauthorized  material  alteration 
destroys  its  validity.  Rex  v.  Beck, 
2  Stra.  1160  ;  Miller  y.  Mayn waring, 
Cro.   Car.  399,    and  one   of  two 
grantors  cannot  confer  authority 
as  against  his  co-grantor.    Bass- 
ford  y.   Pearson,  9  Allen  (Mass.) 
887.    In  South  Carolina  it  has  been 
held  that  an  alteration  made  by 
consent  of  all  parties  in  a  deed 
p^reyiously  deUvered,    is  inopera- 
tiye.  Booker  y.  Stiyender,  13  Kich. 
(S.  C.)  85 ;  Pi^fot's  Case,  11  Coke, 
26  a.    As  applied  to  bonds,  the  rule 
as  stated  in  the  text  has  been  re- 
peatedly held,  and  the  same  prin- 
ciple appUes  to  leases,   deeds  or 
simple  contracts,  and  a  material 
alteration,  erasure  or  interlineation 
destroys  the  instrument,  Wood  y. 
Hildebrand,  46   Mo.  284;   Bell  y. 
Quirk,  3  N.  J.  L.  312 ;  Miller  y. 
Stewart,  4  Wash.  (U.  S.)  26 ;  Pumy 
y.  Corwithe,  18  John.  (N.  Y.)  499 ; 
Heffelfineer  y.  Shute,  16  S.  &  R. 

S*enn.)44 ;  Benr  y.  Berry,  2  J.  J. 
arsh.  (Ky.)  487.  and  defeats  the 
estate  if  done  by  the  lessee  or 
grantee  fraudulently.  Thus  in 
Bliss  y.  Mclntyre,  18  Vt.  466,  it  was 
held  that  if  a  lessee  fratvdulently 
alters  his  lease  in  a  material  part 
subsequent  to  its  execution,  he 
thereby  destroys  all  Ms  future  ri^ht 
under  the  lease  to  retain  possession 
of  the  premises  or  to  preclude  the 
lessor  m>m  re-entering  upon  them. 
And  if  the  lessor  or  grantor  fraud- 
ulently makes  the  alteration,  the 
land  passes  discharged  from  the 
coyenants,  and  a  recoyery  cannot 
be  had  upon  the  ori^al  contract 
for  use  and  occupation,  independ- 
ent of  the  deed,  nor  will  equity 
relieye  and  compel  a  redeUvery  of 


the  premises  or  payment  of  the 
rent.  The  estate  of  the  person 
making  the  cdteration  is  destroyed 
as  a  penalty  of  his  fraud  and  his 
assignee  stsmos  in  no  better  rela- 
tion. Arrison  y.  Harmstead,  2 
Penn.  St.  191.  The  rule  seems  to 
be,  that,  where  a  contract  is  re- 
duced to  writing,  whether  imder 
seal  or  not,  so  as  to  wjerge  the 
original  promise,  and  the  written 
agreement  is  so  altered  without 
authority  from  the  parties  thereto 
as  to  ayoid  it,  the  party  making 
the  alteration  cannot  resort  to  the 
original  contract.  Mills  y.  Starr, 
2  Bailey  (S.  C.)  359 ;  Newell  y. 
MaybeiTV,  3  Leigh.  (Va.)  250; 
WheelocK  y.    Freeman,  18  Pick. 

Stfass.)  165 ;  Jackson  y.  Malin,  15 
ohn.  (N.  Y.)  293  ;  Nunnery  y.  Cot- 
ton, 1  Hawks  (N.  C.)  222 ;  Lewis  y. 
Payn,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  71 ;  Wright 
y.  Wright,  7  N.  J.  L.  175 ;  Smith 
y.  Mace,  44  N.  H.  553 ;  Bigelow  y. 
Btutphen,  35  Vt.  521.  But,  where 
tiie  alteration  is  not  fraudulently 
made,  it  will  not  cancel  a  debt  of 
which  the  instrument  was  evi- 
dence. V<^le  y  Ripper,  84  BL  100. 
And  in  Woods  y.  Hildebrand,  46 
Mo.  284,  it  was  held  that,  when  a 
grantee,  after  delivery  to  him  of 
his  deedy  alters  the  description  of 
the  land,  the  title  is  not  therdyy  re- 
conveyed  to  his  grantor.  But  that 
the  title  haying  passed  by  the  deed, 
its  continued  existence  or  integrity 
is  not  essential  to  the  title,  although 
the  alteration  is  fraudulent ;  but 
that  the  instrument  only  is  de- 
stroyed, so  that  no  action  lies  upon 
its  coyenants,  and  there  can  be  no 
question  but  that  this  is  the  rule  as 
to  deeds,  because  the  destruction 
of  the  instrument,  even  by  the 
consent  of  the  parties,  after  the 
estate  has  yestea,  does  not  diyest 
the  title.  Linker  y.  Long,  64  N.  C. 
296;  Parshall  y.  Shirts,  54  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  99.  But  if  the  title  or  estate 
never  vested  under  the  conyeyance, 
the  rule  is  otherwise.  Upton  y. 
Archer,  41  Cal.  8b.  Therefore  it 
would  at  least  seem  that,  where  the 
lessee  has  never  taken  possessiaa 


468 


Leases. 


intended  by  the  parties,  especially  if  the  deed  is  redeliv- 
ered ; '  nor  by  immaterial  alteration,  although  fraudu- 
lently made.'  The  rule  may  be  said  to  be,  that  an  alter- 
ation of  a  lease  or  deed  after  execution,  which  does  not 
operate  upon  the  provisirma  of  the  deed,  or  the  parties 
who  previously  executed  it,  wUl  not  avoid  the  deed,  but 
it  will  be  valid  against  those  executing  before  as  well  as 
^ter  the  alteration. '  Nor  is  a  lease  or  deed  destroyed  by  an 
alteration  made  therein  by  a  stranger,  without  the  privity 
of  the  party  relying  upon  it.*    An  alteration  in  an  instru- 


nnder  his  lease,  and  it  ia  refused 
him,  either  b;  the  lessor  or  a 
stnuiger,  he  is  without  remedy,  as 
both  the  lease  and  the  estate  have 
been  destroyed  bj  the  mBterial 
alteration.  In  the  case  of  aiease, 
the  subject-matter  lies  in  grant  so 
that  the  estate  cannot  exist  with- 
out the  deed,  because  it  is  of  the 
essence  of  the  estate.  Any  altera- 
tion, material  or  immaterial,  if 
madeby  the  lessee  or  aperion  claim- 
ing under  him,  avoids  the  lease  as 
to  him  to  at]  intents  and  purposes, 
and  not  only  his  remedy  but  his 
estate  is  lost.  Lewis  t.  Payn,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  71 ;  Bliss  v.  Mclntjre, 
ante.  But  a  rent  is  created  by 
dupUcale  deeds,  one  being  in  the 
hands  of  each  party.  Even  though 
the  grantee  uters  his  deed  in  a 
material  part,  neither  the  remedy 
DOT  the  estate  is  loet,  for,  though 
his  deed  is  avoided,  yet  both  were 
original,  and  the  grantor's  deed 
will  support  the  estate.  Lewis  v. 
Payn,  ante. 

'Baasett  v,  Bassett,  ante,  see  pre- 
ceding note.  Doe  v.  Houghton,  1 
Man.  &  Ej,  208 ;  Lewis  v.  Payn,  8 
Cow.<N.  Y.)71  ;  Raviaics v.  Alston. 
5  AJa.  287  ;  Bank  v.  HaU,  14  N.  J. 
L.  588 :  Stewart  v,  Preston,  1  Fla. 
10;  Boston  v.  Benson,  13  Cush. 
(Maes.)  SI.  It  takes  effect  from 
the  dt^  of  alteration  as  a  new  con- 
tract.     StiU  V.  Probst,  69  IlL  388. 

»  Barrett  v.  Thorndike,  1  Me.  73 ; 
People  v.  Muzzy,  1  Den.  (N.  Y.j 
23B  ;  Pequaket  Bridge  v.  Mathea,  8 
N.  H.  139;  Van  Burnt  v.  Van 
Burnt,  8  Edw,  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  14; 
Bumham  v.  Ayer,  35  id.  351  ; 
Nicholle  v.  Johnson,  10  Conn.  10& ; 
Herrick  v.  Mulin',  23  Wend,  (N.  Y.) 
383 :  Huntington  v.  Finch,  3  Ohio 
St.    44S ;    Jackson    v.    Mulin,    15 


John.  (N.  Y.J  293.  But  there  are 
caaes  in  which  it  is  held  that  an 
immaterial  alteration,  fraudtdent- 
ly  made  by  the  pwty  claiming  . 
under  it,  avoids  it  so  tar  as  respects 
the  remedy  by  action  upon  it. 
Nunnery  v.  Cotton,  1  Hawha  (N. 
C.)222;  Jacksonv.  Mulin,  15  John. 
(N.  Y.)  383 ;  Wright  v.  WriKht,  7 
N.  J.  L.  175  ;  Morris  v.  Vanderen, 
1  Dall.  (U.  S.)  67 ;  Moye  v.  Hem- 
don,  80  Mies.  110. 

■Lewis  T.  Bingham,  4  B.  &  Aid. 
874  ■  Whitmg  v.  Daniel.  1  H.  & 
M.  (Va.)890.  It  has  long  been  set- 
tled that,  after  a  lease  or  deed  has 
been  duly  executed ,  and  the  estate 
is  vested  under  it,  that  the  de- 
struction of  the  instrument  by  the 
lessee  or  grant«e  does  not  divest 
the  estate.  Woodward  v.  Aston,  1 
Ventr,  897 ;  Lewis  v,  Bingham, 
ante ;  Bolton  v.  Bishop  of  Carlisle, 
2H.  B.  L.  268  ;  Bnller's  NiniPriua, 
367,  even  though  it  was  done 
fraudulently  ana  with  a  wrongful 
intent.  Barrett  v.  lliorDdike,  1 
Me.  78.  And  where  a  deed  is 
offered  in  evidence,  not  to  charge 
any  one  with  a  duty,  or  to  operate 
anything,  but  to  ahow  irhat  ha» 
been  operated  during  the  time  that 
it  existed  as  an  impeachable  io- 
stiument,  no  alteration,  material 
or  immaterial,  is  an  objection  to 
its  being  received, 

*  As  to  whether  an  alteration  by 
a  stranger,  without  the  knowledge 
of  the  lessee  or  grantee,  will  de- 
stroy the  instrument,  has  been 
variousiy  decided;  but  Mr.  SUQ- 
DEN,  in  his  treatise  on  Powcra,  p. 
400,  upon  the  authority  of  Henfree 
-  Bromley,  6  East,  800,  lays  down 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


What  Invalidate. 


469 


ment  is  a  change  in  its  meaning  or  purpose^  and  any 
change  therein  that  does  not  vary  its  meaning  cannot  be 


of  Henfree  v.  Bromley,  it  is  true, 
related  to  an  awar^  which  is  not 
necessarily  a  deed,  but  it  is  quite 
difficult  to  conceive  of  a  principle 
upon  which  it  can   be  held  tnat 
tlie  mere  spoliation  by  a  stranger 
shall  not  avoid  an  awa^,  but  shcdl 
avoid  a  deed.    Waugh  v.  Russell, 
5  Taunt.  707,  is  an  authority  in 
support  of  Mr.  Sugdek's  rule,  to 
the    extent   that    an   immaterial 
alteration  by  a  stranger  does  not 
avoid  the  lease,  and  Lord  Ellen- 
borough,  in  his  remarks  in  French 
V.   Patton,  9  East,  855,  seems  to 
assent  to  the  doctrine  of  Henfree 
▼.  Bromley,  as  to  alterations  made 
W  a  stranger,   and   the  case  of 
Ziouch  V.  Glaye,  2  Lev.  85,  is  a  full 
authoritnr,  holding   that    an   im- 
material  alteration  does  not  avoid, 
Sanderson  v.  Symonds,  1  Brad.  & 
B.  426,  where  an  alteration  made 
in  an  insurance  policy  by  the  in- 
sured, was  held  not  to  vitiate  it. 
So  Com.  V.  Savings  Bank,  98  Mass. 
12,  where  a  bona  stolen  and  the 
number  altered  by  the  thief,  was 
held  not  to  be  invalidated  thereby. 
So  Kendall  v.  Kendall,  12  Allen 
(Mass.)  92,  where  a  mortgage  was 
held  not  to  be  invalidated  as  a^nunst 
the  mortgagor  by  the  fraudulent 
addition  by    the    grantee  of  the 
name  of  the  grantor's  wife,  as  a 
party  signing  the  same,  for  the 
purpose  of  releasing  her  dower, 
she  being  dead,  so  that  no  rights 
were  effected  or  defeated  thereby. 
In  Rees  v.  Overbaugh,  6  Cow.  (N. 
Y.)  746,  it  was  held  that  a  deed 
was  not  avoided  by  a  stranger^s 
tearing  off  the  seal,  and  that  an 
fdteration  hj  a  stranger,  although 
material,  will  not  avoid  the  deed. 
See  Nicholls  v.  Johnson,  10  Conn. 
192,  where  the    addition   of   the 
words    "Sales    at    auction,    6th 
March,  1826,"  to  a  memorandimi 
of  sale,  by  the  auctioneer,  did  not 
avoid  the  instrument.     Church, 
C.  J.,  in  delivering  the  judgment 
of  the  court,  said :  **  Whether  the 
alteration  in  the  memorandum,  if 
material,  was  made  by  the  plaint- 
iff or  a  stranger,  does  not  appear. 
It  is  said  in  figot's  Case,  11  Co.  27, 
and  also  in  Markman  v.  Gonaston, 
Cro.  Eliz.  626,  that  "when  any 
deed  in  altered  in  a  point  material, 


by  the  plaintiff  himself,  or  by  any 
s&anger,  witliout   the  privity  of 
the  obligee,  be  it  by  interlineation, 
addition,  erasing,  or  by  drawing  a 
pen  through  a  line,  or  through  the 
midst  of  any  material  word,  the 
deed  thereby  becomes  void."    This 
doctrine,  not  without  good  reason, 
has  been  supposed  to  have  been 
derived  from  tne  ancient  technical 
forms  of  pleading  in  cases  of  deeds, 
and  from  principles  applicable  to 
proferta,    Kead  v.  BrooKman,  8  T. 
R.  151 ;  Masters  v.  Miller,  4  T.  R.  821. 
But  whatever  may  have  been  the 
origin  of  this  principle,  it  has  been 
much  relaxed,  if  not  entirely  sub- 
verted, in  later  times,  so  far  as  it 
extends  to  the  acts  of  strangers. 
As  early  as  the  reign  of  Car.  2,  it 
was  decided,  that  a  deed  was  not 
made  void,  the  seal  of  which  had 
been  torn  off  by  a  little  boy.   Palm. 
413.     Before  the  case  of  Read  v. 
Brookman,  3  T.  R.  151,  it  was  un- 
certain how  far  a  profert  could  be 
dispensed  with,  in  a  court  of  law : 
ana  in  that  case   it  was,  for  the 
first  time,  settled,  that  the  loss  or 
destruction  of  a  deed  would  ex- 
cuse a  profert ;  and  that  a  resort  to 
a  court  of  equity,  in  such  cases, 
was  not  necessary.    More  recently 
it  has  been  holden,  that  an  altera- 
tion of  a  written  instrument,  by 
mistake,  will  not  defeat  it.    Chitty 
on  Cent.  298 ;   Raper  v.  Birkbeck, 
15  East,  17 ;    Wilkinson  v.  John- 
son, 2  B.  &  C,  428.     In  the  case  of 
Henfree  v.  Broml^,  6  East,  810, 
the  court  of  King's  Bench  decided, 
that  where  an  umpire,  after  the 
expiration  of  his  power,  had  al- 
tered an  award  in  a  material  part, 
such  award  was  not  thereby  ren- 
dered void,  but  was  good  as  before 
the  alteration.      In   the   case   of 
Jackson  v.  Malin,  15  John.  (N.  Y.) 
298,  it   was  said,  by  Platt,  J., 
'*  that  a  material  alteration,  though 
made  by  a  stranger,  without  the 
privity    of    the    party    claiming 
under  it,  renders  tne  deed  void,  is 
a  proposition  to  which  I  am  not 
ready  to  assent."     And  in  a  still 
later  case  of  Rees  v.  Overbaugh,  6 
Cow,  (N.  Y.)  746,  this  subject  was 
discussed,  and  it  was  held,  that  if 
a  stranger  tears  a  seal  from  a  deed, 
it  shall  not  destroy  it.     And  qq 


460 


Leases. 


[§222. 


said  to  be  an  alteration,  and,  consequently,  does  not  affect 
its  validity ;  *  and,  where  the  law  would  supply  the  matter 
added,  or  where  it  does  not  change  the  meaning y  character 
or  purpose  of  the  instrument,  it  is  immaterial,  and  may  be 
treated  as  surplusage. '   Where  erasures,  interlineations  or 


distinctioii  exists  in  this  respect 
between  deeds  and  other  written 
instruments.  Masters  v.  Miller, 
ante.  The  reasons  controling  the 
decisions  in  the  ciases  referred  to, 
seem  entirely  applicable  to  the 
present,  aivd  wholly  inconsistent 
with  the  old  doctnne  of  Pigot's 
Case,  ante,  in  its  application  to 
the  acts  of  strangers  to  the  deed. 
Indeed  it  can  hardly  be  conceived, 
if  a  deed  or  other  instrument  in 
writing  is  not  rendered  inoperative 
by  either  a  mistaken  alteration^  or 
its  loss  or  destruction,  how  it  can 
be  by  the  unauthorized  intermed- 
dling of  a  stranger.  To  the  same 
effect  see  Waring  v.  Smith,  2  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)Ch.  119;  Harris  v.  Brad- 
ford, 4  Ala.  214 ;  Lee  v.  Alexander, 
9  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  26;  Malin  v. 
Malm,  1  Wend.  (N.  Y.)625 ;  Smith 
V.  McGowan,  8  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  404 ; 
Terry  v.  Hazlewood,  1  Duv.  (Ky.) 
104 ;  Wilks  v.  Caulk,  5  H.  &.  J, 
(Md.)  36 ;  Wright  v.  Wright,  6  N. 
J.  Eq.  175 ;  Lewis  v.  Page,  8  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  71  ;  United  States  v. 
Hatch,  Paine  (U.  S.)  836 ;  Bigelow 
V.  Stilphen,  35  Vt.  521,  and  espec- 
ially is  this  so  if  the  original  tenor 
of  the  instnmient  can  be  ascer- 
tained. Lubbering  v.  Kohlbrecker, 
22  Mo.  590;  Davis  v.  Carlile,  6 
Ala.  707 ;  Medlin  v.  Platte  Co.,  8 
Mo.  235 ;  Croft  v.  White,  36  Miss. 
455. 

>In  Morrill  v.  Otis,  12  N.  H.  466, 
it  was  held  that  memoranda  upon 
a  plan,  that  certain  persons  desured 
to  purchase  one  of  tne  lots,  and  to 
whom  and  when  it  was  sold,  but 
not  varying  the  courses  and  dis- 
tances of  the  lines  of  the  lots,  nor 
the  relative  situation  of  the  lots  to 
each  other,  did  not  constitute  an 
alteration  of  the  plan.  Pequaket 
Bridge  v.  Mathes,  8  id.  189 ;  Bum- 
ham  V.  Ayer,  35  id.  851 ;  NichoUs 
v.  Johnson,  10  Conn.  192.  A 
change  in  the  character  of  the  in- 
strument, as  by  annexing  a  seal  to 
the  name  of  a  party,  thus  making 
the  instrument  a  specialty,  or  tear- 
ing off  a  seal  and  thus  reducing  it 


to  a  simple  contract,  is  an  altera- 
tion that  is  material  and  avoids  the 
instrument  as  to  the  party  doin^ 
it.  But  if  done  bv  a  stranger  with- 
out the  privity  of  the  parties.  Bees 
V.  Overbaugh,  6  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  746, 
or  accidentally,  as  when  they  are 
brushed  off,  or  torn  off  by  a  chOd, 
the  validity  of  the  instrmnent  is 
not  affected.  Zouch  v.  Qaye,  1 
Palm.  418.  An  alteration  of  the 
date  of  a  lease  is  not  material,  un- 
less the  date  is  made  material 
either  as  to  the  commencement  or 
duration  of  the  term,  8tate  v.  Mil- 
ler, 3  Gill  (Md.)  835 ;  S.  P.  Owings 
V.  Amott,  83  Mo.  406  ;  Hooker  v. 
Jamison,  2  Watts  &  8.  (Penn.)438; 
nor  when  the  rights  of  the  parties 
are  not  affected  thereby,  or  tJie 
legal  effect  of  the  instrument  is 
not  changed.  Hunt  v.  Adams,  6 
Mass.  519.  An  alteration  of  the 
amount  of  the  rent  to  be  paid  is 
material.  State  v.  Boring,  15  Ohio 
St.  507 ;  Mathis  v.  Mathis,  8  Dev. 
&  B.  (N.  C.)  L.  60,  or  of  the  time 
or  mode  of  payment.  Darwin  v. 
Rippey,  68  N.  C.  818.  So  an  alter- 
ation that  changes  the  duration  of 
the  term,  or  the  character  of  any 
of  the  covenants,  conditions,  reeer- 
vations  or  exceptions  therein^ 
avoids  the  instnmient  as  to  the 
party  making  the  alteration  or 
causing  it  to  be  made. 

*  Bumham  v.  Ayres,  85  N.  H. 
851 ;  Jackson  v.  Molin,  15  John. 
^.  Y.)  293 ;  People  v.  Muzzy,  1 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  289.  As  applied  to 
bonds.  Reed  v.  Kemp,  16  Ul.  445 ; 
Terry  v.  Hazelwood,  1  Dur.  (Kv.) 
104 ;  Stone  v.  Wilson,  4  McCord 
(S.  C.)  203 ;  Fulton's  Case,  7  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  484 ;  KendaU  v.  Kendall, 
12  Allen  (Mass.)  92 ;  Hatch  V.  Hatch, 

9  Mass.  807  ;  Shelton  v.  Deering, 

10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  405  ;  Wilkes  v. 
Caulk,  5  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  86 ;  Bird  v. 
Bird,  40  Me.  898,  and  the  intent 
with  which  the  charge  was  made, 
will  not  alter  the  l^gfd  effect.  Rob- 
inson V.  Phenix  Ins.  Co.,  25  Iowa, 
480.  In  Herrick  v.  Baldwin,  17 
Minn.  209,  10  Am.  Rep.  161,  the 


.  iifrSt'  «*v 


A  -*i.. 


•At 


N 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


What  Invaodate. 


461 


alterations*  appear  upon  the  face  of  an  instrument,  com- 
mon prudence  requires  that  the  party  receiving  it  should  see 
to  it  that  they  are  properly  noted  in  the  attestation,  and 
thus  avoid  the  possible  contingency  of  being  compelled 
to  explain  them.*  Indeed  in  some  of  the  States,  v^ere 
an  instrument  upon  its  face  appears  to  have  been  altered, 
it  is  presumed  that  it  was  done  subsequent  to  its  execu- 
tion,' while  in  others  it  is  presiuned,  in  the  absence  of 
any  suspicious  circumstances,  to  have  been  done  before 
or  at  the  time  of  its  execution,'  and  in  others,  there  is  no 
presumption  one  way  or  the  other,  but  it  is  a  question 
for  the  jury  when  the  alterations  were  made,  unless  there 
is  evidence  upon  the  face  of  the  instrument,  intrinsic  or 
extrinsic,  that  furnishes  ground  of  suspicion.*  But  gen- 
erally, it  may  be  regarded  as  the  rule  that,  where  an 


defendant  indorsed  a  promissory 
note  for  the  accommodation  of  the 
maker,  who  afterward,  and  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  defendant, 
changed  the  note,  by  adding  to  the 
body  of  it  the  following  words ; 
**  Payable  before  maturity,  and  in- 
terest on  unexpired  term  refunded 
if  I  so  elect  "  and  negotiated  it  to 
plaintiff  who  was  a  bona  fide  hold- 
er thereof,  for  value,  and  with- 
out notice  of  the  alteration.  It 
was  held,  that  the  alteration  was 
immaterial  as  to  the  defendant, 
and  that  his  liability  was  not  af- 
fected thereby.  In  an  action  by 
the  administrators  of  the  payee  of 
a  promissory  note  made  in  1859  and 
payable  **  in  gold  '*  against  the 
sureties  thereto,  the  latter  inter- 
posed the  defence  that  the  words 
"in  gold"  were  inserted  by  the 
payee  w^ithout  their  knowledge  or 
consent  after  delivery.  It  was 
held,  that  the  alteration  did  not 
change  the  legal  liability  of  the 
sureties,  and  that  they  were  there- 
fore liable.  Bridges  v.  Winters, 
42  Miss.  135  ;  2  Am.  Rep  [598.  See 
also  Falmouth  v.  Roberts,  9  M.  & 
W.  469,  where  a  tenant  who  had 
entered  and  become  a  tenant  from 
year  to  year,  subsemiently  entered 
into  an  agreement  for  a  lease  with 
the  landlord  for  seven  years.  He 
altered  the  word  "seven"  in  the 
agreement  to  "fourteen."  The 
court  held  that    the    agreement 


might  be  put  in  evidence  without 
explanation  of  the  erasure,  be- 
cause the  term  of  years  was  im- 
material to  the  parol  contract  to 
hold  from  year  to  year,  subject 
only  to  the  terms  of  tiie  agreement 
as  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land. 

»  Hodge  V.  Oilman,  20  IlL  437. 

'  Burnham  v.  Ayres,  85  N.  H. 
851 ;  Mortag  v.  Linn,  28  DL  651, 
and  the  burden  is  held  to  be  upon 
the  person  having  the  possession  of 
tlie  instrument  to  explain  any  ap- 
parent alteration,  Burton  v.  Pres- 
sly,  1  Cheeves  (S.  C.)  Part  2, 1,  or 
who  is  to  be  benefitted  theretgr. 
Jordan  v.  Stewart,  28  Penn.  St. 
244  ;  Ely  v.  E^y ,  6  Gray  (Mass.)  439; 
Roberts  v.  Unger,  80  Cal.  676. 

'  North  River  Meadow  Co.  v. 
Shrewsbury  Church,  22  N.  J.  L. 
424 ;  Stover  v.  Ellis,  152 ;  Beaman 
V.  Russel,  20  Vt.  205 ;  Matthews  v. 
Coalter,  9  Mo.  705  ;  Famsworth  v. 
Sharp,  4  Sneed  (Tenn.)  55 ;  May  bee 
V.  Sniifen,  2  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
1 ;  Little  v.  Hemdon,  10  WalL  (U. 
S.)  26. 

*  In  Cole  V.  Hills,  44  N.  H.  227, 
it  was  held  that,  where  a  material 
alteration  is  apparent  on  the  face 
of  an  instrument,  and  is  not  noted 
as  being  made  at  or  before  the 
signing,  the  instrument  may  be 
put  in  evidence  before  the  jmy, 
without  previous  evidence  or  the 
time  of  the  alteration,  or  explan- 
atory thereof.     In  such  case  the 


463  Leasbs.  [§223. 

interlineation  or  alteration  appears  upon  the  face  o£  the 
instrument,  attended  with  any  suspicious  circumstances, 
the  party  relying  upon  it  should  show  either  that  it  was 
not  altered  by  him,  or,  if  so,  that  it  was  done  with  the 
consept  of  Uie  other  party,'  and  the  question  as  to 
whether  it  was  made  before  or  after  execution  must  be 
submitted  to  the  jury.'  The  unauthorized  filhng  of 
blanks  left  in  an  instrument  avoids  it  as  to  those  cog- 
nizant of  the  alterations ;'  but,  where  a  person  makes 
and  deUvers  to  a  third  person  an  instrument,  with  the 
name  of  the  grantee  left  blank,  with  verbal  authority  to 
him  to  fill  such  blank  with  the  name  of  a  certain 
person  as  grantee,  the  deed  is  good  and  operative  to  con- 
vey the  estate  ; '  and  there  would  seem  to  be  no  good  rea- 
son why,  if  the  blanks  are  only  filled  according  to  the 

inatrument,  with  its  full  historj,  offering   the   inBtmment   in    evi- 
the  appearance  of  the  alteration,  dence.     Matthews  v.  CoaIt«r,  B  Mo. 
the  poesible  motives  for  and  against  705;  Maybee  v.  Sniffen,  2  E.  D. 
it,  and  its  effect  on  the  respective  Smith  (N.  Y.)  1 ;  Pamsworth  t. 
parties,  should  be  submitted  to  the  Sharp,  4Sne«d(Teim.)  55  ;  Beaman 
lury,  for  them  to  determine  when  v.  Eussell,  20  Vt.  305 ;  but  in  Croft 
it  was  made,  and  whether  fraud-  v.  White,  ante,   where  the  alter- 
ulentlyornot.andthepresumption  ation  was  not  made  in  the  hand- 
that  the  alteration  n-aa  made  after  writiuK  of  anj  of  the  parties,  it 
the  execution  of  the  note  is  one  of  was  held  that  the  court  would  pte- 
fact  for  the  jury,  and  not  of  law  sume    that    it   was   mAde    by   a 
for  the  court.    In  Wicker  v.  Pope,  stranger, 

13  Rich.  (S.  C.)  387,  it  was  held  '  Hunt  t.  Gray,  85  N.  J.  U  227; 

that  whetner  an  instrument  was  Jackson  v.  Oebom,  2   Wend.   (N. 

altered  or  not  is  a  question  for  the  Y.)  555  ;  Norwood  v.   Fairservice, 

jury,  and  that  the  person  offering  Quincy  (Mass.)  189. 

it  is  not  called  upon  to  explain,  but  '  But  only  thoee  claiming  in  right 

may  rely  on  the  appearance  of  the  of  the  grantor  can  avail  themeelyes 

instrument.     See  also  Parker  t.  of  such  an  objection.    McNab  v. 

Moore,   28  Miss.    218;    Ellison    v.  Young,  HIIIL  11 ;  Cooper  v.  Page, 

Mobile,  &c..  B.   E.  Co.,  36  id.  672.  62  Me.  182. 

'  Croft  T.  White.  86  Miss.  455 ;  *  Field  v.    Stagg,  52  Mo.  684 ; 

Huntington  v.  Fitch,  3  Ohio  St.  Pence  v.  Arbuckle,  22  Minn.  417 ; 

445.    Where  an  alteration  appears  Fumaa  y.  Ehirgin,  IIB  Mass.  SOO ; 

on  the  face  of  a  written  mstm-  but  if  the  agent  fills  the  blank  by 

ment,  it  will,  as  a  general  rule,  if  inserting  the  name  of  some  other 

nothing  appears  to  tne  contrary,  be  person  as  grantee,  the  deed  wiU  be 

presumed  to  '  ' "                        ...... 

with  the  exec 
ment ;  but  if 
picion  is  appf 
the  paper, 
nothing,  but  1 
the  time  wlier, 
as  that  of  the 
the  intent  vni 
as  matters  of 
the  jury,  upo 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


What  Invalidatk. 


463 


intention  of  the  parties,  the  instrument  should  be  inval- 
idated, even  though  the  blanks  are  filled  by  the  grantee 
himself/  as  the  lessor  or  grantor,  by  delivering  the  instru- 
ment with  material  blanks,  should  be  regarded  as  impli- 
edly authorizing  the  grantee  or  lessee  to  fill  them  accord- 
ing to  the  intent  of  the  parties.'  The  cancellation  or 
destruction  of  a  lease  for  a  term  by  the  mutual  assent  of 
the  parties,  is  held  not  to  divest  the  lessee  of  his  term 
where  the  lease  is  by  deed,  and  all  the  remedies  that  can 
be  upheld  tmthout  production  of  the  deed  to  either  party 
are  left  the  same  as  though  the  lease  had  not  been  de- 
stroyed," nor  is  it  evidence  of  a  surrender  by  deed.*  If 
the  validity  of  the  lease  is  expressly  made  to  depend  upon 
the  happening  of  a  certain  event,  it  is  invalid  ijsuch  event 
does  not  occur.'  So,  too,  it  may  be  invahdated  by  the 
judgment  of  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction."  So  it 
may  become  void  by  the  breach  of  any  covenant,  by  the 
breach  of  which  it  is  expressly  declared  to  be  void.'    So 


'  Ives  V.  Fanners'  Bank,  2  Allen 
^lass.)  236;  but  in  Burns  t. 
Lynde,  6  id.  805,  as  well  as  in  Cross 
Y.  State  Bank,  it  was  held  that 
authority  to  fill  up  and  deliver 
a  deed  executed  in  blank  must 
be  conferred  by  writing  under  seal. 

*  In  South  Berwick  v.  Huntress, 
68  Me.  89,  it  was  held  that  a  person 
who  executes  and  delivers  a  deed, 
bond  or  otiier  instrument  as  his 
deed,  &c.,  knowing  that  there  are 
blanks  to  be  filled,  must  be  treated 
as  agreeing  that  the  blanks  mav 
be  filled  according  to  the  contract, 
and  altiiough  this  does  not  seem  to 
be  the  generally  accepted  doctrine 
of  the  courts,  yet  there  is  no  valid 
objection  to  it.  Nothing  but 
merely  technical  notions  can  be 
opposed  against  it. 

» Stewart  V.  Astor,  8  Ir.  C.  L.  N. 
8.  85 ;  Roe  v.  Archbishop  of  York, 
6  East,  86 ;  Ward  v.  Lumly,  7  H. 
&  N.  86.  The  covenants  are 
destroyed  but  the  estate  is  not 
therel^  revested  in  the  grantor, 
Wiley  V.  Christ,  4  Watts  (Penn.) 
109 ;  JBatch  v.  Hatch,  9  Mass.  807 ; 
Jackson  v.  Page,  4  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
685 ;  Chessman  v.  Whittemore,  28 
Pick.  (Mass.)  241  ;  Grayson  v. 
Bichards,     10   Leigh     (Va.)    67; 


Lawrence  v.  Lawrence,  24  Mo. 
269 ;  Gilbert  v.  Bulkly,  6  Conn. 
262 ;  Jordan  v.  Jordan,  14  Ga.  145 ; 
Morgan  v.  Elam,  4  Yerg.  (Tenn.) 
875 ;  even  though  the  parties  so 
intended.  Parker  v.  Cane,  4  Wis. 
1 ;  Lawcett  v.  Kimmey,  88  Ala. 
261 ;  Lawton  v.  Gordon,  84  Cal. 
86 ;  Carver  v.  McNulty,  89  Penn. 
St.  478 ;  Listoff  v.  Hart,  25  Miss. 
245 ;  Wilson  v.  Hill,  13  N.  J.  Eq. 
143 ;  Scheffer  v.  Tithian,  17  Ind. 
463.  But  in  New  Hampshire, 
Maine  and  New  Jersey  it  lu^  been 
held  that  the  cancelhng  of  an  un- 
recorded deed  by  mutual  consent 
revests  the  estate,  Mussey  v.  Holt, 
24  N.  H.  248 ;  Nason  v.  Grant,  21 
Me.  160 ;  Faulks  v.  Bums,  16  N.  J. 
^.  250 ;  and,  if  the  rights  of  third 
persons  have  intervened  in  conse- 
quence of  such  concellation,  the 
grantee,  as  against  them,  may  be 
estopped  from  setting  up  his  title. 
Holbrook  v.  Tirrell,  9  Pick.  (Mass.) 
105;  Wiley  v.  Christ,  ante.  See 
Raynor  v.  Wilson,  6  HiU  (N,  Y.), 
469. 

*  Doe  V.  Thomas,  9  B.  &  C.  288. 

» WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  152. 

>  2  Blackstone's  Com.  808. 

'  Hartshome  v.  Watson,  4  Bine. 
N.  C.  178 ;  Davies  v.  Underwood, 


464 


Leases. 


[§222. 


where  the  premises  were  leased  for  an  unlawful  purpose, 
the  landlord  knowing  that  they  were  to  be  so  used,  even, 
though  the  lease  contains  an  express  covenant  against 
such  use,  the  lease  would  doubtless  be  void.*  But 
although  a  lessee  intending  to  use  premises  for  an  unlaw- 
ful purpose  represents  falsely  that  he  intends  to  devote 
them  to  a  lawful  purpose,  and  thereby  procures  the 
lease,  it  is  not  void,  although '  if  the  matter  rested  in  con- 
tract merely  it  would  doubtless  be  a  good  defence  to  an 
action  for  not  granting  the  lease.'  But  it  is  held  that, 
where  a  lease  is  made  by  an  agent,  the  fact  that  he  knows 
that  the  premises  are  to  be  used  for  an  unlawful  purpose, 
the  landlord  not  knowing  the  fact,  contrary  to  the  gen- 
eral rule,  will  not  render  the  lease  void  as  to  him,  or  pre- 
vent him  f  Am  recovering  the  rent,  as,  in  such  cases,  the 
knowledge  of  the  agent  is  not  imputed  to  the  principal.* 


2  H.  &  N.  578 ;  Woolcock  v.  Dew, 
1  F.  &  F.  887. 

*Ga8  light  Co.  v.  Turner,  5 
Bing  N.  C.  666. 

*Feret  vi  HiU,  16  C.  B.  207 ;  see 
also  S.  P.  Stewart  v.  Astor,  8  Ir. 
C.  L.  N.  S.  85. 

»  Calvaleiro  v.  Puget,  4.  F.  &  F. 
537. 

*  In  Stanley  v.  Chamberlain,  39 
N.  J.  L.  565,  the  agent  of  plaintiff, 
who  was  the  owner  of  real  estate, 
rented  the  premises  to  the  defend- 
ant, knowing  that  he  intended  to 
use  them  tot  gaming  purposes. 
Plaintiff  had  no  actual  knowledge 
of  the  intended  use.  In  an  action 
for  the  rent  the  defense  set  up  was, 
that  the  renting  was  for  an  unlaw- 
ful purpose.  Ine  court  held  that 
the  knowledge  of  the  agent  was 
not  to  be  imputed  in  this  case  to 
the  principal,  and  that  the  plaintiff 
was  entitled  to  disown  the  agent's 
contract  and  to  recover  on  a  quan- 
turn  valebat  for  the  use  of  the 
premises.  The  general  rule  is  well 
established,  that  knowledge  of  the 
agent  is  knowledge  of  the  princi- 
pal, and  that  the  principal  must  be 
charged  with  a  notice  of  such 
facts  as  are  communicated  with 
the  agent  in  the  particular  employ- 
ment which  has  been  committed 
to  him.  Comfoot  v.  Fowke,  6  M. 
&  W.  358 ;  Cooper  v.  Slade,  6  H. 
of  L.  Cas.  798.    And  in  Dresser  v. 


Norwood,  10  Jur.  (N.  S.)  it  is  held 
that  the  principal  is  affected  by 
the  knowledge  of  his  agent  ac- 
quired in  transactions  other  than 
those  belonging  to  his  agency. 
See  also  Hem  v.  Nichols,  1  iSalk. 
889,  where  a  merchant  employed 
a  factor  to  sell  silk  for  him,  and 
the  factor  sold  one  sort  of  silk  for 
another,  and  the  doubt  was  wheth- 
er this  deceit  could  charge  the 
merchant ;  Holt,  C.  J.,  was  of  the 
opinion  '*that  the  merchant  was 
answerable  for  the  deceit  of  his 
factor,  though  notcHwinalitery^t 
cimliter,  for  seeing  that  somebody 
must  lose  by  this  deceit,  it  is  more 
reasonable  that  he  who  employs 
the  deceiver  should  be  a  loser  than 
a  stranger."  But  in  every  case 
where  t£e  doctrine  of  constructive 
notice  is  maintained,  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  a^ent  has  been  im- 
puted to  the  prmcipal  for  the  ben- 
efit of  a  third  party,  who  has  d^dt 
with  the  agent  in  good  faith.  The 
court,  in  the  case  at  bar,  says  that 
it  can  have  no  application  here. 
"The  plaintiff  would  not  be  re- 
sponsible to  the  public  by  way  of 
indictment,  without  showing  an 
actual  knowledge  of  the  intended 
wrongful  use  of  his  premises,  and, 
surely,  the  law  will  not  impute 
turpitude  to  him,  by  charging  ium 
witii  a  knowledge  which  he  did 
not  actually  have,  for  the  benefit 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


License. 


465 


A  lessor's  knowledge  at  the  execution  of  the  lease  that 
premises  demised  will  be  used  in  violation  of  a  statute 
which  declares  that  all  buildings,  etc.,  used  as  houses  of 
ill  fame,  etc.,  are  common  nuisances,  makes  the  lease  of 
premises  used  for  such  purpose  void,  and  gives  the  owner 
the  right  of  re-entry,  does  not  make  the  lease  void  so  as 
to  discharge  the  lessee  from  his  covenants  where  the  les- 
sor neither  shares  nor  furthers  the  lessee's  illegal  acts. ' 

An  assignment  of  a  lease  by  the  lessee  does  not  dis- 
chaige  either  the  lessee  or  his  surety  from  the  covenants. 
It  does  not  have  this  effect  even  when  the  lessor  recog- 
nizes the  assignment  by  accepting  rent  from  the  assignee.' 

Sec.  223.  License.— Distinction  between,  and  a  lease.—  An 
instrument  cannot  operate  as  a  lease,  although  words  of 
demise  are  used  therein,  if  it  is  evident  that  such  was  not 
the  intention.*  Thus,  a  lease  for  years  or  for  any  specific 
term  is  a  contract  for  the  exclusive  possession  of  lands  or 
tenements;  *  consequently,  an  instrument  that  merely  gives 
to  another  the  right  to  use  premises  for  a  specific  purpose^ 
the  ovmer  of  the  premises  retaining  the  possession  and  con- 
trol of  the  premises^  confers  no  interest  in  the  land  and  is 
not  a  lease,  but  a  mere  license,^  and  a  similar  right  may 
be  given  to  others  if  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  exercise 


ot  a  defendant  who  sets  up  his 
own  execution  of  such  criminal 
design  in  his  defense.  See,  also, 
on  me  general  subject,  Hill  v. 
North,  84  Vt.  604;  Lawrence  v. 
Tucker,  7  Me.  795 ;  Bracken  v. 
Miller,  4  W<  &  S.  (Penn.)  102. 

» Way  V.  Reed,  6  Allen  (Ma88.)864; 
Trask  v.  Wheeler,  7  id.  109 ;  Cole- 
man v.  Hall,  9  id.  885 ;  Kreis  v. 
Seligman,  8  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  489  ;  Da- 
ter  V.  Earl,  8  Gray,  482  ;  Ralston  v. 
Boady,  20  Ga.  449  ;  Sortwell  v. 
Gughes,  1  Curtis  (U.  S.)  244 ;  HiU 
V.  Spear,  50  N.  H.  253 ;  Gaylord  v. 
Sorogen,  82  Vt.  110;  Aiken  v. 
Bkdsdell,  41  id.  655  ;  Green  v.  Col- 
lins, 8  Cliff.  OJ.  S.  C.  C.)  494. 

» Way  T.  Keed,  6  Allen  (Mass.) 
864 ;  Burnt  v.  Gardner,  39  N.  J. 
Law,  680  ;  Damb  v.  Hoffman,  8  E. 
D.  S.  Qif.  Y.)  861.  Almy  v.  Grene 
18  R.  I. 

» Taylor  v.  CaldweU,  8  B.  &  3. 
S26. 


*  Reg  V.  Morris,  82  L.  J.  M.  C. 
245. 

*  Taylor  v.  Caldwell,  ante ;  Wil- 
liams V.  Jones,  3  H.  &  C.  256 ;  Hill 
V.  Tupper,  2  id.  121;  Funk  v. 
Holdman,  58  Penn.  St.  229 ;  Stock- 
bridge  Iron  Works  v.  Hudson  Iron 
Co.,  107  Mass.  290;  Cornish  v. 
Stubbs,  89  L.  J.  C.  P.  206 ;  Cole- 
man V.  Foster,  1  H.  &  N.  87.  An 
instrument  conferring  an  authori- 
ty to  do  an  act  upon  the  premises  of 
another,  the  owner  still  retaining 
possession,  is  a  mere  license  and  is 
limited  to  the  person  to  whom  it  is 
given,  and  cannot  be  granted,  as- 
signed or  transferred  to  another. 
Carter  v.  Harlan,  6  Md.  29  ;  Prince 
V.  Case,  10  Conn.  875;  Cook  v. 
Steai-ns,  11  Mass.  518  ;  Seidenspar- 

fer  V.  Spear,  17  Me.  128;  Simp- 
ins  v.  Rogers,  15  111.  897 ;  Frost 
V.  R.  R.  Co.,  28  Conn.  875,  and  is 
only  binding  as  to  third  persons 
when  it  has  been  so  far  executed 

80 


Leases. 


[§ 


of  the  right  conferred  upon  the  liceMee.'  Where,  how- 
ever, an  interest  in  the  land  is  given,  or  where  the  license 
is  for  a  definite  period,  it  amounts  to  a  lease,  if  conferred 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  it  validity.' 

Where  a  hall  was  agreed  to  be  let  for  four  nights  at 
a  £100  a  day  for  the  purpose  of  giving  four  concerts  and 
day  and  night  fetes  J  but  from  the  agreement  it  was  evi- 
dent that  the  lessor  was  not  to  part  with  the  possession 
of  the  premises  during  the  four  days,  it  was  held  not  to 
amount  to  a  demise.'  So  where  A  paid  B  twelve  shillings 
a  week  for  permission  to  put  his  loom  machines  in  a  room 
in  B's  factory,  and  for  ingress  and  egress  to  and  from  the 
room  for  himself  and  workmen  for  the  purpose  of  work- 


as  to  give  rise  tb  an  equity,  of 
which  they  had  notice  at  the  time 
of  acquiring  the  interest  sought  to 
be  charged  with  the  license,  WU- 
son  V.  Chalfoot,  15  Ohio  247 ;  Ren- 
ick  y.  Keam,  14  S.  &  R.  (Penn.) 
267  ;  Ricker  v,  Kelly,  1  Me.  117. 

■  In  Silsby  v.  Trotter,  30  N.  J.  Eq. 
328,  it  wa«  held  that  a  contract 
simply  giving  the  right  to  take  ore 
from  a  mine,  no  interest  or  estate 
being  granted,  merely  confers  a 
license  under  which  the  Ucensee 
acquires  no  right  to  the  ore  until 
be  separates  it  from  the  freehold, 
enAttvaXuntesa  especialiy  expressed 
it  is  not  exclusive.  The  authorities 
are  agreed  that  a  license  to  dig  and 
take  ore  is  never  excluatve  of  the  li- 
censor tinlesg  expressed  in  mich 
words  (U  to  show  that  that  iras  the 
intention  of  thf.parties.  When  the 
Ucensee  has  simply  the  right  to  dig 
audtakeore.  the  same  right  may  be 
given  to  other  persons.  This  has 
been  the  prevailing  rule  since 
Mountjor's  Cose,  And.  807,  decided 
during  the  reign  of  Queen  Eliza- 
beth, Co.  Litt.  164.  In  that  case 
such  a  license  was  held  to  be  like  a 
grant  of  common  sant  tiombre, 
which  never  excludes  the  grantor 
from  enjoying  the  common  with 
his  grantee.  In  Chethun  v.  Wil- 
liamson, 4  Bast,  469.  Lord  F.T.i.gv- 
BOHOUOH  declared,  "a  liberty 
reserved  of  digging  coals  could 
not  give  the  person  reserving 
it  the  exclusive  right  to  them. 
No  case  can  be  named  where  one 
who  has  onlr  a  liberty  of  dig- 
ging for  coals  in  another's  stul 


to    the 


sive    right  .    . 

ooals,  so  as  to  enable  him  to 
maintain  trover  against  the  owner 
of  the  estate  for  coals  raised  by 
him."    And  in  Qnibb  v.  Bayard, 

2  Wall.  Jr.  (U.  8.)  81,  where  the 
license  gave  the  licensee  the  right 
to  dig,  and  carry  away  all  the  iron 
(/retobe  found  ia  certaio  designated 
lands,  it  was  held  there  was  no 
grant  of  the  ore,  but  the  licensee 
merely  had  the  right  to  take  aiwiy 
so  much  a»  he  might  dig.  The 
word  "all"  was  held  to  show 
merely  the  extent  of  his  license  as 
to  quantity  ;  be  was  at  liberty  to 
dig  all  t)ie  ore  there  was  in  the 
land,  but  he  acquired  no  titU  to 
any  until  he  aeparated  it  from  the 
freehold.  His  license  conferred  a 
right  without  stint  as  to  quantity, 
but,  like  a  grant  of  a  right  sons 
nonjfrre,  it  did  not  exclude  the 
grantor.  A  similar  doctrine  was 
expressed  in  Funk  t.   Haldeman, 

03  Penn.  St.  229,  and  in  Stockbridge 
Iron  Co.  V.  Hudson  Iron  Co.,  107 
Mass.  290,  also  m  Carr  v.  Benson, 
L.  R.,  8  Ch.  App.  6S4,  where  it  is 
said :  "  It  has  been  held,  from  the 
earUeet  period  that  a  man  taking 

obi 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


License. 


467 


ing  and  inspecting  the  machines^  and  for  the'steam  power 
to  run  them,  which  was  furnished  by  B  ;  it  was  held  that 
there  was  no  demise  to  A  of  any  of  the  room,  and  that  the 
relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  was  not  thereby  created.' 
So  it  has  been  held  that  a  grant  by  a  riparian  proprietor 
to  a  person,  of  a  right  to  take  water  from  a  natural  stream 
on  which  his  land  abuts,  is  a  mere  Ucense  in  gross,  and 
that  the  licensee  has  no  such  interest  as  will  enable  him 
to  maintain  an  action  against  a  wrongdoer.'  But  while 
this  is  true  of  a  license  that  does  not  confer  an  interest  in 
the  land,  yet,  when  the  license  is  coupled  ivith  an  interest j 
so  that  it  is  assignable,  the  rule  is  otherwise,'  and  such  an 
interest  cannot  be  conferred  by  parol ;  *  but  in  some  cases 


1  Handcock  v.  Austin,  14  C.  B. 
N.  S.  429. 

•  Stockport  Water  Works  v.  Pot- 
ter, 8  H.  &  C.  800.  See  also  Hill 
T.  Tupper,  2  id.  121,  whero  it  was 
held  tnat  the  grant  by  deed  by  a 
canal  company  to  a  person,  of  the 
&cdu9ive  rignt  to  put  ptleasure 
boats  on  their  canal,  for  hire,  did 
not  convey  such  an  interest  as 
would  enable  him  to  maintain  an 
action  against  a  stranger  who  dis- 
turbed his  right  by  putting  and 
using  other  pleasure  boats  on  the 
canal  for  hire.  In  Bird  v.  Great 
Eastern  R.  R.  Co.,  19  C.  B.  N.  S. 
268,  it  was  held  that  a  license  to 
hunt  and  shoot  did  not  confer  an 
interest  in  the  land,  and  that  an 
action  would  not  lie  in  his  name 
against  a  stranger  who  interfered 
with  his  right. 

•Goff  V.  Obertuffer,  3  Phila. 
(Penn.)  71.  A  Hcense  not  coupled 
with  an  interest,  is  a  mere  per- 
sonal privilege,  and  not  assignable. 
Dork  V.  Johnston,  55  Penn.  St. 
162,  and  does  not  pass  to  a  lessee 
of  the  licensee,  Grovendyke  v. 
Cramer,  2  Ind.  882;  and  ucensea 
are  revocable  at  the  pleasure  of 
the  licensor,  Hetfield  v.  Central  R. 
'  R.  Co.,  20  N.  J.  L.  571 ;  Dinsmore 
V.  Rich,  22  Wis.;  Hitchens  v.  Shal- 
ler,  82  Mich.  496 ;  Veghte  v.  Raritan 
Canal  Co.,  19  N.  J.  Eq.  158 ;  Wolfe 
V.  Frost,  4  Sandf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  72  ; 
Foster  v.  Browning,  4  R.  I.  47 ; 
Kimball  v.  Yales,  A  Dl.  464,  and 
being  unassignable  is  revoked  by 
an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
licensee  to  assign  it,  Dork  v.  John- 


son, ante,  or  by  the  death  of  the 
licensor  or  licensee,  or  by  a  con- 
veyance of  the  estate  by  the  licen- 
sor, unless  it  is  irrevocable.  Cole- 
man V.  Foster,  1  H.  &  C.  87  :  Eg- 
gleston  V.  R.  R.  Co.,  85  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  162;  Roberts  v.  Row,  8  H.  & 
C.  162 ;  Carter  v.  Hanlon,  6  Md. 
20,  and  if  a  license  to  build  a  dam 
or  erect  other  structures  is  given, 
which  is  not  revocable  so  long  as 
the  structure  remains,  yet,  if  it  is 
destroyed  hj  flood  or  fire  or  other 
casualty,  it  is  revocable.  Veghte 
V.  Canal  Co.,  ante.  In  Carter  v. 
Page,  4  Ired.  (N.  C.)  424,  A  &  B, 
owning  adjoining  lands,  agreed 
that  B  might  cut  ditches  on  A's 
land,  which  were  useful  both  to  A 
and  B,  and  that  they  should  be  dug 
under  the  direction  of  A  and  untu 
he  was  satisfied,  and  the  ditches 
were  accordingly  so  dug  by  B,  and 
used  and  enjoyed  by  him  during 
A's  lifetime,  and  for  three  years 
afterwards,  without  complaint.  It 
was  held,  that  although  the  license 
to  use  the  ditches  on  A's  land  ex-' 
pired  on  As  death,  and  the  person 
succeeding  to  his  title  mieht  fill 
up  these  ditches,  if  he  uiought 
proper  to  do  so,  yet  he  could  not 
sue  B  for  a  nu&ance,  especially 
without  a  reasonable  notice  to  dis- 
continue the  use  of  the  ditches. 
But  if  a  license  is  given  to  two 
persons,  and  one  of  them  dies,  it  is 
not  thereby  revoked  as  to  the 
other.  Chandler  V.  Spear,  22  Vt.  888. 
*  Collius  Co.  V.  Maroy,  25  Conn. 
289,  and  where  it  is  attempted,  it 
is  void,  and  revocable  at  any  time. 


[§  223. 

a  parol  license  may  become  operative  by  way  of  estop- 
pel BO  as  to  become  irrevocable  when  the  licensee  has 
made  large  expenditures  upon  the  faith  of  it,  withtho 
knowledge  and  tacit  assent  of  the  Ucensor.'  In  those 
cases  where  assent  has  been  given  to  one  by  an- 
other to  do  a  certain  act  upon  his  land,  the  natural  and 
probable  consequences  of  which  are  to  produce  a  cer- 
tain result,  and  the  person  to  whom  assent  is  given  goes 
on  and  expends  money  on  the  strength  of  the  assent  and 
makes  erections  of  a  permanent  chziracter;  while  the 
assent  does  not  give  any  interest  in  the  land,  and  at  law 
is  revocable  at  any  time,  even  though  given  for  a  consid- 
eration,' yet,  a  court  of  equity,  in  a  proper  case,  will 
enforce  it  as  an  agreement  to  give  the  right,  and  partic- 
ularly where  its  revocation  would  opemte  as  a  fraud  upon 
the  hcensee,  or  would  be  productive  of  great  hardship, 
will  restrain  its  revocation.*  But  even  at  law,  a  Ucense 
is  a  full  defence  for  all  acts  done  under  it,  within  the  scope  of 
the  license  before  its  revocation,  but  not  after.'  But  the 
license  must  not  be  exceeded,  and  in  order  to  operate  as 

Tanner  t.  Valentine,  7B  111.  624;      , 

Brown  v.  Woodworth,  5  Burb.  (N.  time. 

T.)6B0;  Selden  V.  Delaware,  &c.,  634, 

Canal  Co. ,  29  N.  Y.  6S4 :   SteTeus  '  Huff  v.  UcCaulej.  53  Penn.  SL 

T.  Stevens,  11  Met,  (Masa.)  201.  208  ;  Houston  t.  Laffee,  46  N.  H. 

'Lane  T.  Miller,  27  lud.  084.    In  SOS-.  Hetfleld  v.  R.  R.Co.,2e  N.  J. 

Hodgson  y.  Jeffries,  52  Ind.  884,  a  L.  571. 

license  by  the  owner  of  land  to  the  »  Veghte  T.TheR8ritan,&c.,Co,, 

owner  of  adjoining  lands  to  coD"  19  N.  J.  Eq.  143  ;  Brown  v.  Bowen, 

struct  and  use  perpetuaUy  a  diteh  30  N.  Y.  543  ;  Wood  on  Nuisance*, 

oter   the  land  of  the  former,   for  847, 

the  purpose  of  draining  the  land  *  Wolfe  v.  Frost,  4  Sandf.  {N.  T-> 

of  the  latter,  maj  be  verbal,  and  Ch.  72 ;  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Mclaughlin, 

upon  Buch  construction  and  con-  59  Penn.  St.  28 ;  Cook  v.  Pngdon, 

tinued  use,  is  irrevocable  bv  the  46  Oa.  331  ;  Houston  v.  Laffee.  4fi 

grantoe  of  the  former,  though  un-  N.  H.  508  ;  Bridges  v.  Purcell,  1 

forseen  iniuriee  result  to  the  for-  Dev.  &  B,  (N.  C)  463 ;  Mumford  t. 

mer  and  his  grantee  from  the  con-  Whitney,   15   W^end,   (N.   Y.)  379. 

struction  and  use  of  such  drain.  As  to  the  eSect  of  a  license  from 

In  Wilson    v,   Chalfant,  15  Ohio,  one  toe"               ■             ....-- 

248,    it    was  held    that  one    who  another, 

enters  under  a  parol  license,  and  field  t. 

erects  a  fixture,  may  maintain  tres-  N.  J.  L, 

pass  against  the  owner  of  the  land  case  the 

if  he  interferes  with  it ;  but,  where  authorii 

the  license  is  such  as  conveys  an  t>^e  the 

int«rest  in  land,  as  to  allow  the  road,  bu 

drippings  from  the  eaves  of  an  ad-  not  entt 

ioinm^  buildine  to  fall  upon  the  the  own 

Iftnd,  it  is  void,  if  by  parol,  and  upon  th 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


License. 


469 


a  defence  at  law  for  an  act  done  in  pursuance  of  it,  it 


consent,  but  did  not  take  any  con- 
veyance from  him  in  the  manner 
required  by  law,  in  order  to  give 
them  right  or  title.  The  court  held 
that  this  consent  did  not  dispense 
with  the  necessity  of  a  deed  or 
conveyance  of  the  land  or  right, 
in  the  form  required  by  law.  That 
it  was  not  a  consent  that  was  in- 
tended to  confer  a  title,  and  was 
revocable.  In  Wood  v.  Leadbitter, 
18  M.  &  W.  887,  the  question  as  to 
the  effect  of  a  license  arose  in  an 
action  of  assault  and  battery.  The 
evidence  disclosed  that  the  plaint- 
iff purchased  a  ticket  for  the  sum 
of  one  guinea,  which  entitled  him 
to  admission  to  the  grand  stand, 
That  the  Earl  of  Ellii^gton  was  one 
of  the  stewards  of  the  races,  and 
that  the  tickets  were  issued  by  the 
stewards,  but  were  not  signed  by 
Lord  Ellington.  That  under  this 
ticket  the  plaintiff  entered  the 
ground  on  one  of  the  race  days, 
when  the  defendant,  who  was  a 
policeman,  under  the  directions  of 
Lord  Ellington,  who  first  ordered 
him  to  leave,  upon  his  refusing  to 
do  so  committed  the  assault  com- 
plained of,  using  no  more  force 
than  was  necessary  for  that  pur- 
pose. Upon  the  trial  the  judge 
directed  the  jury  that,  assuming 
the  ticket  to  have  been  sold  to  the 
plaintiff  under  the  sanction  of  Lord 
£31ington,  it  still  was  lawful  for 
Lord  Ellington,  without  returning 
the  guinea,  to  order  the  plaintiff 
to  quit  the  indosure,  and  that  after 
a  reasonable  time  had  elapsed,  if 
he  failed  to  leave,  then  the  plaint- 
iff was  not  on  the  ground  bv  the 
leave  and  license  of  Lord  Elling- 
ton, and  the  defendant  would  be 
justified  in  removing  him  under 
his  orders,  and  tins  rming  was  sus- 
tained in  Exchequer.  In  Miller  v. 
The  Auburn,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  6  Hill 
(N.  Y.)  61,  which  was  a  case  some- 
what similar  to  that  of  Hetfield  v. 
The  Central  B.  R.  Co.,  before  re- 
ferred to,  the  defendants  erected 
their  railroad  with  an  embank- 
ment upon  Garden  street  in  Au- 
burn, mterrupting  the  plaintiff's 
access  to  his  premises,  in  1889  and 
maintaining  it  until  1842,  when 
this  suit  was  brought.  The  defend- 
ants offered  to  prove  that  the  em- 
bankment was  raised    under    a 


I)arol  license  from  the  plaintiff,  but 
the  proof  was  excluaed  by  the 
court,  and  the  case  was  heard  in 
the  Supreme  Court  upon  the  ques- 
tion of  the  admissibility  of  that 
evidence.  Cowen,  J. ,  among  other 
things,  said ;  **  If  what  the  defend- 
ants m  this  case  proposed  to  show 
was  true,  viz.,  tnat  the  plaintiff 
verballv  authorized  the  making  of 
the  railway,  while  the  authority 
remained,  their  acts  were  not 
wrongful.  License  is  defined  to 
be  a  power  or  authority.  So  long 
as  the  license  was  not  counter- 
manded, the  defendants  were  act- 
ing in  the  plaintiff's  own  right." 
In  this  case  the  court  upheld  a 
license  as  a  defence  until  it  is  re- 
voked, and  hold  that  it  must  be 
revoked  before  an  action  can  be 
brought;  but  in  Veghte  v.  The 
Raritan  Power  Co.,  ante,  the  court 
held  that  the  bringing  of  the  ac- 
tion is  a  revocation  of  itself  and 
all  tha^  is  necessary.  But  tiie  for- 
mer would  seem  to  be  the  better 
rule,  and  the  one  generally  adopted. 
The  following  authorities  will  be 
found  applicable  upon  the  ques- 
tion of  the  effect  of  a  license  :  Ex~ 
parte  Cobum,  1  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  570 ; 
Cook  V.  Steams,  11  Mass.  588; 
Ruggles  V.  Lesure,  24  Pick.  (Mass.) 
190  ;  Prince  v.  Case,  10  Conn.  875 ; 
Rex.  V.  Hemdon-on-the-hill,  4  M. 
&  S.  565 ;  Fentiman  v.  Smith,  4 
East,  107  ;  Hewlins  v.  Shipman,  5 
B.  &  C.  222 ;  Bryan  v.'  Whistler,  8 
id.  288 ;  Cacker  v.  Cowper,  1  C. 
M.  &  R.  418 :  Wallis  v.  Harrison. 
4  M.  &  W.  588.  It  has  been  held 
in  some  of  the  cases  that  the  effect 
of  a  license  executed,  as,  for  in- 
stance, to  enter  upon  land  to  erect 
a  house  or  dam,  and  followed  by 
user,  is  to  give  the  licensee  a  right 
to  personal  property  upon  the  Isjid 
of  the  grantor,  and  although  re- 
vocable at  wiU,  yet  the  licensee  can 
enter  for  its  removal,  although  not 
to  maintain  or  use  the  property 
there.  That  the  license  is  irrevo- 
cable as  to  the  right  to  remove  the 
property.  Barnes  v.  Barnes,  6  Vt. 
888 ;  Prince  v.  Case,  ante ;  Van 
Ness  V.  Packard,  2  Pet.  (U.  S.)  148 ;  ' 
Cary  V.  Ins.  Co.  10  Pick.  (Mass.) 
540 ;  Marcy  v.  Darling,  8  id.  288. 
There  are  a  class  of  cases,  how- 
ever, particularly  in  Pennsylvania, 


470 


must  be  shown  that  it  covers  the  very  act,  for  the  recov- 
ery of  damages  for  the  doing  of  which  action  is  brought, 
and  if  the  liceuse  does  not  embrace  the  act  to  the  full 
extent,  hability  will  attach  for  all  Buch  excess.  Thus,  if 
an  action  is  brought  for  an  injury  resulting  from  the 
flooding  of  laud  by  a  dam  erected  by  the  defendant,  it  is 
not  enough  to  show  that  the  plaintiff  assented  to  or 
licensed  the  erection  of  the  dam,  unless  it  appears  that 
he  could  then  have  knovm  or  reasonably  foreseen  that  his 
land  would  be  injured  by  the  dam  in  the.  manner  com- 
plained of.'  If  the  dam  itself  is  so  erected  as  to  produce 
damage  to  the  lands  of  supra-riparian  owners,  it  is  a  nui- 
sance, and  parties  injured  thereby  are  not  estopped  from 
a  recovery  for  injuries  therefor  upon  the  ground  of  acqui- 
escence in  its  construction,  unless  it  could  reasonably 
have  been  ascertained  or  foreseen  at  the  time  of  its  erec- 
tion that  it  would  produce  the  ill-results  combined  of. 
In  this  respect  it  stands  precisely  upon  the  same  ground 
as  any  other  nuisance,  and  the  rule  in  reference  to  acqui- 
escence therein,  and  estoppel  by  reason  of  acquiescence. 

Sup.  Ct.)  182.  In  Woodard  v. 
Seeley,  II  IlL  157,  it  was  held  that 
&  license  bj  deed  or  parol  is  al- 
ways revocable,  imlese  conpled 
witlt  an  interest  and  executed,  and 
that  tken  it  is  irrevocable.  In 
KimbaU  v.  Yates,   14  IlL   4«4,   it 


where  it  ia  held  that  vhere  acts 
have  been  done,  in  pursuance  of 
a  hcense  and  relying  upon  it,  the 
license  operates  as  an  equitable  es- 
toppel, and  the  licensor  will  be 
estopped  from  revoking  it  to  the 
Injury  of  the  hcensee,  bo  long  as 
the  license  is  not  exceeded.  But 
that  for  all  excess  of  use  an  action 
maj  be  maintained.  Bridge  Co.  v. 
Bra^g,  11  N.  H.  102;  Lefevre  v. 
Lefovre,  4  8.  &  R.  (Penn.)  241 ; 
Rieker  V.  Kellj,  1  Greenl.  (Me.)  117  ; 
Hepburn  v.  McDoweU,  17  S.  &  E. 
(Penn.)  383  ;  Cook  v.  Prigdon,  45 
Ga.  831;  13  Am.  E,  582;  Houston 
v.  leSee,  46  N.  H.  608.  In  Selden 
T.  Del.  &  Hud.  Canal  Co.,  29  N. 
Y.  634,  where  defendants  entered 
upon  the  lands  of  plaintiff  by  parol 
licenae  from  him  and  enlai^^ed  the 
same,  it  was  held  that  the  licenae 
operated  as  a  defence  to  all  tl>at 
had  been  done  nnder  it,  but  would 
not  justify  a,  maintenajice  of  the 
same  after  the  license  is  revoked. 
The  same  was  also  held  in  Mum- 
ford  V.  WhitnOT.  1.1  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
380;  Foot  v.  N.  H.,  &c.,  Co.,  2S 
Conn.  214 :  Eggleston  v.  N.  Y.  &. 
H.  R  E.  R.  Co.,  85  Barb.  (N.  Y. 


Scott, 
Fiske, 
20Mic 
SeMd. 
Barb.( 
56  Me. 
N.J.I 

Allen  ( 
39Iiid. 
Mich. 
47  N.I 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


License. 


471 


is  that;  where  a  person  acquiesces  in  the  erection  or 
maintenance  of  anything  that  is  a  nuisance  per  se,  or  that 
he  might  reasonably  have  foreseen  would  become  a  nui- 
sance, a  court  of  equity  will  not  interfere  by  in jimction 
to  relieve  him  from  the  effects  thereof,  but  his  remedy 
at  law  remains  unless  he  has  bolmd  himself  by  grant  or 
license  sufficient  in  law  to  bar  an  action,  or  unless  the 
party  maintaining  the  nuisance  has  acquired  a  prescrip- 
tive right  to  maintain  it.  The  law  presumes  that  when  a 
man  assents  to  the  doing  of  an  act,  he  only  assents  to  its 
being  so  done  as  not  to  injure  him.'  But,  while  a  license 
must  not  be  exceeded,  yet  it  carries  with  it  all  the  inci- 
dents necessary  to  its  exercise."    Thus,  a  license  to  take 


^Burkhardt  v.  Hou^hton^  27 
Beav.  425,  is  a  very  fml  and  ac- 
ceptable authority  upon  this  point, 
and,  except  that  the  case  is  a  very 
long  one,  it  would  be  sAven  here. 
See  also  McKnight  t.  Ratcliff ,  44 
Penn.  St.  159,  where  it  was  held 
that,  though  the  plaintiffs,  who 
were  in  the  Tnining  business,  per- 
mitted the  defendants  in  the  same 
business  to  operate  through  their 
gangway,  yet,  that  this  permission 
would  not  justify  the  defendants 
in  filling  up  the  plaintiff^s  shaft 
with  water. 

*  A  license  to  enter  ui)on  premises 
may  sometimes  be  implied,  as, 
when  the  owner  or  occupant  of 
the  premises  has  taken  and  keeps 
the  property  of  another  there ; 
there  is  an  unplied  license  to  the 
owner  of  the  property  to  enter  and 
take  it,  Williams  v.  Morris,  8  M. 
&  W.  488  ;  Patrick  v.  Colerick,  3 
id.  435;  Anthony  v.  Haney,  8 
Bing.  186,  and  it  is  apprehended 
that  this  rule  prevails,  wherever 
the  property  of  one  is  upon  the 
premises  of  another  without  the 
fault  of  the  owner  of  the  property, 
and  under  such  circumstcuices  that 
the  owner  of  the  premises  has  no 
claim  or  lien  thereon,  legal  or 
equitable,  the  owner  may,  if  he 
can  do  so  peaceably,  doing  as  little 
damage  as  possible,  enter  and  take 
it  away,  Stirling  v.  Warden,  51 
N.  H.  217.  In  the  case  of  Richard- 
son V.  Anthony,  12  Vt.  273,  the 
defendant's  cattle  were  found  bv 
him  upon  the  plaintiffs  land. 
How  they    came   there  was  not 


shown,  but  it  was  admitted  they 
had  been  in  the  plaintiff's  posses- 
sion a  year,  and  the  plaintiff  for- 
bade the  defendant  to  enter  his 
land  to  take  them  away.  The  de- 
fendant against  the  protest  of  the 
plaintiff,  entered  upon  the  land 
and  drove  them  away,  the  plaint- 
iff offering  no  physical  resistance. 
The  court  held  that  the  defendant 
was  justified  in  his  entry  for  that 
purpose,  and  that  an  action  of 
trespass  would  not  lie  afipBinst  him 
therefor.  Williams,  J.,  in  de- 
Uvering  the  opinion  of  the  court 
said :  **  The  time  during  which  the 
cattle  remained  in  the  plaintiff's 
possession  is  of  no  importance. 
The  manner  in  which  they  came 
there  would  be.  The  right  of  the 
owner  of  personal  property  to 
enter  on  the  premises  of  another 
to  reclaim  property,  may  depend 
upon  the  mann,er  in  which 
possession  was  obtained.  It  ath 
veara  to  he  weU  established  thai  if 
one  man  takes  the  goods  of  an- 
other and  puts  them  on  his  own 
land,  the  owner  may  enter  and 
take  them.  *  *  *  In  the  absence 
of  any  evidence  as  to  how  the 
heifers  in  question  came  into  the 
enclosure  of  the  plaintiff,  when  it 
may  be  as  well  presumed  that  they 
came  there  with  his  consent  and 
without  any  neglect  on  the  part  of 
the  defendant,  as  the  contrairy, 
and  when  the  evidence  discloses 
that  he  detained  them  under  a 
wrongful  claim,  we  consider  that 
the  defendant  was  justified  in 
entering  the  enclosure  to  take  his 


473  Leases.  [§  223. 

stone  from  the  licensor's  land,  carries  "with  it  the  right  to 


own  property.**  Beni^ett,  J.,  dis^ 
sented  from  the  opinion  of  the  court 
but  his  dissent  was  predicated  upon 
the  ground  that  the  cattle  had  re- 
mained so  long  in  the  plaintiffs 
possession  as  to  invest  him  with  a 

guasi  property  therein,  of  w'hich 
e  could  not  be  divested  in  such  a 
summary  manner.  But  the  opinion 
of  the  court  has  many  authorities 
in  its  support,  and  is  predicated 
upon  principles  of  natural  justice. 
In  Allen  v.  Fteland,  10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.) 
306,  it  was  held  that  where  one  has 
propertv  upon  the  premises  of  an- 
other, ne  may,  if  he  can  do  so 
peaceably,  enter  and  take  it.  In 
Starling  v.  Warden,  61  N.  H.  217, 
12  Am.  Bep.  80,  the  plaintiff  had 
formerly  been  postmaster,  and  used 
a  part  of  his  house  for  a  post-office. 
Another  person  having  been  ap- 
pointed postmaster,  the  defendant 
by  such  new  appointee  was  ap- 
pointed deputy  ipostmadter,  and 
was  directed  by  him  to  go  to  the 
plaintiff's  house  and  bring  away 
the  property  there  belon^ng  to  the 

government.  The  plaintiff  resisted 
16  taking  of  the  property,  and  the 
defendant  reasonably  repelled  his 
assault  and  took  away  the  property. 
The  court  held  that  an  action  of 
trespass  would  not  lie  therefor. 
But  see  Hupport  v.  Morrison,  27 
Miss.  865,  wnere  it  was  held  that 
unless  propertv  belonging  to  one  is 
in  the  wrongful  possession  of  an- 
other, he  wm  not  be  justified  in 
going  upon  his  premises  to  take  it 
away,  unless  he  can  do  so  peace- 
ably, and  will  not  be  justified  even 
in  repeUing  an  assaufi  made  upon 
him  by  the  owner  of  the  estate 
unless  it  is  excessive.  In  Gardner 
V.  Rowland,  2  Ired.  (N.  C.)  247,  a 
similar  doctrine  was  held,  except 
that  in  that  case  the  defendant  was 
held  liable  because  he  let  down  the 
fence  to  drive  his  hogs  out  of  the 
plaintiff's  premises,  instead  of 
driving  them  through  the  gap  in 
the  fence  through  which  they  en- 
tered, or,  to  use  the  language  of 
the  court,  "because  he  let  down 
the  fence,  instead  of  driving  them 
through  a  gap  or  gate  when  there 
is  one."  In  Adams  v.  McKinney, 
Addis.  258,  it  was  held  that  if  J  », 
who  ought  to  keep  up  a  fence  be- 
tween a  close  of  nis  and  a  close  of 


J  N,  suffer  the  same  to  be  out  of 
repair,  and  the  beast  of  J  N  go 
through  the  fence  into  the  close  of 
J  S,  trespass  does  not  lie,  and  J  S 
may  pursue  his  cattle  and  drive 
them  back  on  to  his  own  close,  be- 
cause the  damage  happens  from 
the  fault  of  J  N  In  Merrill  v. 
Goodwin,  1  Root  (Conn.)  209,  the 
defendant  entered  upon  the  plaint- 
iffs premises  and  cut  a  tree  in 
which  he  found  a  swarm  of  bees. 
It  did  not  appear  that  the  bees 
escaped  from  nis  hive,  and  the 
court  held  him  a  trespasser ;  but 
the  court  plainly  intimated  that, 
if  the  bees  had  escaped  from  the 
defendant's  hive,  he  would  have 
been  justified  in  doing  all  that  was 
necessary  to  reclaim  his  bees.  But, 
while  bees  so  escaping  from  a  hive 
may  be  reclaimed  by  the  owner,  if 
they  can  be  identified,  yet  the 
owner  of  the  bees  cannot  enter 
upon  the  premises  of  another  and 
cut  the  tree  in  which  they  are, 
without  subjecting  himself  to  an 
action  of  tr^pass,  and  liability  to 
the  extent  of  the  actual  damage  to 
the  soil  and  tree.  But  if  a  third  per- 
son cuts  the  tree,  the  owner  of  the 
bees  may  maintain  trespass  there- 
for. Goff  V.  Kilts,  15  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  550.  If  they  can  be  reclaimed 
without  doing  actual  injury,  as  if 
they  are  on  the  fence  or  on  a  bush, 
Quere  f  In  Barnes  v.  Barnes,  6  Vt. 
888,  the  defendant  erected  a  house 
upon  premises  owned  by  the  plaint- 
iff under  a  license.  This  uoense 
was  subsequently  revoked,  and  the 
defendant,  within  a  reasonable 
time  after  the  revokation  of  the 
license,  entered  upon  the  premises 
and  took  down  the  house  and  re- 
moved the  materials.  The  court 
held  that  the  defendant  was  not 
hable  in  trespass  therefor.  But 
in  such  cases,  where  an  erection  is 
made  imder  a  license,  the  licensee 
must  remove  the  house  within  a 
reasonable  time  after  the  license  is 
revoked.  In  Prince  v.  Case,  10 
Conn.  875,  it  appeared  that  the 
owner  of  land  gave  to  a  person  a 
license  to  erect  a  dwelling-house 
upon  his  land,  for  his  own  use. 
Tne  licensee  subsequently  conveyed 
the  house  to  the  plaintiff  in  error. 
After  the  death  of  the  licensee,  the 
grantor  of  the   licensor  brought 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


LiCBNSE. 


473 


enter  with  teams  to  draw  them  away,  the  right  to  be  ex- 


eiectment  against  the  grantee  of 
the  licensee,  and  recovered  therein. 
After  the  lapse  of  more  than  a  year 
after  his  recovery  and  possession 
in  the  action  of  ejectment,  the 
grantor  of  the  licensor  took  down 
the  house,  but  did  not  remove  the 
materials.  In  an  action  of  treq)a88 
for  taking  down  the  house,  it  was 
h^d  that  no  recovery  could  be  had, 
BS  the  owner  of  the  house  had  had 
a  reasonable  time  in  which  to  re- 
move it,  and  having  failed  to  do  so, 
the  defendant  was  justified  in  tak- 
ing it  down.  Parker  v.  Redfield, 
10  Conn.  497 ;  Baldwin  v.  Breed, 
16  id.  68 ;  Branch  v.  Doane,  17  id. 
409;  Curtis  v.  Hoyt,  19  id.  166. 
Such  a  license  is  personal,  and 
ceases  when  the  house  is  conveyed. 
Hull  Y.  Babcock,  4  Johns.  (N. 
Y.)  418;  The  King  v.  New- 
ton, Bridg.  115 ;  Honees  v.  Hall, 
7  B.  &  S.  481.  A  house 
erected  under  a  license  is  personal 
propertv,  and  remains  the  prop- 
erty of  mm  who  places  it  upon  the 
land.  Ricker  v.  Kelley,  1  Greenl. 
(Me.)  117 ;  Welles  v.  Bannister,  4 
Mass.  514 ;  Curry  v.  Com.  Ins.  Co., 
10  Pick.  (Mass.)  540;  Money  v. 
Darling,  8  id.  288;  Ashman  v. 
Williams,  8  Pick.  (Mass.)  402.  In 
Webb  V.  Paternoster,  Palm.  71,  a 
license  to  place  a  stack  of  hay  up- 
on another's  land  was  held  not  to 
be  countermandable  until  after  a 
reasonable  time  had  elapsed.  See 
White  V.  Elwell,  48  Me.  860.  In 
Winter  v.  Brockwell,  8  East,  808,  a 
license  to  erect  a  skylight  was  held 
not  revocable  after  the  skylight 
was  erected,  without  placing  the 
licensee  in  statu  gnw,  oee  Wood  v. 
Lake,  Sayer,  8  ;  Liggins  v.  Inge,  7 
Bing.  682.  But  if  a  person  wrong- 
fully places  his  property  upon  the 
premises  of  another,  he  nas  no 
right  to  enter  to  remove  it.  Thus 
in  Newbald  v.  Sadler,  9  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  57,  the  defendant's  servant 
drove  his  team  upon  the  plaintifTs 
premises,  and  upon  his  return 
round  the  fence  put  up,  and  the 
plaintiff  forbade  nim  from  takine 
it  down.  The  servant  went  and 
informed  the  defendant,  and  he 
entered  the  plaintiff's  premises, 
and  against  the  protests  and  actual 
resistance  of  the  plaintiff,  removed 
bis  team,  assaulting  the  plaintiff 


in  order  to  accomplish  his  purpose. 
In  an  action  of  assault  and  battery 
therefor,  the  defendant  justified 
upon  the  ^ound  that  he  entered 
the  plaintiff's  premises  to  remove 
his  property,  &c, ,  and  that  he  used 
no  more  force  than  was  necessary 
to  accomplish  his  purpose.  The 
court  held  that  he  was  not  justified 
in  making  the  assault,  or  even  in 
the  removal  of  his  property  under 
the  circumstances  oisclosed  by  the 
pleadings  and  evidence.  But  in 
Robson  V.  Jones,  2  Bailey  (S.  C.)  4, 
it  was  held  that  where  one  has 
peaceaNy  entered  the  premises  of 
another,  an  action  of  trespass  wfil 
not  lie  against  him  for  forcing  his 
way  out  Dv  breaking  a  gate  which 
has  been  closed  and  locked  by  the 
owner  of  the  land,  with  a  view  to 
detaining  the  property  of  the  per- 
son entering.  But  this  must  be 
understood  as  applying  only  to  an 
entry  made  upon  lands  of  another 
under  a  license,  express  or  implied. 
If  the  original  entry  was  unlawful, 
the  breaking  out  would  be  unlaw- 
ful, and  liability  would  attach  for 
all  damages  that  resulted  from  the 
trespass.  The  mere  fact  that  an 
entry  is  peaceable,  does  not  render 
it  lawful,  if  it  was  made  without 
authority,  express  or  implied,  or 
without  a  justifiable  cause.  See 
also  Bro.  Tresp.  pi.  186,  and  White 
V.  Wiltshire,  Cro.  Jac.  655.  The 
mere  fact  that  a  person's  property 
is  upon  the  premises  of  another, 
does  not  render  an  entry  to  take  it 
away  lawf uL  If  the  properta^  is 
there  by  his  own  wrong,  or  ii  the 
title  thereto  is  in  dispute,  or  if  he 
cannot  take  it  away  peaceably,  he 
must  resort  to  his  remedy  at  law 
to  recover  it.  Roach  v.  JDamson, 
2  Humph.  (Tenn.)  425;  Chase  v. 
Jefferson,  1  Houst.  (Del.)  257.  In 
Blake  v.  Jerome,  14  Johns..  (N.  Y.) 
406,  the  defendant  entered  the 
plaintiff's  close  against  the  will  of 
the  plaintiff,  and  took  therefrom  a 
mare  and  colt,  which  he  claimed 
as  his  property,  and  to  which  the 
plaintiff  also  claimed  title.  The 
court  held  that  under  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case,  the  defendant 
was  a  trespasser.  In  Hermance  v. 
Vemay,  CT  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  4,  the 
defendant  sold  certain  premises, 
reserving  by  parol  a  certain  bark* 


474 


Leases. 


[§223. 


ercised  carefully.'    And  a  license  to  take  wood  from  cer- 


znill  standing  upon  the  premises. 
He  entered  the  premises  after  the 
sale  and  removed  the  bark-mill. 
Without  deciding  the  q^uestion  as 
to  whether  the  Dark-mill  was  in 

goint  of  fact  a  fixture,  the  court 
eld  that,  under  th6  circumstances, 
he  was  a  trespasser,  and  liable  for 
a  wrongful  entry.  In  Holmes  v. 
Tremper,  20  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  29,  the 
defendant  had  been  a  tenant  of 
certain  premises  of  the  plaintiff  on 
which  he  had  erected  a  cider-mill 
and  press.  After  the  tenancy  had 
expired,  and  after  his  removal 
from  the  premises,  he  entered  and 
took  away  the  cider-mill  and 
press.  The  court  held  him  a  tres- 
passer upon  the  groimd  that  the 
Sroperty  should  have  been  removed 
urmg  his  tenancy,  and  having 
been  left  there  by  his  own  wrong, 
he  was  not  justified  in  entering  to 
take  it  away.  In  Chambers  v. 
Bedell,  2  W.  &  S.  (Penn.)  225,  the 
court  expressly  held  that  where 
the  goods  of  another  had  been 
wronefully  taken  from  him  and 
placed  upon  the  premises  of  the 
taker,  the  owner  of  the  ^oods  might 
enter  upon  the  premises  of  the 
taker  and  remove  it,  without  be- 
ing liable  even  to  nominal  damages 
therefor.  This  case  follows  uie 
doctrine  of  Chapman  v.  Thumble- 
thorp,  Cro.  Eliz.  829,  in  which  it 
was  neld  that  if  J  S  drives  the  beast 
of  J  N  into  the  close  of  J  S,  or  if  it 
have  been  driven  thereinto  by  a 
stranger  with  the  consent  of  J  S 
(and  this  consent  may  be  impUed — 
see  Richardson  v.  Anthony,  12  Vt. 
273),  J  N  may  lawfully  go  thereinto 
to  take  it  away,  because  J  S  was 
himself  the  first  wrong-doer.  Pat- 
rick V.  Colerick,  3  M.  &  W.  484 ; 
Bhea  v.  Sheward,  2  id.  424 ;  Spen- 
cer V.  McGowen,  13  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
256.  So,  if  the  goods  of  one  have 
been  stolen  and  put  upon  the 
premises  of  another,  the  owner 
may  lawfully  enter  to  take  them 
away.  Higgins  v.  Andrews,  2 
Boilers  Rep.  55.  So,  if  a  person 
has  fraudulently  obtained  the  prop- 
erty of  another,  the  owner  may 
enter  upon  the  premises  of  the  per- 
son who  has  it  in  his  possession,  if 


he  can  do  so  peaceably,  to  take  it 
away.  As  if  A  by  means  of  fraud 
obtains  a  horse  from  B,  B  upon 
discoverr  of  the  fraud  may  go 
upon  As  land  to  take  the  horse 
away,  if  he  can  do  so  without  a 
breach  of  the  peace.  Wheelden  v. 
Lowell,  50  Me.  608 ;  Spencer  v.  Mc- 
Gowen, 13  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  257.  So, 
if  a  man  who  is  assaulted  by  an- 
other, and  in  danger  of  his  life, 
enters  the  premises  of  another, 
trespass  will  not  lie,  ''because  the 
doine  of  this — ^it  being  necessary 
for  the  preservation  of  This  life— is 
lawful.**  87  H.  6,  37  pi.  26.  So 
If  "  A  enters  the  premises  of  B  to 
succor  the  beast  of  B,  which  is  in 
danger,  an  action  does  not  lie,  be- 
cause, as  the  loss  to  B  if  his  beast 
had  died  would  be  irremediable, 
the  doing  of  this  is  lawf  uL  But  if 
A  go  into  the  close  of  B  to  prevent 
the  beast  of  B  from  being  stolen, 
or  to  prevent  his  com  from  being 
consumed  by  hogs,  an  action  troura 
lie,  for  the  loss,  if  either  of  these 
things  had  happened,  would  not 
have  been  irremediable.'*  Bro. 
Tresp.  pi.  215.  So,  too,  if  a  tree 
belonging  to  A  is  Uotmdown,  and 
falls  upon  the  land  of  B,  A  may 
lawfully  go  upon  the  land  of  B  to 
remove  it,  for  the  tree  did  not  fail 
there  by  any  fault  of  A;  Bro. 
Tresp.  pL  215;  but  if  A  cuts  a  tree 
upon  his  land,  and^  it  falls  upon 
the  land  of  B,  this  is  a  trespass  of 
itself,  and  he  may  not  lawfully 
enter  to  remove  it,  for  the  tree  is 
there  by  his  fault,  and  might  have 
been  avoided.  Id.  1^  Millin  v. 
Fawdry,  Lateh.  120,  it  was  held 
that  if  the  fruit  of  a  tree  standing 
upon  the  land  of  a  person,  falls 
upon  the  land  of  another,  the 
owner  of  the  tree  may  lawfully 
enter  to  ^et  the  fruit,  because  the 
falling  of  the  fruit  there  was  not 
by  the  fault  of  the  owner  of  the 
tree.  So,  in  Toplady  v.  Sealey,  2 
Roll.  Abr.  568,  it  was  held  that 
where  one  is  looking  for  cattle 
which  he  has  lost,  he  may  law- 
fully go  upon  a  footpath  over  the 
lands  of  another,  but  if  he  eoes 
outside  the  path,  tr^pass  ues. 
See  Bac.  Abr.  Trespass  F.    In  Mil- 


»  Clark  V.  Vt.  Central  R.  R.  Co.. 
28  Vt  103. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


LiCEKSE. 


475 


tain  premises  carries  with  it  the  right  to  enter  to  cut 
and  draw  it  away ; '  and  a  license  to  cultivate  lands  car- 
ries with  it  as  an  incident  the  right  to  enter  and  remove 
it.'    But  a  parol  license  to  take  wood  may  at  any  time 


lin  V.  Fawdry,  Latch.  120,  it  was 
beld  not  to  be  trespass  for  one  to 
drive  ca;ttle  belongmg  to  another 
from  his  own  lands  upon  the  land 
of  the  owner  of  the  cattle.  So, 
too,  in  the  same  case  it  was  held 
that  trespass  would  not  lie  even  if 
the  cattle  were  chased  out  '*  with 
a  little  dog,''  and  the  dog,  notwith- 
standing the  master's  endeavor, 
afterwards  chases  the  beasts  into 
the  owner's  enclosure,  for  the  chas- 
ing of  them  out  of  the  close  was 
lawful,  and  it  is  not  in  his  power 
to  prevent  them  from  being  chased 
into  the  cattle-owner's  enclosure. 
But  otherwise  if  a  stranger  chases 
the  cattle  out,  for,  by  doing  this, 
although  the  owner  of  the  land  on 
which  the  cattle  are  trespassing  is 
apparently  benefited,  yet  by  nis 
act  the  owner  is  deprived  of  his 
right  to  distrain  the  beast.  Bro. 
Tresp.  pi.  421  ;  Kelw.  46  B» ;  Bac. 
Abr.  Irespass  F.  In  Nettleton  v. 
Sikes,  8  Mete.  (Mass.)  84,  the  de- 
fendant cut  down  and  peeled  trees 
upon  the  plaintiff's  land,  under  a 
valid  agreement  that  he  should 
have  the  bark  for  his  services. 
He  entered  upon  the  plaintiff's 
premises  and  removed  tne  bark. 
The  plaintiff  brought  an  action  of 
trespass  against  hun  therefor,  but 
the  court  held  that  the  action 
would  not  lie,  as  the  bark  at  once, 
upon  being  taken  from  the  trees, 
became  the  property  of  the  de- 
fendant, and  that  he  might  law- 
fully enter  to  take  it  aw^ay;  and 
the  doctrine  of  this  case  has  been 
reaffirmed  by  the  courts  of  that 
State  in  several  later  cases.  Mc- 
Neal  V.  Emerson,  15  Gray  (Mass.) 
884;  Drake  v.  Wells,  11  Allen 
(Mass.)  141 ;  McLeod  v.  Jones,  106 
Mass.  403.  But  the  doctrine  of 
these  cases  rests  upon  the  ground 
that,  where  there  is  an  absolute 
sale  of  property  which  is  lying 
upon  the  vendor's  land,  there  is 
an  implied  license  to  enter  and 
take  it  aw^,  and  in  the  case  of 
McLeod  V.  .Jones,  ante,  where  the 
defendant  was  the  mortgagee  of 
chattels  in  the  possession  of  the 


Slaintiff ,  it  was  held  that  no  such 
cense  could  be  implied  when  the 
goods  were  locked  up  in  the  mort- 
gagor's house,  and  an  entr^r  could 
not  be  had  without  breaking  in. 
The  rule  in  reference  to  the  siSe  of 
the  property  lying  or  being  upon 
the  premises  of  another  at  the 
time  of.,  sale,  would  seem  to  be 
that,  when  there  is  an  absolute 
sale  of  property  which  the  pur- 
chaser is  to  remove,  which  at  the 
time  of  sale  is  upon  the  premises 
of  the  vendor,  there  is  an  implied 
license  to  enter  to  remove  the  prop- 
erty. In  any  event,  if  the  ent^ 
is  made  peaceably,  and  in  doing 
so  no  special  damage  is  done,  no 
more  than  nominal  damages  could 
be  recovered ;  but  I  apprehend  that 
not  even  nominal  damages  could 
be  recovered  under  such  a  state  of 
facts.  These  cases  follow  the  doc- 
trine laid  down  in  Rolle's  Abr.  567, 
M.  pi.  1,  where  the  author  con- 
cisely expresses  the  rule  thus :  **  If 
J  S  nas  sold  trees  growing  upon 
his  land  to  J  N,  and  J  N  goes  upon 
the  land  to  cut  and  tcuce  them 
away,  the  action  of  trespass  does 
not  fie ;  the  right  of  doing  this  be- 
ing incident  to  the  purchase ; "  and 
in  Bro.  Tresp.  pL  400,  it  is  said 
that  "  if  the  land  on  which  grow- 
ing trees  are  sold  be  afterwards 
sold,  and  the  person  to  whom  they 
are  sold  go  upon  the  land  to  cut 
and  take  them  away,  trespass  does 
not  lie."  In  2  RoUe's  Abr.  664,  H. 
pi.  1,  2,  the  author  says:  *<If  a 
man  who  was  seized  in  fee  of 
land,  after  having  felled  trees 
thereupon,  die,  and  his  executor 
goes  upon  the  land  within  a  reason- 
able tune  after  his  death  to  take 
them  away,  an  action  does  not  he, 
because  the  law  gives  an  executor 
a  reasonable  time  to  possess  him- 
self of  the  goods  of  his  testator." 
See  also  Dermott  v.  Grover,  Willes, 
195. 

^  Driscoll  V.  Marshall,  16  Gray 
(Mass.)  62. 

«  Com.  V.  Ritney,  4  AUen  (Mass.) 
316 ;  and  the  licensee  is  entitled  to 
a  reasonable  time  to  take  away 


476 


Leases. 


[§224. 


be  revoked;  except  aB  to  that  cut  at  the  time  of  revocation, 
and  an  entry  after  that,  except  to  take  away  the  wood 
80  cut,  will  amount  to  a  trespass.*  A  Mcense  to  "inhabit 
or  enjoy "  certain  premises,  when  the  right  is  exclusive, 
amounts  to  a  lease,  and  should  be  plead  as  such.*  But 
this  is  not  so  where  the  license  does  not  amount  to  an 
exclusive  right,  as,  a  hcense  to  sow,*  to  stack  hay,*  or  to 
hunt  upon  lands.*  A  party  who  seeks  to  justify  under  a 
license,  must  plead  it  specially,  as  it  cannot  be  given  in 
defenc^e  under  the  general  issue ;  *  and  unless  plead,  only 
goes  in  mitigation/  Proof  of  a  lease  will  not  support  a 
plea  of  hcense.*  A  hcense,  in  order  to  be  efficacious^ 
must  be  granted  by  a  person  having  authority  to  do  so, 
as  it  can  never  extend  beyond  the  interest  which  the  licen- 
sor has  /*  consequently,  a  person  entrusted  with  the  care 
of  an  estate,  or  an  agent  with  authority  to  lease  it,  can- 
not grant  a  hcense.  There  must  be  express  authority, 
or  the  hcense  is  invalid." 


Sec.  224.  Leasea  in  reversion.— Interesse  terminL— AH 
leases  made  to  commence  at  a  future  day  are  leases  in 
reversion.  In  other  words,  all  leases  that  do  not  confer 
a  present  right  of  enjoyment,  and  are  not  perfect  in 
estate,  may  be  said  to  be  leases  in  reversion."  Strictly 
and  technically  speaking,  the  term  signifies  a  lease  to 
commence  after  the  termination  of  another  estate  or  in* 


the  wood  already  cut.  Prince  v. 
Case,  Ante ;  Ck)rni6h  v.  Stubbs,  89 
L.  J.  C.  P.  206. 

*  Giles  T.  SimondSy  15  Gray 
(Mass.)  441. 

« HaU  V.  Seabright,  1  Mod.  14 ; 
Reg.  V.  Morrish,  33  L.  J.  M.  C. 
245;  Anonymous,  11  Mod.  42; 
Trever  v.  Roberts,  Hard.  866; 
Anonymous,  8  Salk.  223 ;  Pritch- 
ard  V.  Dodd,  5  B.  &  Ad.  689. 

»  Hare  v.  Celey,  Cro.  Eliz.  143. 

*  Wood  V.  Lake,  Say,  3 ;  Webb 
V.  Paternoster,  Pcdm.  771. 

<  Anonymous,  3  Salk.  223. 

«  Finch  V.  Alston,  2S.  &  P.  (Ala.) 
88 ;  Stambaugh  v.  Hallabaugh,  15 
S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  857. 

T  Hamilton  v.  Windolph,  86  Md. 

301. 
B  Johnson  y.  Carter,  16  Mass.  441. 


•  Petty  V.  Evans,  2  BrownL  40  ; 
Munifas  v.  Baker,  1  Keb.  25; 
Richardson  v.  Richardson,  9  Gray 
(Mass.)  213. 

»•  Gilbert  on  Tenure,  388. 

"  Winter  v.  Loveday,  Comyn, 
89  ;  Goodtitle  v.  Funucan,  2  Doug. 
565.  Although  a  verbal  lease  for 
the  term  of  one  }[ear,  to  commence 
at  a  future  day,  is  void  under  the 
Statute  of  Frauds,  yet,  if  the  tenant 
takes  possession  under  the  lease, 
and  pays  the  rent  as  stipulated, 
this  unparts  validity  to  tne  con- 
tract, creates  the  relation  of  land- 
lord and  tenant  between  the  parties 
and  gives  the  landlord  a  right  to 
an  attachment  against  the  crop  for 
advances  made  during  the  year. 
Martin  v.  Blanchett  Ala.  288. 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


In  Reversion. 


m 


terest  in  the  same  lands,  then  in  being ; '  therefore,  it 
may  be  said,  that  a  future  lease  and  a  lease  in  reversion 
are  synonymous.*  Under  such  leases,  the  lessee  acquires 
a  mere  interesse  termini^  until  the  arrival  of  the  period 
when,  in  point  of  time,  his  estate  is  to  commence."  This 
interesse  termini^  under  our  statutes  of  enrollment,  which 
have  done  away  with  the  feudal  method  of  livery  of 
Boizen,  enables  him,  without  entry,  to  enforce  his  claim 
to  the  estate  by  any  proper  action  against  either  the  les- 
sor or  any  other  person.*  At  the  common  law,  an  estate 
of  freehold  cannot  be  made  to  commence  infuturo ;  con- 
sequently a  lease  for  life  or  for  lives  cannot  be  so  made.* 
" Yet'*  says  Mr.  Platt,*  '^nothing  can  be  clearer,  than 
that  a  freehold  interest  may  be  made  to  commence  in 
futuro  under  the  statute  of  uses."  ^  The  lessor  granting 
such  a  lease, — ^as  in  one  case  a  lease  for  sixty-one  years, 
to  take  effect  after  the  termination  of  a  lease  for  a  simi- 
lar term  previously  granted  by  him, — is  not  regarded  as 
parting  with  his  reversion  so  as  to  disentitle  him  to  dis- 
train for  rent  due  under  the  prior  lease,'  and,  as  a  conse- 
quence, he  does  not  part  with  his  interest  in  the  rents 
accruing  under  a  prior  lease.*  But  where  a  person  leases 
or  conveys  his  reversionary  interest  in  lands,  he  thereby 
confers  upon  the  lessee  a  vested  interest  and  a  right  to 
the  rents  accruing  thereafter,  under  the  prior  lease.  But, 
if  the  language  is  such  as  to  confer  only  an  interesse  ter- 
mini upon  the  lessee,  the  lessor's  right  to  the  rent  still 
remains."    If,  in  a  lease  to  take  effect  after  the  termina- 


'  Winter  v.  Loveday,  ante ;  Al- 
lan ▼.  Culvert,  2  East,  867. 

*  Sugden  on  Powers,  747. 

'  Smith  T.  Day,  2  M.  &  W.  684 ; 
2  Preston,  Conv.  146. 

*  Bryan  v.  Bradley,  16  Conn. 
474. 

*  Whitlock's  Case,  8  Coke,  69  6; 
Winter  v.  Loveday,  ante. 

*1  Piatt  on  Leases,  443. 

''Statute  27  Hen.  8,  Chap.  10. 
Bee  also  Bryan  v.  Bradley,  ante. 

^  *'  It  appeared,"  said  Lord  Ab- 
INOER,  C.  B.,  in  Smith  t.  Day,  2 
M.  &  W.  700,  "that  during  the 
continuance  of  a  lease  from  Sir 
fEhomas  Wilson  to  certain  parties, 


he  granted  another  to  Sir  H.  Fram- 
lingham,  to  take  effect  from  the 
expiration  of  the  first :  and  it  was 
contended  that  he  had  granted 
away  the  reversion  immediatelv 
expectant  on  the  first  lease,  and, 
therefore  had  not  the  power  of 
making  any  distress  for  rent  under 
it.  This  point  was  raised,  hut  not 
very  strongly  pressed ;  and  the 
court  expressed  an  opinion  in  the 
course  of  the  argument,  that  there 
toaa  no  assignment  of  the  reversion 
so  as  to  prevent  the  power  of  dith 
tress" 

*  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  444. 

10 1  Piatt  on  Leases,  444. 


1 


478  Leases.  [§  225/ 

tion  of  a  future  lease,  the  former  lease  is  recited,  and  the 
second  lease  is  made  to  commence  after  such  prior  lease 
is  terminated,  it  will  take  effect  immediately  upon  the 
termination  of  such  former  lease,  whether  by  efiBuzion 
of  time,  forfeiture,  or  any  cause,  although  by  the  haben- 
dum it  is  made  to  commence  at  the  expiration  of  the  for- 
mer lease,  for  ten,  twenty  or  forty  years,  as  the  case 
may  be ;  but  if  the  former  lease  is  recited,  yet,  if  the 
second  lease  is  made  to  commence  iu  so  many  years  from 
its  date,  being  the  last  day  of  the  time  named  in  the 
former  lease,  the  second  lease  will  not  b^in  until  the 
termination  of  the  former  lezise  by  e£Quxion  of  tim^ 
although  it  is,  in  fact,  previously  terminated  in  interest.' 
If  a  lease  is  made  by  one  for  life,  and  he  grants  a  lease 
for  a  term  to  begin  after  the  death  of  the  tenant  for  life, 
a  reversionary  interest  by  way  of  future  lease  is  passed, 
although  the  word  demise  is  not  iised.*  A  lease  made  to 
commence  upon  the  happening  of  a  certain  contingency, 
attaches  at  once  upon  the  happening  of  such  contin- 
gency ;  and,  if  it  is  made  to  commence  upon  the  happen- 
ing of  several  contingencies,  as,  if  several  parcels  of  land 
are  demised,  and,  by  the  lease,  the  term  is  to  com- 
mence as  to  one  parcel  upon  the  happening  of  a  certain 
event,  and  of  ajiother  upon  the  happening  of  a  certain, 
other  event,  &c.,  the  respectively  in  the  lease  will  take 
effect  and  commence  in  order  in  which  the  events  occiir, 
although  the  rent  is  fixed  at  a  gross  sum  for  the  whole.' 

Sec.  225.  iQtereue  termini.— Before  entry,  a  lessee  for 
years  has  at  common  law  only  an  interesse  termini  (an 
interest  of  a  term),  and  no  possession,  He  cannot  main- 
tain an  action  of  trespass;'  br*  *"*  ""»"  maintaiV  £jior4_ 
ment,'  or  he  may  assign  his  i 
may  enter,  or  maintain  ejectme 
as  to  be  a  bai^ain  and  sale  uni3 

■  Woodhouse'e  Case,  1  Dyer,  98  Ti 

h;  Wrottsley  V.  Adams,  2  id.  177  St 

fc ;  Dove  t.  WUIiott.  Cro.  Eliz.  180.  Li 

"  4  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (N.).  v. 

•Veal  T.  Roberts.  Cro.  Eliz.  IBfl.  Bl 

*Co.   Litt.    2B6    b;   Wheeler  t. 

Montefiore.    3    Q.   B.     Vi%,     156;  R 


CHAP.  XXV.]        Vom  OE  Voidable.  479 

possession  is  immediately  executed  in  the  lessee,  without 
actual  entry.*  Premises  were  demised  by  parol  for  a 
year,  the  lessee  accepted  the  lease,  and  by  virtue  of  the 
demise  entered  upon  the  demised  land  :  before  and  at  the 
time  of  the  demise,  eight  acres  included  in  it  had  been 
demised  to  a  third  party,  in  whose  possession  they  were, 
80  that  the  lessee  could  not,  and  did  not,  enter  upon  them  : 
it  was  held  that  the  latter  demise  was  wholly  void  as  to 
the  eight  acres,  and  that  the  rent  was  not  apportionable, 
and  could  not  be  distrained  for,  the  impediment  of  the 
lessee  taking  possession  not  being  analogous  to  an  eviction 
by  an  elder  title.*  So  where  the  tenant  could  not  obtain 
possession  of  part  of  the  premises  demised,  it  was  held  an 
action  of  covenant  could  not  be  maintained  by  the  lessor 
£Lgainst  the  lessee  for  the  rent,  as  in  such  an  action  it  could 
not  be  apportioned.*  A  lessor  may  release  the  rent 
reserved  before  entry,  in  respect  of  the  privity ;  so  the 
interest  which  the  lessee  has  before  entry  is  gran  table  to 
another ;  and  although  the  lessor  dies  before  the  lessee 
enters,  yet  the  lessee  may  enter  into  the  lands ;  so  if  the 
lessee  dies  before  he  enters,  yet  his  executors  or  adminis- 
trators may  enter,  because  he  presently  by  the  lease  has 
an  interest  in  him  :  so  if  it  is  made  to  two,  and  one  dies 
before  entry,  his  interest  survives.  *  This  interesse  termini 
is  in  the  lessee,  whether  the  lease  is  made  to  commence 
immediately  or  at  a  futm-e  day/ 

Sec.  226.  Void  or  voidable.— When  a  lease  contains  a 
proviso  or  condition  that  on  breach  of  any  of  the  cove- 
nants, the  lease  "shall  cease,  determine  and  be  utterly 
void,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  whatsoever,"  such  words 
will  be  construed  to  mean  void  at  the  election  of  the  lessor.* 
The  lessee  wdll  not  be  allowed  to  take  advantage  of  his 
own  wrongful  act  or  omission,  and  to  say  that  thereby 
the  lease  has  become  void.'    The  lessor  must  do  some  act 

'  2  Blac.  Com.  270.  •  Roberts  v.  Davey ,  4  B.  &  Ad. 

'  Neale  v.  Mackenzie,  1  M.  &  W.  667 ;  Pennizigton  v.  Cardale,  8  H. 

747.  &  N.  656  ;  Hughes  v.   Palmer,   19 

'Holgatev.  Kay,  1  C.  &K.  841.  CBN.  S.  893,404;  1  Smith  L.  C. 

*  Co.  litt.  46  b,  270  6.  19. 

»  Com.  Dig.  Tit.  Estate  (G)  14  ;  '  Rede  v.  Farr,  6  M.  &  S.  121 ; 

Lock  V.  Furz,  19C.  B.  N.  S.  96.  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B.  &  Aid.  401/ 


480 


Leases. 


[§  226. 


evideucing  his  intention  to  enter  for  the  forfeiture  and 
determine  the  lease  ;*  and  the  lease  will  be  aviodedfrotn 
that  time  only;  but  previous  arrears  of  rent  may  be  sued 
for,  although  upon  re-entry  the  lessor  is  to  have  the  prem- 
ises again '  ^  as  if  the  said  indenture  had  never  been  made."  * 
So  the  lessor  may  sue  for  any  previous  breaches  of  cove- 
nant to  repair,  &c.'  The  lessor  cannot  avoid  the  lease 
after  he  has  parted  with  the  reversion/  Nor  can  the 
grantee  of  the  reversion  avoid  the  lease  for  a  forfeiture 
committed  before  the  reversion  was  conveyed  to  him/ 
The  lessor  may  enter  and  take  actual  possession  at  any 
time  after  the  forfeiture  has  accrued  and  before  he  has 
waived  such  forfeiture,*  but  not  afterwards/  The  bring- 
ing of  an  ejectment  for  the  forfeiture  is  equivalent  to  an 
entry,  and  amounts  to  an  election  to  determine  the  term 
from  the  day  on  which  the  plaintiff  claims  to  be  entitled 
to  possession,  so  as  to  prevent  the  recovery  of  any  ^u&se- 
qtient  rent,*  No  act  or  intimation  of  election  on  the  part 
of  the  plaintiff  to  avoid  the  lease  is  necessary  before  bring- 
ing an  ejectment ;  *  unless,  indeed,  the  lease  be  for  a  life 
or  lives/*  But  no  such  election  will  avail,  nor  can  an 
entry  or  ejectment  be  supported,  after  the  lessor  has 
waived  the  forfeiture  by  the  acceptance  of  subsequent 
rent  or  otherwise,"  provided  he  then  knew  of  the  forfeit- 
ure, but  not  otherwise/" 


Amatj  V.  Woodward,  6  B.  &  C. 
519  ;  Koberts  v.  Davey,  4  B.  &  Ad. 
664 ;  Nash  v.  Birch,  1  M.  &  W. 
403 ;  Beid  v.  Parsons,  2  Chit.  R. 
247. 

*  Roberts  v.  Davey  and  Amsby  v. 
Woodward,  ante  ;  Fenn  d.  Matth- 
ews V.  Smart,  12  East,  444 ;  Bay- 
lis  V.  Le  Gros,  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  537. 

*  Hartshome  v.  Watson,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  178 ;  Load  v.  Green,  15  M. 
&  W,  216 ;  Selby  v.  Brown,  7  Q. 
B.  620;  Franklin  v.  Carter,  1  C.  B. 
750 ;  Johns  v.  Whitley,  8  Wils. 
127 ;  Attorney-General  v.  Cox,  8  H. 
L.  Case.  240. 

» Woolcock  V.  Dew,  1  F.  &  F. 
337 ;  Davies  v.  Underwood,  2  H  & 
N.  573;  Haddock  v.  HaUett,  12 
Ir.  C.  L.  R.  173. 

« Matthews  v.  Smart,  12  East, 
441,  451;  Marriott  v.  Edwards,  5 


B.  *;  Ad.  1066  :  Prior  v.  ODgiBv^ 
10  C.  B.  25. 

'  Matthews  v.  Smart,  12  East, 
441. 

•  Davis  V.  Burrell,  10  C.  B.  821 ; 
Baylisv.  LeGro8.4C.B.  N.  a587. 

'  Amsby  v.  Woodward,  6  B.  & 

C.  519 ;  Doe  d.  Griffith  v.  Pritch- 
ard,  5  B.  &  Ad.  765. 

B  Jones  V.  Carter,  15  M.  &  W, 
718;  Franklin  v.  Carter,  1  C.  B. 
750 ;  Cole  Ejec.  82,  408. 

»  Hyde  v.  Watts,  12  M.  [&  W. 
254 ;  1  Smith  L.  C.  20. 

"  Co.  Litt.  218 ;  2  Coke,  58  a,  1 
Wms.  Saund.  287  d  (n.);  4Tyr.  625. 

»  Griffith  V.  Pritchard,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
765 ;  Gatehouse  T.  Rees,  4  Bing.  K. 
C.  384;  Litt.  8.  181 ;  Co.  littTSUb. 

"Gregson  v.  Harrison,  2  T.  R. 
425 ;  Walter  t.  Davids,  2  Cowp. 
808;   Duppa  v.   Mayo,   1   Wma, 


r 


CHAP.  XXV.]  What  Avoids.  481 

Sec.  227.  What  aroids  a  lease.— A  lease  by  deed  may  be 
avoided  by  matter  expostfacto^  as,  by  erasure,  interline- 
ation,  or  other  alteration  in  any  material  part. '  A  deed 
executed  with  blanks  in  material  parts,  whereby  it  is  in- 
capable of  having  any  operation,  and  afterwards  filled  up 
and  delivered  by  another  person,  in  the  absence  of  the 
party  who  has  executed,  and  unauthorized  by  instrument 
under  seal,  is  invalid.*  The  addition  by  stranger  of  a 
seal  to  an  instrument  signed  only,  renders  it  void. '  Where 
by  agreement  between  plaintiff  and  defendant,  a  house, 
I^o.  38,  was  let  to  the  plaintiff,  and  after  the  agreement 
was  executed  and  delivered  to  the  plaintiff,  the  number 
was  altered  to  35,  but  it  did  not  appear  by  whom,  No.  35 
being  in  fact  the  house  let ;  it  was  held  that  the  agree- 
ment might  be  given  in  evidence  in  an  action  for  an  excess- 
ive distress,  in  which  the  demise  was  admitted  to  show 
the  terms  of  the  holding.^  If  a  deed  is  altered  by  a  stran- 
ger in  a  point  not  material,  it  is  not  avoided ;  but  it  is 
otherwise  if  it  is  altered  by  a  stranger  in  a  material  point ; 
for  the  witnesses  cannot  prove  it  to  be  the  act  of  the  party 
where  there  is  any  material  difference.  An  immaterial 
alteration,  however,  does  not  change  the  deed,  and  con- 
sequently the  witnesses  may  attest  it  without  danger  of 
perjury  ;  but  if  the  deed  be  altered  by  the  party  himself, 
though  in  a  point  not  material,  yet  it  avoids  it,  for  the 
law  takes  every  man's  act  most  strongly  against  himself. 
Alterations  made  in  a  deed  by  the  grantee,  after  the  execu- 
tion thereof,  though  material,  will  not  prevent  the  deed 
being  received  in  evidence  on  his  behalf  to  show  the  estate 
which  passed  by  it,  and  which  was  not  divested  by  these 
alterations.*  If  there  be  several  covenants  in  a  deed^  and 
one  of  them  is  altered,  this  destroys  the  whole  deed,  for 
it  cannot  be  the  same,  imless  every  covenant  of  which  it 
consists  be  the  same  also.   A  lease  may  be  rendered  invalid 

Samid.    388  a,   5,  n.  (16) ;  Penn-  '  Davidson  t.  Cooper,  11  M.  & 

ant's  Case,  8  Coke  R.  64  6.  W.  778. 

>2  Blac.  Com.  808;    Bennett  v.  *Hutchinsv.  Scott,  3  M.  &  W. 

Yade,  2  Atk.  827 ;  Miller  v.  Mayn-  809 ;  Stewart  v.  Aston,  8  Ir.  C.  L. 

waiiiig,  Cro.  Car.  899 ;  Bull  N.  P.  N.  S.  85. 

267 ;  Bbx  y.  Beck,  2  Stra.  1160.  '  Stewart  v.  Aston,  ante. 

*  Hibblewhite  v.  M'Morine,  6  M. 
AW.  200. 

31 


483 


Leases. 


[§  227. 


by  breaking  oflf  or  defacing  the  seal,  unless  it  is  done  by 
accident ;  thus,  on  an  indenture  being  offered  in  evidence, 
with  the  seals  torn  off,  it  being  proved  to  have  been  done 
by  a  little  boy,  the  indenture  was  allowed  to  be  /ead.  A 
lease  may  also  be  invalidated  by  delivering  it  up  to  be  can- 
celled. But  the  calling  of  a  lease  by  the  mutual  consent 
of  both  parties  does  not  destroy  the  term  vested  in  the 
lessee,  and  the  lessor  may  therefore  maintain  an  action 
of  debt  on  the  demise  for  the  recovery  of  the  rent ;  *  and 
notwithstanding  such  cancellation,  the  deed  may  be  given 
in  evidence  to  show  the  estate  passed.'  By  the  disagree- 
ment of  those  whose  concurrence  is  necessary  in  order  for 
the  deed  to  stand  ;  as  the  husband,  where  a  wife  is  con- 
cerned ;  an  infant^  or  a  person  under  duress,  when  those 
disabilities  are  removed,  and  the  hke.  So,  too,  a  lease 
may  be  rendered  inoperative  by  the  judgment  or  decree 
of  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction. "  A  proviso  or  condi- 
tion in  a  lease,  that  upon  non-payment  of  rent,  or  non- 
performance of  covenants,  or  upon  the  bankruptcy  of  the 
lessee,  or  upon  any  other  event,  the  lease  shall  become 
utterly  void,  means  voidable  only,  that  is,  void  at  the 
election  of  the  lessor,  who  must  by  some  act  signify  his 
election  to  avoid  the  deed  ;  which  will  become  void  from 
that  time  only  :  but  previous  arrears  of  rent,  and  damages, 
for  previous  breaches  of  covenant,  may  be  recovered  after 
the  deed  has  been  so  avoided.  *  Where  a  lease  was  granted 
to  a  man  on  his  fraudulent  representation  that  he  intended 
to  use  the  premises  for  caiTying  on  a  lawful  trade,  he  in- 
tending at  the  time  to  use  them,  and  afterwards  using 
them,  as  a  brothel,  the  representation  being  collateral 
to  the  agreement,  was  held  not  to    avoid  the  lease/ 


'  Lord  Ward  v.  Lumley,  6  H.  &. 
N.  87,  C56. 

*The  Agricultural  Cattle  Ins. 
Co.  V.  FitMjerald,  16  Q.  B.  482; 
Stewart  v.  Aston,  ante. 

3  2Blac.  Com.  808. 

*  Hartshorne  v.  Watson,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  178 ;  Woolcock  v.  Dew,  1  F. 
&  F.  337 ;  Davies  v.  Underwood,  2 
H.  &  N.  573. 

»  Feret  v.  Hill,  15  C.  B.  207.  But, 
if  a  person  agreest  to  W-  premises 


to  another,  and  he  subsequently 
ascertains  that  the  lessee  mtends 
to  use  them  for  an  unlawful 
purpose,  such  facts  will  operate  as 
a  full  defence  to  an  action  for  re- 
fusing to  cany  out  the  agreiement. 
Thus,inan  English  case, the  defend- 
ant agreed  to  let  rooms  to  the  plaint- 
iff ;  afterwards,  learning  that  they 
were  to  be  used  for  lectures  main- 
taining that  the  character  of  Christ 
is  defective  and  his  teaching,  mis- 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Concurrent. 


488. 


But  if  the  lease. had  not  been  actually  granted,  it 
might  have  supported  a  plea  of  fraud  to  an 
action  for  not  granting  the  lease.'  Where  the  lessor 
knew  that  the  lessee  took  the  premises  for  the  purpose  of 
using  them  as  a  brothel,  notwithstanding  an  express 
covenant  therein  contained  not  so  to  use  them,  the  lease 
was  held  void,  and  that  no  rent  or  damages  for  breaches 
of  covenant  was  recoverable.'  In  covenant  for  rent 
it  is  a  good  defence  that  the  premises  were  demised  by  the 
plaintiff  to  the  defendant  for  the  express  purpose  of  being 
used  for  purposes  contary  to  the  provisions  of  any  statute.' 
An  assignment  of  a  lease  obtained  by  false  and  fraudulent 
representations  is  not  void  at  law,  where  something  more 
than  a  simple  avoidance  of  the  deed  is  necessary  to  com- 
plete justice  between  the  parties.* 


Sec.  228.  Concurrent  leafies.— A  concurrent  lease  is  one 
granted  for  a  term  which  is  to  commence  before  the 
expiration  or  other  determination  of  a  previous  lease  of 
the  same  premises,  made  to  another  person/  or  in  other 
words,  an  assignment  of  a  part  of  the  reversion,  entithng 
the  lessee  to  all  the  rents  accruing  upon  the  previous 
lease,  after  the  date  of  his  lease,  and  aH  the  remedies 
against  the  tenant  under  the  prior  lease,  which  his  lessor 
would  have  had  except  for  the  assignment.'  But,  unless 
under  seal,  it  does  not  have  this  effect,  because  it  does 
not  come  within  the  provisions  of  the  statute  32  Hen.  8, 
chap.  34.'  No  attornment  of  the  tenant  in  possession  is 
necessary  as  against  the  lessor;'   but  unless  there  has 


leading,  and  that  the  Bible  is  no 
more  inspired  than  any  other  book, 
he  refused  to  allow  the  use  of  the 
rooms,  but  did  not  give  this  as  a 
reason  for  the  refusal.  In  an 
action  for  breach  of  contract,  it 
was  /le/d,  that  the  purpose  for 
which  the  plaintiff  intended  to  use 
the  rooms  was  blasphemous  and 
illegal,  and  that  the  contract  could 
not  be  enforced  at  law ;  and  that 
the  defendant  might  iustify  his 
refusal  on  this  ^ounci,  notwith- 
standing his  having  given  a  dif- 
ferent reason.  Cowan  v.  Mil- 
bourn,  L.  I^.,  22  Ezchq.  280. 


>  Calvaleiro  v.  Puget,  4  F.  &  F, 
537; 
•Smith  V.White,  10  Mar.  1866, 

KiNDERSLEY,  V.  C. 

•Gas  Light  Co.  v.  Turner,  6 
Bing.  N.  C.  666  ;  6  id.  324. 

*  Stewart  v.  Aston,  8  Ir.  C.  L.  N. 
8.  85.  But  see  Evans  v.  Edmonds, 
18  C.  fi,  777  ;  Canham  v.  Barry,  IQ 
C.  B.  597. 

^  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  170. 

•  Harmer  v.  Bean,  3C.  &  K.  807, 
'  Bickford  v.  Parson,  5  C.  B.  920; 

Studen  v.  Chrismas,  10  Q.  B.  185. 
"  Edwards  v.  Wickmar,  L.  B.,  1 
Eq.  Cas.  403. 


484  Leases.  [§  SS8. 

been  an  attornment  by  tbe  tenant,  tbe  reversioii  does  not 
pass,  but  only  an  interesse  tennini, '  nor  until  notice  of 
such  assignment  of  the  lease  can  the  assignee  chaise  the 
lessee  for  rent  previously  paid  to  the  lessor ; '  but  the 
lessor  "will  be  liable  to  the  second  lessee  for  the  amount 
received  by  him  from  the  tenant,  as,  for  so  much  money 
had  and  received.*  When  the  lessee  himself  takes  and 
accepts  a  concurrent  lease,  it  operates  an  implied  sur- 
render of  his  previous  term,  and  the  last  lease  becomes 
operative  as  a  lease  in  possession  for  the  term  named  in 
it,  upon  the  principle  that  the  same  person  cannot,  at 
the  same  time,  be  both  lessee  and  reversioner  ;*  but  even 
where  there  is  a  mei^r  of  estates,  it  seems  that  the 
lessee  is  still  bound  in  equity  to  perform  those  covenants 
in  his  Arst  lease  that  are  made  for  the  benefit  of  adjoin- 
ingpremises  belonging  to  the  lessee  or  his  grantees.  Thug, 
A  being  possessed  of  a  piece  of  land  for  a  term  of  ninety- 
nine  years,  laid  it  out  in  plots,  and  underleased  one  plot 
to  the  defendant  for  the  residue  of  the  term,  less 
three  days,  the  defendant  covenanting  not  to  build  more 
than  twenty  feet  in  height  on  that  side  of  his  plot  which 
adjoined  a  narrow  passage,  A  underleased  another  plot, 
which  abutted  on  the  other  side  of  the  passage  to  the 
plaintifis.  On  A's  death,  the  estate  was  sold  under  condl* 
tions  which  provided  that  the  purchaser  of  the  largest  tot 
in  value  should  take  an  assignment  of  the  whole,  and  grant 
fresh  underleases  to  the  various  underlessees,  for  the  resi- 
due of  the  term  of  ninety-nine  years,  less  two  days.  The 
defendant  purchased  his  own  plot,  and  the  plaintiffs  pur- 
chased their  plot,  which  was  t 
plaintiffs  took  an  assignment  o: 
fresh  underlease  to  the  defenda 
of  the  term,  less  two  days,  at  ai 

'  Edwards  v.    Wicktnar,  ante  ;  Si 

Agar  T.  Brown,  2  E.  &  B.  881  ;  4  V, 
Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leasca  (N). 

'  Cook  V.   Maylan.  1  Exchq.  67  ;  2S 

Moss    V.    GaUicQore,    Dow.    276;  8! 

WaddiloTe  v,  Harnett,  2  Bing.  N.  S. 

C.  688  1  Lwulej  v.  Hodgson,  16  se 

East.  09.  Ill 

•  Neate  v.  Harding,  8  Excbq.  819;  ai 


<:;hap.  XXV.] 


Estoppel. 


486 


It  was  held  that  though  the  defendant's  origmal  under- 
lease was  mex^ed  at  law,  he  was  still  bound  in  equity  to 
observe  his  building  covenant ;  and  that  the  plaintiffs 
could  obtain  an  injunction  to  restrain  him  from  infring- 
ing it.' 

Sec.  229.  Estoppels-Leases  by.— Estoppels  are  said  to  be 
odious  in  law,  as  they  have  a  tendency  to  prevent  an  in- 
vestigation of  the  truth.'  They  are  said  to  be  an  im- 
pediment or  bar  raised  by  law  upon  a  man's  own  deed  to 
his  averring  or  proving  anything  in  opposition  to  what 
he  has  once  so  solemnly  and  deliberately  declared.*  It 
may  be  said  to  be  a  conclusioiiy  from  its  determining, 
finishing,  closing  or  shutting  up  the  mouth,  so  that  the 
party  cannot  speak,  plead  or  claim  anything  contrary  to 
his  deed.*  In  order  to  be  operative,  they  must  be  certain 
to  every  intent,  and  precise,  clear  and  unequivocal,'  and 
mutual,*  and  both  parties  must  be  bound  thereby,  or 
neither  is.'     Therefore,  if  one  party  is  an  infant,  or  a 


1  Birmingham  Joint  Stock  Co.  v. 
Lea.  86  L.  T.  Rep.  N.  S.  848,  Ch. 
Div.    See  post  Merger. 

*Bez  T.  Lubbenham,  4  T.  R. 
255 ;  Co.  Litt.  865  b ;  Bacon's  Abr. 
Tit  Joint  Tenants  (H)  1 ;  Skipwith 
T.  Green,  8  Mod.  811 ;  Abbott  v. 
Wilbur,  23  La.  An.  868 ;  Comyn's 
Digest,  Tit.  Estates  (K)  8 ;  Wood- 
faU's  L.  &  T.  172.  **  Estoppels,  in 
general,*^  said  Lobd  KisntoK,  in 
the  case  first  cited,  «upra,  "are 
not  to  be  favored ;  they  are  to  be 
extended  only  so  far  as  the  posi- 
tive rules  have  gone :  because  the 
tendency  of  them  is  to  prevent  the 
investigation  of  the  truth  of  the 
case,"  But  however  odious  an 
estoppel  may  be,  there  is  apparent 
justice  in  holding  that  a  person 
who,  by  his  words,  conduct  or 
deed  has  induced  another  to  be- 
lieve in  the  existence  of  a  certain 
state  of  facts,  and  to  act  upon 
them  <xs  such,  should  not  be  per- 
mitted to  aver  a  different  state  of 
facts  to  such  person's  prejudice, 
and  the  courts  do  not  and  will 
not  permit  it.  Roe  v.  Jerome,  18 
Conn.  188 ;  White  v.  Langdon,  80 
Vt.  699 ;  For^h  v.  Day,  46  Me. 
176 ;  Cook  v.  tinkler,  9  Mich.  181 ; 


Bowen  v.  Buck,  28  Vt. ,  808 ;  Garri- 
son v.  Garrison,  29  N.  J.  L.  153;  Wy- 
man  V.  Perkins,  89  N.  H.  218;  Laski 
V.  Gk)ldman,  18  La.  An.  294;  Rigney 
V.  Smith,  89  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  888: 
Cooke  V.  Kuykendall,  41  Miss.  65 ; 
Crockett  v.  Lashbrook,  5  T.  B. 
Mon.  (Ky.)  580  ;  Plumer  v.  Lord, 
9  Allen  (Mass.)  455. 

*  2  Blackstone's  Com.  295 ;  Co- 
myn's Digest,  Tit.  Estoppel  (A). 

*  Co.  l3tt.  87  a,  170  a.  The 
ground  upon  which  estoppels  are 
allowed  is,  that,  when  a  man, 
without  fraud  on  the  part  of  the 
other  partv,  does  or  alleges  that 
upon  which  others  have  acted  and 
believed  to  be  true,  it  must  be 
presumed  to  be  true,  and  he  ought 
not  to  be  permitted  to  deny  it  to 
that  other  s  prejudice.  Co.  Litt. 
852  a,  n,  1. 

»  Rich  V.  Atwater,  16  Conn.  409 ; 
Lajoye  v.  Princau,  8  Mo.  529  ;  Clark 
V.  Cuerdin,  2  John.  (N.  Y.)Cas.  358. 

*  Lansing  v.  Montgomery,  2 
John.  (N.  Y.)  882  ;  Smifii  v.  Law, 
1  Atk.  489 ;  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Es- 
toppel (O). 

'Longwell  v.  Bentlv,  8  Grant's 
Cas.  (Penn.)  177;  Schumann  v. 
Garratt,  16  Cal.  100. 


486 


Leasbs. 


[§280. 


feme  covert y  it  will  not  operate  as  an  estoppel/  nor  can 
any  one  who  is  not  bound  by,  avail  himself  of  it."  So, 
too,  it  must  not  be  induced  by  the  fraud  of  the  other 
party,  nor  the  result  of  an  innocent  mistake  on  the  part 
of  the  person  sought  to  be  bound  by  it.' 

Sec.  230.  After  porohase  of  estate.— If  a  person  leases 
land  for  years,  to  which  he  has  no  title,  but  to  which  he 
subsequently  acquires  one,  the  lease  which  before  oper- 
ated by  estoppel  became  only  a  lease  in  interest.*  Thus, 
if  A  makes  a  lease  to  B  of  certain  lands  to  which,  at  the 
time  when  the  lease  was  made,  he  had  *  no  title,  the  lease 
is  good  against  A  by  estoppel,  but  is  not  good  as  against 
the  real  owner.  But  if  A  subsequently  purchases  the 
estate,  the  lease  thereupon  becomes  a  lease  in  interest, 
and  A  is  estopped  from  setting  up  the  fact  that  he  had 
no  title  when  the  lease  to  B  was  made,  in  avoidance 
thereof.  *  So,  where  an  heir  makes  a  lease  of  lands  before 
the  death  of  his  ancestor,  if  the  ancestor  dies  before  the 
time  named  in  the  lease  expires,  it  instantly  attaches  to 
the  estate  as  a  lease  in  interest.*  But,  in  order  to  operate 


1  Lackman  ▼.  Wood,  25  Cal.  147 ; 
Bacon's  Abr.  ante ;  Smith  v.  Law, 
ante;  Clark  v.  Qoddard,  89  Ala. 
164;  Brown  v.  McAme,  5  Sandf. 
(N.  Y.)  284. 

'  Tan  sing  ▼.  Montgomery,  ante ; 
Cuttle  V.  Brockway,  82  r enn.  St. 
45 ;  Wood  v.  Pennell,  51  Me.  52. 
Parties  and  privies  only  are  bound, 
and  in  order  to  be  binding  the  es- 
toppel must  be  mutual,  Griggs  v. 
Smith,  12  N.  J.  I..  22 ;  Griffin  v. 
Eichardson»  11  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  489  ; 
Lcmger  v.  Filton,  1  Kawle  (Penn.) 
141 ;  Worcester  v.  Green,  2  Pick. 
(Mass.)  425  ;  Deery  v.  Cray,  5  Wall 

ST.  S.)  795  ;  Nvtvell  v.  Tongue,  2^ 
d.  419 ;  Williams  v.  Chandler,  25 
Tex.  4,  and  can  never  be  set  up  by 
a  stranger,  or  one  who  is  not  bound 
by  it.  Louis  v.  Castleman,  27  Tex. 
407 ;  Massure  v.  Noble,  11  HI.  681 ; 
Miles  V.  Miles,  8  W.  &  S.  (Penn.) 
185  ;  Wright  v.  Hazen,  24  Vt.  148  ; 
Langton  v.  McKinne,  2  Murph.  (N. 
C.)  67.  The  government,  national 
or  State,  is  not  bound  by  them, 
Johnson  v.  U.  S.,  5  Mas.  (U.  S.) 
425 ;  Taylor  v.  Shaford,  4  Hawks 


(N.  C.)  116 ;  nor  is  the  grantee  of 
the  government.  Candler  v.  Luns- 
ford,  4  Dev.  &  B.  (N.  C.)  L.  407. 

*Pierpont  v.  Barnard,  5  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  864.  In  Jackson  v.  Spear, 
7  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  401 ;  Jackson  v. 
Ayres,  14  John.  (N.  Y.)224  ;Stough- 
ton  t.  Lynch,  2  John.  Cas.  (N.  Y.) 
858. 

*  Webb  V.  Austin,  7  M.  &  G.  701 ; 
4  Bacon*s  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (O)  189 ; 
Co.  Litt.  47, 227  a  ;  Doe  v.  Ongley, 
10  C.  B.  26  ;  Smith  v.  Law,  1  Atk. 
489 ;  Sturgeon  v.  Wmgfield,  15  M.  & 
W.  224 ;  Doe  v.  Fuller,  Tyr.  &  G.  17. 

«  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (O)  189. 

*Rothwell's  Case,  Hut  91; 
Anonymous,  DaL  27,  pi.  4 ;  South  v. 
Law,  ante  ;  Rawlin*s  Case,  4  Coke, 
58  a  ;  Isham  v.  Morrice,  C)ro.  Car. 
109 ;  Hermitage  v.  Tompkins,  1  Ld. 
Rayd.  729 ;  (ioodtitle  v.  Morse,  8 
T.  R.  871,  and  the  same  rule  pre- 
vails as  to  one  who  makes  a  lease 
of  lands  which  he  claims  under  a 
devise,  before  the  title  has  vested 
in  him,  Hooks  v.  Bellamy,  1  Keb. 
580,  or  by  a  tort  feasor,  "raulin  v. 
Hardy,  Skin.  2, 


] 


CHAP.  XXV.]        Purchase  of  Estatb. 


487 


as  an  estoppel,  the  lands  must  be  particularly  described  ; 
for,  if  a  demise  be  made  of  all  the  lands  which  the  lessor 
had  in  Dale,  and  he  had  no  lands  at  the  time  when  the 
lease  was  made,  it  is  said  that  it  will  fail,  for  its  gen- 
erality, to  create  an  estoppel  against  the  lessor  if  he  sub- 
sequently acquires  land  there.  *  It  was  formerly  held  that 
a  lease  could  not  become  operative  by  way  of  estoppel, 
when  it  appeared  upon  its  face  that  the  lessor  had  no 
title ; '  but  that  if  the  lessor  falsely  recited  that  he  had 
no  title  to  the  lands,  the  recital  would  be  void,  and  the 
lease  would  be  operative  by  way  of  estoppel.'  But  this 
doctrine  has  been  overruled,  and  whatever  may  be  the 
recital  as  to  title,  in  the  lease,  it  will  enure  by  estoppel 
if  the  lessor  subsequently  acquires  title  to  the  lands." 

Under  the  rule  that  both  parties  must  be  bound,  it  is 
held  that  a  lease  cannot  operate  by  way  of  estoppel  un- 
less both  parties  sign  it ;  *  consequently,  a  lease  by  deed 
I)oll  wiU  not  operate  by  way  of  estoppel,  because  the 
lessee  is  not  bound  thereby,  *  but  a  lease  executed  by  the 
lessor,  and  a  counterpart  executed  by  the  lessee,  although 
not  indented,  is  treated  as  one  instrument,  and  such  a 
lease  wiU  operate  by  way  of  estoppel.'  If  any  interest 
passes  under  a  lease '  it  cannot  operate  by  way  of  estop- 
pel.* An  estoppiel  is  not  confined  to  the  parties  to  the 
lease,  but  is  annexed  to  the  estate,  and  is  binding  alike 


1  Jenkin's  Cent.  226,  Case  46. 

'  Lumley  v.  Scarborough,  3  Ad. 
&  El.  2  ;  Hermitage  v.  Tompkins, 
ante ;  Jeffreys  v.  Bucknell,  2  B. 
&  Ad.  278 ;  Cooks  v.  Bellamy,  1 
Keb.  531 ;  Montgomery's  Case,  2 
Dyer,  244  a;  Noak  v.  Amador, 
Cio.  Eliz.  373;  Frontin  v.  Small,  2 
Ld.  Kayd.  418 ;  Ludf ord  t.  Barber, 
1  T.  R.  86 ;  Barber  v.  Lawrence, 
4  Taunt.  23  ;  Pargeter  v.  Harris,  7 
Q.  B.  108.  Martin,  B.,  in  Cuth- 
bertson  v.  Irving,  4  H.  &  N.  at  p. 
767. 

*  Jenkin's  Cent.  255,  Case  46. 

*  Morton  v.  Woods,  L.  R.,  4  Q. 
B.  293;  Jolly  v.  Arburthnot,  4 
DeG.  &  J.  224. 

» Co.  litt.  47  a,  363  6 ;  Pike  v. 
Eyre,  9  B.  &.  C.  909;  Hooks  v. 
Bellamy,  1  Keb.  536 ;  Hillman  v. 
Bore,    Carth.    247;    Cardwell  v. 


Lucas,  2  M.  &.  W.  Ill ;  Palmer  v. 
Ekins,  2  Ld.  Rayd.  1550 ;  Wilson 
V.  Woolfryes,  6  M.  &  S.  841 ;  Wood 
V.  Day,  7  Taunt.  646;  Hill  v. 
Saunders,  9  B.  &  C.  634 ;  Atkinson 
T.  Coatsworth,  8  Mod.  30. 

•  Co.  Litt.  363  h ;  Atkinson  t. 
Coatsworth,  1  Stra.  512 ;  Smith  t. 
Low,  1  Atk.  489. 

'  Wilson  V.  Woolfryes,  ante. 

^  By  interest,  is  meant  legal  in- 
terest. Blake  v.  Foster,  8  T.  R. 
496. 

•  Cuthbertson  v.  Irving,  4  H.  & 
N.  742 ;  Appd.  6  id.  136  ;  Treport's 
Case,  6  Coke,  14  a ;  Hill  v.  Saun- 
ders, 4  B.  &  C.  529,  2  Bing.  112 ; 
2  C.  &  P.  80;  Fawcett  v.  Hall, 
Ale.  &  Nap.  248 ;  Strode  t.  Seton, 
1  Gale,  308.  The  reason  nven  for 
this  rule  is,  that  one  deea  cannot 
so  enure  to  two  interests.     Bere- 


488 


Leases. 


[§  231. 


upon  all  parties  claiming  under  them.^  If  a  mortgagor 
makes  a  lease,  and  after  performance  of  the  condition, 
in  the  mortgage  conveys  the  estate^  the  grantee  takes 
the  estate  subject  to  the  lease.'  Privies  in  law,  as  ten- 
ants by  curtesy,  dower,  elegit,  &c.,  are  also  bound  by, 
or  may  avail  themselves  of,  the  estoppel.* 

Not  only  the  tenant  but  all  who  claim  under  him,  so 
long  as  they  remain  in  possession,  are  estopped  from  de- 
nying the  title  of  the  landlord  from  whom  the  possession 
was  derived,*  but  he  may  show  that  such  title  has  expired.* 

Sec.  231.  Efibct  of  estoppel  on  the  lessor.— A  grantor 
by  deed  is  estopped  from  saying  that  he  had  no  inter- 


ton  V.  EvuiB,  Cro.  Eliz.  700.  U- 
lustrative  of  the  rule,  if  a  tenant 
per  autre  vie  leases  for  twenty- 
one  years,  and  subsequently  pur- 
chases the  fee,  and  the  cestui  que 
vie  dies,  the  lessor  may  avoid  the 
lease,  because  an  interest  passed 
for  the  life  of  the  cestui  que  vie, 
Co.  litt.  47  h;  Treport's  Case, 
ante ;  Palmer  v.  Ekms,  2  Stra. 
817  ;  11  Mod.  407.  The  questions 
involved  under  this  head,  and  in- 
deed covering^  nearly  all  the  im- 
portant questions  Ukely  to  arise 
-under  leases  by  estoppel,  are  fully 
and  ably  reviewed  by  Mabtzn,  B., 
in  Cuthbertson  v.  "Irving,  ante, 
and  the  reader  is  especially  referred 
to  it. 

» Cuthbertson  v.  Irving,  4  H.  & 
K  757;  Webb  v.  Austin,  7  M.  & 
O.  701 ;  Trevivan  v.  Lawrence,  6 
Mod.  256 ;  Faulkner  v.  Morse,  8  T. 
R.  871 ;  Rawlyn's  Case,  4  Coke,  53 
a,  "Where/'  says  Serjt.  Wil- 
liams, Walton  V.  Waterhouse,  8 
Saund.  418,  n.,  a,  "the  grantor  or 
lessor  has  nothing  in  the  land  at 
the  time  of  the  grant  or  lease,  and 
therefore  no  interest  passes  out  of 
him  to  the  grantee  or  lessee  by  the 
erant  or  lease,  but  the  title  begins 
by  the  estoppel  which  the  deed 
creates  between  the  parties,  such 
estoppel  runs  with  the  land."  All 
who  are  privies  in  blood,  Roth- 
well's  Case,  Hilt  91 ;  Anonymous, 
Mo.  20,  pL  69 ;  Weale  v.  Lawer, 
PoUexf .  54 ;  Kesselman  v.  Aid,  4 
Ball.  (Penn.)  168  ;  Upshaw  v.  Mc- 
Bride,  10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  202,  or  in 
estate  are  bound  by  the  estoppeL 


Webb  V.  Austin,  8  Scott,  N.  R.  419 ; 
Iseham  v.  Morrice,  Cro.  Car.  109 ; 
Trevivan  v.  Lawrence,  1  Salk.  276. 
The  lessor's  assignee  may  avail 
hunself  of  it.  PsOmer  v.  Ekins,  11 
Mod.  407  ;  Co  Litt.  852a;  Parker 
V.  Manning,  7  T.  R.  587.  But 
privies  in  blood  will  not  be  bound 
unless  the  estoppel  would  have 
been  operative  against  his  ancestor. 
CarvicK  v,  Blargrave,  1  B.  A  B. 
581 ;  Oilman  v.  Hore,  1  Salk.  275  ; 
Blake  v.  Foster,  8  T.  R.  487 ;  Tie- 
port's  case,  6  Coke,  15  a. 

*  Edwards  v.  OmeUhaUum, 
March,  64 ;  Rawlyn's  Case.  ante. 

»  Co.  litt.  852  a ;  Weale  v.  Law- 
er, ante ;  Pahner  v.  Ekins,  2  \A, 
Rayd.  1551. 

*  Bac  Abr.  (0.)189 ;  Smith  ▼. 
Low,  1  Atk.  489 ;  Webb  v.  Austin, 

7  M.  &  Gr.  701 ;  Doe  v.  FuDer,  1 
Tyr.  &  G.  17 ;  Sturgeon  v.  Wing^ 
field,  15  M.  A  W.  224;  Doe  ▼. 
On^ley,  10  C.  B.  25 ;  Barwick  ▼. 
Thompson,  7  T.  R.  488 ;  Ttivlor  v. 
Needham,  2  Taunt.  278;  Doe  t. 
Mills,  2  Ad.  &  EL  17;  Doe  v.  Aus- 
tin, 2  Moo.  &  Sc.  107 ;  London  and 
North- Western  Ry.  Co.  v.  West» 
L.  R,  2  C.  P.  558 ;  Cuthbertson  ▼. 
Irvine,  4  H.  &  N.  742 ;  affirmed  5 
H.  &  N.  185.    See  per  Batlet,  J., 

8  B.  &  C.  475 ;  White  v.  FQliambe, 
11  Ves.,  at  p.  844 ;  Parry  v.  House, 
Holt,  N.  P.  489 ;  Cooper  v.  Blandy, 
1  Bing.  X.  C.  45  ;  Doe  ▼.  Baytup,  8 
Ad.  &  EL  188 ;  Delaney  v.  Fox,  8 
C.  B.  N.  a  768. 

*  England  v.  Slade,  4  T.  R.  683. 
See  per  Best,  C.  J.,  in  2  Bing.  11 . 
Neave  v.  Moss,  1  Bing.  860 ;  Doe  ▼.' 


'^<i 


'y*^ 


\.z 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


EdTOPPEL. 


489 


est .'  So  a  lessor  is  estopped  by  the  lease  from  denying  that 
he  had  any  estate  in  the  land  at  the  time  the  lease  was 
executed  by  him,  or  that  he  had  no  right  to  dispose  of  the 
possession  during  the  term  thereby  expressed  to  be  grant- 
ed.' So  a  tenant,  so  long  as  he  retains  possession  under 
the  lease,  is  estopped  from  disputing  the  lessor's  title.* 
And  this  is  so  even  where  the  lease  is  not  under  seal  or  is 
by  parol.^  Upon  the  execution  of  a  lease  which  operates 
by  estoppel,  there  is  in  contemplation  of  law,  created  in 
the  lessor,  a  reversion  in  fee  simple  by  estoppel,  which 
passes  by  descent  to  his  heir,  and  by  purchase  to  his  as- 
signee or  devisee,  who  may  sue  on  the  covenants  in  the 


Edwards,  5  B.  &  Ad.  1065  ;  Doe  ▼. 
Ramsbotham,  8  M.  &  S.  616 ;  Doe 
V.  Watson,  2  Stark.  280 ;  Moimtney 
V.  Collier,  1  E.  &  B.  680. 

>  Beale  v.  Hall,  22  Ga.  481 ;  WU- 
kinBon  v.  Scott,  17  Mass.  249 ;  Cur- 
rier T.  Earl,  18  Me.  216 ;  Case  v. 
Benedict,  9  Cush.  (Mass.)  540; 
Wickersham  v.  Orr,  9  Iowa,  258 ; 
AUen  V.  DeWitt,  3  N.  Y.  276  ;  Levy 
V.  Home,  8  Q.  B.  757 ;  Hurst  v. 
Clifton,  4  Ad.  &  EL  818  ;  Leeming 
V.  Skirrow,  7  Ad.  &  El.  157  ;  Gais- 
f  ord  V.  Stone,  8  C.  B.  176.  He  will 
not  be  heard  as  a  witness  to  im- 
peach the  title,  McDldowny  v.  Wil- 
liams, 28  Penn.  St.  492,  as,  that  it 
was  given  to  defraud  creditors, 
Bealo  V.  Hall,  ante,  and  this  is  so 
even  as  to  a  married  woman  who 
has  joined  with  her  husband  in  a 
conveyance  of  her  lands.  Barbett 
V.  Ruth,  16  La.  An.  271 ;  Noah  v. 
Shofford,  10  Met.  (Mass.)  192 ;  Hill 
V.  West,  8  Ohio,  222. 

«  Green  V.  James,  6  M.  &  W.  656 ; 
Darlington  v.  Pritchard,  4  M.  &  G. 
783. 

"Tondro  v.  Cushman,  5  Wis. 
279;  Sims  v.  Glazner,  14  Ala.  695 ; 
Pope  V.  Harkins,  16  id.  821 ;  Cranz 
V.  Kroger,  22  HI.  74;  Burke  v. 
Hale,  9  Ark.  824;  Hoen  v.  Sim- 
mond,  1  Cal.  119 ;  McInWre  v.  Pat- 
ton,  9  Humph.  (Tenn.)  447;  Tewks- 
bury  V.  Magroff ,  83  Cal.  237  ;  Wal- 
den  V.  Bodly,  14  Pet.  OJ.  S.)  156 ; 
Cowley  V.  Chiles,  5  J.  J.  Mar.  (Ky.j 
802;  Winston  v.  President,  28 
Miss.  118;  Rogers  v.  Waller,  4 
Hayw.  (Tenn.)  205;  Anderson  v. 
Darby,  1  M.  &  W.  (S.  C.)  869;  Al- 
wood  T.   Mansfield,  88   DL    452; 


Walker  v.  Harper,  88  Mo.  692; 
Johnson  V.  Stiles,  1  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
575 ;  Robinson  v.  Hathaway,  Brayt. 
m.)  151 ;  Bowdish  v.  Dubuque,  88 
Iowa,  841;  Fuller  v.  Sweet,  80 
Mich.  287 ;  Evans  v.  Bidwell,  76 
Penn.  St.  497 ;  Abbot  v.  Crombie, 
72  N.  C.  292 ;  Baker  v.  NoU,  59  Ma 
265 ;  Clarke  v.  Clarke,  51  Ala.  498 ; 
Phillips  V.  Robertson,  2  Overt 
(Tenn.)  899 ;  Jackson  v.  Stewart,  6 
John.  (N.  Y.)  84  ;  Jackson  v.  Vos- 
buigh,  7  id.  186 ;  Graham  v.  Moore, 
4  Watts  (Penn.)  467 ;  Jackson  v. 
Haii)er,  5  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  246 ;  Gal- 
iaway  v.  Ogle,  2  Binn.  (Penn.)  402 ; 
Hamit  V.  Lawrence,  2  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  866;  Moore  v.  Beasley,  8 
Ohio,  294;  People  v.  Siner,  45 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  56;  Lockwood  v. 
Walker,  8  McLean  (U.  S.)  481 ; 
Hatch  V.  Pendergast,  15  Md.  251 ; 
Swift  V.  Gage,  20  Vt.  224;  St.  John 
V.  Quitzow,  72  ni.  884;  Earle  v. 
Nale,  31  Ark.  470 ;  Ryder  v.  Man- 
sell,  6  Me.  167 ;  Hatch  v.  Bullock, 
67  N.  H.  15 ;  Thrall  v.  Omaha  Ho- 
tel Co.,  5  Neb.  295  ;  Stottv.  Ruther- 
ford, 92  U.  S.  107;  Hughes  v. 
Watt,  28  Ark.  158;  Bertram  v. 
Cook,  32  Mich.  518:  D^gett  v. 
Norton,  20  Bl.  832 ;  Stacy  v.  Bost- 
wick,  48  Vt.  192 ;  Higgins  v.  Turn- 
er, 61  Mo.  249 ;  Rose  v.  Davis,  11 
CaL  133;  Brahn  v.  Jersey  City 
Forge  Co.,  38  N.  J.  L.  74 ;  Grant  v. 
White,  42  Mo.  285. 

*  Willis  V.  Birchmore,  9  Ad.  So 
El.  662 ;  BaQey  v.  Foster,  8  C.  B. 
229 ;  Ayar  v.  Young,  Car.  &  M, 
78;  Johnson  v.  Baytup,  8  Ad.  & 
EL  188. 


490  Leases.  [§  232. 

lease.'  An  underlease  made  by  a  lessee  who,  at  the  time 
of  making  it  and  subsequently,  had  no  legal  interest, 
operates  as  a  demise  by  estoppel.'  A  lessor  is  estopped 
from  setting  up  that  he  merely  bad  an  equitable  estate 
when  the  lease  was  made.'  The  principle  that  a  tenant 
camiot  impeach  his  landlord's  title,  or  set  up  a  title  in 
himself,  acquired  during  the  tenancy,  inconsistent  with 
the  title  of  his  landlord,  which  he  has  admitted  by  accept- 
ing the  demise,  does  not  preclude  him  from  availing 
himself  of  any  defense  consistent  with  such  admission. 
If  the  landlord  has  transferred  his  interest  in  the  premi- 
ses, the  tenant,  though  estopped  to  deny  the  title  of  the 
landlord  from  whom  be  received  possession,  may  still 
show  that  the  transfer  was  invalid  and  passed  no  title  to 
the  claimfint.*  And  this,  too,  notwithstanding  he  has 
paid  rent  to  the  claimant,  or  made  an  express  agreement 
to  become  his  tenant,  if  such  payment,  or  agreement, 
were  made  in  ignorance  of,  or  under  a  mistake  or 
misapprehension  as  to  the  title.' 

Sec.  232.  Bflbct  of  estoppel  oil  tbe  lessee.— It  is  a  well 
settled  general  rule,  that  a  lessee  cannot  deny  the  title 
of  his  landlord,*  and  this  rule  applies  whether  the  ten- 

'Cuthberteon   v.  Irving,    ante.  H.  658;  Walden  v.  Bodley.  UPet 

'Prior  T.  Ongley,  IOC.  B.  25.  m.S.)  156;  Tewksbury  v.  Ma^rott, 

»areen  v.  James,  6    M.   &  W.  88  Cal.  237;  Cody  v.  Quartennan, 

656:    Sturgeon   t.  WinfFQeld,  15  12  Oa.  886;  Atwood  v.  Mansfield, 

U.  &  W.  2U.  8S  Dl.  452.     And  e«peciaU7  is  this 

*  Carrick  t.  Blagrave,  1  B.  &  B.  ao  in  an  action  for  rent,  Codman 

081 ;  PhiUipe  v.  Pearce,  G  B.  &  C.  t.  Jackson,  14  Moss.  63:  Allen  v. 

483;  Funk's  Lessee  t.  Kincaid.   6  Chatfield,  8  Hinn.  435;  Watson  t. 

Hd.  404 ;  Despard  V.  Watbridge,  15  Alexander,    1    Wash.    (Va.)  840; 

H.  Y.  874.  Perkina  v.  Governor,  Minor  (Ala.) 

'  Ik^erev.  Pitcher,  6  Taunt.  202 ;  B42,  and  if  there  are  two  or  mc»6 

GrOTCnor  t.  Woodhouse,  1   Bing.  lesi 

88 ;  7  Moore,  288 ;  Fenner  v.  Dup-  eiti 

lock,     2    Bing.     10;    Gregory    v.  Tai 

Doidge,  8  id.  474  ;  Brook  v.  BiggB,  B. 

2  Bing-  N.  C.  572  ;  Claridge  v.  Mc-  br< 

Kenzie,  4  Scott  (N.  R.)  796;  Wash-  Sel 

ington  V.  Conrad,  SHumph.  (Tenn.)  v. 

603 ;  Shelton  v.  Carrol,  16  Ala.  148 ;  rul 

Swift  V.  Dean,  11  Vt  823 ;  Ingraham  bul 

V.  Baldwin.  9  N.  Y.  46.  DoWoif  t.  K1i 

Martin,  12  R.  I.  688.  C.) 

'Miller  v.  McBrian,  14  S.  &  R.  20. 

,   (Penn.)  882;   Shepard   v.   Martin,  19 

»1  Mo.  483 ;    Cranz  r.    Croger,  23  del 

JU.  74 ;  Plumer  t.  Plumer,  80  N.  Mil 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Estoppel. 


491 


ant  was  in  possession  before  the  lease  was  made  or 


L' 


C.)  850 ;  Rose  v.  Davis,  11  Cal.  138. 
A  stranger  even,  who  comes  into 
possession  through  the  tenant, 
though  by  a  purchase  of  the  land, 
is  subject  to  the  rule.  Newman  v. 
Mackin,  21  Miss.  888;  Lockwood 
V.  Walker,  8  McLean  (U.  8.)  481 ; 
Farley  v.  Rogers,  1  A.  K.  Marsh. 
(Ky.)  245 ;  Phillips  v.  Rothwell,  4 
Bibb  (Ky.)  38.  The  rule  applies 
to  a  mortgagor  and  mortgagee, 
trustee  and  cestui  que  trusty  and 
^nerally  in  all  cases  where  one 
obtains  possession  by  a  recojpition 
of  the  hmdlord's  titfe.  Willison  v. 
Watkins,  8  Pet.  (U.  S.)  48.  And 
whether  the  lease  is  by  deed,  in 
writing  or  oral,  or  even  though  he 
is  in  under  an  agreement  lor  a 
lease  merely  or  under  a  contract 
of  purchase.  Love  v.  Edmonston, 
1  Lred.  (N.  C.)  L.  152;  Dubois  v. 
Mitchell,  3  Dana  fKy.)  886 ;  WU- 
liams  V.  Gush,  27  Ga.  507.  In  an 
action  on  a  bond  conditioned  for 
the  payment  of  the  rent  of  certain 
premises  recited  in  the  condi- 
tion, to  be  demised  by  inden^ 
ture  at  a  certain  rent,  the  defend- 
ant is  estopped  from  saying  that  by 
the  indenture  a  less  rent  than  that 
mentioned  in  the  condition  was 
reserved.  Lanison  v.  Tremere,  1 
Ad.  &  £3.  792.  In  an  ejectment 
for  mines  against  a  member  of  a 
mining  company,  it  was  held  that 
the  defendant  was  estopped  from 
disputing  the  title  of  the  lessor  of 
the  plaintiff  who  had  leased  the 
mines  to  the  company,  of  which 
the  lessor  was  a  partner.  i|t  the 
time  of  the  action,  out  not  at  the 
time  he  granted  the  lease.  Francis 
V.  Harvey,  4  M.  &  W.  881.  The 
lessee  may,  however,  show  that 
hia  landlord's  title  has  expired, 
Neave  v.  Moss,  1  Bing.  368 ;  Eng- 
land V.  Slade,  4  T.  R.  682 ;  Jackson 
V.  Ramsbotham,  8  M.  &  S.  516; 
Strode  v.  Seaton,  2  0.  M.  &  R. 
728 ;  Downes  v.  Cooper,  2  Q.  B.  256 ; 
Agarv.  Young,  1  Car.  &  M.  78; 
Cmridge  v.  Mackenzie,  4  M.  &  G. 
143;  Leeming  v.  Skirrow,  7  Ad. 
&  El.  157 ;  but  where  a  defendant, 
in  an  action  for  use  and  occupa- 
tion, had  occupied  apartments  in 
a  house  belongmg  to  a  wife,  and 
had  paid  rent  to  the  husband,  who 
subsequently,  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  defendant,  granted  a  lease 


of  the  whole  house  to  the  plaintiff ; 
it  was  held,  that  having  occupied 
with  notice  of  the  lease,  he  could 
not  impeach  its  validity,  nor  con- 
trovert the  plaintifTs  title.  Ren- 
nie  V.  Robinson,  1  Bing.  147.  Upon 
an  information  to  set  aside  a  lease 
of  charity  lands,  it  was  held  in 
Chancery  that  the  lessees  could  not 
dispute  the  title  by  setting  uf)  an 
adverse  title  whilst  they  retained 
possession.  Atty.-Gen.  v.  Lord 
Hotham,  8>  Russ.  415.  The  inter- 
est of  a  tenant  for  life  and  a 
reversioner  are  the  same,  and 
therefore  a  lessee  who  has  paid 
rent  to  the  first,  cannot  set  up  title 
in  another  person  as  an  answer  to 
an  action  oy  the  latter  after  the 
death  of  the  former.  Colemore  v. 
Whitroe,  1  D.  &  Rv.  1.  A  lessee, 
by  executing  an  indenture  of  lease, 
aamits  a  wiU  under  which  it  is  re- 
cited that  the  lease  was  granted. 
Bringloe  v.  Goodson,  6  Bing.  N.  C. 
788.  A  lessee  of  tolls,  under  an 
instrument  signed  by  two  persons 
as  trustees,  admits  they  are 
trustees.  Willington  v.  Brown,  8 
Q.  B.  169.  An  assi^ee  is  estopped 
by  the  deed  which  eetopB  his 
assignor,  T^lor  v.  Needham,  2 
Taunt.  278 ;  Barwick  v.  Thompson, 
7  T.  R.  488 ;  Bryan  v.  Winwood,  1 
Taunt.  208  ;  and  an  assignor,  bv 
executing  the  assi^^nment  m  which 
the  original  lease  is  recited,  is  pre- 
cluded in  an  action  by  the  assignee 
from  calling^  upon  him  to  prove 
the  lease.  Nash  v.  Turner,  1  Esp. 
217.  So  an  assignee  of  a  void  lease 
by  a  tenant  for  life  is  estopped 
from  disputing  the  title  ^  of  the 
remainder-man,  though  his  assign- 
ment was  after  the  death  of  the 
tenant  for  life,  and  payment  to 
and  acceptance  of  rent  by  the 
remainder-man,  and  with  notice  of 
that  fact.  Johnson  v.  Mason,  1 
Esp.  89.  So  where  a  lease  was 
granted  by  A  and  B  as  granting 
parties,  and  reserved  the  rent  ana 
right  of  re-entry  to  a  close,  it  waa 
held  that  the  assignee  of  the  lessor 
was  estopped  from  showing  that 
A  had  no  interest  in  the  premises. 
Parker  v.  McLaughlin,  1  Ir.  L.  R. 
N.  S.  186.  In  defence  of  an  action 
of  ejectment,  it  may  be  shown 
that  the  parties  under  whom  the 
plaintiff  claims  had  no  title  when 


J 


•mf 


492 


LEAdfiS. 


[§  232. 


not. '    So  long  as  he  remaiuB  in  undisturbed  possession  be  is 
estopped  from  attacking  the  title  under  which  he  entered/ 


they  oonveyed  to  him,  although 
the  defendant  himself  claims  by  a 
conveyance  from  the  same  parties, 
if  the  latter  conveyance  was  sub- 
sequent to  that  which  the  defend- 
ant seeks  to  impeach.  OUver  v. 
PoweU.  1  Ad.  &  El.  631.  Where  a 
lease  granted  under  a  power  con- 
tainea  in  a  settlement  recited  the 
title  of  the  lessor,  and  showed  tliat 
he  had  only  an  eauita,ble  interest, 
the  lessee  was  neld  not  to  be 
estopped  from  disputing  the  title 
of  tne  lessor  so  disclosed  in  the 
lease.  Greenway  v.  Hart,  14  C. 
B.  848.  The  ground  upon  which 
the  rule  of  estoppel  in  such  cases 
rests,  is  the  advantage  derived  by 
the  tenant  from  bemg  let  into 
possession  by  the  landlord,  which 
would  make  it  imjust  and  inequit- 
able for  him  to  use  his  portion 
thus  acquired  to  undermme  or 
defeat  the  landlord's  rights,  Fuller 
V.  Sweet,  80  Mich.  287,  and  hence 
the  rule  that  a  tenant  cannot  set 
up  a  superior  title  acquired  by 
hun  until  ne  has  first  surrendered 
possession.  Freeman  v.  Heath,  13 
Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  498. 

*  Richardson  v.  Harvey,  37  Ga. 
224  ;  Patterson  v.  Hunsell,  4  Bush. 
OCy.)  664;  Thyer  v.  Society,  20 
JPenn.  St.  dO ;  McCk>nell  v.  Bow- 
dry,  4  T.  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  892 ;  Hock- 
enbury  v.  Snyder,  2  W.  A;  S. 
(Penn.)  240.  But  in  California  the 
rule  is  otherwise,  Franklin  v.  Me- 
dina, 86  Gal.  668  ;  Peratto  v.  Gono- 
chio,  47  id.  269,  and  in  New  York, 
Jackson  v.  Leek,  12  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
105,  Virginia,  Alderson  v.  Merrill, 
16  Gratt.  (Va.)  279,  Tennessee, 
Washington  v.  Conrad,  2  Humph. 

g^enn.)  662,  and  in  South  Carolina, 
ivens  v.  Mallyneaux,  4  Rich.  (S. 
C.)  690,  it  was  held  that  a  person 
in  possession  is  not  estoppea  from 
subsequently  disclaiming  holding 
imder  such  title  if  the  original  en- 
try is  not  under  the  person  whose 
title  is  acknowledged.  And  this 
is  so  in  sdl  the  States  if  such  ac- 
knowledgement was  induced  by 
fraud,  Glein  v.  Rise,  6  "Watts 
(Penn.)  44 ;  Jackson  v.  Harper,  5 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  246 ;  Bryne  v.  Bee- 
son,  ante,  or  was  the  result  of  mis- 
take or  misapprehension.  Miller 
V.  Williams,  15  Gratt.  (Va.)  213; 


Swift  V.  Dean,  11  Vt.  828 ;  Cramer 
V.  Carlisle  Bank,  2  Grant's  Gas. 
(Penn.)  267  ;  Smith  v.  McCurdy,  S 
Phila.  (Penn.)  488.  The  rule 
adopted  in  California  is  certainlr 
just,  and  does  not  seem  to  trencn 
upon  the  general  rule. 

^  Paquetel  v.  Gauche,  17  La.  An, 
He  cannot  controvert  the  title  of 
him  under  whom  he  holds,  ajid 
whose  title  he  has  recognized,  Bre- 
mer V.  Bigelow,  8  Kan.  497 :  Bor- 
nitt  V.  Rich,  45  Ga.  211 ;  Jackson 
V.  Whedon,  1 E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
Ingraham  v.  Baldwin,  9  N.  Y.  45  ; 
Stout  V.  Merrill,  86  Iowa,  47;  even 
by  taking  a  lease  from  another 
after  his  term  is  ended.  Jackson 
V.  Stiles.  1  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  575  ;  Jack- 
son V.  Hinman,  10  John.  (N.  T.) 
292  ;  Phelps  v.  Taylor,  28  La.  An. 
686  ;  Simmons  v.  Robertson,  27 
Ark.  627.  If  he  denies  the  title, 
the  landlord  may,  at  his  election, 
treat  it  as  a  disseizin.  It  is  in  law 
a  termination  of  the  tenancy  and 
equivalent  to  notice  to  guiL  Hall 
V.  Davey,  10  Vt.  698 ;  Currier  ▼. 
Earl,  18  Me.  216 ;  Tillotson  ▼.  Doe, 
6  Ala.  407  ;  Steams  v.  Godfrey,  16 
Me.  168  ;  Fussleman  v.  Worthing- 
ton,  14  lU.  136.  In  an  action  of 
ejectment  or  for  rent,  the  defend- 
ant, by  admitting  that  l^e  is  the 
plamtirTs  tenant,  admits  the  plaint- 
ifTs  title.  Millhaller  v.  Jones,  7 
Ind.  716  ;  Russell  v.  Erwin,  88  Ala. 
40  ;  Ingniham  v.  Baldwin,  9  N. 
Y.  46.  The  fact  that  the  lease  is 
void,  does  not  change  the  rule,  or 
enable  the  tenant  to  dispute  the 
title,  but,  after  the  relation  has 
ceased,  his  right  to  do  so  is  not  im- 
paired because  he  neglected  to  do 
so  before.  Bryne  v.  Beeson,  1 
Dougl.  (Mich.)  179 ;  Heath  v.  WU- 
liams,  26  Me.  209 ;  King  v.  Mur- 
ray, 6  Ired.  (N.  C.)L.  62  ;  Aukeney 
V.  JMerce,  1  111.  202.  He  cannot  set 
up  a  title  acquired  by  adverse  use 
wnilehewas  occupying  either  as 
tenant  or  licensee.  Uoming  v. 
Troy  Nail  Factory,  84  Barb.  (N.  , 
Y.)  486  ;  Brown  v.  KeUer,  82  IlL 
151 ;  Bryne  v.  Beeson.  1  DougL 
(Mich.)  179 ;  Hateh  v.  Pendergrast,  ^ 
16  Me.  261.  In  order  to  gain  such  ' 
a  title  he  must  first  disclaim,  Wal«^' 
den  V.  Badley,  14  Pet.  (U.  S.)  166^ 
Duke  V.  Huper,  6  Yerg.  (Tenn^ 


IP 

S 

y 

fib 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


EsTOPPEt. 


49a 


unless  his  entry  was  induced  by  the  fraud  of  the  landlord 


280,  aod  surrender  the  property  be- 
fore he  will  be  permitted  to  assert 
them,  Heed  v.  Shepley,  6  Vt.  602  ; 
Tompkins  v.  Snow,  68  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  525  ;  Hershay  v.  Clark,  27  Ark. 
527 ;  Brown  v.  Keller,  ante ;  Ryer- 
Bon  V.  Eldred,  18  Mich.  12 ;  Greeno 
•V.  Munson,  9  Vt.  87  ;  Moshier  v. 
Bedding,  12  Me.  478 ;  and  state- 
ments of  his  own  title  will  not  be 
evidence  unless  brought  home  to 
the  landlord,  Ingram  ▼.  Little,  14 
Ga.  178 ;  and  a  tenant  at  will  will 
not  be  permitted  to  set  up  an  incon- 
Bistent  title  without  surrender  or 
eviction  by  the  owner  of  a  para- 
mount title  or  its  equivident. 
Town  V.  Butterfield,  97  Mass.  105. 
He  cannot   avail   himself  of  the 

Surchase  of  an  outstanding  title  to 
ef eat  the  title  of  his  landlord, 
demm  v.  Wilcox,  15  Ark.  102; 
Kussell  V.  Titus,  8  Grant's  Gas. 
a>eim.)  295;  £lUott  v.  Smith,  28 
Penn.  St.  181.  See  Gallagher  v. 
Bennett,  88  Tex.  291,  and  excep- 
tion to  rule,  post.  In  order  to  cre- 
ate this  estoppel,  the  relation  of 
landlord  and  tenant  must  exist. 
It  does  not  apply  to  a  tort  f  eazor  or 
one  who  has  not  recognized  the 
landlord's  title.  But  if  he  has  dis- 
tinctly recognized  the  landlord's 
title,  so  that  ne  can  be  said  to  hold 
under  him,  or  in  subserviency  to 
his  title,  the  rule  applies.  The  best 
evidence  of  such  recognition  is  the 
payment  of  rent  or  the  taking  of 
a  lease,  but  these  are  not  indispen- 
sable. Hood  V.  Mathias,  21  Mo. 
808 ;  Plumer  v.  Plumer,  80  N.  H. 
558 ;  Morse  v.  Roberts,  2  Cal.  515. 
In  Maine,  it  is  held  that  there  must 
be  an  actual  surrender  of  theprem^ 
ises,  and  that  notice  to  the  land« 
lord  is  not  sufficient.  Longfellow  v. 
Longfellow,  61  Me.  590.  If  a  tenant 
holds  over  after  the  termination  of 
his  lease,  he  cannot,  by  surrender- 
ing part  of  the  premises,  acquire  a 
right  to  dispute  the  title  of  the 
landlord  to  the  remainder.  Long- 
fellow V.  Longfellow,  54  Me.  240 ; 
Stoops  V.  Delvin,  16  Mo.  162.  A 
sub-tenant  cannot  dispute  the  title 
of  his  lessor  or  of  ms  assignee. 
Stagg  V.  Eureka  Tanning  Co.,  56 
Me.  817;  Dunshee  v.  Grundy,  15 
Gray  (Mass.)  814 ;  Earle  v.  Hale,  81 
Ark.  470;  Prevat  v.  Lawrence, 
61 N.  Y.  219.    A  tenant  at  suffer- 


ance is  bound  by  this  estoppel. 
Griffin  v.  Sheffield,  88  Miss.  859 ; 
nor  can  a  lessee  of  a  tenant  at  will 
dispute  the  title  of  his  lessor  or  of 
the  landlord,  Hilboum  v.  Fogg,  99 
Mass.  11 ;  nor  can  the  lessee  for 
life,  at  law  set  up  a  convevance  by 
their  intestate  to  a  third  person, 
of  which  he  was  ignorant  when 
they  leased  to  him.  Haws  v.  Shaw, 
100  Mass.  187.  A  tenant  contract^ 
ing  to  pay  the  taxes  upon  the 
premises,  cannot,  by  permitting 
the  lands  to  be  sold  for  taxes  and 
purchasing  them  at  such  sale,  ac- 
quire any  title  thereto  as  against 
his  landlord.  Cauthers  v.  Weaver, 
7  Kan.  110.  But  a  tenant  at  will 
may  at  anv  time  abandon  his  ten- 
ancy, ana  then  take  the  same 
property  by  purchase  from  an- 
other, so  as  to  avail  himself  of  the 
statute  of  limitations ;  but  the 
abandonment  must  be  brought 
home  to  the  knowledge  of  his  land- 
lord. Hudson  V.  Wheeler,  84  Tex. 
856.  A  person  who  was  in  pos- 
session of  land  when  the  lease  was 
made  is  estopped  from  setting  irp 
that  the  lessor  holds  the  title 
merely  as  his  trustee.  Lucas  v. 
Brooks,  18  Wall  (U.  S.)  486.  For 
instances  where,  according  to  the 
rule  in  California,  a  tenant  may 
set  up  a  paramount  title  when  he 
was  m  possession  when  the  lease 
was  made,  see  Peratta'  v.  Gono- 
chio,  47  Cal.  259;  HoUoway  v. 
Galliae,  47  id.  474  ;  Franklm  v. 
Mereda,  85  Cal.  558 ;  Tewksbuiy  v. 
Magroff,  88  Cal.  287.  The  rule 
extends  only  to  the  lessor  and  his 
privies  in  blood  or  estate  ;  as 
against  a  stranger,  the  tenant  may 
set  up  a  title  in  hhnself  or  a  third 
person,  Cole  v.  Maxfield,  18  Minn. 
285.  A  person  in  possession  of 
premises  which  are  sold  or  set  off 
upon  an  execution  against  him, 
becomes  so  far  a  quasi  tenant  as 
to  be  precluded  from  disputing  the 
title  of  the  purchaser  upon  execu- 
tion while  he  is  in  possession^  but 
not  ff  he  18  not  in  possession. 
Wood  V.  Turner,  7  Humph.  (Tenn.) 
517.  A  person  who  enters  as  sub- 
tenant, although  he  subsequently 
acquires  a  perfect  title  to  the  lands, 
cannot  set  up  such  title  against  his 
lessor  without  first  surrendering 
possession  to  him.    He  must  give 


•fr 


t.<j 


494 


XjBlASJBiSa 


[§  232. 


or  by  a  mistake  in  the  execution  of  the  lease/  or  unless 


up  the  advantage  which  he  de- 
rived under  the  tenancv  by  being 
let  into  possession,  before  the  es- 
toppel is  removed.  Callendar  v. 
Sherman,  5  Ired.  ^N.  C.)  L.  711  ; 
Millhouse  v.  Patrick,  6  Rich.  (S. 
C.)  850;  Freeman  v.  Heath,  18 
Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  498.  The  rule  ap- 
plies where  a  party  takes  an  undi- 
vided half  of  premises  as  pur- 
chaser, and  the  other  half  aa  ten- 
ant. In  such  a  case  he  is  estopped 
from  denying  the  title  of  his  les- 
sor to  the  half  leased  to  him. 
Clark  V.  Crego,  47  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
599. 

» lively  V.  Ball,  2  Mon.  (Kv.)  68. 
In  the  case  of  Mavs  v.  Dwight,  re- 
centlv  decided  by  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Pennsylvania,  an  ou  well 
was,  leased  which  was  supposed  by 
botli  parties  to  be  upon  tne  land  of 
the  lessors,  but  turned  out  to  be  up- 
on that  of  another  person,  who 
claimed  rent.  In  an  action  in 
equity  by  the  lessors  to  compel  the 
the  lessee,  in  substance,  to  account 
for  the  rent,  the  court  sav :  *  *  Per- 
haps no  rule  of  law  is  better  set- 
tled than  that  a  tenant  in  posses- 
sion under  a  lease  shall  not  be  al- 
lowed to  dispute  the  title  of  his 
lessor.  Tet  this  rule  like  most 
others  has  its  exceptions.  When 
the  tenant  has  been  induced  to  a4> 
cept  the  lease  by  misrepresenta^ 
tion,  fravd  cr  trick  practiced  up^ 
on  him  by  the  lessor^  he  is  not  es» 
topped  from  setting  up  a  superior 
title  to  that  of  the  lessor.''^  Ham- 
ilton V.  Marsden,  6  Binn.  (Penn.) 
45 ;  Brown  v.  Dysenger,  1  Rawle 
OPenn.)  408 ;  Baskin  v.  Seechrist, 
6  Penn.  St.  154.  If  a  person  false- 
ly represents  himself  to  be  the 
owner  of  premises,  and  thus  in- 
duces a  person  to  take  a  lease 
from  him,  the  tenant  is  not  es- 
topped from  denying  suchper- 
son  8  title.  Glein  v.  tSse,  6  "Watts 
(Penn.)  44.  In  Jenckes  v.  Cook, 
9  R.  1.  630,  it  was  held  that  a 
person  whose  assent  to  a  lease  was 
procured  by  the  fraud  of  the  other, 
was  not  estopped  from  denying 
the  lessor's  title.  In  Gallagher  v. 
Bennett,  88  Tex.  291,  it  was  held 
that,  where  the  landlord  was 
guilty  of  fraud  in  the  execution  of 
me  lease,  and  is  unable  by  reason 
of   insolvency  to  indemnify   the 


tenant  for  rents  wrongfully  exact- 
ed, the  tenant  may  purchase  a  su- 
perior title,  if  he  does  so  in  good 
faith  and  from  a  well-grounded 
fear  of  eviction,  and  set  it  up  in  de- 
fense t  o  an  action  by  the  landlord  to 
recover  possession  of  the  premiaes. 
In  Alderson  v.  Miller,  15  Gratt. 
(Va.)  279,  the  defendant  was  in 
possession  of  the  lands  under 
a  claim  of  title,  but  the  defendant 
fraudulently .  led  him  to  believe 
that  the  title  was  in  him,  and  in- 
duced the  defendant  to  take  a 
lease  from  him.  The  court  held 
tliat  the  defendant  was  not  es- 
topped from  denying  the  plaindfTs 
title.  See  also  P^arce  v.  Nix,  84 
Ala.  188,  where  it  was  held  that  a 
person  who  had  attorned  to 
another  under  an  honest  belief 
that  he  had  a  bettei  title  than 
himself,  was  not  estopped,  upon 
discovery  of  the  mists^e,  mxn 
disputing  such  person's  title. 
Where  a  tenant  leases  his  claim  to 
dispute,  the  court  may  in  its  dis- 
cretion, order  the  tenant  to  prove 
the  fraud  or  mistake  before  he 
pass  evidence  of  his  title  before 
the  jur^,  or  it  may  allow  him  to 
show  title  first,  subject  to  the  ne- 
cessity of  making  that  evidence 
competent  by  the  removal  of  the 
estoppel  by  subsequent  proof  of 
the  fraud.  And  if  that  proof  is 
not  made,  the  jmr  will  be  in- 
structed to  disregard  the  tenant's 
title  previously  proved.  Alderson 
V.  Miller,  15  Gratt.  (Va.)  379.  If  it  is 
shown  that  the  tenant  was  induced 
to  attorn  to  the  plaintiff  as  land- 
lord, in  consequence  of  the  plaint- 
iff's fraud  or  misrepresentation,  he 
is  not  estopped.  Schnetz  v.  Ar- 
ratt,  82  Mo.  172 ;  Tison  v.  Yawn, 
15  Ga.  471.  Indeed  the  rule  ma^ 
be  said  to  be  that  the  tenant  is 
never  estopped  from  showing 
that  the  tenancy  was  induced  by 
fraud,  misrepresentation  or  mis- 
apprehension, Swift  V.  D^ji,  11 
Vt.  238 ;  Cramer  v.  Carlisle  Bank, 
2  Grant's  Cas.  (Penn.)  267 ;  Smitii 
V.  McCurdy,  3  Phila.  (Penn.)  488, 
or  otherwise  unfairly  obtained. 
Brown  v.  Dvserger,  ante:  Isaac 
V.  Clarke,  5  GiU.  (Md.)  1 ;  Miller  v. 
Bonsadon,  9  Ala.  817.  W,  lessee 
of  certain  premises  for  a  term  of  .' 
seventy-five  years,  mortgaged  the^' 


CHAP.  XXV.] 


Estopped. 


495 


the  lease  was  made  for  purposes  in  violation  of  law/  or 
of  improvements  upon  public  lands  specially  reserved 
from  siale  so  that  the  lessor's  possession  was  imlawful." 
The  fact  that  the  lease  is  void/  or  that  the  lessor  had  no 
title  whatever/  or  that  the  title  was  really  in  the  lessee, 
and  he  was  ignorant  of  the  fact  when  the  lease  was 
made,  will  not  change  the  rule.*  Nor  is  the  inile  changed, 
although  the  lease  was  made  to  defraud  the  landlord's 


lease  to  T,  and  joined  with  him  in 
an  indenture,  by  which,  after  recit- 
ing the  mortgage,  the  premifies 
were  demised  to  J  for  twenty-one 
years.  The  mortgage  was  as- 
signed to  S,  and  by  indenture,  to 
wnich  S  and  W  were  parties,  af- 
ter reciting  the  lease  .to  J  that 
lease  was  assigned  to  M.  This  as- 
signment contained  a  covenant  by 
M  with  W,  that  M  would  not  de- 
mise or  assign  the  premises  with- 
out the  license  and  consent  of  W, 
with  a  provision  for  re-entry  if  he 
did.  M  paid  rent  to  W,  and  after- 
ward assigned  the  premises  to  K, 
without  the  license  or  consent  of 
W.  In  an  action  of  ejectment  by 
S  and  W,  it  was  held,  1.  That  M 
was  not  estopped  from  showing 
that  W  was  not  legal  owner  of  the 
reversion,  but  mortgagor  only; 
and  that  W  having  a  mere  eqmt- 
able  interest,  could  not  recover.  2. 
That  S  could  not  recover,  because 
no  right  of  re-entry  was  reserved  to 
him.  Saunders  v.  Merryweather, 
8  H.  &  G.  902. 

1  In  Milton  v.  Hayden,  82  Ala. 
80,  the  landlord  usurped  the  right 
to  keep  a  public  f  erry^  in  violation 
of  law,  and  leased  it  to  the  defend- 
ant. The  court  held  that  he  could 
not,  under  these  circumstances, 
claim  from  the  lessee  the  allegiance 
due  from  a  tenant  to  his  landlord 
so  as  to  estop  him  from  disputing 
his  title.  See  also  Satterlee  v 
Matthewson,  18  S.  &R.  (Penn.)  138. 

«  Dupas  V.  Wassell,  1  DiU.  (U.  S. 
C.  C.)  213. 

•Byrne  v.  Buson,  1  Dougl. 
(Mich.)  179 ;  Heath  v.  Williams,  26 
Me.  209 ;  King  v.  Murray,  6  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  L,  62. 

^Bowdish  V.  Dubuque,  88  Iowa, 
841.  A  tenant  under  a  lease  from 
one  having  possession  and  control 
of  the  premises,  but  no  title  to 
them  (which  lease  contains  a  clause 


that,  in  case  lessors  should  cease 
to  control  or  own  the  property,  no 
rent  should  be  paid,  unless  their 
successors  should  in  writing  con- 
firm the  lease),  by  holding  under 
and  paying  rent  to  the  successive 
assignees  of  the  owner,  is  estopped 
from  denying  that  they  are  as- 
signees of  his  original  lessor,  and 
continues  bound  to  pay  rent  to 
them  in  that  character,  or  as  hav- 
ing, by  the  instruments  of  con- 
firmation, become  new  lessors. 
Whalin  v.  White,  25  N.  Y.  462; 
Flanders  v.  Train,  18  Wis.  596; 
Jackson  v.  Wheedon,  1  E.  D.  S. 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  141. 

« In  Baker  v.  Noll,  59  Mo.  265, 
the  tenant  took  a  lease  of  the 
plaintiff  who  held  the  lands  as 
trustee  of  the  tenant's  wife,  but  of 
which  fact  the  tenant  was  ignorant 
when  the  lease  was  made.  The 
court  held  that  he  was  estopped. 
In  Abbott  V.  Cromartie,  72  rt.  C. 
292,  the  tenant  was,  in  fact,  en- 
titled to  the  lands  as  a  homestead, 
but  he  was  ignorant  of  the  fact 
when  the  lease  was  made.  The 
court  held  that  he  was  estopped. 
But  contra^  see  Cain  v.  Gteinon,  86 
Ala.  168;  Shultz  v.  Elliott,  11 
Humph.  (Tenn.)  188.  A  woman 
mortgaged  a  parcel  of  land  to  a 
bank.  The  bank  foreclosed  the 
mortgage  and  the  husband  of 
the  woman  agreed  to  pay  rent  for 
the  same  to  the  bank  until  the 
bank  sold  the  land.  Subsequently 
the  bank  conveyed  the  land,  and 
the  grantee  brought  an  action, 
under  the  Pub.  Sts.  C.  175,  agunst 
the  husband  to  recover  possession. 
The  judge,  who  tried  the  case 
without  a  jury,  found  that  the  de- 
fendant was,  at  the  time  of  the 
deed  to  the  plaintiff,  the  tenant  of 
the  bank ;  and  ruled  that  it  was 
not  open  to  the  defendant  to  deny, 
in  this  action^  the  bank's  title  or 


496 


Leases. 


[§  232. 


creditors/  But,  in  order  to  subject  a  party  to  this  rule 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant  must  exist.  By  this 
it  is  not  meant  that  the  party  must  be  in  under  a  lease, 
or  that  he  must  pay  rent ;  but  if  he  is  in  possession  by 
the  permission  of  the  owner,  and  has  recognized  his  title 
in  any  way,  it  is  enough.'  A  tenant  in  law,  as  a  tenant 
by  dower,  elegit  or  curtesy,  is  estopped  wherever  the 
person  from  whom  their  title  is  derived  would  have  been ;  * 
and  the  rule  also  applies  to  a  person  who  goes  in  under 
an  agreement  for  a  lease,  or  under  a  contract  for  the 
purchase  of  the  premises,  or  under  any  arrangement 
which  operates  as  a  recognition  of  the  landlord's  title, 
and  as  holding  under,  or  in  subserviency  to  it.*    When 


possession  at  the  time  of  said  deed. 
It  was  held  that  the  finding  was 
warranted  by  the  evidence,  and 
that  the  ruling  was  correct.  Gran- 
ger y.  Parker,  1S7  Mass.  228. 

»  Steen  v.  Wadsworth,    17  Vt 
297. 

•  In  Downer  v.  Ford,  16  Cal.  845, 
the  defendant,  having  settled  on 
and  encloeed  a  vacant  lot,  told  the 
owner  that  he  would  give  it  up 
when  his  family  came,  and  after- 
wards he  wanted  to  fence  with 
boards,  and  it  was  agreed  that  he 
should  do  so,  and  that  the  owner 
should  pay  one-half  of  the  expense, 
and  at  ouier  times  he  recognized 
the  owner^s  title.  It  was  held  in 
ejectment  by  such  owner's  vendee, 
that  the  defendant  was  estopped 
from  disputing  the  title.  In  Ward 
V.  Mclntoeh,  12  Ohio  St.  281,  M. 
being  in  possession  of  land,  claim- 
ing title  thereto,  during  his  mar- 
riage with  S,  conveyed  the  same 
to  W  with  covenant  of  general 
warranty,  and  delivered  possession 
of  the  same  to  W,  which  W  re- 
tained, deriving  neither  title  nor 
possession  from  any  other  source. 
Upon  the  decease  of  M,  S  filed  her 
petition  against  W  to  obtain  dower 
in  said  premises.  It  was  held 
that  W,  under  such  circumstances, 
in  an  application  for  dower  by  the 
widow  of  M,  was  precluded  from 
showing  a  title  in  a  third  person 
with  wnich  he  did  not  connect 
himself,  or  from  claiming  an  ad- 
verse possession.  In  Flanders  v. 
Train,  13  Wis.  596,  F  by  agree- 
ment entered  lands  in  the  name  of 
W,  the  profits  of  the  transaction 


and  the  lands  to  be  divided  be- 
tween them  in  certain  agreed  pro- 
portions. F  afterwards  contracted 
with  the  defendant  for  the  cut- 
ting of  timber  on  the  land,  he  to 
receive  one-half  for  his  services. 
He  carried  away  all  the  timber 
cut.  In  a  suit  by  F  for  his  share 
of  the  timber,  it  was  held  that  a 
defence  of  his  want  of  title  in  the 
land  was  invalid,  and  that  he  was 
entitled  to  recover.  In  Wyoming, 
&c.t  Co.  V.  Price,  SI  Fsenn.  St.  I5o, 
a  coal  company,  occupying  lands 
adjoining  to  those  of  the  defend- 
ant, having  mined  over  their  land 
into  his  lands,  agreed  to  pay  him 
for  the  coal  mined  on  his  land,  as 
well  as  for  all  that  they  should 
mine  for  the  next  eight  months,  at 
a  certain  rate  per  ton.  It  was  held 
that  the  relation  of  landlord  and 
tenant  did  not  exist  between  them 
under  this  Agreement,  and  that 
they  were  not  estopped  from  de- 
nying his  title. 

*Love  V.  Dennis,  Harp.  (S.  C.) 
70  ;  Bufferlow  v.  Newsom,  1  Dev. 
(N.  C.)  L.  208 ;  Qorham  v.  Brenon, 
2  id.  174.  The  tenant  of  a  tenant 
by  dower  is  estopped  from  disput- 
ing the  title  of  the  intestate. 
Clarke  v.  aarke,  51  Ala.  498.  A 
tenant  in  possession  under  a  lessor 
whose  lands  are  sold  on  execution, 
may,  however,  set  up  the  title  of 
the  purchaser,  in  defence  to  an 
action  for  the  rent  accruing  after 
the  sale.  Lancashire  v.  Mmou,  75 
N  C  455 

*  Dubois  V.  Mitchell,  8  Dana  (Ky.) 
836;  Love  v.  Edmaston,  1  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  L.  152. 


CBAF.  XXV.] 


ESTOPPBL. 


497 


the  estate  which  the  landlord  held  vests  in  the  lessee, 
whether  by  purchase  from  the  lessor  or  by  purchase 
under  valid  legal  proceedings,  the  tenant  may  set  up  this 
title  in  defence  to  any  action  brought  against  him  by 
the  lessor,  either  to  recover  possession  of  the  premises, 
or  to  recover  after  accruing  rent,*  and  indeed  in  all  cases 
it  is  competent  for  the  tenant  to  show  that  the  land- 
lord's title  has  terminated,  as,  that  the  premises  have 
been  sold  under  foreclosure  proceedings,*  under  execu- 


>  Ryder  v.  Manzell,  66  Me.  197 ; 
Shields  t.  LosBear,  84  N.  J.  L.  496 ; 
8  Am.  Bep.  256. 

*  And  it  is  competent  for  him  to 
show  that  they  were  sold  upon  a 
mortgage  given  to  himself,  and 
that  he  became  the  purchaser  at 
such  sale,  or  that  the  condition 
upon  which  the  mortgage  to  him 
was  given,  is  broken.  Shields  v. 
Lozear,  ante,  and  in  those  States 
where  the  common  law  rule 
prevails,  and  a  mortgage  is  treated 
as  conveying  the  fee,  he  may  show 
that  the  landlord,  subsequently  to 
the  lease,  mortgaged  the  premises 
to  him  and  that  he  holds  as 
mortgagor,  or  that  the  landlord 
has  mortgaged  to  a  third  person  to 
whom  he  has  been  notified  to 
attorn,  Pope  v.  Biggs,  9  B.  &  C. 
245;  Watson  v.  Lane,  11  Exchq. 
769.  See  ante,  Chap.  Leases  bv 
Mortgagors ;  or  where  his  title  bus 
been  extinguished  m  any  manner 
subsequent  to  the  making  of  the 
lease.  Camp  V.  Camp,  5  Conn. 
291;  Jackson  v.  Rowland,  6  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  666 ;  Wheelock  v.  Wars- 
chaner,  21  id.  809;  Randolph  v. 
Carlton,  8  Ala.  606 ;  McLevitt  v. 
Sullivan,  8  Cal.  592;  Deuatch  v. 
Newsom,  8  Ohio,  57;  Walls  v. 
Mason,  5  Dl.  84;  Lawrence  v. 
Miller,  1  Sandf.  (N.  Y.)  516; 
Tilghman  v.  Little,  18  Bl.  289; 
Ryress  v.  Farwell,  9  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
615;  Kinney  v.  Doe,  8  Blackf. 
Qnd,)  850 ;  Hoag  v.  Hoag,  85  N. 
Y.  469;  Casev  v.  Gregory,  18  B 
Mon.  (Ky.)  846 ;  Gregory  v.  Crab, 
2  id.  284;  Homer  v.  Leeds,  25  N. 
J.  L.  106 ;  Hintz  v.  Thomas,  7  Md. 
846 ;  Giles  v.  Ebswortli,  10  id.  888 ; 
Howell  V.  Ashmore,  22  N.  J.  L. 
261  ;  Wolf  V.  Johnson,  80  Miss. 
518'  England  v.  Slade,  4  John. 
(N.  Y.)  682 ;  BusseU  v.  A  Hard,  18 


N.  H:  222;  Purtz  v.  Cuester,  41 
Mo.  447.  After  a  judgment  of 
eviction  against  the  tenant,  he  may, 
without  uie  landlord's  consent, 
attorn  to  the  successful  party,  al- 
though he  has  not  actually  been 
evicted,  Moffat  v.  Strong,  9  Bos. 
jN.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  57;  Lunsford  v. 
Turner,  5  J.  J.  Marsh.  (Ky.)  104 ; 
Foster  v.  Morris,  8  A.  K.  Mar. 
(Ky.)  609 ;  or  he  may  show  that 
the  premises  have  been  sold  under 
a  mortgage,  execution,  or  for 
taxes,  Shields  v.  Lozear,  84  N.  J. 
L.  496 ;  Doe  v.  Ashmore,  261 ;  and 
and  if  the  sale  is  subsequently  set 
aside,  he  may  dispute  the  title  of 
the  purchasers  and  attorn  to  his 
origmal  landlord.  Thus,  on  a 
decree  in  favor  of  H,  land  was  sold 
to  him;  he  conveyed,  and  the 
purchasers  entered  and  put  in  their 
tenant ;  on  appeal,  the  sale  was  set 
aside,  and  a  re-conveyance  by  a 
commissioner  was  ordered  and 
executed:  thereupon  the  tenant 
attorned,  and  afterwards  gave 
possession  to  the  original  owner, 
to  whom  the  re-conveyance  had 
been  so  made.  It  was  held,  on 
ejectment  by  the  purchasers,  that 
the  relation  of  tenancy  did  not 
estop  the  tenant  so  to  attorn ;  that 
therefore  after  his  attornment  the 
original  owner  was  in  possession 
by  nim,  under  the  new  title  by  the 
re-convevance,  so  that  he  was  not 
in  as  sub-tenant  of  the  plaintiffs, 
and  therefore  was  not  estopped  to 
deny  the  plaintiff's  title,  and  the 
plaintiffs  were  called  upon  to  show 
title  in  themselves.  Miller  v.  Wil- 
liams, 15  Gratt.  (Va.)  213.  This  is 
upon  the  principle  that  if  one  in 

goBsession,  imder  claim  of  title,  is, 
y  fraud  or  mistake,  induced  to 
believe  that  another  has  a  better 
title,  and  thereupon  to  take  a  lease 

82 


A 


498 


Leases. 


[§  232. 


tion,'  or  for  taxes/  or  indeed  that  the  title  of  the  landlord 
has,  from  any  cause,  expired.  *  So  a  tenant  is  not  estopped 
when  he  has  been  induced  to  take  a  lease  from  the  landlord 
by  his  fraud  or  misrepresentation/  or  under  a  misappre- 
hension or  mistake.*  Neither  is  he  estopped  from  setting 
up  a  paramount  title  in  another,  where  he  has  been 
evicted,  or  a  judgment  of  eviction  has  been  obtained 
against  him,*  nor  when  the  payment  of  rent  by  him  was 
merely  gratuitous."  The  estoppel  exists  only  during  his 
tenancy,  express  or  impUed.  After  that  is  ended,  whether 
by  surrender  or  otherwise,  he  may  set  up  title  in  himself, 
or  in  a  third  person,"  and,  as  a  tenant  for  years  holding 
over  after  his  term  expired  is  treated  as  holding  as  tenant 
upon  the  terms  of  the  former  lease,  he  remains  subject 
to  the  estoppel.  *  While  a  tenant  is  estopped  from  deny- 
ing the  title  of  his  landlord,  so  long  as  the  relation  exists 
and  is  recognized  between  them,  he  may  repudiate  the  re- 
lation, and  set  up  an  adverse  claim  and  possession  in  him- 


from  him,  the  tenant  will  not  be 
estopped.  Alderson  v.  Miller,  15 
Gratt.  (Va.)  279. 

^Doe  V.  Ashmore,  23  N.  J.  L. 
261.  And  he  may  set  up  the  title 
of  tibe  purchaser  under  execution 
against  the  landlord  in  any  action 
brought  b^  the  landlord,  for  mat- 
ters accruing  or  occurring  after 
such  ^e.  I^uicashire  v.  Mason, 
75  N.  C.  455. 

'«And,  if  the  lessee  buys  in  the 
whole  or  a  part  of  the  lessor's  title 
at  a  tax  or  execution  sale,  or  by 
private  purchase,  it  is  a  proportion- 
ate defence  to  a  suit  tor  rent  or 
ejectment.  Nellis  ▼.  Lathrop,  22 
Wend.  ^.  Y.)  121;  ElUott  v. 
Smith,  2dPenn.  St.  181 ;  George  v. 
Putney,  4  Gush.  rMass.)  858 ;  Betti- 
son  V.  Budd,  17  Ark.  546 ;  Camley 
T.  Stanfield,  10  Tex.  546.  But  if 
the  tenant  contracted  to  pay  the 
taxes  he  cannot  set  up  a  lax  title 
against  the  landlord.  Canthers  v. 
Weaver,  7  Kan.  110. 

>Doe  V.  Seaton,  2  Or.  M.  &  E. 
728 ;  see  ante,  n. 

*Glem  V.  Rise,  6  Watts  (Penn.) 
44;  Swift  V.  Deen,  11  Vt.  823; 
Baskin  v.  Seechrist,  6Penn.  St.  154. 

>  Schultz  V.  EUiott,  11  Humph| 
CTenn.)  188. 


•Moffat  V.  Strong,  9  Bos.  (N.  Y. 
Sup.  Ct.)  57 ;  Foster  v.  Morris,  8  A, 
K.  Mar.  (Kv.)  609 ;  Fletcher  v.  Mo- 
Farlane,  12  Mass.  48;  Allen  v. 
Thayer,  17  id.  299. 

^  Shelton  v.  Carnal,  16  Ala.  148. 

^Page  V.  Kinsman,  48  N.  H. 
828 ;  Carpenter  v.  Thompson,  8  id. 
204.  If  there  is  no  tenancy  there 
is  no  estoppel.  Hughes  v.  Clarks- 
ville,  6  Pet.  (U,  8.)  869;  Foust  v. 
Trice,  8  Jones  (N.  C.)  L.  290 ;  Head 
7,  id.  620.  As  the  estoppel  began 
by  the  making  of  the  lease,  so  by 
the  determination  thereof  it  enda. 
Cuthbertson  v.  Irving,  ante;  4 
Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (O.)  191. 

•Stoops.  V.  Delain,  16  Mo.  162; 
LongfeQow  v.  LongfeUow,  54  Me. 
240.  See  cicmiTa,  Carpenter  v. 
Thompson,  ante,  where  it  is  held 
that  the  estop^  applies  only  while 
the  term  continues.  In  Wilson  v. 
James,  79  N.  C.  849,  it  was  held 
that  even  where  one  who  at  the 
time  of  entry  was  disabled  from  en- 
tering into  a  contract,  entered  up- 
on land  by  permission  of  one  who 
claimed,  and  was  acknowledged  to 
be  the  owner,  he  must  return  the 
possession  to  him,  as  a  conditioii 
precedent  to  denymg  his  titl0» 


CHAP.   XXV.] 


Estoppel. 


499 


self,  which  may  ripen  into  a  title  under  the  statute  of 
limitations ;  but  such  hostile  claim,  his  part  operates  a 
forfeiture  of  the  lease,  at  the  election  of  the  landlord, 
who  may  at  once  eject  him  as  a  trespasser.  But  when 
the  tenant  sets  up  adverse  possession  in  himself,  in  defense 
of  an  action  by  the  landlord  under  whom  he  entered, 
knowledge  of  such  adverse  holding  must  be  brought 
home  to  the  landlord  or  notice  of  collateral  facts  from 
which  such  knowledge  will  be  inferred.* 


>  Wells  V.  Sheerer,  78  Ala.  142 ; 
in  Houston  v.  Ferris,  71  Ala.  570, 
it  is  a  well  settled  rule  that  a  ten- 
ant is  estopped  from  disputing  his 
landlord's  ntle  so  long  as  he  con- 
tinues in  possession  of  the  demised 
premises;  and  hence  ordinarily,  he 
must  surrender  the  possession  of 
the  premises,  before  he  can  be 
heard  to  set  up  or  assert  an  out- 
standing title,  adverse  to  that  of 
his  landlord.  The  plaintiff  in  an 
action  of  unlawful  detainer  having 
derived  title  by  purchase^rom  a  tes- 
tator^s  sole  devisee,  the  defendant 
having  entered  under  a  lease  from 
the  plaintiff  cannot  imder  the 
principles  above  stated  defeat  a 
recovery  hj  showing  that  he  had 
been  appomted  administrator  of 
the  estate  of  the  testator  under 
whom  the  plaintiff  derived  title 
and  that  the  latter  owed  debts  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  some  of 
which  were  still  outstanding  and 
unpaid.  These  facts  do  not  show 
that  the  landlord's  title  had  expired 
or  that  it  had  been  extinguished, 
and  hence  the  case  does  not  come 
within  the  established  exception  to 
the  general  principle  f  orbiading  a 
tenant  from  disputing  his  land- 
lord's title,  that  the  tenant  may 
always  show  that  his  landlord^i 
title  has  expired  or  been  extin- 
guished since  the  creation  of  the 
tenancy.  In  Elliott  v.  Dycke,  18 
Ala.  150,  it  was  held  that  the 
law  holds  a  tenant  to  verv 
strict  allegiance  to  his  land- 
lord, and  does  not  allow  him,  hav- 
ing entered  under  his  landlord, 
though  only  paying  the  taxes  on 
the  land  as  rent,  to  throw  off  his 
allegiance,  and  become  the  tenant 
of  another,  unless  he  shows  that 
other  has  acquired  the  title  of  his 
former  landlord  pending  his  occu- 


pancy. In  Crim  v.  Nelues,  78  Ala. 
d04,  the  rule  which  holds  a  tenant 
estopped  from  disputing  the  title 
of  his  landlord,  without  first  sur- 
rendering the  possession  which  he 
has  received,  is  founded  on  con- 
siderations of  pubhc  policy,  and 
is  co-extensive  with  its  require- 
ments and  purposes;  and  it  de- 
pends on  the  existence  of  the'legal 
relation,  which  can  only  be  created 
by  a  valid  contract.  A  conveyance 
of  the  homestead  by  husband  and 
wife,  the  voluntary  signature  and 
assent  of  the  wife  not  being  shown 
and  certified  as  required  by  law,  is 
a  nullity  and  has  no  operation 
against  the  husband,  by  estoppel 
or  otherwise ;  *  and  a  subsequent 
verbal  promise  by  him  to  pay  rent 
to  the  grantee,  no  surrender  or 
change  of  possession  being  shown , 
is  without  consideration,  and  does 
not  create  the  relation  of  landlord 
and  tenant  between  them.  If  a 
tenant  enters  into  possession  under 
the  lease  and  afterwards  acquires 
an  outstanding  title  adverse  to  his 
landlord  he  cannot  assert  it  against 
his  landlord,  without  first  surren- 
dering the  possession  ;  andfostiori 
where  the  tenant  enters  under  a 
lease  from  an  administrator  in  his 
official  capacity  he  is  estopped 
from  setting  up  as  against  the  ad- 
ministrator de  bonis  non  a  subse- 
quent lease  from  the  administra- 
tor personally  under  claim  of  per- 
sonal title  or  title  in  opposition  to 
the  estate,  Norwood  v.  Kirby,  70 
Ala.  897.  When  the  tenant  enters 
into  possession  on  the  faith  of  his 
lease,  or  being  in  possession  is  per- 
mitted to  remain  on  recognition  of 
the  landlord's  title,  he  is  estopped 
from  setting  up  an  outstandmg 
title  in  defense  of  an  action  by  his 
landlord  during  the  continuance  of 


600 


JjHASES. 


[§  233 


Sec.  233.  Construotion.— Leases  by  deed.— Deeds — in- 
cluding leases  by  deed — being  the  highest  description  of 
private  written  instruments,  are  themselves  the  best  evi- 
dence of  the  facts  which  they  contain,  the  circumstances 
which  they  relate,  and  the  makers'  intentions.  In  their 
construction,  regard  must  be  had  to  all  their  parts ;  and 
general  words  may  be  restrained  by  particular  recitals.' 
Where  the  recitals  in  a  lease  stated  that  A  sum  of 
money  which  was  in  part  to  be  given  for  fixtures  was 
part  of  the  consideration  for  the  lease,  it  was  held,  that, 
whether  the  lessee  would  or  would  not  be  estopped  by  it, 
he  was  not  bound  to  execute  such  a  lease.*  K  a  deed 
may  operate  in  two  ways,  the  one  consistent  with  the  in- 
tent of  the  parties,  and  the  other  repugnant  to  it,  the 
courts  will  put  such  a  construction  on  it  as  to  give  effect 
to  the  intent ; "  for  deeds  must  be  construed  so  as  to 


his  estate,  Caldwell  v.  Smith,  77 
Ala.  157.  A  tenant  cannot  extin- 
guish his  landlord's  title  to  the  de- 
mised premises  by  purchasing  a 
title  adverse  to  his  landlord,  but  he 
may  do  so  and  terminate  the  lease 
by  purchasing  his  landlord's  title 
at  a  voluntary  or  forced  sale.  A 
tenant  cannot  withhold  overdue 
rents  or  other  moneys  due  the 
landlord  to  cover  damages  from 
an  apprehended  eviction  oy  a  su- 
perior title.  The  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  is  implied  in  every  mu- 
tual contract  for  leasing  land, 
Pickett  V.  Ferguson,  45  Ark.  177. 
A  tenant  can  not  dispute  the  title 
of  the  landlord  under  whom  he 
entered,  while  still  holding  under 
him,  but  must  first  surrender  th(  < 
Ix)88e88ion  in  good  faith  ;  it  is  nol 
enough  that  he  left  the  possession 
for  a  few  days  without  notice  to 
his  landlord,  and  again  resumed  it 
by  collusion  with  another  person, 
Littleton  v.  Clayton,  77  AJa.  571. 
He  cannot  collude  with  and  attorn 
to  another  to  the  prejudice  of  his 
landlord,  Bryan  v.  Winburn,  43 
Ark.  28.  Nor  can  he  be  relieved 
from  the  payment  of  rent  and 
restoration  of  the  premises  to  his 
landlord,  by  buying  up  the  out- 
standing title  from  another  during 
his  tenancy.  Brown  v.  Keeler,  43 
Ark.  289.     The  title  or  possession 


of  real  estate  is  not  put  in  issue, 
in  an  action  to  recover  rent  alleged 
to  be  due  on  a  written  lease,  by  an 
answer  denying  the  plaintiff's  title 
and  right  of  possession,  and  alleg- 
ing the  title  and  right  of  posses- 
sion to  be  in  some  one  else,  under 
whom  defendant  entered  and  held 
possession,  Ohiradelli  v.  Greene, 
56  Cal.  629.  In  an  action  of  un- 
lawful detainer,  it  is  error  to  per- 
mit the  defendant  to  prove  that 
his  signature  to  the  lease  was  ob- 
tained by  fraud  or  mistake,  neither 
of  which  was  set  up  in  the  answer. 
And  a  party  who  accepts  a  lease 
cannot  lawfully  refusQ  to  sur- 
render possession  of  the  demised 
premises  at  the  expiration  of  the 
term,  on  the  ground  that  there 
was  a  prior  agreement  under  which 
the  lessee  might  have  held  if  he 
had  not  taken  a  lease,  McCreary 
V.  Marston,  66  Cal.  408. 

}  Paler  v.  Hemersham,  4  M.  &  S. 
423 ;  Simons  v.  Johnson,  3  B.  & 
Ad.  175  ;  Bain  v.  Cooper,  9  M.  & 
W.  701 ;  Major  v.  Selisburv.  2  D. 
&  L.  763.  768  ;  White  v.  Osborne, 
4  Jur.  O.  S.  941\ 

*  Vonhollen  v.  Knowles,  12  M. 
&.  W.  602. 

« Solly  V.  Forbes,  4  Moo.  448 ; 
Hotham  v.  East  India  Co.,  1  T.  R. 
639. 


CHAP.  XXV. J  Construction.  501 

« 

operate  according  to  the  intention  of  the  parties,  if  by 
law  they  may ;  and  if  they  cannot  operate  in  one  form, 
they  shall  in  another.'  The  language  of  a  lease  will  be 
construed  with  reference  to  the  subject  matter  to  which 
it  applies,  and  in  reference  to  a  general  or  local  custom  if 
there  is  any  controlling  the  matter ;  and  if  the  words 
used  have  acquired  a  peculiar  meaning  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  leased  premises^  such  meaning  may  be  shown.  Thus, 
a  tenant  under  a  lease  bound  himself  to  ^^  cultivate  and 
farm  said  land  in  a  workmanlike  manner ;  to  put  out  all 
the  crops  in  good  season  and  in  proper  order,  of  such 
kind  of  grain  and  in  such  field  as  the  landlord  should 
designate ;  also  to  take  off  all  the  crops  in  proper  season 
and  house  the  same  in  proper  order."  It  was  held  that 
**  workmanlike  mamier"  meant  in  a  **  farmer  like 
manner, "  or  as  good  farmers  usually  do.  The  duty  of 
the  tenant  was  not  confined  to  performing  the  things 
expressly  required  by  the  lease.  And  in  an  action  by  the 
tenant  for  work  and  labor  in  spreading  Ume  in  the  faU 
before  he  was  to  take  possession  under  his  lease,  it  was 
held  competent  for  defendant  to  show  as  evidence  of  what 
was  meant  by  '^workmanlike  manner"  of  cultiva- 
tion, that  good  husbandry,  and  the  usual  course  of  manag- 
ing such  faiTOs  in  that  vicinity,  required  that  a  tenant 
about  to  take  possession  in  the  spring,  or  hold  over  another 
year,  should  prepare  the  ground  in  the  preceding  fall  or 
winter ;  and  should  spread  on  com  ground  such  lime  or 
other  fertilizers  as  the  landlord  furnished,  without  stipu- 
lation to  that  effect  in  the  lease,  and  without  charging  the 
the  landlord  therefor.*  Where  a  material  word  appears 
to  have  been  omitted  in  a  lease  by  mistake,  and  other  words 
cannot  have  their  proper  effect  unless  it  is  introduced,  the 
lease  must  be  construed  as  if  that  word  was  inserted, 
although  the  particular  passage  where  it  ought  to  stand 
conveys  a  suflBciently  distinct  meaning  without  it."  An 
instrument  of  demise  was  produced  in  evidence,  by  which 

*  Edwards  v.  Bailey,  Cowp.  600  ;         '  Aughinbaugh  v.  Coppenhaffer, 
Shep.  Touch.  81  (sec.  18) ;  2  Smith      55  Penn.  St.  347. 
L.  C.  412,  notes,  4th  ed.  'Wright  v.  Dickson,  1  Dow.  141, 

147. 


■» 


502 


J^jiEIASBS* 


[§  233 


the  plaintiff  agreed  to  let  for  the  term  of  one  year  fully 
to  be  complete  and  ended  ;  most  of  the  subsequent  stipu- 
lations in  the  lease  were  wholly  inapplicable  to  a  tenancy 
determinable  by  a  notice  to  quit ;  the  document  appeared 
on  the  face  of  it  to  have  originally  contained  words  cre- 
ating a  tenancy  from  year  to  year,  which  were  struck  out, 
and  the  above  words  as  to  the  term  only  remained ;  it  was 
held,  that  the  words  struck  out  might  be  looked  at  to  show 
what  the  intention  of  the  parties  was ;  that  the  tenancy 
was  for  a  single  year  only ;  and  that  the  terms  inap- 
plicable to  such  a  tenancy  must  be  considered  as  expunged 
or  as  only  applicable  in  case  the  tenancy  should  continue/ 
Gteneral  words  at  the  end  of  a  particular  specification  will 
not  pass  any  property  of  a  different  nature  from  that 
particularly  mentioned." 

In  construing  a  deed  conveying  either  a  fee  or  a  term, 
the  court  will  not  lay  too  much  stress  upon  the  strict  and 
precise  meaning  of  words  where  the  intention  is  manifest, 
but  will  marshal  the  words,  if  necessary,  so  as  to  give 
effect  to  the  intention  of  the  parties ; "  and  it  sometimes 
happens,*  that  a  different  meaning  will  be  given  to  the  same 
words,  when  they  refer  to  different  subject  matters,  and  it 
is  clear  that  they  were  used  to  convey  a  different  sense  in 
reference  to  on©  matter,  from  what  they  were  intended  to 
have  in  another,  *  The  end  contemplated  by  the  parties  wiU 
be  regarded,  rather  than  the  mode  taken  to  obtain  it,  and 
the  failure  of  the  latter  will  not  be  permitted  to  involve 
the  failure  of  the  former;*  and  if  there  is  an  evident 
intention  to  pass  the  land  in  one  way  or  another,  the  con- 
veyance may  be  good  either  way ;  *  and  if  the  intention 


>  Strickland  y.  Maxwell,  2  C.  & 
3L5d9. 

'Anon.  Lofft.  898;  Sandiman 
V.  Breach,  7  B.  &  C.  96 ;  Hare  v. 
Horton,  6  B.  &  Ad.  71,  5 ;  Reg  v. 
Kevill,  8  Q.  B. ;  East  London  Water 
Works  Co.  V.  Trustees  of  Mile  End 
Old  Town,  17  Q.  B.  512 ;  Lyndon  t. 
Stanbridge.  2  H.  &  N.  51 ;  Hunt- 
ington V.  Havens,  5  John.  Ch.  (N. 
Y.)23. 

•  Cook  V.  Gerrard,  1.  Wm.  Saund. 
170;  Atto  V.  HemmingB,  Bulst. 
282. 


*  Footh  V.  Chapman,  1  P.  Wms. 
667. 

^Bell  T.  Scanunan,  15  N.  H. 
881 ;  Bryan  y.  Bradley,  16  Conn. 
474. 

<  Bryan  v.  Bradley,  ante ;  Shep. 
Touch.  88;  Willbb,  C.  J.,  in  Mu- 
boume  v.  Simpson,  2  Wils.  22; 
Wilkinson  v.  Trammer,  2  id.  75 ; 
Barrett  v.  French,  1  Conn.  854 ;  3 
Inst.  271 ;  Gale  v.  Cobiim,  18  Pick. 
(Mass.)  897;  Crossing  y.  8end»- 
more,  1  Mod,  175. 


^ ' 


CHAP.  XXVO 


CONSTBUOnON. 


fi03 


to  convey  is  clear  the  misuse  or  misapplication  of  technical 
words  or  terms  will  not  defeat  such  intention/  If  an 
instrument  contains  two  distinct  instruments,  as  a  lease 
and  a  release,  the  court  will  regard  that  as  first  which 
is  first  in  point  of  time,  in  order  to  cany  out  and  give 
effect  to  the  intention  of  the  parties.*  A  grammatical 
error  will  not  be  permitted  to  defeat  a  deed,  the  rule 
being  according  to  the  masim  ^^maia  grammatica  non 
vittat  chartum,^^  and  if  necessary  to  effectuate  the  clear 
intention  of  the  parties,  the  proper  word  will  be  supplied 
or  a  word  will  be  construed,  as  though  the  proper  word 
was  used,  and  under  this  rule  the  word  ^^and"  has 
been  made  as  "or."'  In  construing  a  deed,  the  court 
will  look  at  the  entire  instrument,  and  general  words 
will  be  restrained  by  particular  recitals,*  and  an  erroneous 
or  false  description  will  not  destroy  or  qualify  a.  former 
description.  Thus,  if  a  lease  is  made  of  "all  my  lands" 
in  a  certain  town,  "  containing  ten  acres,"  all  my  lands 
in  the  town  named  will  pass,  whether  it  embraces  more 
or  less  than  ten  acres ;  agreeably  to  the  maxim  ^  ^fcUsa 
demonstration  non  noceV^^  If  there  are  particulars 
enough  to  indicate  what  land  is  intended  to  be  conveyed, 
addition  of  other  inconsistent  particulars  will  be  rejected. 
The  rule  may  be  said  to  be  that,  where  two  clauses  of  a 
deed  are  so  inconsistent  or  repugnant  with  each  other 
that  both  cannot  stand,  the  first  will  be  enforced  and  the 
last  rejected,"  as,  if  anything  in  the  habendum  is  irrecon- 
cilable with  the  premises,  that  portion  of  the  habendum 
will  be  treated  as  void/  and  the  granting  clause,  in  case 


'  Ljnch  V.  liyingston,  8  Barb. 
2^  Y.)  463 ;  Krider  v.  Lofferty,  1 
Whart.  (Penn.)  803;  Brown  v. 
Manter,  21  N.  H.  528. 

'Bredan's  Case,  1  Coke,  76; 
Barker  v.  Keat,  2  Mod.  252. 

*  1  Inst.  225  a ;  Chapman  v.  Dal- 
ton,  Plowd.  289 ;  Hancock  v.  Wat- 
son, 18  Cal.  137 ;  Jackson  v.  Top- 
ping, 1  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  888. 

*  Mosely  V.  Motteux,  10  M.  &  W. 
585;  Simons  v.  Johnson,  8  B.  & 
Ad.  175 ;  Pritchard  v.  Dodd,  5  id. 
689 ;  Payler  v.  Homersham,  4  M. 
&  S.  682 ;  Swindells  v.  Beswick,  8 
Ad.  &    £L   878;   Huntington   v. 


Havens,  5  John.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  28; 
Moore  v.  Griffin,  22  Me.  850. 

» Shep.  Touch.  248 ;  Uewyllwyn, 
11  M.  &  W.  188 ;  Herrick  v.  Hip. 
kins,  28  Me.  217. 

*  Seamen  v.  Hogeboom,  21  Barh. 

r.  Y.)  898 ;  Prescott  v.  Hayes,  4B 

.  H.  598 ;  Anderson  v.  Baugh- 
man,  7  Mich.  6fit 

■J  Havens  v.  Dale,  18  Cal.  859; 
Daniel  v.  Veal,  82  Ga.  589 ;  Gould 
V.  Womack,  2  Ala.  83 ;  Webb  v. 
Webb,  29  id.  588 ;  Doe  v.  Porter,  8 
Ark.  18. 

8  Eldredge  v.  See.  Yap.  Co.,  17 
Cal.  44. 


S! 


504 


Leases. 


[§  235. 


there  is  repugnancy,  prevaQs  over  the  introductory  state- 
ment/ and  generally,  subsequent  words  of  doubtful 
import  will  never  be  construed  so  as  to  contradict  pre- 
ceding words  that  are  certain ; '  and  in  applying  these 
rules,  the  court  will  regard  that  part  of  a  deed  which 
ought  to  toke  precedence  Q&  being  precedent,  although  such 
is  not  its  order  in  the  deed."  But  every  part  of  a  deed 
will  be  give  effect  to,  if  it  can  be  done,  and  there  must 
be  a  positive  repugnancy  to  warrant  the  rejection  of  any 
part  of  it.*  The  language  of  a  deed  will  be  construed 
most  strongly  against  the  party  using  it,  as  it  is  presumed 
that  a  person  will  not  use  language  to  his  own  dis- 
advantage ;  *  and  if  it  is  susceptible  of  either  of  two  con- 
structions, the  grantee  or  lessee  may  elect  which  way  to 
take  it,"  but  the  party  must  make  his  election,  and  not 
leave  the  court  to  make  it  for  him .' 

Sec.  234.  Parol  evidence  inadmissible^to  vary  deeds.—- The 
general  rule  with  regard  to  the  admission  of  parol 
evidence  to  explain  the  meaning,  or  to  add  to,  vary  or 
alter,  the  express  terms  of  a  deed,  is,  that  it  shall  not  be 
admitted.'  Thus,  where  property  has  been  conveyed  by 
deed,  parol  evidence  of  an  agreement  to  apportion  the 
rent  of  the  current  quarter,  contrary  to  the  terms  of  the 
deed,  is  inadmissible.'  So  parol  evidence  is  inadmissible 
to  show  that  a  particular  piece  of  land  was  intended  to 
be  included  in  or  to  be  excluded  from  the  deed." 


Sec.  235.  ExceptionB.— The  exceptions  to  this  rule  are 
— 1st,    where,    although   the    de^   is   clearly   enough 


^  Webb  V.  Webb,  ante. 

«Pitty  V.  Booth,  19  Ala.  638; 
but  this  is  not  the  rule  in  the  con- 
struction of  wills.  Sherritt  v. 
Buckley,  2  Mv.  &  K.  149 ;  Doe  v. 
Biggs,  2  Taunt.  109. 

*Doe  V.  Porter,  ante. 

<Corbin  v.  Healey,  20  Pick. 
(Mass.)  514;  Pike  v.  Monroe,  86 
Me.  309 ;  Gibson  v.  Bogg,  28  Mo. 
478. 

^  Judson  V.  McMullen,  1  Strobh. 
(S.  C);  Marshall  v.  Mills,  8  Conn. 
869 ;  Carroll  v.  Norwood,  5  H.  & 
J.  (Md.)  163 ;  Adams  v.  Frothing- 


ham,  8  Mass.  352 ;  Bushnell  v.  Pro- 
prietors, &c.,  81  Conn.  150 ;  Alton 
V.  Illinois  Trans.  Co.,  12  m.  28 
Cocheco  V.  Whittier,  10  N.  H.  805 
Dunn  V.  English,  28  N.  J.  L.  126 
Mills  V.  Catfin,  22  Vt.  98 ;  Hogg's 
Appeal,  22  Penn.  St.  479. 

^Jackson  v.  Hudson,  8  John.  (If. 
Y.)  875 ;  Shep.  Touch.  83. 

'  Miller  v.  Green,  8  Bing.  92. 

«Ro8.  Ev.  14  (11th  ed.). 

•  Flinn  v.  Calow,  1  M.  &  G.  589. 

^^  Meres  v.  Ansell,  3  Wils,  275  ; 
Hope  V.  Atkins,  1  Price,  148 ;  Doe 
d.   X^orton  v,  Webster,  12  Ad.  & 


CHAP.  XXV.]  Exceptions.  606 

expressed,  some  ambiguity  arises  from  extrinsic  circum- 
stances ;  2,  where  the  language  of  a  charter  or  deed  has 
become  obscure,  and  the  construction  doubtful  from 
antiquity ;  3,  where  the  grant  appears  uncertain,  owing 
to  a  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  grantor's,  estate  ;  4, 
where  it  is  important  to  show  a  different  consideration 
consistent  with  but  not  repugnant  to  that  stated  in  the 
deed,  itself ;  5,  where  it  becomes  necessary  to  show  a 
different  time  of  delivery  from  that  at  which  the  deed 
purports  to  have  been  made ;  6,  where  it  is  sought  to 
prove  a  customary  right  not  expressed  in  the  deed,  but 
which  is  not  inconsistent  with  any  of  its  stipulations ;  7, 
where  fraud  or  illegality  in  the  formation  of  the  deed  is 
relied  on  to  avoid  it.  If  a  clause  in  a  deed  is  so  ambigu- 
ously or  defectively  expressed,  that  a  court  of  justice 
cannot,  even  by  reference  to  the  context,  collect  the 
meaning  of  the  parties,  it  will  be  void.* 

Where  a  written  lease  is  silent  as  to  fixtures,  but  pro- 
vides that  the  lessee  shall  make  all  improvements  and 
repairs ;  it  may  be  shown  that  the  lessor,  for  an  indepen- 
dent consideration,  agreed  that  certain  fixtures  then  in 
the  building  should  remain  for  the  lessee's  use.  Thus, 
in  a  New  York  case,'  it  appeared  that  on  the  31st  of 

El.  442 ;  Barton  v.  Dawes,  10  C.  B.  v.  Lacey,  17  C.  B.  (N.  S.)  578,  and 

261.  a  written  agreement  conditioned 

>  Woodf all's  L.  So  T.  90.  on   an   unperformed  oral   agree- 

'Lewis  V.  Seabnry,  74    N.    T.  ment,  Pym  v.  Campbell,  6  E.  &  B. 

400 ;  80  Am.  R^.  811.    In  Naum-  870 ;  Wallis  v.  litt^,  11  C.  B.  (N. 

berg  V.  Young,*  44  N.  J.  L.  881,  it  S.)  889  ;  Dupub,  J.,  said  :    "  Three 

was  held  that  upon  a  written  lease  recent  English  cases  have  carried 

9f  a  factory  with  its  fixtures  and  the  doctrine  of  the  admissibility  of 

machinery,    there   is   no   imi)lied  parol  evidence  where  there  is  a 

warranty  tibat  the  machinery  is  in  written   agreement    between   the 

eood  repair  or  of  sufficient  capac-  parties,  to    an    extreme    length. 

^  for  the  work  for  which  the  Morgan  v.  Griffith,  L.  R.,6Eixchq. 

premises  are  designed;  and  that  70;  Erskine  v.  Adeane,  L.  R,  8 

oral  testimony    was   inadmissible  Ch.  App.  756 ;  Mann  v.  Nunn,  48 

to  prove  that  the  landlord,  during  L.  J.,  tf.  P.  (N.  S.^  241.    Morgan  v. 

the  negotiations,  guaranteed  that  Griffith  and  Erskine  v.  Adeane  are 

the   engine    and    boiler   were   in  almost  identical  in  their  facts.    A 

thorou^  repair  and   would  fur-  farmer  in  treaty  for  grass  lands 

nisn  sufficient  power  for  the  busi-  declined   to   take   them,    on   the 

ness.    After  laying  down  the  gen*  ground    that    the   property   was 

end  rule  of  the  inadmissibility  of  overrun  with  rabbits.    The  lease, 

parol  evidence  to  add  to  or  alter  as  prepared  in  writing,  reserved  to 

the  terms  of  a  written  contract,  the  lessor  the  right  to  kill  game, 

and   specifying  the  chief  excep-  The  lessee  refused  to  execute  it  un- 

tions,  namely,  a  distinct  and  col-  til  the  lessor  promised  to  kill  down 

lateral  parol  agreement,  lindley  the  game.    The  rabbits  not  having 


606 


Leases. 


[§  235. 


March,  1876,  the  defendant  leased  to  the  plaintiff  certain 


been  destroyed,    the  tenant  sued 
the  landlord  for  the  dama^  done 
by  them  to  the  grass  and  crops ; 
and  evidence  by  parol  of  the  land- 
lord's undertaking  to  keep  down 
the  game  was  admitted.    Morgan 
V.  Griffith  was  decided  upon  little 
consideration.    The  ground  of  de- 
cision was  that  the  verbal  agree- 
ment was  collateral  to  the  lease, 
and  did  not  affect  the  mode  of  en- 
joyment   of   the   land    demised. 
Erskine  v.  Adeane  was  decided  by 
two  equity  judges  on  the  authority 
of  Morgan  v.  Griffith,  reversing 
the  decision  of  Lord  Romillt,  M. 
E.,   who   had   excluded  the  evi- 
dence, for  the  reason  that  the  al- 
leged agreement  was  not  a  dis- 
tinct agreement,  but  an  alteration 
of  the  original  terms   of   agree- 
ment, and  to  be  binding,  should 
have  been  inserted  in  the  lease. 
Morgan  v.  Griffith  was  approved 
in  Angell  v.  Duke,  L.  R.,  10  Q.  B. 
174 ;   but  it  is  apparent  from  the 
report  of  the  laUer  case  that  the 
approbation  expressed  had  refer- 
ence only  to  the  fact  that  such  an 
agreement   was   not    within   the 
Statute  of  Frauds;  for  Angell  v. 
Duke,  on  that  occasion,  was  argued 
on  demurrer,  and  the  only  point  of 
demurrer  was  that  the  agreement 
in  question  was  for  an  interest  in 
lands  within  the  Statute  of  Frauds, 
and  it  appearing  on  the  face  of  the 
pleading  that  the  landlord's  agree- 
ment sued  on—- to  put  the  house  in 
repair  and  send  more  furniture  into 
it---was  antecedent  to  and  collat- 
eral to  the  contract  of  letting,  the 
declaration  was  sustained.    Sut  at 
the  trial  oral  testimony  w^as  ten- 
dered of  the  alleged  promise  in  the 
course  of  a  treaty  for  the  lease, 
and  the  lease  containing  a  demise 
of  the  house  and  the  furniture  in 
it,    commised  in  a  schedule   an- 
nexed,  Blackburn,   J.,  rejected 
the  testimony,  and  held  that  the 
lease  was  conclusive  as  to  all  that 
referred  to  the  taking  of  the  house 
and  furniture,  and  his  ruling  was 
sustained  by  the  court  in  oane, 
Angell  V.  Duke,  82  L.  T.  (N.  S.) 
820 ;  28  W.  Rep.  548.    In  Mann  v. 
Nunn  the  defendant  let  a  messuage 
in  an  unfinished  state,  by  a  written 
agreement.      Before   and   at   the 
time  of  signing  the  agreement,  he 


verbally  promised  to  put  the  prem- 
ises in  a  condition  nt  for  babita^ 
tion — ^mentioning,  among  other 
things,  a  new  water-closet.  He 
failed  to  put  in  the  closet,  and  oml 
testimony  of  his  promise  was  held 
to  be  competent  in  an  action  hj 
the  tenant  for  damages.  The  land- 
lord's promise  possibly  may  be  con- 
sidered to  relate  to  whi^  Chief 
Justice  Erle,  in  Lindley  v.  Lacej, 
calls  a  preliminary  matter  to  be 
done  at  once,  before  the  lea^e 
should  take  effect.  Mann  v.  Nunn 
was  doubted  by  Blackburn,  J.,  in 
Angell  V.  Duke,  82  L.  T.  820,  and 
if  the  landlord's  promise  be  re- 
garded as  in  the  nature  of  a  cove- 
nant to  repair,  is  contrary  to  that 
line  of  cases  which  hold  that  such 
an  undertaking  cannot  be  eetab- 
lii^ed  by  parol  if  the  premises  are 
let  by  a  lease  in  writmg."  After 
reviewing  the  application  of  the 

general  rule  to  a  number  of  re- 
ted  cases,  the  court  continued  : 
'*In  the  present  case  the  lease  is 
perfect  and  complete  in  all  its 
parts.  On  its  face  it  purports  to 
express  the  terms  of  the  letting  as 
finally  agreed  upon.  The  effort  is 
to  engrait,  by  parol  evidence,  a 
contract  of  warranty  upon  a  con- 
tract in  writing,  whiich  appears  to 
be  complete  and  perfect,  and  is 
silent  on  that  subject.  Oral  testi- 
mony cannot  be  admitted  for  this 
purpose  without  breaking  down 
the  rule  which  permits  parties  to 
make  their  written  contracts  the 
only  evidence  of  their  undertak- 
ings, and  enables  them  to  protect 
themselves  from  the  hazard  of  un- 
certain oral  testimony  with  respect 
to  their  engagements.  Where  the 
lease  contains  no  warranty  of  the 
condition  of  the  premises,  declara- 
tions of  the  lessor  on  that  subject 
are  not  admissible  to  create  a  war- 
ranty ;  such  proof  would  beaddine 
to  the  written  agreement  by  parol 
evidence.  Dutton  v.  Gerrisn,  9 
Cush.  (Maes.)  89,  and  Brigha^  v. 
Rogers,  17  Mass.  571,  are  directly 
in  point.  In  the  first  of  these  cases 
parol  evidence  of  a  warranty  of  the 
condition  of  the  premises  de- 
mised— there  being  a  written  lease 
— was  excluded ;  and  in  the  sec- 
ond it  was  held,  that  where  an  es- 
'tate  was  demised  by  lease  under 


CHAP.   XXV.] 


Exceptions. 


507 


Th..  ■-■     11    111 

iifoaklyiij 


seal,   no  action  lay.  on   a  parol 
ptromise  made  bj  the  lessor  at  the 
time  of  ezecutmg  the  lease,  that 
the  water  on  the  premises  demised 
would   be  good   and   that   there 
w^ould  be  enough  of  it,  and  if  not 
he  would  make  it  so.    Nor  will  a 
warranty,  such  as  has  been  sued 
on,  be  implied  from  the  contract 
of  letting.    The  general  doctrine 
of  the  law  is,  that  upon  a  demise 
there  is  no  implied  contract  that 
the  property  is  fit  for  the  use  for 
which     the    lessee     requires    it, 
whether   for   habitation,   occupa* 
tion   or   cultivation.      Sutton    v. 
Temple,  12  M.  &  W.  52 ;  Hart  v. 
Windsor,     id.     68  ;     Erskine     t. 
Adeane,  L.  R.,  8  Ch.  App.  756; 
CUves  V.  WiUoughby,  7  Hfll  (N.  Y.) 
83 ;   Button  v.  Gerrish,   0  Gush. 
(Mass.)  89;  Foster  v.  Peyser,  id. 
242;   Wood  on  Land.  &  Ten.,  § 
382.    There  is  no  implied  duty  on 
the  owner  of  a  house  which  is  in  a 
ruinous  and  unsafe  condition  to  in- 
form a  proposed  tenant  that  it  is 
unfit  for  habitation,  and  no  action 
y^-iU  lie  against  him  for  an  omis- 
sion to  do  so  in  the  absenceof  ex- 
press warranty  or  deceit.    Keates 
V.  Earl  of  Cadogan,  10  C.  B.  591. 
An  obligation  on  the  psui;  of  the 
landlord  will  not  be  implied  that 
he  shall  make  substantial  repairs 
because  of  the  premises  being  in 
a   dangerous   condition.    Gott   v. 
Gandy,  2  £.  <fe  B.  845.    The  doc- 
trine with  respect  to   covenants 
implied  from  the  letting  has  been 
held   in  great   strictness   in  tills 
State.    A  covenant  on  the  part  of 
the  lessor,  even  for  title,  will  not 
arise  from  the  relation  of  landlord 
and  tenant ;  there  must  be  either 
an  express  agreement  to  that  ef- 
fect, or  words  must  be  used  from 
which  such  an  agreement  ccm  be 
implied.    Gano  v.  Vanderveer,  81 
N.  J.  L.  298.    Smith  v.  Marrable, 
11  M.  &  W.  5,  contains  the  only 
exception  to  the  general  rule  tliat 
from  the  letting  no  implied  under- 
talfing  will  arise  that  me  premises 
are  fit  for  or  adapted  to  the  pur- 
poses for   which  they   were  let. 
There  a  furnished  house  was  let  to 
a  tenant  for  a  short  term — five  or 
six  weeks.    It  was  found  to  be  in- 
fested with  bugs  and  unfit  for  hab- 
itation.   The  tenant  quit  for  that 


reason,  and  set  up  these  facts  as  a 
defense  to  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation,  and  his  defense  was 
allowed  by  the  court.  This  case 
was  expUuned  and  distinguished 
by  Lord  Abinoer  in  Sutton  v. 
Temple,  12  M.  &  W.  52,  as  resting 
on  exceptional  grounds.  It  was 
greatly  shaken  by  Hart  v.  Wind- 
sor, 12  M.  &  W.  68,  but  has  since 
been  followed  in  the  English  courts 
as  an  exceptional  case  in  Wilson  v. 
Finch,  L.  R.,  2  Exchq.  Div.  886, 
where  the  court,  following  Smith 
V.  Marrable,  held  that  a  family 
taking  a  lease  of  a  furnished  house 
might  refuse  to  occupy  it,  and  de- 
fend an  action  for  rent,  if  the 
house,  owing  to  the  defective 
drainage,  was  unfit  for  habitation. 
The  reasoning  on  whicft  these 
cases  were  decided  was  subjected 
by  Bramhall,  L.  J.,  in  Robertson 
T.  Amazon  Tug  and  Lighterage 
Co.,  46  L.  T.  (N.  S.)  146,  to  a  criti- 
cism bordering  on  ridicule.  Smith 
V.  Marrable  was  distinguished  by 
Parke,  B.,  in  Sutton  v.  Temple, 
12  M.  &  W.  65,  on  the  ^ound  that 
the  contract  wasof  a  mixed  nature, 
being  for  a  house  and  furniture ; 
and  in  Cleves  v.  WiUoughby,  7 
Hill  (N.  Y.),  86,  the  case  was 
likened  to  a  sale  of  provisions  for 
domestic  use,  on  which  the  law 
will  imply  a  contract  that  they  are 
wholesome  and  fit  for  use.  Cer- 
tain it  is  that  Smith  v.  Marrable 
has  never  been  followed,  except 
under  the  precise  circumstances 
on  which  it  was  decided,  and  then 
only  as  enabling  the  tenant  to 
abandon  the  premises,  rescind  the 
lease,  and  defend  against  the  pay- 
ment of  rent.  The  case  has  never 
been  cited  to  raise  an  implied  war- 
ranty under  any  other  circum- 
stances without  disapproval.  The 
distinction  between  such  a  condi- 
tion of  the  premises  as  will  justly 
the  refusal  of  the  tenant  to  enter 
and  occupy,  and  a  warranty  which 
will  subject  the  lessor  to  an  action 
for  damages,  is  referred  to  by  Cot- 
ton, L.  J.,  in  Robertson  v.  Amazon 
Tug  and  Lighterage  Co.,  ante." 
In  the  absence  of  fraud  or  express 
agreement,  the  lessor  is  not  Bable 
to  the  tenant  or  others  for  the  con- 
dition ot  the  premises,  nor  does  he 
undertake  that  they  are   tenant- 


608 


Leases. 


[§235 


for  three  years  from  the  first  of  May  then  next.  That 
at  the  time  the  lease  was  executed,  the  premises  were  in 
good  order,  with  gas  fixtures,  shelving,  and  other  fixtures 
suitable  and  ready  for  immediate  use  in  the  business  of 
a  bakery,  and  the  defendant  represented  to  the  plaint- 
iff, that  these  were  appm*tenant  and  belonged  to  the 
premises.  That  at  the  commencement  of  the  term,  the 
shelving  and  fixtures  had  been  removed  with  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  defendant  and  without  the  consent  of  the 
plaintiff,  and  the  premises  were  in  bad  condition.  That 
the  defendant  promised  the  plaintiff  to  replace  these  things 
and  refit  the  premises,  and  the  plaintiff  entered  into  pos- 
session upon  the  faith  of  this  promise,  but  the  defendant 
neglected  to  replace  or  refit,  and  the  plaintiff  was  com- 
pelleif  to,  and  did  at  the  request  of  the  defendant,  replace 
some  ^rtion,  and  expended  the  sum  of  $100,  which  the 
defendant  has  not  repaid  and  for  which  he  remains  in- 
debted to  the  plaintiff,  "to  the  damage  of  the  plaintiff  of 
the  sum  of  $100." 

It  was  proved  that  certain  fixtures,  in  the  place  at  the 
time  of  the  execution  of  the  lease,  had  been  originally 
bought  by  the  plaintiff,  when  previously  occupying  the 
bakery,  from  one  Immerschitt,  an  earlier  tenant ;  that 
she  had  sold  them,  with  the  good-will  of  her  term,  to 
Lippincott,  when  he  came  in  after  her ;  and  that  Lippin- 
cott  took  them  off  when  he  left  the  premises,  claiming 
under  the  bill  of  sale  from  her.  The  plaintiff  also  gave 
evidence  tending  to  show— that  when  negotiating  with 
the  defendant  for  the  present  lease,  she  objected  that  the 
fixtures  belonged  to  Lippincott,  by  his  previous  purchase 
from  herself,  and  that  perhaps  he  would  take  them  away ; 
that  the  defendant  repUed,  that  they  were  annexed  to  the 
premises  and  belonged  to  him,  and  she  had  no  right  to 


able  for  the  purposes  for  -which 
they  are  apparently  intended. 
Jaffe  V.  Harteau,  56  N.  Y.  898 ; 
15  Am.  Bep.  438.  In  this  case  the 
defect  was  the  lack  of  a  safety- 
valve  to  a  boiler.  But  fraud  will 
be  imputed  where  the  landlord  lets 
premises  for  habitation,  knowing 
them  to  be  infected  by  a  conta- 


gious disease,  without  notifying  the 
tenant,  and  he  will  be  held  liable 
in  damages  to  the  tenant  attacked 
by  such  disease.  Cesar  v.  Kanitz, 
60  N.  Y.  229 ;  19  Am.  Rep.  164 ; 
Minor  v.  Sharon,  112  Mass.  477; 
17  Am.  Bep.  122,  and  note,  127: 
Eaton  V.  Winne,  20  Miph.  156;  4 
Am.  Bep.  877. 


CHAP.  XXV.]  Exceptions.  609 

sell  them  to  Lippincott  or  the  earlier  tenant  to  sell  them  to 
her^  and  that  Lippincott  should  not  move  them,  and  he 
would  see  that  all  would  be  right ;  that  for  this  promise,  to- 
gether with  the  sale  of  the  good- will,  she  paid  the  defend- 
ant a  consideration  entirely  aside  from  the  rent  or  any- 
thing stipulated  in  the  lease  to  be  paid  by  her ;  that  after 
Lippincott  had  removed  the  fixtures,  the  defendant  again 
told  the  plaintiff,  before  she  entered  into  possession,  not 
to  go  near  the  place,  and  that  he  would  see  everything 
would  be  right  for  her  ;  and  that  subsequently,  after  she 
she  had  gone  into  possession  and  had  expended  about  $150 
in  repairing  and  putting  in  fixtures,  upon  his  demand  of 
the  rent  and  her  refusal  at  fii'st  to  pay  it,  he  again 
said  he  would  make  everything  right. 

Hand  J.  said :  * '  The  lease  was  in  writing  and  contained 
no  stipulation  of  the  defendant  as  to  fixtures,  but  a  clause 
that  the  plaintiff  should  make  all  'improvements  and 
repairs  ^'  necessary  to  be  made  on  the  premises  during  the 
continuance  of  her  term,  and  that  she  should  at  the  end 
of  the  term  leave  on  the  premises  all  the  repairs  and 
improvements,  that  may  have  been  made  or  put  on  the 
same.  It  is  insisted  by  the  defendant  that  this  writing 
is  conclusive  of  the  contract  and  precludes  any  evidence 
of  the  oral  agreement  as  to  fixtures. 

The  case  is  undoubtedly  very  near  the  line,  but  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  such  parol  agreement  was  a  sepa- 
rate and  independent  one,  touching  a  subject  not  covered 
by  the  lease,  and  made  for  an  independent  consideration 
paid  by  the  plaintiff,  not  stipulated  for  or  referred  to  in 
the  lease.  The  promise  that  certain  specific  fixtm*es  then 
on  the  premises  should  be  retained  and  remain  there,  so 
that  the  plaintiff  might  enjoy  the  benefit  of  them,  if  she 
took  the  lease,  may  be  sustained  as  a  previous  distinct 
collateral  agreement  upon  a  collateral  and  independent 
consideration,  which  did  not  merge  in  the  subsequent 
written  contract  of  hiring.  See  Erskine  v.  Adeane,  L.  R. 
8  Ch.  App.  756 ;  Hope  v.  Balen,  58  N.  Y.  380.  The  case 
is  distinguishable  from  such  cases  as  Johnson  v.  Oppen- 
heim,  55  N.  Y.  280,  where  the  parol  agreement  necessar- 
ily affected  the  premises  themselves^  and  if  admitted 


V 


510  Leases.  [§  235. 

would  have  varied  the  terms  of  the  instrument  as  to  the 
identical  property  leased. 

It  is  insisted,  however,  by  the  defendant  that  there  is 
no  proof  but  that  the  fixtures  were  so  annexed  to  the 
building  as  to  belong  to  the  defendant  as  he  claimed,  and 
consequently  that  he  did  give  good  title  to  the  plaintiff, 
and  she  could  have  recovered  them  from  Lippincott  or 
restrained  him  from  removing  them.  But  on  the  trial, 
the  defendant  distinctly  disclaimed,  on  oath,  being  the 
owner  or  having  any  claim  upon  the  things  removed  by 
Lippincott,  and  stated  he  presumed  Lippincott  to  be  the 
owner. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  am  led  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  evidence  did  authorize  the  jury  to  find  that  there 
was  a  breach  of  a  valid  contract  by  the  defendant  and  a 
cause  of  action  arising  thereon.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
decide  that  the  amount  expended  by  the  plaintiff  in  put- 
ting in  the  new  fixtiu-es,  which  she  afterward  sold  to 
Colwell  with  the  lease,  furnishes  any  measure  of  the 
damages  she  is  entitled  to  recover  for  the  breach  of  this 
contract  of  the  defendant. 

An  administrator  having  under  the  statute  the  power 
to  rent  the  lands  of  his  intestate,  this  power  and  the  duty 
to  rent  resulting  therefrom  authorize  him  to  make  such 
repairs  as  are  necessary  to  render  the  lands  tenantable ; 
and  if  even  in  the  absence  of  such  power  an  administra- 
tor  should  stipulate  with  the  tenant  for  making  repairs, 
he  could  not  avoid  the  stipulation,  and  whoever  claimed 
its  enforcement  would  take  it  cum  onere. 

In  an  action  against  a  tenant  for  the  recovery  of  rent, 
if  he  is  entitled  to  damages  in  consequence  of  the  failure 
of  the  landlord  to  repair  according  to  a  covenant  in  the 
lease,  or  in  an  agreement  made  at  the  time  of  the  contract 
of  renting  he  may  recoup  for  damages  by  way  of  reducing 
or  extinguishing  the  rent. 

If  a  statute  does  not  intervene,  contracts  may  be 
expressed  partly  in  writing  and  partly  in  parol ;  and  if 
the  writing  does  not  purport  to  set  out  the  entire  contract, 
but  only  the  part  thereof  which  is  obligatory  on  the 
party  making  it,  parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  establish 


»-f 


chap.  XXV.]  Exceptions.  611 

a  distinct  and  separable  part  of  the  contract,  obligatory 
on  the  other  party,  but  not  reduced  to  writing.' 

Hence,  where  only  the  promise  of  a  tenant  to  pay  rent 
is  reduced  to  writing,  parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  es- 
tablish a  distinct  and  separable  contract  on  the  part  of 
the  landlord  to  repair,  made  contemporaneously  with 
the  writing. 

When  a  landlord  stipulates  to  make  repairs  and  fails 
to  do  so,  it  is  not  the  duty  of  the  tenant  to  cause  the 
repairs  to  be  made,  limiting  his  recovery  to  the  expenses 
thereby  incurred ;  but  he  has  the  right  to  rely  upon  the 
landlord's  promise  to  make  them,  and  for  a  breach  of  the 
promise  the  landlord  is  liable  for  such  damages  as  are 
the  natural  and  proximate  result.* 

>  Evans    v.    BeU,  20  Ala.  509  »  Vaadergrif t  v.  Abbott,  75  Ala. 

ovemiled  on  this  point.  487. 


512  'E^SBMENIB.  [§  23ft 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

EASEMENTS. 

Sec.  286.  Easemente— Generally. 

Sec.  287.  Right  of  way. 

Sec.  288.  Bj  grant. 

Sec.  239.  Prescription,  necessity,  &a 

Sec.  240.  Duties  of  those  using. 

Sec.  241.  "Who  must  repair. 

Sec.  242.  Public  n:Lay  acquire  right. 

Sec.  248.  "Who  liable  for  obstruction  of. 

Sec.  244.  Bight  of  common. 

Sec.  245.  Inter-commoning. 

Sec.  246.  Common  of  turbary.* 

Sec.  247.  Nature  and  description  of  common  of  estovers. 

Sec.  248.  Common  of  fishery — ^Nature  of. 

Sec.  249.  Watercourse— Definition  of. 

Sec.  250.  Nature  of  rights  in  natural  streams. 

Sec.  251.  Rights  between  mill-owners  on  the  same  stream. 

Sec.  252.  Questions  of  reasonableness  for  jury. 

Sec.  258.  Limitation  upon  right  to  dam  water. 

Sec.  254.  Precautions  to  be  adopted. 

Sec.  255.  Prescriptive  rights — How  acquired. 

Sec.  256.  Extent  of  right  acquired.— Gilford  v.  Lake  Co. 

Sec.  257.  Lawlor  v.  Potter. 

Sec.  258.  Carlisle  v.  Cooper. 

Sec.  259.  Mertz  v.  Domey. 

Sec.  260.  Change  of  machinery. 

Sec.  261.  Ancient  mills. 

Sec.  262.  Effect  of  prior  use. 

Sec.  268.  What  is  mill  seat. 

Sec.  264.  Artificial  watercourses. 

Sec.  265.  Lnplied  grant  or  reservation  of  drains,  &c 

Sec.  266.  License  to  make  or  use  drains,  <S^. 


CHAP.  XXV.]  Genebally.  618 

Sbc.  267.  Elztmguishment  or  suspension  of  drains,  Ao. 

Sbo.  268.  Underground  water. 

Sbo.  269.  Sorface  water. 

Sbo.  270.  Lateral  support. 

Sec.  271.  Subjacent  support. 

S£C.  236.  Easements-^Generally.— It  may  be  said  that  all 
easements  that  belong  to  the  premises  demised  pass  with 
the  lease,  unless  expressly  reserved,  and  the  tenant  also 
takes  the  estate  subject  to  all  such  easements  as  are  im- 
posed upon  it,  and  upon  the  one  hand  takes  the  same 
rights,  and  on  the  other  hand  is  subject  to  the  same  duties, 
in  respect  of  such  easements,  as  the  landlord  himself. 
Among  these  easements  or  servitudes  are  rights  of  way, 
of  commons,  fisheries,  watercourses,  drains,  right  of  sup- 
port,and  many  others  that  are  not  important  to  enumerate. 
It  may  not  be  out  of  place  briefly  to  define  the  nature  of 
these  easements,  and  the  rights  and  liabilities  imposed 
thereby* 

Sec.  237.  Bight  of  way.— A  way  is  an  incorporeal  here- 
ditament, and  arises  either  from  grant,  presumption  or 
necessity.  It  is  right  of  passage  acquired  over  another's 
land.  It  is  either  in  gross  or  appendant  to  land.  A  way 
in  gross  is  a  way  that  is  attached  to  the  person,  or 
appurtenant  to  land  ; '  and  a  way  appendant  is  a  way  that 
is  incident  to  the  estate  of  the  person  claiming  it  and  has 
a  terminus  thereon.  A  way  in  gross,  being  personal, 
cannot  be  transferred,*  but  a  way  appendant  is  an  incident 
of  the  estate  and  passes  as  an  appurtenance  by  grant."  A 
right  of  way  appendant  to  an  estate  can  be  used  only  for 
purposes  connected  with  that  estate,  and  a  right  of  way 
in  gross  can  be  enjoyed  only  by  the  person  in  whom  it 
exists/ 

Seo.  238.  By  grant.— Rights  of  way  by  grant  must  be 
used  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  grant,  and  are 

1  Garrison  t.  Rudd,  19  HI.  558  ;  »  Thorpe  v.  Brumfit,  8  L.  R.  (Eq. 

Wood  on  Nuisances,  159-166.  Ca.)  650. 

« Washburn  on  Easements,  232 ;  *  Ackroyd  v.  Smith,  10  C.  B.  16i. 
Alley  V.  Carlton,  29  Texas,  77. 

33 


[ 


bl4  EaSBUEHTS.  [§  239 

subject  to  all  the  restrictions  thereinimposed.'  The  way 
granted  may  be  inclosed  by  the  owner  of  the  land  with 
gates  or  bars  unl^s  it  is  expressed  to  be  an  open  way, 
or  unless  such  inclosure  is  inconsistent  with  the  purposes 
for  which  it  was  granted.'  But  if  the  way  had  been  laid 
out  before  the  grant,  it  will  pass  in  the  condition  it  was 
when  conveyed,-  and  if  it  was  them  open  the  grantor 
would  have  no  right  to  set  upgatesorbars  at  its  entrance.* 
Unless  restricted  by  the  terms  of  the  grant  the  owner  of 
the  land  may  do  any  act  that  does  not  impair  the  right 
of  passage  over  the  way  granted,  or  interfere  with  its  free 
use  by  the  person  to  whom  the  right  is  granted.  * 

Sec.  239.  Prescription,  n©oeBBity,&o.— A  way  by  prescrip- 
tion is  a  right  of  passage  over  another's  land,  acquired  by 
adverse  user  for  the  statutory  period,  and  presupposes  a 
grant."  Ways  of  necessity  can  never  exist  except  over 
one  of  two  parcels  of  land  of  which  the  grantor  was  the 
owner  when  the  land  in  favor  of  which  the  way  exists 
was  granted,  and  arises  only  when  the  land  granted  is 
wholly  surrounded  by  the  land  of  others,  and  no  other 
access  exists.*  It  is  appurtenant  to  the  land  and  passes 
by  grant ; '    mere  convenience  or  inconvenience  does  not 

'  Gterraty  \.  Daffy,  7  E.  I.  476.  buildings,  and  passed  ckee  to  one 

■  Garland  v.   Furber,  47  N.   H.  side  of  the  stable  of  Boeeville.   Br 

804  [  HoopeB  v.  Alderson,  32  Iowa,  indenture  of  tbe  Ist  of  May,  1880, 

163.  defendant  denused  SoHeville  to  H. 

'WelshT.Wikox.lOlUaes.  163.  for  ten  yeara.     H.   entered  on  tbe 

'  Schwarer  t.  Boyleton  Market,  premisee,  and  built  over  ijie  stable 

OS  Mass.  S86 ;  Bakeman  v.  Talbut,  a    hay-loft,    with    two    openings 

81  N.  Y.  866  ;  Bean  t.  Coleman,  44  toward  the  private  farm  road,  har- 

N.  H.  589.  ine  first  obtained  permission  from 

'  Dirrii^kBon  v.  Springer,  5  Har~  defendant  to  do  so,  and  also  per- 

rington  (Mich.)  21.  mission  from  defendant  and  the 

'  White  V.  Seeeon,  G  E.  &  N.  OS  -.  then  tenant  of  the  farm  to  use  the 
Tracy  V.  Atherton,  85  Vt.  52;  Mar-  farm  road  for  the  purpose  of  brine- 
shall  V.  Trumbull,  28  Conn.  183  ;  ing  hay,  straw,  &c.,  to  the  loft, 
Trask  V.  Fatt«TEon,  29  Me.  499.  that  being  the  only  access  to  the 

'Wissler  T.  Hershey,  "-  " —  --.--'?-  ^.    .  /.      

3t  888.  "  All  ways  om 
way,  occupied  atia  enjo 
puled  aa  appurtenant.' 
ant  was  owner  in  fee  of  i 


of  an  adjoining  farm 
farm,  having  a  private  i 
led  from  a  bign  road  U. 


CHAP.   XXVI.] 


Right  of  Way. 


515 


determine  the  right  to  such  a  way/  There  must  an 
actual  necessity  exist  or  the  right  is  not  created/  and  the 
right  ceases  when  the  necessity  therefor  ceases." 

Sec.  240.  Duties  of  those  using.—As  has  been  previously 
stated,  when  a  right  of  way  has  been  acquired  by  grant, 
it  must  be  used  according  to  the  terms  of  the  grant/  and, 
when  a  right  has  been  acquired  by  prescription,  the  right 
will  be  commensurate  with,  and  measured  by,  the  use.* 

The  owner  of  the  land  is  subject  to  the  restriction  that 
he  must  do  no  act  upon  the  land  adjoining  the  way  that 
impairs  its  usefulness  or  interferes  with  the  passage  over 
it,*  but  he  may  make  any  reasonable  or  ordinary  use  of 
the  adjacent  land,  provided  he  does  not  thereby 
obstruct  the  passage  over  it."  He  may  sink  drains 
or  wateixx)urse3  beneath  it,"  he  may  dig  cellars 
beside  it,  erect  buildings  on  its  borders,  with  doors 
opening  on  to  it,  if  in  a  city  or  town,*  or  with 
bUnds  and  shutters  opening  over  it, "  and,  unless  it  is  a 
way  by  prescription,  or  he  is  restricted  by  his  grant,  he 
may  build  over  it,"  or  may  close  it  up  with  bars  or  gates." 
The  title  io  the  soil  is  in  the  owner  of  the  land,  and  he 
may  maintain  trespass  against  persons  using  it  without 


and  appurtenances  to  the  said 
dwelling-house,  cottage,  and 
hereditaments,  or  any  of  them  ap- 
pertaining or  with  the  same  or 
any  of  uiem  now  or  heretofore 
demised,  occupied,  or  enjoyed 
or  reputed  as  part  or  parcel  of 
them,  or  any  of  them,  or  appurte- 
nant thereto.  Held,  that  the  right 
to  use  the  farm  road  for  the  afore- 
said purposes  passed  to  the  plaint- 
iff under  the  above  words.  Lang- 
ley  V.  Hammond,  L.  R.,  8  Ex.  161, 
discussed ;  Kay  v.  Oxley,  L.  R.  10 

Q.  B.  aeo. 

'  McDonald  v.  Undhall,  8  Rawle 
(Penn.)  492. 

»  Hyde  v.  Jamaica,  27  Vt.  460 ; 
Leonard  v.  Leonard,  2  Allen  (Mass.) 
548. 

•  Abbot  V.  Stewartson,  47  N.  H. 
280 ;  Staple  v.  Heydon,  6  Mod.  1 ; 
Holmes  v.  Seeley,  19  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  507 ;  Scriven  v.  Gregorie,  8 
Rich.  Law  (S.  C.)  158  ;  Gayetty  v. 
Bethune,  14  Mass.  49 ;  Alley   v. 


Carlton,  29  Texas,  78 ;  Lawton  v. 
Rivers,  2  McCtord  (S.  C.)  445  ;  N. 
Y.  Life  Iqs.  &  Tr.  C.  v.  Milnor,  1 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  368  ;  Collins  v.  Pren- 
tice, 15  Conn.  89. 

•  Kirkham  v.  Sharp,  1  Whart. 
(Penn.)  828. 

•  Reignolds  v.  Edwards,  Willes, 
282 ;  Smith  v.  Wiggin,  52  N.  H. 
112. 

•O'Linda  v.  Lathrop,  21  Pick. 
(Mass.)  292. 

'  Underwood  v.  Carney,  1  Cush. 
(Mass.)  292. 

«  Tillmes  v.  Marsh,  67  Penn.  St. 
507 ;  R)meroy  v.  Mills,  8  Vt.  279. 

•  Underwood  v.  Carney,  1  Cush. 
(Mass.)  292. 

»» O'Linda  v.  Lathrop,  21  Pick. 
(Mass.)  292. 

"  Schowerer  v.  Boylston  Market, 
99  Mass.  285. 

"  Bakeman  v.  Talbot,  81  N.  Y. 
866;  Hudson  v.  Young,  4  Lans. 
(N.  Y.  S.  C.)  68. 


516  Easbments.  [§  24L 

right,'  or  ejectment  against  those  making  erections  upon 
or  over  it.'  But  any  act  of  the  landowner,  that  obstructs 
or  hinders  the  right  of  the  person  in  whom  the  easement 
is  vested,  or  interferes  with  any  rights  that  he  has  acquired 
as  incident  to  his  right  of  way,  is  a  nuisance,  and  ac- 
tionable as  such.  Thus,  if  he  digs  a  drain  under  the  way, 
he  is  bound  to  close  it  up  securely,  and  if  he  fails  to  do 
so,  whereby  the  way  is  injured,  or  whereby  the  owner 
of  the  way  is  damaged,  either  in  his  property  or  person, 
he  is  liable  for  all  the  damages  that  ensue.*  So,  if  he 
makes  insecure  erections  upon  the  way  that  dam- 
age the  person  in  whom  the  right  is  vested,  or  if  he 
makes  openings  near  thereto  and  does  not  securely  guard 
them,*  or  if  he  closes  up  the  way  or  in  any  manner  hin- 
ders or  obstructs  the  right  of  passage  over  it,  he  is  guilty 
of  a  nuisance  and  chargeable  with  all  the  consequences/ 

Sec.  241.  Who  must  repair  .—The  grantee  of  a  way,  or 
the  proprietor  of  a  way  by  necessity  or  prescription,  is 
bound  to  keep  it  in  repair,  and  the  landowner  is  charge- 
able with  no  duty  or  liabiUty  in  that  respect.*  When 
the  track  is  fixed  by  user  the  right  exists  in  tijat  track, 
and  even  though  the  track  becomes  impassable,  or  is 
obstructed  by  the  owner  of  the  land,  the  person  in  whom 
the  easement  exists  cannot  deviate  from  the  old  track 
upon  other  lands  of  the  person  over  whose  lands  the 
right  exists.^  But,  if  the  landowner  places  obstructions 
in  the  way,  the  owner  of  the  right  of  way  may  remove 
them.?  If  the  owner  of  the  land,  or  any  other  person, 
builds  over  the  way  so  as  to  darken  it  or  to  obstruct  it, 
or  in  anywise  render  it  less  convenient,  he  is  Uable  a^  for 
a  nuisance.'    Thus,  where  the  plaintiff  had  a  right  of 

*  Hollenbeck  v.  Rowley,  8  .Allen        •  Wynkoop  v.  Burger,  12  Johns. 
(Mass.)  476.  (N.  Y.)  222 ;  Walker  v.  Pierce,  8S 

*  Codman   t.    Evans,     5    Allen     Yt.  95. 

(Mass.)  808.  'i  Williams    v.    Safford,  7  BarK 

*  Perley  v.  Chandler,  6  Mass.  454.     (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  809 ;  Boyce  v.  Brown. 

*  Ctorby  V.  Hill,  4  C.   B.  (N.  S.]     id.  80. 

556 ;  Gallagher  v.   Humphrey,   10        *  Boyce  v.  Brown,  supra. 

W.  R.  664 ;  Shadwell  v.  Hutchin-        •  Richardson  v.  Pond,  16  Gray 

son,  4  C.  &  P.  828.  (Mass.)  887. 

» Kent  y.  Judkins,  58  Me.  162 ; 
BatishiU  y.  Reed,  18  C.  B.  696. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  PuBuc  Eight.  517 

way  over  the  lands  of  the  defendant,  for  hauling  tner- 
chandise  to  his  store,  and  had  hoisting  apparatus  ar- 
ranged for  taking  the  goods  into  the  store,  it  was  held 
that  the  defendant  was  liable  for  all  damages  that 
resulted  from  the  erection  of  a  building  over  the  way, 
that  cut  off  these  facilities,  as  the  plaintiff  was  entitled 
to  the  use  of  the  way  for  all  the  purposes  for  which  he 
had  used  it  for  a  period  sufficient  to  acquire  a  pre- 
scriptive right/ 

Sec.  242.  PubUo  may  aoqaire  right.->The  public  may 
acquire  a  prescriptive  right  to  use  a  way  as  well  as  a 
single  individual;'  and  where  a  private  way  is  opened, 
leading  from  a  public  street,  and  prepared  for  use  the 
same  as  a  public  street,  and  with  nothing  to  show  that 
it  is  not  such,  although  it  is  closed  at  one  end,  the  public 
may  use  the  way,  and  are  bound  only  to  the  exercise  of 
the  same  care  as  in  the  use  of  a  public  street.' 

Sec.  243.  Who  liable  fbr  obstruotion  Qf.->Where  a  right 
of  way  is  vested  in  several  persons,  for  the  benefit  of 
several  tenements,  neither  of  the  persons  in  whom  the 
right  exists  has  a  right  to  more  than  a  reasonable  use  of 
the  way,  and  any  obstruction  thereof  by  one  to  the  detri- 
ment of  the  others,  is  a  nuisance,  and  actionable.*  If 
the  acts  of  several  persons  together,  though  not  done 
jointly  or  in  concert,  operate  as  a  nuisance  to  a  way, 
when  the  acts  of  either  alone  would  not  operate  as  an 
appreciable  injury,  an  action  may  be  maintained  in 
equity  against  all  of  them  in  favor  of  one  who  is  injured 
by  the  aggregation  of  their  acts.  In  a  recent  English 
case,*  it  appeared  that  A  and  B  were,  in  1853,^  the  owners 
of  the  Commercial  Inn,  at  Bradford,  and  certain  lands 
and  buildings  adjoining.  In  the  rear  of  the  inn  wais  a 
yard,  occupied  with  it.  The  only  access  to  the  stable 
and  yard  for  horses  and  carriages  was  from  a  street, 
called  the  TyrdlSj  along  a  passage,  which  was  upon  part 

1  Richardson  v.  Pond,  15  Gray  'Danforth  v.  Duiell^  8  Allen 
(Mass.)  387.  (Mass.)  242. 

•Richardson  t.  Pond,  15  Gray  *Thorpe  v.  Brumfitt,  8  K  Bi 
(Mass.)  887.  (Eq.  Ca.)  650. 


filS  Easkhbnts.  [g  243. 

of  the  land  also  belonging  to  A  and  B.  The  passage  ran 
northerly  from  the  yard  to  the  street.  In  July,  1853,  A 
and  B  sold  and  conveyed  the  buildings  and  land  adjoia> 
ing  the  Tyrells  to  one  John  Morrell,  reserving  the  way  to 
the  inn  yard.  Subsequently  to  the  sale  to  Morrell  the 
parties  agreed  to  a  change  in  the  boundary  between  their 
lands,  and  a  new  passage  was  substituted  to  the  inn  yard 
in  place  of  the  old  one,  which  was  properly  conveyed  to 
A  and  B  by  Morrell,  and  by  the  terms  of  which  Morrell 
was  to  construct  the  new  way  and  keep  it  in  proper 
repair.  It  was  also  provided  that  Morrell  might  erect 
buildings  over  the  passage-way,  so  that  it  was  left  at 
least  eight  feet  high.  Morrell  also  reserved  a  right  of 
way  over  the  passage  for  the  benefit  of  his  premises,  and 
the  right  to  grant  a  right  of  way  over  the  same  to  others. 
The  new  way  was  constructed  and  Morrell  erected  ware- 
houses on  the  land  purchased  by  him,  and  also  made  in 
the  floor- way  of  the  new  passage  a  large  opening  form- 
ing the  entrance  to  a  cellar  beneath,  and  covered  it  with 
a  wooden  trap-door.  Ho  also  made  a  trap-door  over  it, 
forming  an  entrance  through  the  roof  covering  the  pas- 
sage-way into  the  warehouse  above.  He  also  made  side 
entrances  into  the  warehouses  and  placed  folding  doors 
in  them,  for  the  purpose  of  loading  and  unloading  goods 
from  the  passage-way.  He  let  these  premises  to  differ- 
ent parties  in  1863,  and  he  was  never  after  that  time  in 
the  occupation  of  them.  The  tenants  occupying  distinct 
portions  of  the  premises  caused  the  road-way  to  be 
blocked  up  with  carts  and  wagons,  and  kept  the  trap- 
door and  folding-doors  open,  and  the  crane  used  for  hoist- 
ing goods  at  work  for  long  and  unreasonable  periods  dur- 
ing the  busiest  hours  of  the  day,  when  great  numbers  of 
persons  with  vehicles  and  on  foot  required  to  pass  to  the 
inn  yard.  The  court  held  thf*  '■^~  -"""^ — '■'—  -'  ^^- 
way  by  teams  and  otherwise,  i 
ing  of  goods  upon  the  passage 
the  plaintiff,  for  which  the  d' 
him.  Lord  Justice  James,  ai 
"  The  plaintiff  only  claims  a  rij 
claim  to  be  entitled  to  the  soil 


CHAP.  xxvL]  Eight  op  Common.  619 

of  the  soil  from  exercising  over  it  any  rights  which  do 
not  derogate  from  his  grant.  The  plaintiff  cannot  com- 
plain unless  he  can  prove  an  obstruction  which  injures 
him.  The  case  is  not  hke  one  of  trespass  in  which  a 
recovery  can  be  had  if  no  damage  is  proved.  Nothing 
can  be  much  more  injurious  to  the  owner  of  an  inn  than 
that  the  way  to  his  yard  shoiild  be  constantly  obstructed 
by  the  loading  and  unloading  of  heavy  wagons.  It  is 
said  that  the  plaintiff  alleges  an  obstruction  caused  by 
several  persons,  acting  independently  of  each  other,  and 
does  not  show  what  share  each  had  in  causing  it.  It  is 
probably  impossible  for  a  person  in  the  plaintiff's  posi- 
tion to  show  this.  Nor  do  I  think  it  necessary  that  he 
should  show  it.  The  amount  of  obstruction  caused  by 
any  one  of  them  might  not,  if  it  stood  alone,  give  groimd 
for  any  complaint,  though  the  amount  caused  by  aU  of 
them  may  be  a  serious  injury.  Suppose  one  person 
leaves  a  wheelbarrow  standing'  on  a  way.  That  may 
not  cause  any  appreciable  inconvenience,  but  if  a  hun- 
dred do  so,  that  may  cause  a  serious  inconvenience, 
which  a  person  entitled  to  the  use  of  the  way  has  a  right 
to  prevent ;  and  it  is  no  defence  to  any  one  among  the 
hundred  to  say,  that  what  he  does  of  itself  causes  no 
damage  to  the  complainant." 

Sec.  244.  Bight  of  oommon.--Common,  asalegalterm^ 
signifie^i  a  right  or  hberty  to  take  or  use  some  part  or 
portion  of  that  which  another  person's  lands,  woods, 
waters,  &c.,  naturally  produce,  without  having  any  prop- 
erty in  the  soil,*  and  embraces,  among  others,  common 
of  pasture,  of  turbary,  estovers  and  piscary.  A  common 
of  pasture  is  a  right  or  hberty  which  one  or  more  per- 
sons may  have  to  feed  their  cattle  on  another's  lands, 
and  is  generally  restricted  to  commonable  cattle  :  that  is, 
such  as  plow  and  manure  the  lands,  such  as  horses,  oxen, 
cows  and  sheep,  and  seldom  extends  to  other  animals,  as 


*  Bacon*s  Abr.  Tit.    Commons ;  which  several  persons  have  to  the 

Tador's  Leading  Cases,  Real  Prop-  produce  of  the  lands  or  waters  of 

erty,  108 ;  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  602.  another.     Van  Rensselaer  v.  Rad- 

Common  is  a  right,  or  privilege,  cliff,  10  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  639. 


620 


Easements. 


[§  2m; 


goats,  swine,  geese,  and  the  like.'  The  number  is  usually 
restricted  either  by  an  express  limitation  as  to  the  num- 
ber, or  by  those  only  being  allowed  to  depasture  which 
are  levant  and  nonchant  upon  the  land,  in  respect  of 
which  the  right  of  common  is  claimed.  That  is,  such 
cattle  as  the  winter  eatage  of  the  lands,  together  with 
the  produce  of  it  in  summer  and  the  food  obtained  from 
the  common,  is  capable  of  maintaining.'  It  cannot  be 
claimed  by  prescription  for  a  house  without  any  land,' 
nor  can  it  exist  without  limitation,  as  appurtenant  to 
an  ancient  house,  without  land,  ^  but  it  may  exist  as  an 
appurtenant  to  land  without  a  house.*  A  limitation  as 
to  the  time  of  the  year  in  which  the  rights  shall  be  exer- 
cised is  sometimes  imposed,  but  as  to  whether  any  or 
what  restrictions  are  imposed  depends  upon  the  terms  of 
the  grant,  or  the  extent  o£  the  users.  Conunon  of  pas- 
ture is  either  appendant,  appurtenant^  Uf,  gross,  or  pter 
(Cause  de  vicinage  ;  but  in  pleading,  it  is  not  necessary  to 
allege  whether  it  is  of  one  class  or  another.*  A  common 
appendant  is  purely  a  common  law  right,  and  must  have 
existed  from  time  immemorial,'  and  belongs  only  to  ara- 
ble, lands,  for  conunonable  cattle,  levant  and  couchant,' 
and  only  for  so  many  of  the  tenant's  cattle  as  are  neces- 
sary to  manure  the  tenant's  arable  land,'  and  does  not 
extend  to  the  waste. '''  Common  of  pasture  appurtenant 
is  a  right  or  liberty  of  pasturing  cattle  on  another's  land^ 
jdxA  is  not  confined  either  to  arable  land  or  commonable 
<»ttle,  and  may  be  claimed  by  modem  grant "  or  by  pre- 
scription ; "  but  this  right  extends  only  to  the  party's  own 
icattle,  levant  and  couchant  on  his  land."  A  right  of  com- 


'^  Tudor's  Leading  Gaaes  of  Eeal 
Property,  109. 

« Carr  v.  Lambert,  3  BL  &  C. 
499 ;  Whitlock  v.  Hutcliiiifion,  % 
M.  &.  R.  205. 

*  Scholes  V.  Hargreaves^  5  T-  R. 
4CL 

*  Benson  y.  Chester,  8  T.  R.  596. 
»  Ricketts  v.  Salwey ,  2  B.  &  Aid. 

860. 

*  Petersdorff  8  Abr.  144. 
*Tudor*B   Leading   Cases,   Real 

Prop.  109. 

'  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  Commons 
(H)l. 


*  Tyringham*s  Case,  4  Coke,  86 
a ;  Benson  v.  Chester,  8  T.  R.  896 ; 
Bennett  v.  Reeve,  Willes,  227; 
Cheesman  v.  Hardham,  1  B.  & 
Aid.  711. 

**  Dunraven  v.  Llewellyn,  15  Q. 
B.  791. 

11  Tyringham's  Case,  ante ;  Co. 
Litt.  122  a;  Cowlan  v.  Slack,  18 
East,  108. 

"  Co.  Litt.  122  a. 

** Benson  v.  Chester,  ante;  3 
Wm.  Saund.  846,  n.  1. 


OHAP.  XXVI.]         Right  of  Common.  621 

mon  of  pasture  in  gross  is  a  right  to  pasture  cattle  upon 
another's  land,  although  the  person  in  whose  favor  it 
exists  does  not  own  or  occupy  any  other  land.  Such  a 
right  is  created  by  deed,  and  may  be  conveyed  to  a  man 
and  his  heirs  or  only  for  Ufe.*  Common  appendant  or 
appurtenant  for  cattle  levant  or  couchant  cannot  be  con- 
verted into  common  in  gross,  because  they  cannot  be 
severed  from  the  land  to  which  they  are  annexed  with- 
out being  extinguished  ;  but  a  common  appurtenant  for 
a  certain  number  of  cattle  may  be,  because  it  has  no  con- 
nection of  tenure.*  Common  pur  cause  de  vicinage  is  a 
liberty  that  the  tenants  of  one  landlord  in  one  town  have 
to  enjoy  a  common  of  pasture  with  the  tenants  of 
another  landlord  in  another  town.'  It  can  only  be 
claimed  by  grant,  or  by  prescription  from  time  immem- 
orial, or  by  user  for  sixty  or  thirty  years  under  2  &  3 
Will.  4,  c.  Yl,  but  not  by  custom.*  This  is  not  properly 
a  right  of  common,  but  rather  an  excuse  for  a  trespass, 
and  at  most  but  a  permissive  right,  which  was  originally 
allowed  for  the  prevention  of  suits  in  neighborhoods 
where  a  boundary  could  not  easily  be  established.*  It 
exists  where  the  tenants  of  two  lords  have  used,  time 
out  of  mind,  to  have  common  promiscuously  in  both  lord- 
ships, lying  together  and  open  to  one  another ; '  it  is 
therefore  necessary  that  these  adjoining  lands  should 
both  be  commonable.^  It  seems  that  common  jpwr  cause 
de  vicinage  may  also  exist  between  the  proprietors  of 
neighboring  lands,  though  there  are  no  commons  on 
either  side ; '  and  the  lord  of  a  manor  may  have,  in 
respect  of  the  waste  or  common  land  in  his  own  manor, 
a  right  to  turn  his  own  cattle  upon  the  common  of  an 
adjoining  manor.'  Those  who  claim  common,  jn^r  cause 
de  vicinage  may  not  put  their  cattle  on  such  common, 

^  Tador's   Leading   Cases,   Keal     Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Common  (A)  4 ;  Tu- 
Prooerty,  111.  dor  L.  C.  Real  Prop.  112. 

*  Bunn  y.  Channer,  6  Taunt.  244.        *  8  Coke  R.  78. 

<  Jones  V.  Robin,  10  Q.  B.  620.  ^  Heath  v.  Elliott,  4  Bing.  N.  C. 

*  Jones  V.  Robin,  10  Q.  B.  681,     888. 

620;   Clarke   v.   Tinker,  id.  604;  ^jo^es  v.  Robin,  10  Q.  B.  ^1, 

Prichard  v.  Powell,  id.  589,  608 ;  620. 

Tudor  L.  C.  Real  Prop.  118.  •  Earl  of  Sefton  v.  Court,  6  B.  & 

»  Co.  Litt.  122  a ;  Willee,  R.  822 ;  C.  917. 


623  EASEaiSINTS. 

for  then  they  are  distrainable,  but  she 
their  own  fields,  and  ]eave  them  to  stra; 
ing  common. '  Every  common  pur  cc 
common  appendant.'  Where  one  of  i 
mons,  with  common  of  vicinage,  was  i 
off  by  the  owner  of  the  soil,  leaving  c 
sufflcient  for  the  highway  which  led 
other ;  yet  as  the  separation  was  not 
prevent  the  cattle  straying  from  on 
means  of  the  highway,  it  was  held,  tt 
vicinage  still  continued.*  Where  t 
possessed  of  a  house  and  land  in  Q,  I 
exercised  rights  of  common  in  W,  1 
this  was  done  near  the  boundary  of  tl 
E  and  W,  which  lay  open  and  unii 
each  other :  and  it  also  appeared  tha 
cising  the  right  did  not  at  the  tim< 
boundaries,  and  the  plaintiff  had  on  a 
of  the  common  of  E  obtained  an  allot 
of  his  estate ;  it  was  held  that  the  ; 
leaving  it  to  the  jury  to  say  whethei 
referable  to  an  exercise  of  the  right  i 
in  the  boundary,  or  to  an  exercise  of  t. 
this  country,  rights  of  common  may 
lete,  especially  in  the  Northern  and  'V 
New  York  the  right  is  recognized 
where  there  are  lands  granted  as  o 
hamlets  and  villages  that  are  always 
Missouri  as  well  as  in  New  York  it  is 
may  be  lost  by  adverse  user.' 

Sec.  245.  intor-oommoning.— There  is 
ual  right  of  inter-commoning  betweei 

■Termes  de  Ley.146;  Bac.  Abr.  11    id,  465 

Tit.  Common  (A)  4.  Barb.  <N. 

'  Danv.  Abr.  799.  Ketcham, 

'OuUett    T.    Lopes,     Bart.,    18  Post.  20  W 

East  348.  iiig  v.  Qou 

*  Hetherington  v.  Vane,  4  B.  &  •  Hebert 

Aid.  428.  '  Punkhi 

'  LivingHton  v.  Ten  Broeck,   16  Mo.   453 ; 

John.  (N.  Y.)  26 ;  Watta  v.  Cofan,  John.  Ch. 


/^' 


CHAP.  XXVI.]        Common  of  Turbary. 


623 


land  in  open  common  fields :  t^e  extent  of  this  right  and 
the  mode  of  e3;ercising  it  varies  according  to  the  custom 
which  has  prevailed  among  the  occupiers  of  such  land. 
Where,  however,  there  is  no  custom  which  has  become 
binding  upon  the  parties,  the  common  law  rule  appears 
to  be,  that  those  persons  only  who  are  owners  of  land 
within  an  open  common  field  are  entitled  to  enjoy  the 
right  of  intercommoning ;  and  such  right  can  be  exer- 
cised at  those  times  only  when  the  corn  is  off  the  land, 
that  is,  after  all  the  com  and  grain  have  been  reaped  and 
gathered,  and  before  any  more  has  been  sown.'  Where 
A,  being  possessed  of  a  quantity  of  land  in  a  common 
field,  and  having  a  right  of  common  over  the  whole  field, 
and  B  having  also  a  right  of  common  over  the  whole 
field,  they  entered  into  an  agreement,  for  their  mutual 
advantage  and  convenience,  not  to  exercise  their  respec- 
tive rights  for  a  certain  term  of  years,  and  each  party 
covenanted  to  that  effect ;  it  was  held,  that  if,  during 
the  t^rm,  the  cattle  of  B  came  upon  the  -land  of  A,  he 
might  distrain  them,  damage  feasant.*  There  are  also 
statutes  pointing  out  the  mode  of  exercising  the  right  of 
common.'  The  owners  of  land  in  open  common  fields 
may  by  custom  mutually  inclose  against  each  other,  and 
sometimes  by  statute.  The  remedies  for  a  disturbance 
of  common  of  pasture  have  been  already  mentioned.* 

Sec.  246.  Common  of  turbary.— Common  of  turbary  is  a 
right  or  hberty  to  dig  turf  upon  the  ground  of  another, 
or  in  the  lord's  waste  :  this  common  is  appendant  or  ap- 
purtenant to  a  house,  but  not  to  lands,  for  turves  are  to 
be  burnt  in  the  house.*    It  may  also  be  in  gross,  or  may 


*  Cheesman  t.  Hardham,  1  B.  & 
Aid.  706;  Musgrave  v.  Cave, 
Willes,  819.  There  can  be  no 
inter-commonage  or  common  be- 
cause of  vicinage,  imless  there  are 
contiguous  townshipe,  the  inhab- 
itants of  which,  secKing  to  excuse 
atrespass  for  that  cause,  have  com- 
mon rights  of  pasturage  append- 
ant, appurtenant,  or  in  gross,  in 
the  towns  where  they  reside.  The 
fact  that  cattle  are  suffered,  with- 
out objection,  to  run  at  larj^e  over 
the  immclosed  woodlands  of  a  new 


country,  affords  no  ground  from 
which  to  imply  a  grant.  Supreme 
Ct.,  1854,  Smith  v.  Floyd,  18  Barb. 
522 

«  Whiteman  v.  KincL  2  H.  Bl.  4. 

«  29  Geo.  2,  c.  86 ;  iPGeo:  8  c.  81. 

*  Hickman  v.  Thome,  2  Mod. 
105 ;  Tyringham*s  Case,  4  Co.  R. 
36  6,  88  6,  89  a ;  Tudor  L.  C.  Real 
Prop.  101-126  (2d  ed.);  Corbet's 
Case,  7  Co.  R.  5  a ;  Jones  v.  Robin, 
10  Q.  B.  587. 

*  Tudor  L.  C.  Real  Prop.  116  (2d 
ed.). 


tt 


524  Easements.  [§  247.' 

be  granted  expressly  with  other  land.'  It  does  Aot  give 
any  right  to  the  land,  trees,  or  mines ;  nor  can  it  exclude 
the  owner  of  the  soil ;  *  but  as  this  right  never  existed  in 
this  country,  its  discussion  is  of  no  practical  value. 

8eo.  247.  Nattire  and  description  of  common  of  estovers.-^ 
Common  of  estovers  is  a  right  or  liberty  of  taking  neces- 
sary wood  for  the  use  and  furniture  of  a  house  or  farm, 
from  off  another's  land.*  This  right  is  generally  consid- 
ered as  being  divided  into  three  distinct  species,  disting- 
uished from  each  other  by  a  different  application  of  the 
Saxon  word  "bote,"  which  is  synonymous  with  the 
French  *^ estovers:"  thus,  there  is  a house-bote,  plough- 
bote  and  hay-bote.  House-bote  is  a  sufficient  allowance 
of  wood  to  build  or  repair  the  house,  or  to  bum  in  it, 
which  latter  is  sometimes  called  flre-bote.  Plough-bote 
and  cart-boto  are  wood  to  be  employed  in  making  and 
repairing  all  instruments  of  husbandry,  as  ploughs,  carts, 
harrows,  rakes,  forks,  &c.  Hay-bote  or  hedge-bete  is 
wood  for  repairing  hedges  dr  fences,  as  pales,  stiles,  and 
gates  to  secure  inclosures.*  These  botes  or  estovers  must 
be  reasonable,  and  such  as  any  tenant  or  lessee,  except  a 
strict  tenant  at  wiU,  may  take  off  the  land  demised  to  him 
without  waiting  for  any  leave,  assignment  or  appoint- 
ment of  the  lessor,  unless  he  be  restrained  by  special  cove- 
nant to  the  contrary.  *  House-bote,  hay-bote  and  fire-bote 
belong  to  a  termor  of  common  right,  and  he  may  take 
wood  for  the  same ;  but  if  he  takes  more  than  is  needful 
he  may  be  punished  for  waste,*  as,  if  he  cuts  down  wood 
to  bum,  when  he  has  sufficient  dead  wood.  Although 
the  tenant  may  cut  down  and  take  sufficient  wood  to 
repair  walls,  fences  or  hedges  as  he  found  them,  yet  he 
cannot  do  so  to  make  new  ones.^  K  a  man  has  common 
of  estovers  by  grant,  he  cannot  build  new  houses  to  have 
common  #f  estovers  for  those  houses.'    The  right  to  esto- 

»  O'Hare  v.  Fahy,  10  Ir.  Com.  L.  »  Fitz.  N.  B.'^9;  Co.  Litt.  41. 

818,  C.  P.  •  Termea  de  Ley,  887,  896. 

•  4  Co.  R.  37.  '  Co.  Litt.  68 ;  Wood's  Inst.  525 ; 
» Co.  Litt.  122  a  ;  2  Blac.  Com.  Coke,  118. 

Tudor  L.   C.   Real  Prop.  114,  85 }         «  pitz.  N.  B.  180,  H. ;  Arundel  v. 
(2d  ed.).  '  Steere,  Cro.  Jac.  25. 

*  Wood's  Inst.  844 


CELAP.  XXVI.]       Common  of  Fishery. 


625 


vers  belongs  and  is  incident  to  the  state  of  every  tenant, 
whether  for  life  or  years,  except  that  of  a  strict  tenant 
at  will,  for  that  is  said  to  be  too  mean.  Common  of  es- 
tovers cannot  be  appendant  to  land,  but  it  must  neces- 
sarily be  to  a  house  to  be  spent  there.*  A  copyholder 
may  take  the  necessary  estovers  or  botes  on  his  copyhold 
wiHiout  a  special  custom ;  but  to  enable  him  to  take  them 
on  the  other  lands,  a  special  custom  must  be  shown.' 

If  a  man  has  common  of  estovers  in  the  woods  of  an- 
other, and  the  owner  of  the  wood  cuts  down  all  the  wood, 
he  who  ought  to  have  the  estovers  might,  before  3  &  4 
WiU.  4,  c.  27,  s.  36  (which  abolished  real  and  mixed 
actions),  have  had  an  assize  of  his  estovers ;  now  it  seems 
that  an  action  on  the  case  is  the  proper  remedy.* 

Sec.  248.  Common  of  fishery.— Nature  of.— Common  of 
fishery  is  a  right  or  hberty  of  fishing  in  another  man's 
water.*  It  can  exist  only  in  streams  which  are  not  navi- 
gahUy  for  the  sea  and  all  navigable  rivers  are  open  to  all.* 
It  is  a  profit  a  prendre  and  not  a  mere  easement  nor  an  in- 
terest in  land.  *  It  may  be  either  appendant,  appurtenant, 
or  in  gross.  ^  It  may  exist  by  grant,  or  by  prescription 
from  time  immemorial,  or  by  user  for  such  a  period  of 
time  as  is  required  by  statute  to  fix  a  right  by  prescrip- 
tion,' but  not  by  custom.*    A  custom  for  all  the  inhab- 


» Co.  litt.  121  h ;  Fitz.  N.  B.  180, 
C.  h ;  Tudor  L.  C.  Real  Prop.  115. 

«4  Co.  R.  81  6.  Common  of 
estovers  camiot  be  apportioned. 
Co.  Litt.  164  6.  If  a  partition  of 
the  premises  is  made  without 
reserving  the  right  of  common  to 
one  alone,  it  extinguishes  the  right. 
Livingston  v.  Ketcham,  1  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  592.  To  the  same  effect  is 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  RadclifF,  10 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  689;  Leyman  v. 
Abeel,  16  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  80.  It 
9eemSf  that  where  a  right  of  com- 
mon devolves  by  operation  of  law 
upon  several,  they  may  jointly 
convey  it  to  one.  Leyman  v. 
Abeel,  16  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  80 ;  Van- 
Rensselaer  v.  Radcliff,  10  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  639 ;  and  see  Livingston  v. 
Ketcham,  1  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  592.  A 
prescription  of  twenty  years  will 
bar  a  claim  to  a  right  of  common. 


Denton  v.  Jackson,  2  Johns.  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  820. 

>  Ashmead  v.  Ranger  (in  error), 
1  Ld.  Rayd.  551;  2  Salk.  688;  1 
Chit.  PL  159. 

*  Tudor  L.  C.  Real  Prop.  114  (2d 
ed.). 

*  Warren  v.  Matthews,  6  Mod 
73 ;  Baggott  v.  Orr,  2  Bos.  &.  P 
472. 

•Herbert  v.  Laughluyn,  Cro. 
Car.  492 ;  Wickham  v.  Hawker,  7 
M.  &.  W.  68. 

'  Tudor  L.  C.  Real  Prop.  114  (2d 

82  &  8  Will.  4,  c.  71,  8.  1; 
Wickham  v.  Hawker,  7  M.  &  W.  68. 

'Gateward's  Case,  6  Coke,  60; 
Atty.  Grenl.  v.  Matthias,  4  K.  &  J. 
579 ;   Grimstead  v.    Marlow,  4  T 
R.  717 ;  Lloyd  v.    Jones,    6  C.  B 
81 ;  Blewitt  v.  Tregoning,  8  Ad.  & 
£L  554. 


526 


Easememb. 


[§248. 


itants  of  a  town  or  parish  to  fish  in  a  person's  rirer  is 
bad.'  So  a  custom  for  all  the  inhabitants  in  a  town  to 
use  a  foot-path  for  angling  with  rods  and  lines  for  fish  in 
the  daytime,  for  recreation  only,  and  not  profit,  is  bad  as 
setting  up  a  custom  to  take  a  profit  a  prendre  in  aZieno 
solo*  Common  of  fishery,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  owner 
of  the  soil,  is  contrary  to  law ;  though  a  person  by  pre- 
scription may  have  a  separate  right  of  fishing  in  such 
water,  and  the  owner  of  the  sofl  will  be  excluded ; "  for 
a  man  may  grant  the  water  without  passing  the  soiL  If 
one  grant  a  separate  fishery,  neither  the  soil  nor  the  water 
pass,  but  only  a  right  of  fishery.* 

An  exclusive  right  of  fishery  may  exist  either  by  grant 
or  prescription,  but  neither  by  grant  nor  prescription  can 
a  person  acquire  a  right  to  erect  dams  or  other  obstruc- 
tions so  as  to  prevent  fish  from  going  up  the  stream/  A 
patent  to  the  inhabitants  of  a  town,  conveying  all  the 
land  under  water  within  certain  boundaries,  together 
with  the  exclusive  right  of  fishery  in  such  waters,  has 


» Lloyd  V.  Jones,  6  C.  B.  81,  89. 
>  Bland  v.  Lipecombe,  4  E,  ^  B. 
718,  n.  c.     . 
« Co.  Litt.  122  a. 

*  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Pischaiy. 

*  Brown  v.  Kennedy,  6  H.  &.  J. 
(Md.)  195;  People  v.  Piatt,  17 
John.  (N.  Y.)  195 ;  Adams  v.  pease, 
2  Conn.  481.  "  In  rivers  not  navi- 
^ble,"  says  Lord  Mansfield,  in 
Carter  v.  Murcot,  4  Burr.  2164, 
**  the  proprietors  of  land  have  the 
rieht  of  fishery  on  their  respective 
sides,  and  it  ge:f'*rally  extends  ad 
filitim  aquce,  Hut  in  navigable 
rivers,  the  proprietors  of  the  land  on 
each  side  have  it  not."  These 
principles  of  common  law  are  in- 
controvertible. If  the  term  navi- 
gable is  construed  according  to  its 
popular  import,  every  river  cap- 
able of  bemg  sailed  upon  by  a 
boat,  however  small  or  shallow,  is 
embraced  by  it.  Many^  of  the  incon- 
siderable streams  which  fall  into  a 
floatable  river,  are  of  this  descrip- 
tion. The  same  common  law, 
however,  which  has  established 
the  principle,  has  furnished  a  defi- 
nite explication  of  the  term.  Ev- 
ery river  where  the  8ea  ebbs  and 
flows,  is,  by  the  common  law,  con- 


sidered as  navigable ;   and  all  riv- 
ers   not    thus   distinguished    are 
not  navigable.    2  Roll.  170,  pL  14 ; 
Royal    Fishery    of  the    Banne, 
Davies'  Rep.  152,  5,  7 ;  Carter  v. 
Murcot,  4  Burr.  2162  ;  The  King  v. 
Wharton,  12  Mod.  510 ;  Hale's  De 
Jure  Maris,  Harg.  Law  Tracts,  5  ; 
Lord  Fitzwalter*8    Case.    1    Mod. 
105;  The  distinction  between  riv- 
ers    navigable     and     not    navi- 
gable,   that   is,    where    the    sea 
does,     or    does     not,    ebb     and 
flow,  is  very  ancient.     The  EJng 
V.  Smith,  Doug.  441.     The  former 
are  called  arms  of  the  sea,  while 
the  latter  pass  undet  the  denomi- 
nation of  private  or  inland  rivers. 
''Tliat  is  called  an   arm  of   sea 
where  the  tide  flows  and  re-flows, 
and  so  far  only,  as  the  tide  flows 
and  re-flows."    Hale  De  Jure  Mar- 
is, cap.  4.    If  a  river  runs  contig- 
uousfy  between  the  landof  two per^ 
sons,  each  of  thsm  is  owner  of  that 
part  of  the  river  which  is  next  his 
land,  of  common  right"  Rex  v. 
Wharton,   12  Mod.  610;  and   the 
right  of  flsher^  belongs  exclusive- 
ly to  such  ad  joming  owners.    Beck- 
man  V.  Kreamer,  43  111.  447  ;  Ad- 
ams V.  Pease,  ante ;   Ingram  t. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]        Common  op  Fishery. 


527 


been  held  to  confer  a  right  of  fishing  as  the  common 
property  of  the  town,  so  as  to  give  to  the  inhabitants 
the  right  to  regulate  the  same  at  any  legal  meeting.'  A 
town,  however,  does  not,  at  common  law,  unless  express- 
ly granted  to  it,  possess  any  right  of  property  in  a  fishery 
within  its  limits.  The  right  is  in  the  pubhc*  Unless  a 
special  grant  or  prescription  is  shown,  a  private  right  of 
fehery  is  limited  to  frih  water  rive^  where  the  tide 
does  not  ebb  or  flow,'  and  in  navigable  streams  the  pub- 
lic have  the  right  to  fish,  except  an  individual  has  acquired 
an  exclusive  right  thereto  by  grant  or  prescription.* 
Whether  the  State  has  the  right  to  regulate  private  as 
well  as  public  fisheries  within  its  limits  or  not,  is  not  now 
an  open  question,  as  the  right  has  been  assumed  and 
acted  upon  for  so  long  a  period  as  to  prevent  any  inquiry 
in  that  direction.* 


ThreadgiU,  8  Dev.  (N.  C.}  69. 
Where  a  right  is  conferred  by- 
statute  upon  particular  individu- 
als, it  is  not  assignable.  Muneon 
T.  Baldwin,  7  Conn.  168 ;  Comm'rs 
V.  Jennings.  6  C!ow.  (N.  Y.)  618 ; 
People  V.  Tebbetts,  19  (N.  Y.)  523 ; 
Ck)m.y.  Charlestown,  1  Pick.  (Mass.) 
180;  Coumers  v.  Kempshall,  26 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  404 ;  Scott  v.  WU- 
son,  8  N.  H.  821 ;  Beryl  v.  Carle, 
8  Me.  269  ;  Gould  v.  James,  6  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  869;  Rogers  v.  Jones,  1 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  sS? ;  Brookhaven 
T.  Strong,  1  S.  C.  415. 

'  Rogers  V.  Jones,  1  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  237. 

*  Randolph  v.  Braintree,  4  Mass. 
814. 

*  Mayor  v.  Richardson,  4  T.  R. 
437 ;  Arnold  v.  Mundy,  6  N.  J.  L. 
1 ;  Parker  v.  Mill  Dam  Co.,  20  Me. 
353 ;  Martin  v.  Waddell,  16  Pet. 
(U.  S.)400 ;  Carter  V.  Murcot,  ante. 

*  Id.  Any  person  may  take  fish 
in  such  waters  if  he  can  do  so 
without  trespassing  on  the  lands 
of  individuals.  Com.  v.  Chapin, 
5  Pick.  (Mass.)  199 ;  Coolidge  v. 
Williams,  4  Mass.  140;  Freery  v. 
Cooke,  14  Mass.  488,  and  extends 
to  the  taking  of  shell  fish  on  the 
shores  of  navigable  waters  where 
the  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  Parker  v. 
Cuttor  Mill  Dam  Co.,  ante ;  Moul- 
ton  V.  Libbey,  87  Me.  472,   upon 


the  general  proposition  stated  in 
the  text.  See  Preble  v.  Brown,  47 
Me.  284.  A  free  fishery  is  not  an 
exclusive  fishery.  Melvin  v. 
Whiting,  7  Pick.  (Mass.)  79.  A 
right  to  take  shell  fish  does  not 
carry  with  it  a  ri^t  to  take  the 
soil  or  dead  shellfish  imbedded 
therein,  except  such  as  necessarily 
adheres  to  the  living  fish  taken. 
Porter  v.  Shehan,  7  Grav  (Mass.) 
435.  In  New  Jersey  it  is  held  that 
no  person  can  have  ad  exclusive 
right  to  take  fish  from  navigable 
waters.  Yard  v.  Carman,  3  N.  J. 
L.  936.  And  it  is  also  held  that 
the  right  of  fishing  is  not  insei>> 
arable  from  the  soiL  Cobb  v. 
Davenport,  32  N.  J.  L.  869.  In 
order  to  avail  Imnself  of  a  pre- 
scriptive right  to  a  several  fishery 
in  navigable  waters,  the  person 
claiming  it  is  required  to  establish 
his  right  by  clear  proof,  as  all  pre- 
sumptions are  against  it.  Could 
V.  Jones,  6  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  869.  In 
the  absence  of  a  prescriptive  ri^ht, 
there  can  be  no  exclusive  ri^ht 
except  by  grant  from  the  sovereign 
power.  State  v.  Glen,  7  Jones  (K. 
C.)  321 ;  Collins  v.  Benbury,  5  Ired. 
(N.  C.)  L.  118 ;  S.  C.  3  id.  277. 

^  Smith  V.  Levins,  8  N.  Y.  472 ; 
Com.  V.  Bailey,  13  Allen  (Mass.) 
541 ;  Dunham  v.  Lamphere,  3  Gray 
(Mass.)  868. 


528 


EAS£HEin?S. 


[§248. 


Merely  clearing  out  a  fishing  place  in  a  river,  or  mj 
valuable  improvements  therein,  does  not  give  an  exclu- 
sive right  of  fishery,  nor  does  a  person  acquire  such  a 
right  by  stocking  a  stream.'    But,  a  person  who  plants 
oysters  in  a  stream,  and  clearly  designates  the  bed,  ac- 
quires such  a  property  therein  as  enables  him  to  main- 
tain trespass  against  any  one  interfering  therewith  ;■ 
and  his  right  of  property  is  such  as  even  persons  navigat- 
ing the  waters  are  bound  to  respect,  and  if  they  wilfully 
or  negligently  commit  a  damage  thereof  they  are  liable 
therefor.'    A  fishery  may  be  leased,  and  a  mere  lease 
thereof  does  not  pass  an  interest  in  the  land,  but  simply 
a  right  to  take  fish  from  the  water  in   the  mode,  and 
within  the  limits  perscribed  in  the  lease.* '  A  mere  grant 
of  a  right  to  fish  with  nets,  for  a  certain  period,  is  not  a 
lease  of  the  fishery,  but  merely  of  the  right  to  draw  nets 
within  the  limits  prescribed.    And  in  any  event,  even  if 
a  lease,  it  could  confer  no  more  exclusive  rights  upon 
the  lessee  than  the  lessor  had,  and  if  his  right  simply 
consisted  in  fishing  with  nets,  that   right  alone  would 
pass,  and  the  fishery  would  still  remain  in  common.'    In- 
deed, although  in  navigable  streams  the  right  of  fishing 
is  common,  yet  the  owners  of  the  land  bordering  thereon 
have  the  exclusive  right  of  drawing  seines  and  taking  fish 
<m  their  ctum  landSy  that  is,  upon  the  flats  that  are  covered 
only  at  high  tide,  if  they  belong  to  adjoining  owners.' 


>  Westfall  V.  Van  Arker.  12 
John.  (N.  Y.)  424. 

*  Fleet  V.  Hegeman,  14  Wend. 
<N.  Y.)  42 ;  Decker  v.  Fisher,  4 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  692;  Lowndes  v. 
Dickerson,  84  id.  586. 

*  Cobb  V.  Bennett,  75  Penn.  St. 
826 ;  Mayor  of  Colchester  v.  Brooke, 
6  Q.  B.  839. 

*Cortelyon  v.  Van  Brandt,  2 
John.  (N.  Y.)  857. 

*  Brink  v.  Bichmeyer,  14  John. 
(N.  Y.)  256.  In  Reed  v.  Green- 
berry,  8  Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  109,  A 
leased  a  fishery  to  B,  and  cove- 
nanted with  him  that  he  should 
use  the  fishery  for  certain  priv- 
ileges and  for  the  offal,  which  A 
was  to  have  in  part  payment.  B 
pat  up  his  fish  in  gross,  and  A  sued 


him  for  a  breach  of  the  covenantB 
of  the  lease.  It  was  held  that  the 
word  offal  meant  such  parts  of  the 
ftih.  as  were  not  used  for  food,  and 
if  Bputup  his  fish  in  gross,  though 
A's  profits  were  diminished,  yet 
there  was  no  breach  of  covenant. 
An  attempt  was  made  to  show  a 
custom  of  fishermen  to  cut  up 
their  fish,  but  no  general  custom 
which  is  necessary  to  explain  the 
meaning  of  worcfs  in  a  covenant 
was  shown.  Also,  that  the  cove- 
nant b^  B  did  not  amount  to  a 
stipulation  to  cut  up  the  fish  which 
Jhe  took  at  A*s  fishery. 

•  Com.  V.  Shaw,  14  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  9  ;  Lay  v.  King,  6  Day 
(Conn.)  72. 


j|LJt 


CHAP.  XXVI.]       Navigable  Streams. 


529 


Sec.  249.  Navigable  streams.— In  this  country,  the  com- 
mon law  rule  as  to  navigable  streams — at  least  in  most  of 
the  States — ^has  been  enlarged,  and,  while  all  streams  in 
which  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows  are  treated  as  navigable 
whether  they  are  in  fact  so  or  not,  so,  too,  all  streams  capa- 
ble of  serving  a  useful  purpose  in  floating  the  products  of 
the  country  either  in  a  rough  or  manufactured  state.' 

The  test  by  which  to  determine  the  navigability  of  our 
rivers  and  streams  is  to  be  found  in,  and  determined  by, 
their  actual  navigable  capacity  for  any  useful  purpose, 
and  those  rivers  that  are  navigable  in  fact  for  useful 
purposes,  and  serve  as  a  means  of  commercial  intercourse 
either  between  x)oints  in  the  same  State,  or  between 
States,  are  regarded  as  navigable,  and  are  subject  to  that 
servitude  irrespective  of  prescriptive  use  or  statutory 
enactment.'  This  is  a  part  of  our  common  law,  created 
by  necessity,  and  applied  by  common  consent,  and,  while 
there  is  some  conflict  in  the  cases,  as  to  the  relative  rights 
of  the  public  and  of  riparian  owners,  in  this  class  of 
streams,  yet  in  the  main,  I  think  our  courts  have  exhibited 
less  conflict  upon  this  subject,  and  much  more  consistency 
than  might  have  been  expected  to  result  from  such  a 
variety  of  questions  as  arise,  and  the  varied  conditions 
under  which  they  are  presented. 

There  is  yet  another  class  of  streams  which,  although 
not  navigable  by  "boats  or  lighters,"  are  yet  susceptible 
of  valuable  use  for  the  purpose  of  floating  logs  and  other 
products  of  the  country  along  its  banks  to  market  or  to 
mills,  and  which  are  floaiable  in  fact,  and  regarded  as 
quasi  navigable.'    In  most  of  the  States,  while  the  test 


^ 


» CJomm'rB  v.  Hemphill,  26  Wend. 
r.  Y.)  404 ;  Morgan  v.  King,  85 
.  Y.  454 ;  Weise  v.  Smith,  8  Or. 
445.  See  Folger  v.  Pearson,  8  id. 
455;  Tomlin  v.  Railroad  Co.,  82 
Iowa,  106;  The  Daniel  Ball,  10 
Wal.  (U.  S.  S.  C.)  557  ;  The  Mon- 
tehello,  11  id.  411 ;  Chicago  v.  Mc- 
Ginn, 51  El.  266  ;  Volk  v.  Eldred, 
28  Wis.  410  ;  Scott  v.  Wilson,  8  N. 
H.  821 ;  Georgetown  v.  Alexandria 
Canal  Co.,  12  Pet.  (U.  S.)  91  ;  Var- 
ick  V.  Smith,  9  Paige's  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
278;  Wardsworth  v.  Smith,  2  Fair. 


(Me.)  278 ;  Veasde  v.  Dwmel,  50 
Me.  496 ;  Knox  v.  Chaloner,  42  id. 
150 ;  McManus  v.  Carmichael,  8 
Iowa,  1  ;  People  v.  Tibbits,  19  N. 
Y.  528 ;  Hooker  v.  Cummings,  20 
Johns.  (N.  Y.)  90  ;  Pahner  v.  Mul- 
ligan, 8  Caines  (N.  Y.)  807. 

*  Wood  on  Nuisances,  612  ;  The 
Daniel  Ball,  10  Wal.  (U.  S.  S.  C.) 
559  ;  The  Montebello,  11  id.  411 ; 
Chicago  V.  McGinn,  51  lU.  289. 

»  Morgan  v.  King,  85  N.  Y.  454 ; 
Laney  v.  Clifford,  54  Me.  491; 
Brown  y.  Chadbome,  81   id.  9; 

34 


530 


Easeheitts. 


t§  249, 


of  navigability  is  made  to  depend  upon  the  capacity  of 
the  stream  for  that  purpose,  even  though  it  be  a  fresh- 
water stream,  yet  all  streams  in  which  the  tide  ebbs  and 
flows  are  regarded  as  navigable  in  law,  and  the  rules  of 
the  common  law  appUcable  thereto,  so  far  as  the  rights  of 
the  State  and  riparian  owners  are  concerned,  are  adopted/ 
In  all  the  cases  referred  to  in  the  previous  note,  it  is  held 
that,  while  other  streams  than  those  in  which  the  tide 
ebbs  and  flows  to  the  point  where  the  tide  ceases  to  affect 
them,  are  navigable,  yet  the  pubUc  do  not  have  the  same 
right  of  property  in  the  alveus  of  fresh  water,  as  in  tide- 
water streams,  and  that  on  all  fresh-water  streams  the 
owner  of  the  banks  also  owns  the  bed  of  the  stream  to 
the  ^^  medium  jUium  aquae,^^  while  in  those  affected  by 
the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tides,  the  title  to  the  bed  of  the 
stream  is  in  the  State,  and  the  titles  of  the  riparian 
owners  are  restricted  to  high-water  mark/ 


People  V.  Canal  Appraisers,  83  N. 
Y.  472  ;  Weise  v.  Smith,  8  Or.  445  ; 
Palmer  v.  Mulligan,  3  Caines'  Rep. 
(N.  Y.)  807;  Lorman  v.  Benson,  8 
Mich.  18 ;  Middleton  v.  Flat  River 
BoominK  Co.,  27  Mich.  583;  Davis 
V.  Winafow,  51  Me.  264 ;  Veazie  v. 
Dwinel,  50  id.  474 ;  Magnolia  v. 
Marshall,  89  Miss.  126;  Com.  v. 
Chapin,  5  Pick.  (Mass.)  199 ;  Volk 
V.  Eldred,  28  Wis.  410 ;  Stuart  v 
Clark,  2  Swan  (Tenn.)  9  ;  Rhodes 
V.  Otis,  88  Ala.  578  ;  Nearderhauser 
V.  State,  28  Ind.  270 ;  Moore  v. 
Sanbome,  2  Mich.  528;  Ellis  v. 
Carey,  80  Ala.  725 ;  Hubbard  v. 
BeU,  54111.  112. 

*In  Avery  v.  Fox,  1  Abb.  Ch. 
Rep.  (U.  S.)  246,  it  was  held  that 
the  owner  of  land  bordering  upon 
a  stream  though  navigable,  in 
which  the  tide  does  not  ebb  and 
flow,  is  presumed  to  be  the  owner 
of  the  bed  of  the  stream  to  the 
centre  thereof.  Com'rs  v.  People, 
5  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  855 ;  Shaw  v. 
Crawford,  10  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  286; 
People  V.  Tibbetts,  19  N.  Y.  528 ; 
Comers  V.  Hemphill,  26  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)404.  See  Morgan  v.  King,  85 
N.  Y.  454;  Gray  v.  Burdick,  20 
Pick.  (Mass.)  186;  Trustees  v. 
Dickinson,  9  Cush.  (Mass.)  544; 
Com.  V.  Chapin,  5  id.  190 ;  Scott  v. 
Wilson,  8  N,  H.  821 ;  Middleton  v. 


Page,  8  Conn.  221 ;  Chapman  v. 
Kimball,  9  id.  88 ;  Spring  v. 
Seavey,  8  Me.  138 ;  Berry  v.  Carly, 
8  Greenl.  (Me.)  269;  Brown  v. 
Kennedy,  5  H.  &  Johns.  (Md.)  195 ; 
Hays  V.  Bowman,  1  Rand.  (Va.) 
417;  Lamb  v.  Ricketts,  11  Ohio, 
811 ;  Gavit  v.  Chambers,  3  Ohio, 
495 ;  Gates  v.  Waddlington,  1  Mo- 
Cord  (S.  C.)  580 ;  McCullough  v. 
Wall,  4  Rich.  (S.  C.)  68 ;  Stuart  v. 
Clark,  2  Swan  (Tenn. )  9 ;  Magnolia 
V.  Marshall,  89  Miss.  109 ;  Com*ra 
V.  Withers,  29  id.  21  ;  Morgan  ▼. 
Reading,  8  S.  &  M.  (Miss.)  866; 
Mariner  v.  Schultz,  13  Wis.  693 ; 
Walker  v.  Shepardson,  4  id.  486 ; 
Schurmiiur  v.  liailroad  Co.,  10 
Minn.  82;  Lorman  v.  Benson,  8 
Mich.  18 ;  Middleton  v.  Pritchaid, 
8  Scam.  (111.)  500;  Cox  v.  The 
State,  8  Black.  (Ind.)  198 :  Hub- 
bard V.  Bell,  54  111.  110 ;  Warren 
V.  Chambers,  25  Ark.  120 ;  State 
of  Penn.  v.  The  Wheeling  Bridge 
Co.,  18  How.  (U.S.)  421. 

*  Hale's  De  Jure  Maris ;  Trustees 
V.  Bootle-cum-Linacre,  L.  R.,  3 
Q.  B.  4.  In  Rex  v.  Smith,  2  Doug. 
441,  it  was  held  that  the  soil  of  a 
navigable  stream  is  not,  by  pre- 
sumption of  law,  in  the  owner  of 
the  banks,  but  in  the  king ;  but 
that  the  title  of  the  soil  in  all 
streams  in  which  the  tide  does  not 


CHAP.  XXVI.]        Navigable  Streams. 


531 


In  New  York  it  held  that  on  all  the  larger  navigable 
rivers  of  the  State  above  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide, 
which  are  boundaries  between  States,  or  which  are  high- 
ways for  commerce  between  States,  the  title  of  riparian 
owners  is  restricted  to  highwater  mark,  as  also  upon  all 


ebb  and  flow  is  in  the  riparian 
owner.  In  that  case  a  nice  ques- 
tion arose  as  to  what  point  m  a 
stream  in  which  the  tide  ebbs  and 
flows,  the  navigability  of  the 
streams  ends.  The  city  of  London 
under  certain  supposed  powers, 
delegated  to  it  by  act  of  parlia- 
ment, erected  piles  on  the  bed  of 
the  river  Thames,  near  Richmond, 
within  the  high-water  mark,  some 
80  feet  from  the  shore,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  a  towing-path 
for  horses,  adjoining  and  contigu- 
ous to  a  whiu^  in  the  possession  of 
the  defendants.  The  defendants 
believing  the  towing-path  and  piles 
to  be  in  violation  of  their  rights, 
and  a  nuisance,  cut  away  one 
of  the  piles,  for  which  they 
were  indicted.  The  defendants 
insisted  that  the  tide  did  not  ebb 
and  flow  in  the  Thames  above 
London  bridge,  and  that  above  that 
point  it  was  kept  navigable  bv 
artificial  means,  and  that  the  tide 
above  that  point  was  occasioned 
by  the  pressure  and  accumulation 
backward  of  the  river  water,  and 
that,  therefore,  the  soil  did  not 
belong  to  the  crown.  Lord  Mans- 
field said:  "The  distinction  be- 
tween rivers,  navigable  and  not 
navieable,  and  those  where  the 
sea  does  not  ebb  or  flow,  is  very 
ancient ;  but  the  point  contended 
for,  a  distinction  between  the  case 
of  the  tide  occasioned  by  the  flux 
of  the  sea  water,  or  by  thepressure 
ba^ktcard  of  the  fresh  water  of  a 
river,  seems  to  be  entirely  new, 
but  there  were  no  facts  set  forth  in 
the  case,  which  let  in  the  consider- 
ation of  that  distinction.  The  case 
does  not  state  whether  the  water, 
when  the  tide  rises  at  Richmond, 
was  fresh  or  salt,  but  it  rather 
seems  to  be  taken  for  granted  that 
it  was  salty  A  verdict  was  ren- 
dendered  against  the  defendants, 
which  was  sustained  in  the  King's 
Bench.  Li  Attorney-General  v. 
Wood,  108  Mass.  36;  11  Am.  Rep. 
880,  a  similar  question  arose  in  ref- 
erence to  the  rights  of  the  public 


and  riparian  owners  upon  the  Mys- 
tic river  above  the  point  of  naviga- 
bililp^  in  fact,  except  for  skiffs  and 
small  pleasure  boats,  but  within 
the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tida  It 
appeared  that  the  tide  rose  and  fell 
at  the  point  in  Question  about  two 
feet,  and  that  the  ordinary  depth 
of  the  channel  was  about  the  same. 
The  defendant  erected  a  dam  at 
the  point  in  (question,  in  1851,  and 
maintained  it  there  until  1870, 
when  it  was  destroyed.  The  river 
is  a  small  stream  flowing  into  Bos- 
ton harbor,  and  the  defendant 
denied  that  it  was  navigable  in 
fad ;  and  it  did  not  appear  that  it 
was,  except  for  small  pleasure 
boats.  He  also  denied  that  it  wxs 
navigable  in  law,  and  insisted  that 
although  the  rise  and  faU  of  the 
water  there  was  two  feet,  that  tw 
was  occasioned  by  the  meeting 
the  salt  water  of  the  tide  with  t* 
fresh  water  of  the  stream  on  IjS 
downward  passage.  But  upon  this 
point  the  court  said  :  **  The  law  on 
this  point  is  well  settled.  It  is  the 
rise  and  fall  of  the  water,  and  not 
the  proportion  of  salt  water  to 
fresh,  that  determines  whether  ^, 
particular  portion  of  a  stream  is 
within  tide  water,*'  and  the  court 
cited  Rex  v.  Smith,  ante ;  Peyroux 
V.  Howard,  7  Pet.  (U.  S.  S.  C.)  324, 
and  lApish  v.  Bangor  Bank,  8  Me. 
85,  in  support  of  its  position.  Li 
reference  to  the  actual  navigability 
of  the  stream,  except  for  pleasure 
craft,  the  court  said:  ** Navigable 
streams  are  highways,  and  a  trav- 
eller for  pleasure  is  as  fully  entitled 
to  protection  in  using  a  public  way, 
whether  by  land  or  water,  as  a 
traveller  for  business.  *  ♦  *  if 
water  is  navigable  for  pleasure 
boating,  it  must  be  regarded  as 
navigable  water  though  no  craft 
has  ever  been  upon  it  for  the  pur- 
poses of  trade  or  agriculture,"  thus 
overruling  the  doctrine  of  Rowe  v. 
Granite  Bridge  Co. ,  21  Pick.  (Mass.) 
844 ;  Charlestown  V.  County  Com'rs 
8  Mete.  (Mass.)  202,  and  Murdock 
V.  Stickney,  8  Cush.  (Mass.)  113. 


632 


Easemeihs. 


[§M9. 


streams  navigable  in  their  natural  state,  which  have  been 
declared  navigable  by  statute/  It  also  seems  to  be  the 
doctrine  of  the  courts  of  that  State,  and  indeed  the  doc- 
trine of  all  the  courts,  that  the  waters  of  a  stream  in 
their  natural  condition,  susceptible  of  beneficial  use 
for  the  purposes  of  navigation  and  commerce,  are  pvMici 
juris,  and  may  be  declared  navigable  by  the  l^is- 
lature,  and  become  subject  to  all  the  restrictions  of 
navigable  streams,  without  compensation  to  riparian 
owners  for  injuries  sustained.  But  that  the  legislature 
has  not  constitutional  power  to  declare  a  stream  navigable 
that  is  not  so  in  fact,  and  which  can  be  made  navigable 
only  by  artificial  means,  without  proper  compensation  to 
riparian  owners  for  the  damages  inflicted  upon  them  in 
depriving  them  of  the  use  of  the  streams  for  ordinary 
purposes.'  In  several  of  the  States  no  distinction  is  made 
between  the  rights  of  riparian  owners  upon  fresh- water 
streams,  navigable  in  fact,  and  those  streams  affected 
by  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide.  But  the  same  rule  pre- 
vails as  to  oily  and  the  bed  of  all  navigable  streams  is 
held  to  be  vested  in  the  State."  In  several  of  the  States 
where  it  is  held  that  the  title  to  the  beds  of  the  streams  are 
in  the  State,  the  titles  of  riparian  owners  are  extended  to 
low-water  mark,  thus  vesting  in  them  the  power  and  the 
right  to  erect  and  maintain  wharves  in  front  of  their  prop- 
erty, where  it  can  be  done  without  actual  impediment 
to  navigation.* 


1  The  People  v.  Canal  AimiftiseiB, 
88  N.  Y.  m. 

«  Morgan  V.  King,  85  N.  Y.  464  ; 
Walker  v.  The  Board  of  Public 
Works,  16  Ohio,  640. 

»  Shrunk  v.  Schuylkill  Co.,  14  S. 
&  B.  (Penn.)  71  ;  Bridge  Co.  v. 
Kirk,  46  Penn.  112  ;  Ellia  v.  Carey, 
80  Ala.  725 ;  Bullock  v.  Wilson,  2 
Porter  (Ala.)  436  ;  Ingraham  v. 
Threadgill,  8  Dev.  (N.  C.)  59  ;  Col- 
lins V.  Benbury,  8  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
277  ;  Stuart  v.  Clark,  2  Swan 
(Tenn.)  9;  Elder  v.  Bums,  6  Humph. 
(Tenn.)  858  ;  Haight  v.  Keokuk,  4 
Iowa,  199;  McManus  v.  Carmi- 
chael,  8  Clarke  (Iowa)  1 ;  Tomlin  v. 
Dubuque,  83  Iowa,  106  ;  Attorney- 
General  V.  Wood,  108  Mass.  86. 


*  Qualifiedly  in  McManus  v.  Car- 
michael,  8  ]!owa,  1.  But  contra^ 
Haight  V.  Keokuk,  4  id.  199 ;  Tom- 
lin V.  Dubuque,  82  id.  106 ;  Elder 
V.  Bums,  6  Humph.  (Tenn.)  885 ; 
Stuart  V.  Clark,  2  Swan  (Tenn.) 
9 ;  Blanchard  v.  Porter,  11  Ohio 
188.  But  later,  that  the  title  of 
riparian  owners  covers  the  bed  of 
the  stream  if  he  owns  on  both 
sides.  Walker  v.  Board  of  Public 
Works,  8  Ohio,  495;  Howard  ▼. 
IngersoU,  17  Ala.  780 ;  Rhodes  v. 
Otw,  83  id.  88  ;  Ellis  v.  Carey,  80 
id.  725 ;  Flanagan  v.  Philadelphia, 
45  Penn.  St.  219 ;  Bridge  Co.  v. 
Kirk,  46  id.  112;  East  Haven  v. 
Henmiingway,  7  Conn.  186. 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


Navigable  Streams. 


533 


Thus  it  will  be  seen  that,  in  this  country,  there  are 
three  classes  of  navigable  streams : 

1st.    Tidal  streams  that  are  navigable  in  law.* 

2d.  Those  that,  although  non-tidal,  are  yet  navigable 
in  fact  for  ^'  boats  or  lighters  "  and  susceptible  of  valuable 
use  for  commercial  purposes  ;•  and 

8d.  Those  which  are  fioatabley  or  capable  of  valuable 
use  in  bearing  the  products  of  the  mines,  forests,  and 
tillage  of  the  country  it  traverses  to  mills  or  markets." 

It  should  be  understood  that,  except  in  salt-water 
streams,  so  far  as  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  the  question 
of  navigability  is  one  of  fact,  and  must  be  established  by 
those  who  seek  to  use  it  as  such ;  *  and  also,  that  the 
stream  must  be  navigable  in  its  natural  state,  unaided  by 
artificial  means  or  devices.'  If  a  stream  is  not  suscept- 
ible of  valuable  use  to  the  public  as  a  navigable  or  float- 
able stream,  without  the  erection  of  dams,  it  is  not  a  nav- 
igable stream,  even  though  it  might  be  appUed  to  that 
use  after  dams  are  erected.  So,  too,  it  must  be  susceptible 
of  use  for  a  considerable  portion  of  the  year,  *  although  the 
fact  that  it  is  dry  at  some  seasons  of  the  year,  if  for  a 
considerable  time  at  other  seasons  it  is  really  floatable, 
will  not  destroy  the  pubUc  right  of  navigation.*    So,  too, 


*  The  Royal  Fishers  of  the  River 
Banne,  Davy's  Rep.  148. 

» The  Daniel  Bell,  10  WaU.  (U. 
S.)  G55 ;  The  Montebello,  11  id.  411 ; 
Chicago  V.  McGinn,  61  HI.  269. 

*  Rhodes  v.  Otis,  88  Ala.  578; 
Weise  v.  Smith,  8  Oregon,  445  ; 
Morgan  v.  King,  80  Barb.  (N.  Y. 
S.  C.)  9 ;  affirmed  Ct.  of  Appeals, 
85  N.  Y.  454 ;  McManus  v,  Car- 
michael,  8  Iowa,  1;  Veazie  v. 
Dwinel,  54  M^.  160  ;  Lorman  v. 
Benson,  8  Mich.  18 ;  State  v.  Can- 
terbiuy,  28  N.  H.  195,  navigable 
by  usage ;  Scott  v.  Wilson,  2  N. 
H.  821.  (The  Connecticut  River 
above  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide 
held  to  be  navigable  for  rafts  and 
logs  by  long  user.)  See  also  Shaw 
V.  Crawford,  10  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  286 ; 
Fitkin  v.  Olmstead,  1  Root  (Conn.) 
217,  in  which  it  is  held  that  the 
ConnectiGut  River  above  the  tide 
is  common  to  all.  Bullock  v.  Wil- 
son, 2  JPort  (Ala.)  486;  Martin  v. 


Bliss,  6  Blackf .  (Ind.)  85  ;  Depew 
V.  Canal  Co.,  6  Ind.  8 ;  Young  v. 
Harrison,  6  Ga.  180  ;  Jones  v.  Wa- 
ter Lot  Co.,  18  id.  589  ;  Harring- 
ton V.  Edwards,  17  Miss.  586  ;  Dal- 
^mple  V.  Mead,  1  Grant's  Cases 
^'enn.)  197 ;  Hubbard  v.  Bell,  54 
111.  110 ;  Lincoln  v.  Chadbume,  56 
Me.  157 ;  Hooper  v.  Hobson,  57  id. 
278 ;  Folger  v.  Pearson,  8  Oregon, 
455  ;  VaUc  v.  Eldred,  28  Wis.  410; 
Munson  v.  Hungerford,  6  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  265;  Varick  v.  Smith,  5 
Paige  (N.  Y.)  148 ;  Dwinel  v. 
Veazde,  44  Me.  167. 

*  McManus  v.  Carmichael,  8 
Iowa,  1 ;  Rhodes  v.  Otis,  88  Ala. 
578 ;  Morgan  v.  King,  85  N.  Y. 
454. 

^  Morgan  v.  Kizig,  85  N.  Y.  454 ; 
Beryl  v.  Carl,  8  Me.  209 ;  Wads- 
worth  V.  Smith,  2  Fair  Me.  276. 

•  PeoDle  V.  Tebbits,  19  N.  Y.  528 ; 
Reynolds  v.  McArthur,  2  Peters* 
(U.  S.)  417. 


su 


Easements. 


[§»*9. 


in  order  to  make  a  stream  l^ally  floatable^  and  thus  a 
public  highway^  it  must  be  in  such  a  condition  that  it 
will  float  logs  or  other  productions  of  the  country  with- 
out artificial  aid.  Thus,  in  one  case,  it  was  held  that  a 
stream  that  would  not  float  logs,  without  the  aid  of  a 
person  in  a  canoe,  or  of  people  on  the  banks  to  push  them 
along,  and  when  the  logs  were  frequently  injured  by  the 
difficulty  in  passing  them  through,  the  stream  was  not 
navigable  in  any  sense.' 

The  stream  must  be  of  such  a  character  and  capacity 
that  it  can  be  profitably  and  advantageously  used  during 
certain  seasons  of  the  year,  in  its  natural  state,  for  the 
I)assage  of  the  products  of  the  country  through  which  it 
passes ;  but,  while  a  stream  that  cannot  at  any  season  of 
the  year  be  turned  to  profitable  account  for  this  purpose 
is  not  floatable  in  the  legal  sense,  yet,  if,  in  its  natural 
state,  it  is  susceptible  of  profitable  use  for  such  purposes 
at  some  seasons  of  the  year,  the  fact  that  dams  are  erected 
and  that  by  the  aid  of  those  dams  alone  it  is  suscept. 
ible  of  such  use  at  other  seasons  of  the  year,  than  those 
in  which  it  would  otherwise  be  used,  does  not  prevent 
its  use  for  such  purposes  at  any  season  when,  by  the  aid 
of  such  dams,  it  can  be  used.' 

No  definite  legal  test,  by  which  to  determine  the  ques- 
tion of  navigability  for  the  purposes  of  floatage^  can  be 
given.  It  is  purely  a  question  of  fact,  dependent  upon 
the  capacity  of  the  stream,  the  products  of  the  country, 
and  the  profitableness  or  unprofitableness  of  its  use  in 
that  manner.'    K,  in'  its  natural  state,  it  is  capable  of 


>  Morgan  v.  King,  85  N.  Y.  454 
•  Volk  V.  Eldred,  23  Wis.  410 ; 
Moore  v.  Sanbome,  2  Mich.  428 ; 
Wadsworth  v.  Smith,  11  Me.  278 ; 
Naederhouser  v.  State,  28  Ind. 
270;  Veazie  v.  Dwinel,  50  Me.  579. 
» Morgan  v.  King,  85  N.  Y.  454. 
The  natural  capacity  of  the  stream 
must  be  such  as  to  make  it  serve 
a  useful  purpose  to  the  public,  as  a 
means  of  floating  the  products  of 
the  coimtry  to  mills  and  markets. 
Hence  if  it  can  be  used  only  by  a 
a  few  individuals,  and  only  for  a 
few  weeks  in  each  year,  it  is  not 
regarded  as  a  public  strram.  Mun- 


son  v.  Hungerford,  0  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
2  5 ;  Burrows  v.  Qaliup,  82  Conn. 
501.  Nor  unless  it  is  capable  of 
use  without  deepening  or  vriden- 
ing,  or  other  artificial  means ;  as 
by  a  dam,  Volk  v.  Eldred,  ante, 
or  digging  out  the  channel  or  witli 
enin^  the  stream.  Wadsworth  ▼. 
Smith,  11  Me.  278;  Veazie  v. 
Dwinell,  50  id.  479 ;  People  v. 
Piatt,  17  Johns.  fN.  Y.)  4&.  It 
must  serve  a  useiul  puolio  pur- 
pose, so  as  fairly  to  be  said  to  be 
of  a  public  character,  and  bene- 
ficial as  a  public  highway  for  the 
outlet  of  the  products  of  &e  co<aii« 


Ik 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  NaYIGABLE  STREAMS.  535 

floating  vessels,  rafts,  logs  or  other  products  of  the  coun- 
try to  market  or  to  mills,  and  in  that  respect  is  fairly- 
susceptible  of  beneficial  use  to  the  public,  for  any  consid- 
erable portion  of  the  time,  then  it  may  be  used  by  the 
public  for  that  purpose,  but  the  owner  of  the  alvetis  of 
the  stream  is  not  thereby  prevented  from  using  the 
stream  in  all  ways  and  for  adl  purposes  not  inconsistent 
with  its  use  by  the  public* 

The  riparian  owner  may  apply  the  water  to  use  for  the 
propulsion  of  machinery,  and  for  that  purpose  may  erect 
a  dam  across  the  stream  where  the  stream  is  simply 
floatable^  leaving  suitable  ways  for  passage  of  logs  and 
other  products ."  The  right  of  the  public  for  passage  with 
logs,  &c.,  is  superior  to  the  right  of  the  riparian  owner, 
and  if  he  erects  obstructions  in  the  stream  which  pre- 
vents, endangers  or  materially  hinders  the  passage  of 
rafts  or  logs,  whether  such  obstruction  is  in  the  form  of 
a  dam  or  otherwise,  such  obstruction  is  a  nuisance  and 
subjects  the  person  making  it,  not  only  to  an  action  for 
the  damages  sustained  by  the  owners  of  rafts  or  logs 
obstructed  by  it,  but  also  to  indictment  as  for  a  public 

try  it  traverses.    Curtis  t.  Keeler,  right  to  use  it  for  that  purpose. 

15  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  511 ;  Hubbard  v.  )  Iwodes  v.  Otis,  ante.    In  determin- 

Bell,  54  lU.  113 ;  Treat  v.  Lord,  42  in[^  the  question  of  navigability, 

Me.  582 ;  Brown  v.  Chadboume,  it  is  the  rxUtiable  more  than  the 

31  id.  9  ;  Morgan  v.  King,  18  Barb,  continual  capacity  that  is  to  be 

(N.  Y.)  277 ;  85  N.  Y.  (Court  of  Ap-  considered.    The  real  question  is, 

peals)  454 ;   Walker   v.   Shepard-  can  it  be  made  a  vcduame  and  hen- 

son,  4  Wis.  486 ;  Stuart  v.  Clark,  e/ZctoZ  aid  to  the  public  in  getting 

2  Swan  (Tenn.)  9 ;  Moore  v.  San-  the  products  of   the   country   to 

borne,   2    MicL    253 ;    Weise    v.  market.    Lorman  v.  Benson,  ante ; 

Smith,  8  Oregon,  445  ;  Falyer  v.  Rice  v.  Ruddington,  19  Mich.  125 ; 

Robinson,  id.  458 ;  Naederhouser  v.  Drawbridge  Co.  v.  Halliday,  4  Ind. 

State,  28  Ind.  270 ;  Rhodes  v.  Otis,  36 ;  Martin  v.  Bliss,  5  Blackf  .^d.) 

33  Ala.  578;  Laney  v.  Clifford,  54  135;  Depew  v.  Canal  Co.,  5  Ind. 

Me.  489.    In  such  streams  it  is  not  8 ;  Moore  v.  Sanborne,  2  Mich.  518. 

necessary  that  they  should  be  sub-  >  Lorman  v.  Benson,  8  Mich.  18 ; 

ceptible  of  navigation  against  the  laney  v.  Clifford,  54  Me.  491 ;  Mor- 

current.    Morgan  v.  Kmg,  ante;  gan  v.  King,  18  Barb.  (N.  Y.)277; 

Lorman   v.   Benson,  8  Mich.  18.  Scofleld  v.  Lansing,  17  Mich.  437. 

But,  upon  the  authority  of  all  the  See  note  in  Washington  on  £as&- 

cases,  it  must  be  susceptible   of  ments,  i).  507  ;  Avery  v.   Fox,  1 

bearing  the  products  of  tne  coun-  Abb.  (iK  S.  C.  C.)  246 ;  Yates  v, 

try  m  a  state  fit  for  market,  so  as  Milwaukie,  10  Wid.  (N.  S.)  497. 

rcKaUy  to  serve  a  valuable  and  bene-  'Scofield  v.  Lansing,  17  Mich, 

ficial  public  purpose.    Whether  it  487  ;   Thurman  v.  Morrison,  8  B. 

is  navigable  tor  such  purpose  is  a  Mon.  C^-)  867 ;  XX)Ugla88  Yt  State^ 

question  of  fagt,  and  must  be  es-  4  Wis.  8o7. 
toblished  by  those  asserting  the 


J 


636  Easements.  [§  250. 

nuisance,  and  the  person  so  injured  by  the  obstruction 
may  abate  so  much  of  the  same  as  is  necessary  to  secure 
the  proper  exercise  of  his  right. ' 

But,  while  the  right  of  passage  for  the  public  must  oa 
the  one  hand  be  respected  by  the  riparian  owner,  so  oa 
the  other  hand  must  the  rights  of  the  riparian  owner  be 
respected  by  the  public,  and  where  a  river  is  merely 
floatable  the  public  have  no  right  to  so  use  it  as  to  destroy 
its  beneficial  use  for  manufacturing  purposes.'  Thus  it 
has  been  held  that  persons  using  a.  floatable  stream  have 
no  right  to  erect  dams  thereon,  and  thereby  detain  and 
hold  the  water  to  be  let  off  in  such  a  manner  as  to  aid  in 
the  floating  of  logs,  when,  by  such  dams,  the  water  is 
withheld  from  mill-owners  below,  to  their  injury,  even 
though  except  for  such  dams  the  stream  could  not  be 
used  for  floatage  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year.* 

Thus,  it  will  be  seen  that,  in  order  to  determine 
whether  the  owners  of  land  bordering  upon  a  stream 
navigable  in  fact,  but  in  which  the  tide  does  not  ebb  and 
flow,  have  a  private  right  of  fishery  or  not,  depends  upon 
the  question  whether,  in  the  State  where  the  question 
arises,  he  is  treated  as  being  the  owner  of  the  soil  ad 
Mium  aquody  or  is  restricted  to  low- water  mark.  In  any 
event,  it  must  also  be  remembered  that  fish,  uncaught, 
are  not  absolutely  the  property  of  the  owner  of  the 
stream,  but  that  he  has  simply  a  qualified  or  qvjosi  prop- 
erty therein,  while  they  remain  in  the  water  upon  his 
land,  but  this  property  is  lost  whenever  they  escape 
beyond  the  limits  of  his  boundaries.* 

Sec.  250.  Watercourse.— Definition  o£~A  watercourse  is 
Water  flowing  between  banks  more  or  less  deflned.  To 
constitute  a  watercourse  in  which  rights  may  exist,  or 
may  be  acquired  by  user  or  otherwise,  the  flow  of  water 

'  R^nwick  v.  Morris,  7  Hill  (N.  ner,  42  id.  156  ;  State  v.  Freeport, 

Y.)  575  ;    Memphis  R.  R.  Co.  v.  43  id.   198 ;  Powers  v.    Irish,    28 

Hicks,  5  Sneed  l(Teim.)  427  ;  Barnes  Mich.  429. 

V.  Racine,  4  Wis.  454;  Burrows  v  'Scofield  v.  Lansing,  17  Mich.  437. 

Pixley,  1  Root  (Conn.)  863  ;  Brown  »  Middleton  v.  Flat  River  Boom- 

V.  Watrons,  47  Me.  161 ;  Gerrish  v.  ing  Co.,  27  Mich.  538. 

Brown,   51   id.    256;    Veazie   v.  ^Taylor's  Landlord  and  Tenant, 

Dwinel,  50  id.  479 ;  Knox  y.  Calo-  193. 


CHAP.  XXVI.] 


Watercourses. 


537 


must  possess  *that  unity  of  character  by  which  the  flow 
on  one  person's  land  can  be  identified  with  that  on  his 
neighbor's  land.  Water  which  squanders  itself  over  an 
indefinite  surface  is  not  a  watercourse,  nor  a  proper  sub- 
ject-matter for  the  acquisition  of  a  right  by  user.*  But 
the  moment  the  water  of  a  spring  runs  into  a  definite 
channel,  it  constitutes  a  watercourse  ;  *  and  all  accessions 
to  such  stream,  from  whatever  source,  form  a  part  of  it.* 

Sec.  251.  Nature  of  rights  in  natural  streams.— Flowing 
water  ia  pvMici  juris^  not  in  the  sense  that  it  12  a  honum 
vacansy  to  which  the  first  occupant  may  acquire  an  ex- 
clusive right,  but  that  it  is  public  and  common  in  this 
sense  only,  that  aU  may  reasonably  use  it  who  have  a 
right  of  access  to  it;  that  none  can  have  any  property  in 
the  water  itself,  except  in  the  particular  portion  which 
he  may  choose  to  abstract  from  the  stream  and  take 
into  his  possession,  and  that  during  the  term  of  his  pos- 
session qnly.*  The  right  to  the  use  of  fiowing  water  is 
clear.  Prima  facie  the  proprietor  of  each  bank  is  the 
proprietor  of  half  the  land  covered  by  the  stream,  ad 
medium  JUum  aqtue^  but  there  is  no  property  in  the 
water.  Each  proprietor  of  the  land  has  a  right  to  the 
advantage  of  the  stream  flotuing  in  its  natural  course 
over  his  land,  and  to  use  the  same  as  he  pleases  for  any 
purpose  of  his  own,  not  inconsistent  with  a  similar  right 
in  the  proprietors  of  land  above  or  below ;  so  that  neither 
can  any  proprietor  above  diminish  the  quantity  or  injure 
the  quality  of  the  water  which  would  otherwise  naturally 
descend,  nor  can  any  proprietor  throw  back  the  water, 
without  the  license  or  the  grant  of  the  proprietor  above  ;^* 

»  Shields  v.  Amdt,  15  N.  J.  Eq. 
284 ;  Dickinson  v.  Worcester,  7 
Allen  (Mass.)  9 ;  Eulrich  v.  Richter, 
d7  Wis.  226 ;  S.  C.41id.  818 ;  Barnes 
V.  Sabron,  10  Nev.  217  ;  Luther  v. 
Winnissmet  Co.,  0  Cush.  (Mass.) 
191 ;  Wagner  v.  Long  Island  R.  R. 
Co.,  2  Hun  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  683 ;  Bris- 
coe V.  Drought,  11  Ir.  Com.  L.  R. 
260;  Rawson  v.  Taylor,  11  Exchq. 
869  ;  Broadbent  v.  Ramsbottom, 
id.  602. 

'  Dudden  v.  Guardians  of  Clut- 


ton  Union,  1  H.  &  N.  627  ;  Gillett 
V.  Johnson,  80  Conn.  180 ;  Macon>- 
ber  v.  Godfrey,  108  Mass.  219  ;  11 
Am.  Rep,  849 ;  Ashley  v.  Wolcott, 
11  Cush.  (Mass.)  192;  Gannon  v. 
Hargdon,  10  Allen  (Mass.)  106; 
Franklin  v.  Fisk,  18  id.  211. 
«  Wood  V.  Waud,  8  Exch.  748. 

*  Embrey  V.  Owen,  6  Exch.  869. 
Mason  v.  Hill,  8  B.  &  Ad.  804  ;  5 
id.  1. 

•  Merritt  V.  Brinkerhoff,  17  John. 
(N.  Y.).806  ;  Hetrick  v.  Deuchler, 


588 


Easemekts. 


[§  251. 


or  a  right  to  do  so  acquired  by  prescription  from  tune 
immemorial,  or  by  user  for  the  period  prescribed  by 
statute.'  Every  riparian  proprietor  has  a  right  to  the 
reasonable  use  of  water  flowing  past  his  land ;  namely, 
for  his  domestic  purposes,  and  for  his  cattle.  He  has 
also  the  right  to  the  use  of  the  water  for  any  other  pur- 
pose, provided  he  does  not  thereby  interfere  with  the 
rights  of  the  proprietors  either  above  or  below  him,' 
Subject  to  this  condition,  a  riparian  proprietor  may  dam 
up  the  stream  for  the  purpose  of  a  mill,  or  divert  the 
water  for  the  purposes  of  irrigation ;  but  he  has  no  right 
to  interrupt  the  regular  flow  of  the  stream,  if  he  thereby 
interferes  with  the  lawful  use  of  the  water  by  other  pro- 
prietors and  inflicts  upon  them  a  sensible  injury.*  He 
has  a  right  by  means  of  water-wheels  and  machinery. 


6  Penn.  St.  82  ;  Merritt  v.  Parker, 
1  N.  J.  L.  460 ;  Dorman  v,  Ames. 
Where  a  lease  conveyed  the  right 
to  draw  a  certain  Quantity  of  water 
from  a  canal  of  tne  lessors  to  the 
mills  of  th&  lessees,  and  contained  a 
reservation  excepting  and  reserv- 
ing to  the  said  lessors,  however, 
the  control  of  the  water  in  the  W 
river,  and  in  all  mill  ponds,  hays, 
lakes,  and  reservoirs  at  and  above 
said  premises,  with  the  right  of 
holding  back  and  retaining  and 
discharging  the  water  therefrom 
at  their  pleasure,  an  abatement  of 
the  rent  hereinafter  mentioned  be- 
ing made  in  case  said  lessees  shall 
be  interrupted  in  the  use  of  said 
mills  thereby, — Held,  upon  a  con- 
sideration of  the  whole  mstrument 
together,  that  the  lessors  could  not, 
at  their  pleasure,  erect  a  barrier  to 
prevent  the  flow  of  water  from 
their  reservoir  into  the  canal,  and 
in  that  way  terminate  the  lease, 
when  such  coiurse  was  not  neces- 
sary in  their  general  control  and 
management  of  the  water.  Ck>le 
V.  Lake  CJompany,  54  N.  H.  242 ; 
Pierce  v.  Kinney,  59  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
56;  Woodbury  v.  Short,  17  Vt. 
387;  Wallace  v.  Drew,  59  Barb. 
fN.  Y.)  418  ;  Shamleffer  v.  Council 
Grove  Ck).,  18  Kan.  24;  Acquac- 
hanonk  Water  Co.  v.  Watson,  29 
N.  J.  Eq.  866  ;  Taylor  v.  Welch,  6 
Oregon,  198 ;  Mason  v.  Hill,  5  B. 
&ild.  1,24;  8B.&Ad.  804;  5  id. 


1 ;  Wright  v.  Howard,  1  Sim.  & 
Stu.  190,  203 ;  Acton  v.  Blundell 
(in  error),  12  M.  &  W.  848,  349 ; 
Tyler  v.  Wilkinson,  4  Mas.  (U.  S.) 
897. 

^  Belknap  v.  Trimble,  8  Paige's 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  605 ;  Haight  v.  Mce, 
21  N.  Y.  241 ;  Norton  v.  Valentine, 
14  Yt.  243 ;  Butman  v.  Hussey,  12 
Me.  407;  Hatch  v.  Dwight,  17 
Mass.  296  ;  Webb  v.  Portland 
Mfg.  Co.,  3  Sum.  (U.  S.)  189 ;  Bol- 
ivar V.  Mfg.  Co.,  16  Pick.  (Masa) 
241 ;  King  v.  Tiffany,  9Conn.  162; 
Drewett  v.  Sheard,  7  C.  &.  P.  465 ; 
Sampson  v.  Hoddmott,  1  C.  B.  N. 
S.  590 ;  3  id.  596 ;  Moore  v.  Webb, 
1  C.  B.  N.  S.  678;  Carlyon  v. 
Levering,  1  H.  &  N.  784 ;  Mur- 
gatroyd  v.  Robinson,  7  E.  &  B. 
891 ;  Gaved  v.  Martyn,  19  C.  B.  N. 
S.  732 ;  Tudor  L.  C.  Real  Prop. 
159-168. 

«  Tyler  v.  Wilkinson,  4  Mas.  (U. 
S.)  897  ;  China  v.  Southwick,  12 
Me.  288 ;  WiUiams  v.  Gale,  3  H. 
&  J.  (Md.)  281 ;  Richardson  v.  Kerr, 
34  Cal.  69 :  Lapham  v.  Curtis,  5 
Vt.  371  ;  Hodges  v.  Hodges,  5  Met. 
(Mass.)  205 ;  Milner  v.  Qilmour.  13 
Moore  P.  C.  C.  131 ;  Smnpson  v. 
Hoddinott,  1  C.  B.  N.  S.  590  :  8  id. 
596;  Embrey  v.  Owen,  6  Exch. 
853  ;  Ld.  Norbury  v.  Kitchin,  8 
F.  &  F.  292. 

*  If  he  raises  his  dam  so  as  to 
flood  the  lands  of  upper  owners, 
or  unreasonably  holds  it  back  from 


CfHAP.  XXVI.] 


Mill  Owners. 


539 


erected  by  him  for  that  purpose,  to  pump  up  water  from 
the  stream  to  a  reservoir,  and  to  convey  it  thence  by 
pipes  to  his  dwelling-house  upon  another  estate  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  stream,  and  there  to  apply  such  water  to 
his  domestic  and  other  necessary  purposes  of  utiUty; 
provided  he  takes  only  a  reasonable  quantity  with  refer- 
ence to  the  size  of  the  stream  and  the  rights  of  his  neigh- 
bor ;  but  he  has  no  right  to  take  more  water  by  means 
of  the  wheels  and  machinery  than  he  would  have  a  right 
to  take  otherwise.*  The  proprietor  of  a  watercourse  has 
a  right  to  avail  himself  of  its  momentum  as  a  power 
which  may  be  turned  to  beneficial  pm-poses ;  and  he  may 
make  a  reasonable  use  of  the  water  itself  for  domestic 
purposes,  for  watering  cattle,  or  even  for  irrigation,  pro- 
vided it  is  not  unreasonably  detained  or  essentially  di- 
minished.* A  riparian  proprietor  has  a  right  to  divert 
water  to  a  reasonable  extent  for  the  purposes  of  irriga- 
tion ;  but  the  extent  of  such  user  must  depend  upon  the 
circumstances  of  each  case.  It  must  not  be  such  as 
materially  to  prejudice  any  proprietor  below."    If  a  ripa- 


lower  owners,  he  is  liable  for  the 
conseouences.  Mayor  v.  Bailey,  8 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  488  ;  Johns  v.  Stevens, 
8  Vt.  808 ;  Webb  v.  Portland  Mfg. 
Co.,  8  Sum.  (U.  S.)  189 ;  Mabie  v. 
Mattison,  17  Wis.  1 ;  Shaw  v.  Cum- 
iskey,  7  Pick.  (Mass.)  76 ;  Spring- 
field v.  Harris,  4  Allen  (Mass.) 496  ; 
Casebeer  v.  Mowry,  55  Penn.  St. 
478 ;  Davis  v.  Getchell,  50  Me.  604  ; 
Ferrea  v.  Knipe,  28  Cal.  348 ;  Mil- 
ner  v.  Gilmour,  12  Moo.  P.  C.  C. 
131 ;  7  W.  R.  828 ;  Lord  Norbury  v. 
Kitchin,  8  F.  &  F.  292  ;  9  Jur.  N. 
S.  132,  Exch. 

*  Lord  Norbury  v.  Kitchin,  ante. 

*  Blanchard  v.  Baker,  8  Me.  258 ; 
6  Exch.  865. 

»  Embrey  v.  Owen,  6  Exch.  858, 
872  ;  Ld.  Norbury  v.  Kitchin,  ante. 
In  Wadsworth  v.  Tillotson,  15 
Conn.  869,  it  was  held  that  a  diver- 
sion of  the  water  reasonably  nec- 
essary for  domestic  uses,  and  a 
reasonable  use  of  water  for  other 
piurposes,  is  not  a  nuisance,  and 
that  the  question  of  reasonable- 
ness is  always  for  the  jury.  Gil- 
lett  V.  Johnson,  80  Conn.  188 ;  Ev- 
ans V.  Merriweather,  8  Scam.  (111.) 


492.  See  Bliss  v.  Kennedy,  48  111* 
78 ;  Ferrea  v.  Knipe,  28  Cal.  844  ; 
Johns  V.  Stevens,  3  Vt.  308  ;  Blan- 
chard V.  Baker,  8  Me.  258 ;  Stein 
V.  Burden,  29  Ala.  127 ;  Smith  v. 
Adams,  6  Paige  (N.  Y.  Ch.)  435 ; 
questioned  in  Trustees  v-  Youmans, 
50  Barb.  jfN.  Y.  Sup.  a.)  819  ;  El- 
liott V.  Fitchburg  R.  R.  Co.,  10 
Cush.  (Mass.)  191 ;  Pugh  v.  Wheel- 
er, 2  Dev.  &  B.  (N.  C^  50 ;  Bealey 
V.  Shaw,  6  East,  208  ;  Coming  v. 
Troy,  34  Barb.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  485. 
In  Kidd  v.  Lard,  15  Cal.  161,  it  was 
held  that  where  a  person  had  ao- 

?uired  a  right  by  grant  from  the 
Inited  States  government  to  di- 
vert water  from  a  running  stream, 
with  no  restrictions  as  to  the  point 
from  which  it  should  be  taken,  the 
place  of  diversion  or  the  mode  of 
use  m^ht  be  changed  at  any 
time,  u  no  one  was  injured 
thereby.  But  when  the  riehts  of 
others  are  affected  thereby  no 
change  can  be  made.  See,  also, 
Butte  V.  Morgan,  19  Cal.  609 ;  Mit- 
chell V.  Parks,  26  Ind.  854 ;  Pratt 
V.  Lawson,  2  Allen  (Mass.)  275 ; 
Arthurv.  Case,  1  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 


i 


540 


EASEldfiliTS. 


[§263 


rian  proprietor  unreasonably  detain  the  water  of  a  stream 
for  purposes  of  irrigation,  whereby  another  proprietor 
lower  down  the  stream  is  deprived  of  the  use  of  the 
water  daily  for  several  hours,  xm.til  it  is  too  late  for  him 
to  use  it  for  irrigating  his  land,  or  for  any  other  lawful 
and  necessary  purpose,  he  may  maintain  an  action.'  A 
proprietor  of  land  contiguous  to  a  stream  may,  as  soon 
as  he  is  injured  by  the  diversion  of  the  water  from  its 
natural  course,  maintain  an  action  against  the  party  so 
diverting  it ;  and  it  is  no  answer  to  the  action  that  the 


448;  Curtis  v.  Jackson  ^  18  Mass. 
507;  Webb  v.  Portland  Manuf. 
Co.,  8  Sum.  (U.  S.)  187 ;  Vander- 
bergh  v.  Van  Bergen,  18  Johns. 
(N.  Y.)  212,  In  Crocker  v.  Bragg, 
10  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  260,  an  island 
divided  the  stream  so  that 
only  a  small  portion  of  it  de* 
scended  on  the  defendant's  side 
of  the  island  and  the  balance 
on  the  other  side.  The  defendant 
placed  obstructions  at  the  head  of 
the  island  for  the  purpose  of  di- 
verting more  of  the  water  of  the 
stream  to  his  side.  The  Court  held 
that  each  owner  wasf  entitled  to  all 
the  water  that  natui^y  descended 
to  him,  and  that  where  there  was 
a  natural  barrier  that  divided  the 
stream,  neither  owner  could  erect 
obstructions  to  change  the  natural 
course  of  the  water.  But  the  wa- 
ter of  a  stream  may  be  diverted  on 
one's  own  land  if  it  is  returned 
again  to  its  original  channel  with- 
out sensible  diminution  to  the  in- 
jury of  those  lower  down  on  the 
stream.  Norton  v.  Valentine,  14 
Vt.  239:  Johnson  ▼.  Lewis,  18 
Conn.  308.  Water  may  be  divert- 
ed by  sluices  or  artificial  channels 
for  a  reasonable  use,  and  no  liabil- 
itv  attaches  for  that  insensible  loss 
of  the  water  consequent  upon  its 
reasonable  beneficial  use.  Wads- 
worth  V.  Tillotson,  15  Conn.  866. 
The  diversion  or  obstruction  of 
water,  in  order  to  be  actionable, 
must  be  such  as  to  injure  the 
lower  owners,  and  no  prescriptive 
right  can  be  acquired  unless  such 
use  does  operate  injuriously.  But 
tiie  diversion  or  obstruction  of  all 
the  water  is  actionable,  or  of  such 
a  quantity  as  sensibly  diminishes 
its  natural  flow.  Davis  v.  Fuller, 
12  Vt.  178 ;  Norton  v.  Valentine, 


14  Vt.  280 ;  Parker  v.  Hotchkiss, 
25  Conn.  821;  Webster  v.  Flem- 
ming,  2  Humph.  (Tenn.)  518; 
Plumleigh  v.  Dawson,  1  QUman 
(m.)  544 ;  Miller  v.  Lapham,  44  Vt. 
416 ;  Snow  v.  Parsons,  28  Vt.  49. 
But  when  the  diversion  is  by  one 
who  has  no  legal  right  to  make  it, 
an  action  may  be  maintained  by  a 
riparian  owner,  even  though  no  ac- 
tual damage  is  sustained.  Whip- 
ple V.  Cumberland  Manufacturing 
Co.,  2  Story  (U.  S.)  661 ;  Butman 
V.  Hussey,  8  Fairfax  (Va.)  407. 
In  Pfiurker  v.  Griswold,  17  Conn. 
2^,  it  was  held  that,  in  order  to 
maintain  an  action  for  diversion, 
it  is  not  necesssry  to  fdlege  that  the 
plaintiff  had  a  null  upon  his  prem- 
ises, but  tibat  an  allegation  of  in- 
jury to  the  I^id  is  sufacient.  L^- 
gett  V.  Kenton,  2  Rich.  (S.  C.)  456. 
fiut  the  injury  must  be  percept- 
ible, and  not  merelv  theoretical. 
Thompson  v.  C^rocker,  9  Pick. 
(Mass.)  59;  Merrittv.  Parker,  Coxe 
(N.  J.)  46  ;  Pugh  v.  Wheeler,  3 
Dev.  &  Bat.  (N.  C.)  56 ;  Omelvany 
V.  Jaegers,  2  Hill  (N.  Y.,)  684. 
Divernn^  water  for  purposes  of  ir- 
rigation IS  unlawful,  when.  An- 
thony V.  Lapham,  5  Pick.  (Mass.) 
175 ;  Weston  v.  Alden,  8  Mass. 
136;  Arnold  v.  Foot,  12  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  830. 

*  Sampson  v.  Hoddinot,  1  C.  B. 
N.  S.  590 ;  3  id.  596 ;  Snow  v.  Par- 
son, 28  Vt.  457 ;  Parker  v.  Hotch- 
kiss,  25  Conn.  821 ;  Robertson  v. 
Miller,  40  id.  40  ;  Keeney  v.  Wood 
Mfg.  Co.,  39  id.  576;  Oregon  Iron 
Co.  V.  Terwilliger,  8  Oreg.  1 ; 
Springfield  v.  Harris,  4  Allen 
(Mass.)  464 :  Stein  v.  Burden,  29 
Ala.  127  ;  Foster  v.  Fowler,  2  T.  & 
C.  425 ;  Ripka  v.  Saigeant,  7  W.  & 
S.  (Penn.)9. 


CHAP.  XXVI.] 


Mill  Owners. 


541 


defendant  first  appropriated  the  water  to  his  own  use, 
unless  he  has  had  twenty  years'  undisturbed  enjoyment 
of  it  in  its  altered  course. '  So  where  the  water  is  improp- 
erly heightened  and  penned  and  forced  back  upon  the 
plsdntifTs  land  situate  higher  up  the  stream,'  or  the 
stream  is  heated  or  otherwise  polluted  with  the  refuse  of 
a  mill  or  works  higher  up  the  stream,  or  in  any  way.* 
The  right  to  have  a  stream  flow  in  its  natural  state, 
without  diminution  or  alteration,  and  uncontaminated 
by  artificial  means,  is  a  natural  right  incident  to  the 
property  in  the  land  through  which  it  passes,  and  not  a 
mere  easement.*  The  owner  of  such  property  has  a 
right  to  have  the  stream  come  to  him  in  its  natural  state 
in  flow,  quantity  and  quality,  and  to  go  from  him  with- 
out obstruction,  upon  the  saufe  principle  that  he  is  en- 
titled to  have  the  air  come  to  him  over  his  neighbor's 
soil  reasonably  pure  and  in  its  natural  state.  Such  a 
right  in  no  way  depends  upon  prescription,  or  the  pre- 
sumed grant  of  his  neighbor,  nor  from  presumed  acqui- 
escence of  the  proprietors  above  and  below.*    By  grant. 


>  Mason  t.  HiU,  5  B.  &  AM.  1. 

*  Saunders  T.  Newman  ^  1  B.  &. 
Aid    258 

« Wood  V.  Waud,  3  Exch.  748 ; 
Carlyon  v.  Lovering,  1  H.  &  N. 
784;  Whaley  v.  Laing,  2  H.  &  N. 
476 ;  8  Id.  675 ;  5  Id.  480 ;  Mur- 
gatroyd  v.  Robinson,  7  E.  &  B.  891 ; 
Magor  V.  Chadwick,  11  Ad.  &  El. 
671 ;  Mason  v.  Hill,  8B.  &  Ad.  804  ; 
6  Id.  1.  A  person  who  pollutes  the 
water  of  a  stream  so  as  to  dimin- 
ish its  value  for  domestic  or 
manufacturing  purposes,  is  guilty 
of  an  actionable  nuisance.  Stock- 
port Waterworks  Co.  V.  Potter,  7 
H.  &  N.  159 ;  Wood  v.  SutiHffe,  16 
Jur.  75  ;  Attomev-General  v.  Gee, 
L.  R.,  10  Eq.  Gas*.  131 ;  Goldsmith 
V.  Tunbridge  Wells  Imp.  Co.,  L. 
R.,  1  Ch.  App.  849  ;  liUy white 
V.  Trimmer,  16  L.  T.  N.  S.  818 ; 
Cushart  v.  Auburn  Gas  Light  Co., 
28  Barb.  (N.  Y.)444  ;  Wilts  v.  Navi- 

grtion  Co.,  L.  R.,  9  Ch.  App.  451 ; 
udson  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Laeb,  7  Robt. 
(N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  248 ;  Attorney- 
General  V.  Leeds,  L.  R.,  5 Ch.  App. 
683 ;  Norton  v.  Schofield,  9  M.  & 
W.  668;   Carlyon  v,  Lovering,  1 


H.  &  N.  784 ;  Jones  v.  Crow,  83 
Penn.  St,  898 ;  Merrifield  v.  Lom- 
bard, 18  Allen  (Mass.^^  16  ;  Hols- 
man  v.  Boiling  Springs  Co.,  14  N. 
J.  Eq.  884;  Attomev-General  v. 
Steward,  20  N.  J.  L.  416 ;  Lewis  v. 
Stein,  16  Ala.  214 ;  Wormsley  v. 
Church,  17  L.  T.  N.  S.  190 ;  Ottawa 
Gas  Co.  V.  Thompson,  89  111.  601 ; 
Brown  v.  Illins,  25  Conn.  583; 
Howell  V.  McCoy,  8  Rawle  (Penn.) 
856 ;  aowes  v.  Staffordshire  Wa- 
terworks Co.,  L.  R.,  8  Ch.  App. 
126 ;  Lingwood  v.  Stowmarket  Co. , 
L.  R.,  1  Eq.  Cas.  77 ;  Crossley  v. 
lightower,  L.  R.,  8  Eq.  Cas.  279  ; 
L.  R.,  2  Ch.  App.  478  ;  O'Riley  v. 
McChesney,  8  Xans.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.) 
278 ;  Snow  v.  Parsons,  28  Vt.  459 ; 
Hounsee  v.  Hammond,  39  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  89  ;  Hayes  v.  Waldron,  44 
N.  H.  585. 

*  Embrey  v.  Owen,  6  Exch.  853  ; 
Dickinson  v.  Grand  Junction  Ca- 
nal Co.,  7  Exch.  282;  Chasemore 
V.  Richards,  2  H.  &  N.  168 ;  7  H. 
L.  Cas.  849 ;  Rawstron  v.  Taylor, 
11  Exch.  881 ;  Tyler  v.  Wilkinson, 
4  Mas.  (U.  S.)  897. 

^  Chasemore  v.  Richards,  ante. 


542  Easements.  [§  252. 

or  by  prescription  from  time  immemorial/  a  riparian 
proprietor  may  acquire  a  right  to  use  the  water  in  a 
manner  not  justified  by  his  natural  right ;  but  such 
acquired  right  is  an  easement,  and  has  no  operation 
against  the  natural  rights  of  a  landowner  higher  up  the 
stream,  unless  the  user  by  which  it  was  acquired  affects 
the  use  that  he  himself  has  made  of  the  stream,  or  his 
power  to  use  it,  so  as  to  raise  the  presumption  of  a  grant, 
and  so  render  the  tenement  above  a  servient  tenement." 
Nothing  short  of  twenty  years'  undisturbed  possession 
of  water  diverted  from  the  natural  channel,  or  raised  hy 
a  dam,  can  give  a  party  an  adverse  right  against  those 
whose  lands  lie  lower  down  the  stream,  and  to  whom  it 
is  injurious ;  a  possession  for  a  less  period  than  is  required 
by  statute  is  not  sufficieift.'  A  riparian  proprietor  de- 
rives his  right  in  respect  of  the  water  from  possession  of 
land  abutting  on  the  stream^  and  if,  by  a  deed  which  con- 
veys only  land  not  abutting  on  the  stream,  he  affects  to 
grant  water  rights,  the  grant,  though  valid  as  against 
the  grantor,  can  create  no  rights  for  an  interruption  of 
which  the  grantee  can  sue  a  third  party  in  his  own 
name.*  The  abstraction  of  water  from  a  natural  stream 
openly  and  under  a  claim  of  right  for  a  period  of  twenty 
years  to  a  tenement  not  abutting  on  the  stream  will 
create  no  easement  to  have  pure  water  flow  down  the 
stream  to  the  point  of  abstraction.* 

Sec.  252.  Bights  between  mill-owners  on  the  same  stream. 
The  rights  of  mill  owners  upon  the  same  stream,  are  to 
be  construed  according  to  their  respective  rights  under 
the  conveyance  under  which  they  hold,  and  in  reference 
to  their  prescriptive  rights,  if  they  have  acquired  any. 
Upper  mill-owners  have  a  right  to  the  first  use  of  the 
ivater,  and  to  detain  it  reasonably  for  that  purpose.*    As 

»  Ante,  p:  869.  »  Prescott   v.    Phillips,   cited   6 

«  Sampson  v.  Hoddinott,  1  C.  B.  East,  213. 

N.  S.  590  ;  3  Id.   596  ;  Wright  v.  *  The  Stockport  Waterworks  Go. 

Williams,  1  M.  &  W.  77 ;  Murga-  v.  Potter,  3  BL  &  C.  300. 

troyd  V.  Robinson,  7  E.  &  B.  891 ;  *  Id. 

Wood  V.  Waud,  3  Exch.  778 ;  Grea-  "  Piatt  v.  Root,  16  John.  .(N.  Y.) 

trex  V.   Hayward,    8  Exch.  291 ;  92 ;  Palmer  v.  Mulligan,  3  Gaines 

Garlyon  v.  Lovering,  H.  &  N.  797.  (N,  Y.)  307 ;  Davis  v.  Winslow,  51 


M 


CHAP,  xxvi.]     Between  Mtt.t.  Owners. 


543 


f 


to  what  is  a  reasonable  use  of  water  on  a  stream,  is  always 
a  question  of  fact  to  be  determined  by  a  jury,  and  is  to 
be  arrived  at,  first,  by  ascertaining  the  capeicity  of  the 
stream,  the  nature  and  character  of  the  works  sought  to 
be  propelled  thereby,  the  kind  of  wheels  and  machinery 
used,  and  the  reasonable  necessities  of  the  mill-owner  in 
view  of  all  those  facts,  and  the  custom  of  the  country, 
if  there  be  any,  in  a  beneficial  application  of  the  water.* 
A  man  must  adjust  his  uses  of  the  water  to  the  capacity  of 
the  stream.  He  may  not  erect  a  dam  and  build  mills  to  be 
propelled  by  the  water  of  a  stream,  that  in  their  require- 
ments are  far  beyond  the  ordinary  capacity  of  the  stream  to 
supply  the  power  for,  neither  has  he  a  right  to  use  wheels 
which  require  an  excessive  amount  of  water  to  propel ;  but 
in  this  use,  both  in  the  requirements  of  the  works  and  in 
the  character  of  his  machinery,  he  must  have  a  reasonable 
regard  to  the  ordinary  capacity  of  the  stream,  and  when  he 
has  thus  conformed  his  use  of  the  water  to  the  capacity  of 
the  stream,  he  may  detain  the  water  from  the  mills  below 
to  the  extent  necessary  to  make  it  beneficial  to  him,  even 
though  it  takes  the  entire  water  of  the  stream.'  If,  how- 
ever, there  is  sufiicient  water  for  all  the  mills,  if  reasonably 
used,  then  it  is  the  right  of  each  mill-owner  to  require  of 
the  others  such  a  use  of  the  water  as  shall  yield  him  his 
proper  supply.*  The  upper  owner  may  detain  the  water 
so  long  as  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  working  his  mills ; 
but  he  must,  at  his  peril,  see  to  it  that  he  does  not  un- 
necessarily or  unreasonably  detain  it.* 


Me.  290.  Parker  t.  Hotchkiss,  25 
Conn.  851 ;  Olney  t.  Fenner,  2  R. 
L  811 ;  Martin  v.  Bigelow,  2  Aiken 
(Vt.)  185 ;  King  v.  'fiffany,  9  Conn. 
162;  Barrel  v.  Wells,  22  Pick. 
(Mass.)  287 ;  Wood  on  Nuisances, 
458et  seq. 

'  Thomas  v.  Brackney,  17  Barb. 
(N.  Y.  S.  C.)  654 ;  Hill  v.  Waud, 
2  Gillman  (HI.)  285;  Gould  v. 
Boston  Duck  Co.,  13  Gray  (Mass.) 
442;  Sampson  v.  Hoddinot,  38 
Eng.  Law  &  Eq.  241 ;  PoUitt  v. 
Long,  8  N.  Y.  S.  C.  Rep.  (Parsons' 
Ed.)  282 ;  68  Barb.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  79  ; 
Hetrick  v.  Deuchler,  6  Barr  (Penn.) 
82 

*  Gould  V.  Boston  Duck  Co.,  13 


Gray  (Mass.) 442;  Pollitt  v.  Long, 
8  N.  y.  S.  C.  (Parsons'  Ed.)  282 ; 
Whalen  v.  ,Ahl,  29  Penn.  St.  98 ; 
Clinton  v.  Myers,  46  N.  Y.  511 ; 
Timm  v.  Bear,  29  Wis.  254. 

«  Snow  V.  Parsons,  28  Vt.  459. 

*  Whalen  v.  Ahl,  29  Penn.  St. 
98 ;  PoUitt  V.  Long,  8  N.  Y.  S.  C. 
Rep.  (Parsons'  Ed.)  282 ;  Snow  v. 
Parsons,  28  Vt.  459;  Parker  v. 
Hotchkiss,  25  Conn.  821 :  Barrett 
V.  Parsons,  10  Cush.  (Mass.)  867. 
In  Timm  v.  Barr,  29  Wis.  254,  it 
is  held  that  an  upper  mill-owner 
has,  generally,  no  right  to  deprive 
the  lower  mill-owners  of  the 
natural  flow  of  the  water,  and 
that  in  determining    what  is  a 


641 


Easehekts. 


[§  253. 


Sec.  263.  Question  of  reasonableneBS  for  jury.— As  to 
what  is  a  reasonable  detention  or  use  of  water  is  always 
a  question  of  fact  to  be  determined  by  the  jury  from  the 
circumstances  of  each  case,  and  in  determining  the  ques- 
tion, a  variety  of  considerations  are  to  be  considered,  such 
as  the  size  of  the  stream,  the  adaptabiUty  of  the  machinery 
to  the  ordinary  condition  and  volume  of  the  stream,  the 
uses  to  which  it  is  or  can  be  applied,  as  well  as  the  charac- 
ter of  the  machinery  used  as  compared  with  the  improve- 
ments in  machinery  for  a  similar  piupose,  and,  in  the 
language  of  Foster,  J. ,  in  a  recent  case  in  New  Hampshire, 
^^  where,  under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  it  is  or 
is  not  a  reasonable  use  of  the  stream ;  and  in  determining 
that  question,  the  extent  of  the  benefit  to  the  mill-owner, 
and  of  the  inconvenience  to  others,  may  very  properly  be 
considered."'  The  right  of  a  mill-owner  is  to  tise  the 
water,  but  he  has  no  right  to  divert  it  entirely  from  the 
stream.  If  he  conducts  it  away  from  the  stream  to  a 
mill,  he  must  see  to  it  that  it  is  returned  again  before  it 
leaves  his  premises,  so  that  an  owner  below  is  not  dam- 
aged by  the  act.'  So,  too,  a  mill-owner  is  bound  to  bo 
maintain  his  dam  (unless  he  has  acquired  a  prescriptive 
right  to  do  otherwise)  so  as  not  to  set  the  water  back  up- 
on the  land  or  the  wheels  and  machinery  of  an  upper 
mill,'  or  so  as  to  discharge  it  in  a,  fitful  manner,  to  the  in- 
jury of  an  owner  below.* 

Sec.  253.  Limitation  upon  right  to  dam  water.— The  rights 
of  a  riparian  owner  to  dam  the  stream  have  been  previ- 


reasonable  detention,  reference 
may  be  had  to  the  kind  of  ma- 
chinery used  in  the  upper  mill, 
and  its  adaptability  for  use  on 
such  a  stream.  See  Bi*ace  v.  Yale, 
Jj9  Mass.  488 ;  Clinton  v.  Myers,  4(J 
N.  Y.  511. 

»  Norway  Plains  Co.  v.  Bradley, 
62  N.  H.  110 ;  Hays  v.  Waldron, 
44  id.  584 ;  Bassett  v.  Salisbury 
Manufacturing  Co.,  48  id.  567, 

« Sackrider  v.  Beers,  10  Johns. 
(N.  Y.)  241 ;  Brissell  v.  Shall,  4 
Dallas  (U.  S.)  211 ;  Merritt  v.  Brin- 
kerhoff,  17 "Johns.,  (N.  Y.)  306; 
Stein  V.  Burden,  29  Ala.  127. 


« Wright  V.  Howard,  1  Sim.  & 
Stu.  (Ch.)  208 ;  Saunders  v.  New- 
man, B.  &  Ad.  268 ;  Butz  v.  Irec, 
1  Rawle  (Penn.)  218  ;  StUes  v. 
Hooker,  9  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  266 ;  Gil- 
man  V.  TUton,  5  N.  H.  232  ;  Hodges 
V.  Raymond,  9  Mass.  816 ;  Hill  v. 
Ward,  7  111.  283  ;  Cheek  v.  Mo- 
AUey,  11  Rich.  (S.  C.)  153. 

*  Stein  V.  Burden,  29  Ala.  127 ; 
Mabie  v.  Mattison,  17  Wis.  1 ;  Cor- 
ning V.  Troy,  &c.,  89  Barb.  (N.  Y. 
S.  C.)  311  ;  Davis  v.  GetcheU,  50 
Me.  604 ;  Hume  v.  ShrieTe,  3 
Green's  Ch.  (N.  J.)  116. 


CHAP,  XXVI.] 


MnjiOwNSBS. 


54& 


^ 


ously  discussed.  The  right  exists  so  long  as  it  can  be  done 
without  injury  to  the  property  or  rights  of  others,  but  if 
a  dam  ii  erected  so  as  to  injure  the  lands  above  or  below 
the  mill  by  flooding  them,  or  otherwise  producing  injury 
thereto  of  which  the  dam  is  the  proximate  cause,  it  is  a 
nuisance,  and  its  maintenance  unlawful.'  If,  by  hoard- 
ing the  water  by  a  dam,  the  water  is  set  back  and  held 
so  that  it  impairs  the  health  of  those  Uving  on  the  stream, 
or  as  to  impair  their  comfort  by  reason  of  the  noxious 
vapors  arising  therefrom,  this  is  not  only  an  actionable 
but  an  indictable  nuisance.'  Or  if  it  interferes  with  the 
drainage  of  lands,'  destroys  springs,*  charges  the  soil  with 
water,'  or  causes  ice  to  accumulate  or  to  be  thrown  there- 
on,' or  in  any  way  interferes  with  the  natural  condition 
of  the  land  or  the  rights  of  landowners,  its  maintenance  is 
tmlawf  ul  and  imposes  upon  those  maintaining  it  liability 
for  all  the  natural  and  probable  consequences  flowing 
therefrom.^  So,  too,  in  the  erection  of  dams,  lower  owners 
are  restricted  to  the  erection  of  such  dams  as  will  not  set 
back  the  water  upon  the  wheels  of  upper  mill-owners, 
or  in  any  wise  interfere  with  the  free  and  unobstructed 
operation  thereof.'  He  cannot  substract  from  the  power 
of  an  upper  owner  by  throwing  the  water  back  upon  him.' 
Nor  does  it  make  any  difference  whether  the  upper  owner 
has  a  mill  upon  his  premises  or  not,*'  and  if  the  water  is 
set  back  upon  the  premises  of  one  who  has  a  mill  site, 
even  though  the  lands  are  not  overflowed,  the  backing 
of  the  water  creates  an  actionable  injury." 


>  HiU  V.  Ward,  3  Oilman  (JU.) 
285 ;  Haas  v.  Chaussard,  17  Tex. 
688. 

'Konnslar  v.  Ward,  Gilmer 
(Va.)  127 ;  Rhodes  v.  Whitehead, 
27  Texas,  804. 

'Bassett  v.  Company,  43  N.  H. 
673;  Tiustees  v.  YounuuM,  50 
Barb.  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)  828 ;  Johnstone 
V.  Roane,  8  Jones'  (N.  C.)  Law, 
528;  Barron  v.  Lun(^,  15  La. 
An.  681 ;  Hooper  v.  Wilkinson, 
id.  497. 

*  Payne  V.  Taylor,  8  A.  K. 
Marsh.  {Ky.)  328 ;  Neil  v.  Henry, 
1  Meigs  (Tenn.)  17. 

•Pixley  V.  Clark,  25  N.  Y. ;  85 
id«  579. 


*  Smith  V.  Agawam  Canal  Co., 
2  Allen  (Mass.)  855. 

^Amoskeag  Co.  v.  Goodale,  46 
N.  H.  58. 

8  Graver  v.  Scholl,  42  Penn.  67 ; 
Waring  v.  Martin,  Wright  Of*6^Mi«) 
281 ;  Shreve  v.  Voorhees,  2  Green's 
Ch.  (N.  J.)  25 ;  Thompson  v. 
Crocker,  9  Pick.  (Mass.)  59  ;  Good 
V.  Dodge,  8  Pittsburgh  (Penn.) 
557  ;  Ripka  v.  Sargeant,  7  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  9 ;  Pixley  v.  Clark,  85  N. 
Y.  525;  Stout  v.  McAdams,  2 
Scam.  (Dl.)  67. 

•  Good  V.  Dodge,  ante. 

^^  Stout  V.  McAdams,  ante. 
"Amoskeag  v.   Goodale,  43  N. 
H.56. 

35 


M6  EaSBMBFTS.  [§  255. 

Sec.  255.  FreoautLpns  to  be  adopted.— In  the  erection  of 
a  dam,  the  person  erecting  it  is  bound  to  regard  the  char- 
acter of  a  stream,  and  the  incidents  of  the  loca^y,  and 
if  it  is  subject  to  extraordinary  and  violent  freshets,  even 
though  occuring  only  at  intervals  of  several  years,  he  is 
bound  to  construct  his  dam  of  sufficient  strength  to  resist 
such  freshets,  and,  failing  in  that,  he  is  liable  for  all  the 
damages  that  ensue.'  The  restriction  imposed  by  law 
upon  mill-owners  in  the  erection  of  dams,  is,  that  they 
must  not  essentially  injure  those  above  or  below  them  in 
the  use  of  the  stream,  or,  as  stated  in  a  recent  well-con- 
sidered case  in  New  Hampshire/  '^so  as  not  sensibly  and 
injurUmsly  to  affect  the  rights  of  other  miIl-owner&" 

Sec.  256.  Presoriptive  rights.— How  acquired.— Prescrip- 
tive rights  by  long  user  of  the  water  in  a  particular  way 
may  be  acquired,  and  when  acquired  are  added  to  the  nat- 
ural right,  and  to  the  extent  of  such  increase,  are  a  com- 
plete defence  to  actions  for  injuries  resulting  from  a  use 
of  the  water  in  excess  of  the  natural  right.  Prescriptive 
rights  may  not  only  be  acquired  against  riparian  owners 
either  above  or  below  him  on  the  stream,  but  also  against 
mill-owners  upon  the  same  dam.  Thus  one  mill-owner 
who  has  the  right  to  use  a  certain  quantity  of  water  from 
the  pond  by  grant,  and  in  a  certain  way,  or  at  certain 
times  of  the  day,  may  acquire  the  right  by  twenty  years' 
adverse  use  in  larger  quantities,  for  a  different  purpose  or 
at  a  different  time,  to  use  the  water  in  a  manner  entirely 
different  from  the  terms  of  his  grant.  But  in  order  to 
acquire  a  prescriptive  right,  his  use  must  be  adverse,  open, 
continuous,  uninterrupted  and  as  of  right,  and  with  the 
knowledge  and  acquiescence  of  the  owner  of  the  estate 
affected  thereby.'  Thus  it  is  held  that  when  one  has 
maintained  a  dam  at  a  given  height  for  twenty  years,  this 
raises  the  presumption  of  a  grant  to  maintain  it  at  that 

*  Gray  v.  Harris,  107  Mass.  492.  24  id.  461 ;  Stokes  v.  Appomatox 

«  Norway  Plains  Co.  v.  Bradley,  Co.  3  Leigh  (Va.)  818 ;  Watkins  v. 

52  N.  H.  86.  Peck,   13  N.  H,  860  f  Thomas  v. 

3  Yard  v.  Ford,  2  Wm.  Saunders,  Marshfield,   13  Pick.  (Mass.)  240 ; 

17«5,  6  note ;  Parker   v.    Foot,  19  Winnipiseogee  Lake  Co.  v.  Youn^y 

W«nd.  (N.  Y.)  309  ;  Luce  v.  Carey,  40  N.  H.  420. 


GHAF.  XXVI.]  PBBSCBIPnyE  BiGHT. 


wr 


height  in  a  state  of  perfect  repair.  But,  if  during  that 
period  it  has  not  flooded  the  lands  above,  if,  when  re- 
paired, it  produces  that  result,  the  dam  is  a  nuisance,  and 
an  action  lies  for  all  injuries  produced  hj  flooding  the 
upper  land  the  same  as  though  it  was  a  new  dam.' 

Sec.  257.  Extent  of  right  aoqtiixed.--(Hlford  v.  Lake  Co.— 
But  this  must  be  understood  as  subject  to  the  condition 
that  the  use  of  the  water  in  a  particular  way,  in  order  to 
confer  a  prescriptive  right,  must  not  only  be  ^^  adverse 
under  a  claim  of  right j  exclusivey  continuous  and  uninter- 
rupted j^^  but  such  use  must  be  known  to,  and  acquiesced 
in,  by  the  owner  of  the  rights  affected  thereby,  and  the  bur- 
den of  proving  these  conditions  is  upon  the  person  assert- 
ing the  claim/  But  a  use  of  water  for  however  long  a 
period,  lacking  in  either  of  these  elements,  confers  no  pre- 
scriptive right.*  In  a  New  Hampshire  case,^  Smith,  J.,  in 
dehvering  the  opinion  of  the  court,  thus  laid  down  the 
rule :  *  *  Merely  maintaining  a  dam  for  twenty  years,  with- 
out thereby  raising  the  water  on  the  plaintiff's  land  often 
enough  to  give  notice  that  they  claimed  the  right  to  flow 
it,  would  not  give  the  defendant  a  prescriptive  right  to 
flow  plaintiff's  land  as  high  o&ii  could  be  flowed  by  means 
of  that  dam.  The  mere  erection  and  maintenance  of  the 
dam  did  no  injury  to  the  plaintiffs,  and  furnished  them 


»  stiles  T.  Hooker,  7  Cow.  (N.  Y.) 
266 ;  BufiseU  v.  Scott,  9  id.  279 ; 
MetE  T.  Domey,  26  Penn.  St.  519. 
But  see  Jackson  v.  Harrin^n,  2 
Allen  (Mass.)  242 ;  Norway  Plains 
Ck).  V.  Bradley,  62  N.  H.  108 ;  Win- 
nipiseogee  Lake  Co.  v.  Young,  40 
id.  420  ;  Bumham  v.  Kempton,  44 
id.  78.  See  Colwell  v.  Thayer,  6 
Met.  (Mass.)  253 ;  Ray  ▼.  Fletcher, 
12  Cush.  (Mass.)  200;  Hinds  ▼. 
Schultz,  89  Barb.  (N.  Y.  8.  C.)  600. 
But  the  riffht  will  only  be  co-ex- 
tensive wim  the  use,  and,  though 
the  dam  has  been  maintained  at 
a  given  height  for  the  prescriptive 
period,  yet  if  during  uiat  time  it 
nas  not  been  kept  in  repair,  so  as 
to  set  the  water  back  upon  the 
lands  above,  the  owner  of  the  dam 
will  be  liable  for  all  damages  re- 
sulting from  the  setting  back  of 
the  water  when  the  dam  is  in  re- 


pair beyond  that  what  is  covered 
hj  his  use.  Carlisle  v.  Cooper,  4 
C.  E.  Green  (N.  J.)  260 ;  Mertz  v. 
Domey,  26  Penn.  St.  519. 

*  Mehans  v.  Patrick,  1  Jones  (N. 
C.)  28  ;  Gentleman  v.  Soule,  82 
IlL  279 ;  American  Co.  v.  Bradford, 
27  Cal.  866 ;  Esling  v.  Williams,  10 
Penn,  St.  266;  Tracey  v.  Ather- 
ton,  86  Vt.  614  ;  Evans  v.  Daner,  7 
R.  I.  811 ,  MitcheU  v.  Parks.  26 
Ind.  864 ;  Finicum  Fishine  Co.  v. 
Carter,  61  Penn.  St  40 ;  Olney  v. 
Gardner,  4  M.  &  W.  406 ;  Arnold 
V.  Stevens,  21  Pick.  (Mass.)  106; 
Watkins  v.  Peck,  18  N.  H.  860 ; 
Luce  V.  Corley,  24  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
461. 

*  American  Co.  v.  Bradford,  27 
Cal.  866;  Gilford  v.  Lake  Co.,  62 
N.  H.  262. 

^Gilford  V.  Lake  Co.,  52  N.  H. 
262. 


i 


548 


Easements. 


[§  258. 


no  ground  of  action  against  the  defendants.  It  is  not  the 
right  to  erect  or  maintain  a  dam  upon  their  own  land  that 
the  defendants  seek  to  establish  by  prescription,  for  that 
they  have  already.  They  may  build  and  maintain  a  dam 
on  their  own  land  at  any  height ;  unless  it  x>ens  back  the 
water  on  the  pliaintiff 's  Land,  the  plaintiffs  could  not  com- 
plain or  maintain  an  action  against  them  for  an  inyasion 
of  their  right.  It  is  not  the  height  of  the  dam,  but  of  the 
water^  which  does  the  injury.  It  is  not  the  height  of 
the  dam  but  of  the  water  of  which  the  plaintiffs  com- 
plain. *  *  *  To  gain  a  prescriptive  right  there  must 
be  something  more  than  a  mere  intention  to  do  some  act 
on  the  plaintiff's  land.  The  land  otuners  on  the  shores  of 
this  lake  are  not  bound  to  make  annual  pilgrimages  to 
Lake  village  to  mea.sure  the  dam  of  the  Lake  Co .,  and 
employ  an  engineer  to  calculate  whether^  if  kept  tight  and 
fully  it  can  be  used  to  throw  water  on  their  land.^^ '  The 
fact  that  the  dam  owner  exercised  the  right  of  flowing 
the  land  as  often  as  he  chose,  is  not  the  test.  The  ques- 
tion is  did  he  exercise  the  right  so  often,  and  in  such  a 
way,  as  to  invade  the  rights  of  the  plaintiff,  and  as  to 
operate  as  a  notice  of  the  extent  of  his  claim  ?  *  So  where 
a  mill-owner  has  used  flush  boards  in  dry  times  for  the 
period  of  twenty  years,  taking  them  off  upon  a  rise  of 
water,  he  does  not  thereby  acquire  a  right  to  maintain 
them  upon  the  dam.  In  order  to  acquire  a  prescriptive 
right  to  the  use  of  the  water  in  a  particular  way  the  use 
must  be  such  as  is  in  violation  of  the  rights  of  others,  and 
such  as  is  actionable  on  the  part  of  those  affected  thereby, 
although  it  need  not  be  such  as  to  produce  actual  damage.' 

^    Sec.  258.  Lawlor  v.  Potter.~In  a  iNew  Brunswick  case,* 


'  Carlisle  v.  Cooper,  4  C.  E.  Green 
(N.  J.)  256;  Stiles  v.  Hooker,  7 
Cow.  N.  Y.  256 ;  Mertz  v.  Domev, 
25  Perm.  St.  519 ;  Sargent  v.  Stark, 
12  N.  H.  832 ;  Burham  v.  Kemp- 
ton,  44  id.  78 ;  Courtauld  v.  Legn, 
L.  R.,4Ex.  126. 

-  Lowe  V.  Carpenter,  6  Ex.  825 ; 
Carr  v.  Foster,  3  Q.  B.  581 ;  Lake 
Co.  V.  Young,  40  N.  H.  420. 

» King  V.  Tiflfany,  9  Com.  162 ; 
Lawlor  v.  Potter,  1  Hannay  (N.  B.) 


328 ;  Mertz  v.  Domey,  25  Penn.  St. 
519  ;  Carlisle  v.  Cooper,  6  C.  E. 
Green,  (N.  J.)  578  ;  Bumham  v. 
Kempton,  44  N.  H.  90 ;  Carlisle  v. 
Cooper,  4  C.  E.  Green  (N.  J.)  263. 
But  see  Hall  v.  Augsbury,  44  N. 
Y.  622 ;  Marcly  v.  Shultz,  28  id. 
852 ;  Hynds  v.  Shultz,  39  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)600. 

*  Lawlor  v.  Potter,  1  Hannay 
(New  Brunswick)  328, 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  LaWLQB  V.  POTTKR.  549 

an  interesting  question  was  raised  as  to  the  right  of  a 
mill-owner  to  raise  the  water  in  dry  seasons  by  means  of 
flush  boards,  whereby  the  lands  of  supra-riparian  owners 
were  flooded,  and  rendered  useless  for  the  purposes  of  cul- 
tivation. It  appeared  that  the  defendant  was  the  owner 
of  a  mill  and  dam,  and  during  a  dry  time,  when  the 
stream  was  low,  he  put  on  logs  and  raised  the  water  and 
overflowed  the  plaintiffs  lands  during  the  dry  season, 
more  than  ever  had  been  done  by  the  original  dam, 
so  that  the  plaintiff  was  unable  to  cut  hay  from  portions 
of  his  premises  bordering  on  the  stream  from  which  he 
would  otherwise  have  been  able  to  take  it.  Upon  the 
trial  of  the  case  the  judge  charged  the  jury  that,  if  the 
defendant's  dam  had,  for  the  period  of  twenty  years  pre- 
vious to  this^  action,  been  maintained  at  its  present 
height,  and  had  thus  been  kept  up  and  maintained  con- 
tinuously for  the  period  of  twenty  years,  and  had  backed 
up  the  water  so  as  to  overflow  the  land  above,  then  there 
could  be  no  recovery.  But  that,  if  the  defen3ant,  by 
x-aiging  his  dam  by  means  of  permanent  or  temporary 
devices,  thereby  overflowed  more  of  the  upper  land,  or 
overflowed  land  which  had  been  only  partially  flooded 
before,  or  if  the  original  dam  overflowed  the  land  only 
in  a  particular  way,  and  at  particular  seasons  of  the  year, 
any  change  in  the  dam  which  occasioned  an  overflow  in 
a  different  manner,  or  at  different  or  other  seasons  of 
the  year,  would  be  a  nuisance,  and  actionable  as  such. 
The  judgment  was  afiirmed  upon  appeal.  The  use  of 
flush  boards  or  any  devices  whereby  the  height  of  the 
dam  or  the  quantity  of  water  in  the  pond  is  increased, 
whether  in  wet  seasons  or  dry,  is  unlawful  and  a  nui- 
sance^  and  is  actionable,  even  though  no  special  damage 
results  therefrom,  because,  if  kept  up  for  twenty  years^  a 
right  to  use  them  is  thereby  gained  by  prescription. 
But  this  must  be  qualified  with  the  condition  that  the 
water,  during  the  season  when  the  flush  boards  or  other 
devices  are  used,  raises  the  water  in  the  channel  beyond 
what  it  would  be  raised  at  that  season  by  the  original  dam.* 

» HyndB  v.  Shultz,  a9  Barb.  (N.  Y.)      Cal.  407 ;  Marcly  v.  Shultz,  29  N.  Y. 
600 ;  Qrigsby  v.  Clear  Lake  Co.  ,40     852  ;  Pierce  v.  Travers,  97  Mass.  806. 


550  Easements.  [§  259. 

The  rule  generally  adopted  seems  to  be  that  it  is  not 
the  height  of  the  dam  that  regulates  and  measures  the 
rights  of  the  parties  to  flood  the  lands  of  supra-riparian, 
owners,  but  the  height  of  the  water  as  ordinarily  and 
usually  kept  in  the  dam  when  kept  in  repair ^  as  dams  are 
kept  for  profitable  and  economical  use.^ 

Sec.  259.  Carliflle  Y.  Coo](>er.— In  Carlisle  v.  Cooper,  dted 
in  the  last  note,  it  was  held,  in  a  case  where  a  right  to 
flood  lands  by  prescription  was  claimed,  that  the  fact 
that  the  dam  had  been  maintained  at  a  given  height  for 
twenty  years,  was  not  conclusive  of  the  right  of  the 
party  to  maintain  his  dam  at  that  height,  but  that  it 
must  be  shown  that  the  dam  during  all  that  time  had 
been  maintained  in  such  a  state  of  repair  that  the  right 
of  flooding  would  be  maintained  to  the  full  height  of  the 
dam,  and  that  where  a  dam  had  been  allowed  to  remain 
in  a  leaky  condition  and  out  of  repair  for  two  year^,  so 
as  not  to  amount  to  full  assertion  and  maintenance  of 
the  right  to  the  full  height  of  the  dam,  those  two  years 
would  not  be  counted  as  a  part  of  the  prescriptive  period. 
A  different  rule  would  certainly  be  productive  of  fraud, 
and  would  be  exceedingly  oppressive,  as  it  would  enable 
parties  surreptitiously,  and  without  the  knowledge  of 
the  owners  of  estates  to  be  affected  thereby,  to  impose 
burdens  upon  their  estates,  without  their  knowledge  and 
without  the  power  of  resistance  on  their  part ;  and  would 
also  be  opposed  to  the  fundamental  principles  controlling 
the  law  of  prescription,  which  requires  that  the  use 
should  be  open^  adverse j  as-  of  right y  and  continuous^ 
during  the  requisite  period. 

The  dam  must  be  kept  in  such  a  condition  as  to  amount 
to  a  f  uU  exercise  of  the  right  claimed  during  the  entire 
period.  Merely  temporary  suspensions  in  the  user,  such 
as  occur  from  accidental'  or  necessary  cause,*  that  are 
not  permitted  to  continue  for  any  considerable  period, 
will  not  defeat  the  right,  but  a  neglect  to  keep  the  dam 

1  CarliBle  v.  Cooper,  21  N.  J.  L.  *  Hoas  v.  Ddonne,  80  Wis.  604. 

678 ;  Mertz  v.  Domey,  25  Penn.  St.  »  Perm  v.  Garfield,  87  Vt.  810 ; 

519 ;  Bumham  t.  Kempton.  44  N.  Brace  v.  Yale,  10  Allen  (ICaes.)  448. 
H.  90;  Smith  v.  Robb,  17  Wia.  227. 


CHAP.  ZXVL]  MEBTZ  V.  DOBNET.  551 

in  such  a  state  of  repair  as  to  fairly  amount  to  an  asser- 
tion and  continuance  of  the  right  to  set  back  the  water 
to  the  full  extent  which  the  dam  in  a  perfect  state  of  re- 
pair would  set  it  back,  would  restrict  the  party  to  a  use 
of  the  water  commensurate  only  with  that  which  he  had 
exercised,  with  the  dam  in  the  condition  in  which  it  had 
ordinarily  been  maintained. 

• 

Sec.  260.  Mertz  v.  Domey.— In  a  Pennsylyania  case,* 
the  defendant  had  for  a  period  of  twenty  years  main- 
tained his  dam  at  a  given  height,  but  during  aU  that 
time  it  had  been  Id  a  defective  state  of  repair  and  leaky, 
so  as  not  to  hold  and  set  back  the  water  as  it  would  have 
done  if  it  had  been  kept  tight  and  in  repair.  At  the  ex- 
piration of  twenty  years  the  defendant  repaired  and 
tightened  his  dam  without  increasing  its  height,  and  as 
a  result  the  water  was  set  back  upon  the  plaintiff's  land 
beyond  what  it  had  ever  formerly  been,  during  the 
twenty  years,  and  it  was  held  that  the  defendant  was 
responsible  for  all  damages  resulting  from  the  setting 
back  of  the  water  beyond  what  it  had  formerly  been  set 
back  by  the  dam  in  its  leaky  and  defective  condition. 
It  is  the  use  that  measures  the  right,  and  this  is  to  be 
determined  from  the  ordinary  effects  of  the  dam  upon 
the  lands  above,  and  the  condition  in  which  the  dam  has 
been  kept,  together  with  the  condition  of  the  stream, 
and  the  uses  to  which  it  has  been  applied  by  the  owner 
of  the  dam  during  the  prescriptive  period.' 

Sec.  261.  Change  of  maohinery.— As  between  mill-own- 
ers, an  ancient  mill  has  no  right  to  change  its  machinery, 
by  putting  in  such  as  requires  more  water,  or  as  is  in  any 
measure  a  nuisance  to  other  mill-owners  on  the  i 
The  antiquity  of  a  mill  affords  no  protection  agad         jl- 

*  Mertz  V.  Domey,  25  Penn.  St.  Penn.  St.  619 ;  Carlisle  v.  Cooper, 
519.  19  N.   J.   L.,  260;  Darlington  v. 

*  Murdy  v.  Shultz,  89  Barb.  (N.  Painter,  7  Penn.  St.  478 ;  Bumham 
Y.  S.  C.)  600 ;  Carlisle  v.  Cooper,  v.  Kempton,  44  N.  H.  78 ;  Stiles  v. 
21  N.  J.  L.  587 ;  Pierce  v.  Travers,  Hooker,  7  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  266 ;  Gil- 
97  Mass.  806:  Powell  r.  Lash,  64  ford  v.  Lake  Co.,  52  ff.  H.  262. 
N.  C.  456 ;  Hoag  v.  Delorme,  80 

Wis.  594;  Metz  v.    Delorme,  25 


i 


552 


!Basements. 


[§  261. 


bility  for  injurieB  thus  inflicted,  for,  as  to  the  new  wheel 
or  other  machinery,  it  will  be  treated  as  a  new  mill.' 

So,  where  a  mill,  ancient  or  otherwise,  has  been  used 
for  a  particular  purpose,  as  a  saw-mfll,  grist-mill  or  paper- 
mill,  it  may  not  apply  the  water  to  any  other  class  of 
machinery  or  business  requiiing  more  power  to  the  injury 
of  others,  but  it  may  use  the  same  quantity  of  water  that 
was  formerly  required  in  any  other  business,  unless  by 
grant  it  is  specially  restricted  to  a  particular  and  special 
use." 

But  when  water  rights  are  granted  with  specific 
restrictions  as  to  the  apphcation  of  the  water,  it  must  be 
applied  only  in  the  mode  specified  in  the  grant.  The 
j:estrictive  clause  must,  however,  be  positive  and  unequiv- 
ocal, and  clearly  import  an  intention  on  the  part  of  the 
paities  thereto  to  restrict  the  use  of  the  water  to  a  par- 
ticular class  of  business,  and  that  only.  Thus  a  convey- 
ance of  a  fulling-mill  in  these  words,  'together  with 
water  suflBcient  to  operate  the  f uUing-mill  thereon  stand- 
ing," would  not  restrict  the  grantee  to  the  use  of  the 
water  for  a  fulling-mill,  but  would  authorize  the  use  of 
an  equal  quantity  for  any  other  purpose.  But  where  the 
language  of  the  grant  is  specific  and  clearly  indicated,  an 
intention  to  restrict  the  use  of  the  water  to  a  special  use, 
as  *•  together  with  water  suflBcient  to  operate  the  fulling- 
mill  thereon  standing  and  for  no  other  purpose,^^  this 
Would  restrict  the  use  of  the  water  to  that  purpose  alone, 
and  any  different  use  would  be  actionable.*  Indeed  any 
language  in  the  granting  clause  that  indicates  a  clear 
intention  on  the  part  of  the  grantor  to  limit  the  use  of 


>  Simpson  v.  Leaney»  8  Me.  188 ; 
Pratt  y.  Sampson,  2  Allen  (Mass.) 
278 ;  Bardwell  v.  Ames,  22  Pick, 
^ass.)  354 ;  Adams  v.  Warner,  28 
Vt.  895 ;  Dewey  v.  Williams,  40  N. 
H.  227 ;  Kaler  v.  Beaman,  49  Me. 
20S ;  Olmstead  v.  Loomis,  6  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  152  ;  Wakeley  v.  Davidson, 
26  N.  T.  887 ;  Miller  v.  Lapham, 
44  Vt.  433. 

« Miller  v.  Lapham,  44  Vt.  433. 

•Tortelot  v.  Phelps,  4  Gray 
(MassO  370 ;  Shed  v.  Leslie,  22  Vt. 
4S8 ;  Dishon  v.  Porter,  88 Me.  289; 


McDonald  t.  Askeny,  29  OaL  207. 
But  in  all  cases  where  the  language 
of  the  grant  will  admit  of  its  being 
construed  as  the  measure  rather 
than  the  quality  of  use,  the  courts 
will  so  construe  it.  Adams  ▼. 
Warner,  28  Vt.  895 :  Cromwell  t. 
Selden,  8  N.  T.  253;  Salmon  v. 
Rudd,  6  N.  Y.  22 ;  Pratt  v.  Sam- 
son,  2  Allen  (Mass.)  275 ;  Ealer  v. 
Beaman,  49  Me.  208 ;  Wakeley  ▼• 
Davidson,  2G  N,  Y.  887, 


CHAP«  XXVI.] 


Ancient  Mills. 


553 


the  water  to  a  particular  class  of  business  or  machinery 
will  be  operative  to  that  end.' 

Sec.  262.  Ancient  mnis.— In  reference  to  what  are 
termed  ancient  mills,  it  may  be  said  that  the  mere  fact 
that  a  mill  is  ancient  and  has  had  the  entire  use  of  the 
water  of  a  stream  does  not  confer  a  right  upon  the  own- 
ers to  use  the  water  at  their  own  convenience  or  as  their 
interest  may  dictate,  as  against  a  new  mill  lower  down 
the  stream.  But,  when  a  lower  miU  is  erected,  the 
ancient  mill  is  bound  to  a  reasonable  and  proper  use 
of  the  water  in  reference  to  the  rights  of  the  new  mill, 
and  any  unreaaonahle  detention  or  use  of  the  water  is  a 
nuisance  to  the  lower  mill,  and  actionable  the  same  as 
though  the  upper  mill  was  also  a  new  one.' 

Sec.  263.  Efibct  of  prior  luie.—It  may  be  understood  as 
a  settled  rule  of  law  that  priority  of  occupation,  in  the 
use  of  water,  by  a  mill-owner,  gives  him  no  such  rights 
as  will  deprive  those  above  or  below  him  on  the  stream 
from  also  turning  the  water  to  beneficial  purposes.  He 
simply  acquires  the  right  to  use  the  water  in  its  natural 
flow,  and,  while  an  owner  above  or  below  him  cannot  do 
any  act  in  violation  of  his  rights  by  unreasonably  detain- 
ing it  from  his  mill  on  the  one  hand  or  setting  it  back 
upon  his  wheels  upon  the  other,  neither  can  he  make  an 
unreasonable  use  of  the  water  to  their  injury.'  It  may 
be  said,  however,  that  he  who  is  first  in  point  of  time  in 
turning  the  water  of  a  stream  to  a  beneficial  use  has  the 
right  to  water  sufficient  to  operate  his  mill,  even  though 
the  effect  be,  in  a  reasonable  use  thereof,  to  destroy  the 


*  strong  Y.  Benedict,  5  Conn. 
219. 

^Barrett  v.  Parsons,  10  Gush. 
(Mass.)  367. 

'Martin  v.  Bigelow,  3  Aiken 
(Vt)  184 ;  Gould  v.  Boston  Duck 
Co.,  18  Gray  (Mass.)  442 ;  Thurber 
V.  Martin,  2  id.  894;  Tyler  v. 
Wilkinson,  4  Mason  (U.  S.)  897  ; 
Davis  T.  Getchell,  60  Me.  604; 
Sprinefield  v.  Harris,  4  Allen 
(MassO  494.  In  California  it  is 
held,  if  the  first  appropriator  only 


takes  a  nart  of  the  water,  or  only 
uses  it  auiin^  certain  times,  an- 
other may  take  the  surplus  or  use 
it  for  the  balance  of  the  time. 
Smith  V.  O'Hara,  48  CaL  371 ; 
Thorp  V.  Freed,  1  Mon.  T.  651 ; 
Columbia  Mining  Co.  v.  Haller,  id« 
296.  In  Maine  it  is  held  that  as 
between  owners  of  dams  on  the 
same  stream  he  has  the  best  right 
who  is  first  in  point  of  time. 
Lincoln  y,  Chadbome,  56  Me.  197. 


554 


Easements. 


[§364. 


value  of  a  lower  privilege/  It  is  not  every  riparian 
owner  who  may  erect  a  dam  upon  the  stream,  nor  indeed 
can  it  ever  be  lawfully  done,  when  the  dam  will  raise  the 
water  beyond  its  natural  surface,  to  the  injury  of  other 
owners." 


Seo.  264.  What  ia  mm  seat.— A  dam  may  be  erected, 
whether  upon  a  f  aU  or  not,  so  as  to  raise  the  water  up 
to  the  level  of  his  own  land,  but  no  further.'  If  there 
be  no  fall  upon  the  land,  and  no  method  by  which  a  mill 
can  be  propelled  by  the  water,  there  is  no  mill  seat,  and 
no  right  on  the  part  of  the  riparian  owner  to  pen  back 
the  water  to  the  injury  of  others,  for  the  law  will  not 
recognize  the  right  of  interfering  with  the  natural  flow 
of  a  stream,  to  the  injury  of  others,  except  when  the 
water  is  appUed  to  a  beneficial  purpose.^  No  rights  are 
acquired  by  a  frivolous  use  of  water,  as  by  the  erection 
of  a  dam  for  the  simple  purpose  of  turning  a  wheel  to 
which  no  machinery  is  attached,  and  which  served  no 
useful  end  or  beneficial  purpose.*  Where  water  flows 
through  land  upon  what  is  termed  a  ^^dead  levdj^  with 
no  perceptible  fall,  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  a  man  has 
a  ^^mill  seatj^  or  "mZZ privilegey^^ within  the  meaning 
of  the  law.  But  if  there  is  a  point  upon  his  land  to 
which  the  water  can  be  directed  with  sufficient  momen- 
tum and  fall  to  be  beneficially  apphed  as  a  power,  the 
owner  may  thus  divert  it,  if  he  can  and  does  again  return 
it  to  its  original  channel  before  it  leaves  his  land ;  but 
he  cannot  divert  the  water  entirely  from  its  natural 
channel  for  any  purpose.* 


>  Hatch  ▼.  Dwighl,  17  Mass.  289 ; 
Chandler  v.  Howland,  7  Gray 
(Mass.)  a48 ;  Thurber  v.  Martin,  3 
id.  394 ;  Smith  ▼.  Agawam  Canal 
Co.,  2  Allen  (Mass.)  355.  But  see 
King  V.  Tiffany,  9  Conn.  162 ;  Bat- 
man V.  Hussey,  12  Me.  407;  Pool 
V.  Lewis,  41  Ga.  168;  Omelvaney 
V.  Jaggars,  2  HiU  (N.  Y.)  634. 

*  Colwell  V.  May's  TAnding  Co., 
19  N.  J.  L.  248. 

•McCalmont  v.  Whittaker,  8 
Rawle  (Pa.)  84 ;  Brown  t.  Bush, 
45  Penn.  St.  66 ;  Rhodes  v.  White- 
head, 27  Tex.  810. 


^Stackpole  v.  Curtis,  82  Me. 
88? ;  Russell  ▼.  Scott,  9  Cowen  (N. 
Y.)  281. 

•  Jackson  t,  Vermilyea,  6  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  677;  Weaver  v.  Eureka 
Co.,15Cal.  271. 

•Davis  V.  PuDer,  18  Vt.  178; 
Van  Hoesen  v.  Coventry,  10  Barh. 
(N.  Y.  S.  C.)  518 ;  Binney's  Case, 
2  Bland's  (Md.)  Ch.  99;  Bardwell 
V.  Ames,  22  Pick.  (Mass.)  888; 
Crittenden  v.  Field,  8  Gray  (Maaa.) 
621 ;  Samuels  v.  Bradford,  25  Wis. 
827;  Brace  V.Yale,  10  Allen  (Mass. 
447 ;  Bealey  v.  Shaw,  6  East,  205 


CHAP,  xxn.]  Abtibicial  Watebcoxtbsbs. 


656 


Sec.  265.  ArtilLoial  watatootuMA— The  right  of  a  ripa- 
rian proprietor  is  limited  to  natural  streams,  and  does 
not  attach  in  the  case  of  artificial  cuts  or  drains.'  But 
a  watercourse,  though  artificial,  may  have  been  origi- 
nally made  under  such  circumstances  and  have  been  so 
used  as  to  give  aU  the  rights  that  the  riparian  proprie- 
tors would  have  had  if  it  had  been  a  natural  stream; 
and  therefore,  in  an  action  by  one  riparian  proprietor 
against  another,  for  the  pollution  and  diversion  of  a 
watercourse,  it  is  a  misdirection  to  tell  the  jury  that,  if 
the  stream  were  artificial  and  made  by  the  hand  of  man, 
the  plaintiff  could  have  no  cause  of  action.'  The  flow  of 
water  from  a  drain  made  by  a  land  owner  in  his  own  land 
for  the  purposes  of  agricultural  improvements  for  twenty 
years,  does  not  give  a  right  to  the  neighbor,  so  as  to  pre- 
clude the  landowner  from  altering  the  level  of  his  drain 
for  the  improvement  of  his  land.'  No  right  can  be  ac- 
quired to  the  use  of  an  artificial  watercourse  made  for  a 
particular  and  temporary  purpose.*  In  one  case  it  was 
held  that  in  the  absence  of  a  special  custom,  artificial 
watercourses  were  not  distinguished  in  law  from  natural 
ones ;  and  that  a  title  might  be  gained  by  twenty  years* 
user  as  well  to  the  former  as  to  the  latter.*  But  that 
case  was  unsatisfactory,  and  has  since  been  overruled.* 
All  the  authorities  from  the  Digest  downwards  show 
that  there  is  a  difference  in  this  respect  between  a  nat- 
ural watercourse.'  Nevertheless,  an  artificial  water- 
course or  drain  may  have  been  originally  made  for  per- 
manent purposes,  and  under  such  circumstances,  and 
have  been  since  used  for  such  a  period  as  to  give  aU  the 
rights  that  the  riparian  proprietors  would  have  had  if  it 


Procter  v.  Jennings,  6  Nev.  87; 
Baldwin  v.  Calkins,  10  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  167;  Rex  v.  Trafford,  1  B.  & 
Aa.  874 ;  Lord  v.  Comers  of  Sidney, 
13  Moore's  P.  C.  478. 

1  Sampson  v.  Hoddinott,  1  C.  B. 
N.  S.  500;  3  id.  696;  Wardle  v. 
Brocklehurst,  1 E.  &  E.  1058 ;  Gale, 
262. 

*  Sutcliffe  v.  Booth,  82  L.  J.  Q. 
B.  136. 

*  Greatrex  v.  Hayward,  8  Exch. 


291 ;  Wood  v.  Waud,  3  Exch.  778. 
*Arkwright  v.  Gell,  11   Exch. 
610. 

*  Magor  v.  Chadwick,  11  Ad.  & 
El.  571. 

*  Sampson  v.  Hoddinott,  1  G.  B. 
590,  606. 

'Id.  606 ;  Arkwright  v.  Gell,  5 
M.  &  Wr.  208 ;  Acton  v.  Blundell, 
12  M.  &  W.  324 ;  Wood  v.  Waud, 
3  Exch.  778;  Greatrex  v.  Hay- 
ward,  3  Exch.  291. 


656  Easements.  [§  266. 

had  been  a  natural  stream.'  The  plaintiff  and  the  de- 
fendant occupied  contiguous  portions  of  land.  For  more 
than  forty  years,  and  as  for  back  as  living  memory  went, 
the  occupiers  of  the  plaintiff's  land  had  been  in  the  habit 
of  passing  over  the  defendant's  land  to  a  brook  which  lay 
on  the  other  side  of  that  land  and  of  damming  up  the 
brook  when  necessary,  so  as  to  force  the  water  into  an 
old  artificial  watercourse  which  ran  across  the  defendant's 
land  to  the  plaintiff's  land.  They  did  this  for  the  pur- 
pose of  supjjlying  their  cattle  with  water  whenever  they 
wanted  the  water,  except  when  the  owners  of  the  defend- 
ant's land  used  the  water,  as  they  did  at  certain  seasons 
of  the  year  for  irrigation  : — held,  that  upon  this  evidence 
the  jury  was  warranted  in  inferring  an  user,  as  of  right, 
by  the  occupiers  of  the  plaintiff's  land,  of  the  easement 
on  the  defendant's  land ;  and  that,  for  the  interruption 
of  such  easement,  the  plaintiff  might  maintain  an  action 
against  the  defendant.' 


Sec.  266.  Implied  grant  or  reservation  of  drains,  4^.— 
Where  the  owner  of  two  or  more  adjointag  houses  sells 
and  conveys  one  of  them  to  a  purchaser,  such  house  is 
entitled  to  the  benefit,  and  is  subject  to  the  burthen,  of 
all  existing  drains  communicating  with  the  other  house, 
without  any  express  reservation  or  grant  for  that  purpose ; 
an  implied  grant  or  reservation  (as  the  case  may  require) 
will  be  presumed  in  the  absence  of  express  words  to  the 
contrary.  It  makes  no  difference  in  this  respect  that  the 
purchaser  did  not  know  of  the  drains  under  his  house,  if 
he  might  have  ascertained  their  existence  upon  a  careful 
inspection  by  a  person  ordinarily  conversant  with  the  sub- 
ject, and  it  will  be  deemed  his  own  fault  if  he  did  not  do  so 
at  the  time  of  his  purchase.'  Two  properties,  which  ad- 
joined, were  originally  possessed  by  the  same  owner,  in 
one  of  which  was  a  cesspool  and  a  drain  to  carry  the 
water  from  the  adjoining  property,  which  was  a  tan-yard. 
The  owner  afterwards  sold  the  property  to  different  per- 

'    J  Sutcliffe  V.  Booth,  83  L.  J.  Q.         »  Pyer  v.  Garter,  1  H.  &  N.  91«. 
B.  136.  But  see  contra^  SufSeld  v.  Brown, 

<  Beestonv.  Weate,  5E.  &  B.  986.      (on  appeal),  83  L.  J.  Ch.  249. 


CHAP.  xxvL]       License  fob  Drains. 


657 


sons,  and  the  conveyances  contained  no  reference  to  the 
drain  and  cesspool : — ^held,  that  there  was  an  implied  grant 
of  the  easement  of  the  cesspool  in  the  conveyance  of  the 
tan-yard.'  Where  the  plaintiff  excepts  and  reserves  to 
himself  the  right  to  make  and  use  a  sewer  in  land  convey- 
ed by  him  to  the  defendant,  whereby  the  exclusive  use  of 
such  sewer  is  reserved  to  the  plaintiff,  he  may  maintain 
an  action  against  the  defendant  for  opening  and  using  the 
sewer."  So  where  the  defendant  grants  to  the  plaintiff 
the  use  of  water,  subject  to  a  proviso  for  the  use  thereof  by 
the  defendant,  the  plaintiff  may  maintain  an  action  on 
the  deed  for  the  abuse  of  such  reservation  by  the  defend- 
ant/ 

Sec.  267.  laoense  to  make  or  use  drains,  icc—A  parol  li- 
cense to  inake  a  drain  or  watercourse  in  the  land  of  the 
licensor  will  not,  even  after  it  has  been  fully  executed  at 
the  expense  of  the  licensee,  confer  any  right  or  title  on 
him  to  have  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  drain  or  watercourse 
free  from  obstruction ;  nor  enable  him  to  maintain  any 
action  against  the  licensor  for  obstructing  such  drain  or 
watercourse  without  notice.^  But  a  license  attached  to  a 
valid  grant  of  real  or  personal  property  is  irrevocable,  it 
being  a  license  coupled  with  an  interest.*  No  man  can 
derogate  from  his  own  grant,  nor  can  any  person  claim- 
ing through  or  under  him.  But  a  license  connected  with 
an  invalid  grant  is  a  mere  license  (whether  under  seal  or 
not)  and  may  be  revoked  at  any  time,*  either  expressly 
or  byimphcation.'  A  parol  license  to  erect  a  skylight, 
or  a  weir,  or  other  easement  on  the  land  of  the  licensee 
cannot  be  revoked,  after  it  has  been  executed  at  the  li- 


\: 


*  Ewart  V.  Cochrane,  5  L.  T.  N. 
S.  1,  H.  L.  But  see  Suffield  v. 
Brown,  supra, 

*  Lee  y.  Stevenson,  E.  B.  <&  E. 
612. 

*  Rawston  v.  Taylor,  11  Exch.  869. 

*  Hewlins  v.  Shippam,  2  B.  &  C. 
221 ;  Cocker  v.  Ck)wper,  1  C.  M.  & 
R.  418;  Greenfllade  v.  Hallidaj,  6 
Bing.  879 ;  Mason  v.  HiU,  6  B.  & 
Ad.  1 ;  Wood  v.  Lea^bitter,  13  M, 
&  W.  888 ;  Adams  v.  Andrews,  15 
Q.  B.  284 ;  Taplin  v.  Florence,  10 


C.  B.  744 ;  Roffey  t.  Henderson,  17 
Q.  B.  574 ;  Roberts  v.  Rose,  8  H.  & 
0.  162 ;  affirmed  in  error,  4  H.  & 
C.  103;  L.  R.,  lEx.  82. 

» Wood  V.  Manley,  11  Ad.  &  El. 
84:  Feltham  v.  Cartwright,  5 
Bing.  N.  C.  569. 

«  Fentiman  v.  Smith,  4  East,  107; 
Wood  V.  Leadbitter,  13  M.  &.  W, 
828 ;  Taplin  v.  Florence,  10  C.  B. 
744. 

'  Roflfey  V.  Henderson,  17  Q.  B. 
574. 


558 


Easements. 


[§268- 


censee's  expense,  so  as  to  render  it  necessary  for  the  li- 
censee to  incur  further  expense  in  removing  it. ' 

Sec.  268.  Eztinguishxnent  or  suspenaion  of  drams,  &a— 
Nothing  of  absolute  necessity  to  a  messuage  or  other 
building  is  extinguished  by  unity  of  ownership  or  posses- 
sion, as  a  gutter  in  cUieno  solo  to  carry  off  water,  &c.,  or 
a  watercourse,  or  a  way  of  necessity.  They  are  merely 
stispended  as  easements  during  the  joint  ownership  or 
possession,  and  will  revive  whenever  the  building  or  the 
land  is  conveyed  to  another.'  But  it  is  otherwise  with 
respect  to  ways  not  of  necessity  or  other  easements  not 
of  a  continuous  nature.' 

Sec.  269.  Underground  water.— The  principles  which 
regulate  the  rights  of  owners  of  land  in  respect  to  water 
flowing  in  known  and  defined  channels^  whether  upon  or 
below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  do  not  apply  to  under- 
ground water  which  merely  percolates  through  the  strata 
in  no  known  channels.*  The  owner  of  land  throu^ 
which  water  flows  in  a  subterranean  course  has  no  right 
or  interest  in  it  which  will  enable  him  to  maintain  an 
action  a^inst  a  landowner  who,  in  carrying  on  mining 
operations  on  his  own  land  in  the  usual  manner,  drains 
away  the  water  from  the  land  of  the  first-mentioned 
owner,  and  leaves  his  well  dry.*  The  owner  of  a  mill  on 
the  banks  of  a  stream  cannot  maintain  an  action  against 
a  landowner  who  sinks  a  deep  well  on  his  own  land,  and 
by  pumps  and  steam-engines  diverts  the  underground 
water  which  would  otherwise  have  percolated  the  soil 
and  flowed  into  the  river,  by  which  for  more  than  sixty 


'  Winter  v.  Brockwell,  8  Eaat, 
S08 ;  Ldggins  t.  Inge,  7  Bing.  682 ; 
Harvey  v.  Beynolds,  12  Price,  724. 

»  Pheysey  v.  Vicary,  16  M.  &  W. 
485. 

»  Pyer  v.  Carter,  1  H.  A;  N.  916  ; 
Dodd  V.  Barchell,  1  H.  &  C.  118 ; 
Worthington  v.  Gimeon,  2  E.  &  £. 
618 ;  Pearson  t.  Spencer,  1  B.  &  S. 
571 ;  8  B.  &  S.  761 ;  Polden  v. 
Bastard,  4  B.  &  S.  258 ;  affirmed 
in  error,  L.  B.,  1  Q.  B.  156. 


^  Chaaemore  v.  Richards  (in 
ror),  2  H.  &  N.  168 ;  7  H.  L.  Cas. 
849;  Reg.  y.  The  Metropolitan 
Board  of  Works,  8  B.  &  S.  710 ; 
New  River  Co.  v.  Johnson,  29  L. 
J.  M.  C.  98 ;  nibotson  v.  Peat,  8  H. 
&C.  644. 

»  Acton  V.  Blundell,  12  M.  &  W. 
824,  348 ;  New  River  Co.  v.  John- 
son, 29  L.  J.  M.  C.  98 ;  Galgay  v. 
Great  Southern  and  Western  B, 
Co.,  4  Ir.  Com.  L.  R.  456)  Q.  B. 


A 


CHAP.  XXVI.] 


Surface  Water. 


559 


years  the  mill  was  worked/  '^If  a  man  has  the  misfort- 
une to  lose  his  spring  by  his  neighbor  digging  a  weU,  he 
must  dig  his  own  well  deeper. '  ^  A  mine  owner  may  work 
his  coal  in  the  manner  most  advantageous  to  himself, 
and  remove  a  bar  of  coal  therein  to  obtain  the  coal  in 
such  bar,  although  in  consequence  of  his  so  doing,  the 
water  floods  an  adjoining  mine.'  But  he  has  no  right  to 
pollute  the  water  flowing  through  swaUets  in  his  own 
mine  which  communicate  with  a  stream  running  into  an 
adjoining  mine/  And  after  a  demise  of  certain  closes 
and  all  streams  of  water  therein,  reserving  to  the  lessor 
all  mines  and  minerals,  with  power  to  win  and  work  the 
same,  the  lessor  or  his  assigns  cannot  work  the  mines  so 
as  to  cut  off  the  springs  in  the  closes  demised.* 

Sec.  270.  Surltoe  water.— A  landowner  had  a  right  to 
appropriate  surface  water  which  flows  over  his  land  in 
no  definite  channel^  although  the  water  is  thereby  pre- 
vented from  reaching  a  watercourse  which  it  previously 
supplied.*  He  has  an  unqualified  right  to  drain  his  land 
for  agricultural  purposes  in  order  to  get  rid  of  mere  sur- 
face water,  the  supply  of  the  water  being  casual  and  its 
flow  following  no  regular  or  definite  course ;  and  a  neigh- 
boring proprietor  cannot  complain  that  he  is  thereby 
deprived  of  such  water,  which  otherwise  would  have 
come  to  his  land.^  But  where  the  water  from  a  spring 
flowing  in  a  gvlly  or  natural  channel  to  a  stream  on 
which  was  a  mill,  the  spring  having  been  cut  off  at  its 
source  and  the  water  received  into  a  tank  as  it  rose  from 
the  earth,  by  the  license  of  the  owner  of  the  soil  on 
which  the  spring  rose ;  held,  that  an  action  lay  by  the 
millowner  against  the  person  so  abstracting  the  water.' 

'  Chesemare  t.  Richards  (in  er- 
ror) 2  H.  &  N.  168 ;  Reg.  v.  The 
Hetrqpolitan  Board  of  Works,  8  B. 
&  S.  710 ;  New  River  Co.  v.  John- 
son, 29  L.  J.  M.  G.  98 ;  Ibbotson  t. 
Peat,  8  H.  &  C.  644.  660. 

"Per  Bramwsll,  B.,  in  Ibbot- 
son  T.  Peat,  3  H.  &  C.  650. 

» Smith  V.  Kendrick,  7  C.  B.  515 ; 
and  see  Fletcher  v«  Rjlands,  8  H. 
&  C.  774 ;  Baird  v.  WiUiamson,  15 
C.  B.  N.  S.  876. 


*  Hodgkinson  t.  Ennor,  4  B.  & 
S.  229. 

»  Whitehead  t.  Parks,  2  H.  &  N. 
870. 

■Broadhent  t.  Ramsbottom,  11 
Exch.  602. 

^Rawston  t.  Tayk)r,  11  Exch. 
869 ;  Reg.  t.  The  Metropolitan 
Board  of  Works,  8  B.  &  S.  710. 

^  Dudden  v.  Guardians  of  Glut- 
ton Union,  1  H.  &  N.  627. 


660 


Eassments. 


[§271 


The  flow  of  water  for  twenty  years  from  the  eaves  of  a 
house  cannot  give  a  right  to  a  neighbor  to  have  it  con- 
tinue to  flow/  although  the  owner  of  the  house  may,  by 
such  user,  acquire  the  right  to  have  it  flow  there.'  It 
will  be  understood  that  the  rights  and  liabilities  of  a  ten- 
ant, unless  qualified  or  restrained,  are  the  same  as  the 
landlord. 

Sec.  271.  Lateral  8upport.—Every  landowner  has  a  right 
to  have  his  soil  preserved  intact,  as  against  its  own 
weight  and  the  ordinary  effects  of  the  elements ;  and  an 
adjoining  owner  who  excavates  so  near  to  the  line  of  his 
neighbor's  land  as  to  cause  it  to  crumble  or  fall  away,  is 
liable  for  all  the  damages  ensuing  therefrom ;  but  if  the 
character  of  the  adjoining  soil  is  such  that  it  will  and 
does  sustain  its  own  weight,  and  the  natural  pressure 
thereon  by  the  power  of  its  own  coherance,  without  the 
aid  of  the  surrounding  soil,  the  adjoining  owner  may 
remove  his  soil  without  liability  to  damage  therefor.  No 
damage  is  recoverable  except  for  an  actual  disturbance 
of  the  integrity  of  the  soil.'  The  right  to  support  extends 
only  to  the  soil  itself,  and  does  not  include  anything 
placed  thereon  that  sensibly  increases  the  pressure,^  nor 
does  it  exist  after  the  owner  has  removed  the  soil,  and 
substituted  a  wall  or  other  artificial  substitute  therefor.' 
This  right  to  support  from  neighboring  soil  exists  ex 
jure  naturcUy  and  not  as  an  easement,*  although  it  par- 


*  Wood  V.  Waud,  ante. 

*  Thomas  v.  Thomas,  2  C.  M.  & 
B.d4. 

•Wilde  V.  Minflterley,  Pasch. 
884 ;  Farrand  t.  Marahall,  19  Barb. 
m.  Y.)  880 ;  21  id.  409 ;  Foley  v. 
Wyeth,  2  Allen  (MasB.)  121  ;  Thurs- 
ton V.  Hancock,  12  Mass.  220 ;  Mc- 
Guire  v.  Grant,  25  N.  Y.  Eq.  856  ; 
Shrieve  v.  Stokes,  8  B.  Mon.  (Ky.) 
458  ;  La  Sala  v.  Holbrook,  4  Pa&e 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  167  ;  Vt  Centl.  B.  R. 
Co.  V.  Richardson,  25  Vt.  465  ; 
Moody  V.  McClelland,  89  Ala.  45 ; 
Humphries  v.  Brogden,  12  Q.  B. 
739 ;  Dugdale  v.  Robertson,  8  K. 
&  J.  695  ;  Proud  v.  Bates,  84  L.  J. 
<Ch.)  406,  and  indeed  all  the  Eng- 
lish cases  are  to  the  same  effect. 


4  Stansell  v.  Jollard,  1  Selw.  N. 
P.  444 ;  Wyatt  V.  Harrison,  8  B.  & 
Ad.  871 ;  Partridge  v.  Scott,  8Mees. 
&Wels.  220;  Humnhrios  v.  Brog- 
den, 12  Q.  B.  744  ;  ^lomon  v.  Vin- 
ter*sCo.,4H.  &  N.  (Ezch.)  585; 
Murchie  v.  Black,  84  Law  J.  (C. 
P.)  887. 

*  Wilde  V.  Minsterley,  ante ; 
Thurston  t.  Hancock,  12  f  lass.  220 ; 
La  Sala  v.  Holbrook,  4  Paige's  Clu 
(N.  Y.)  167  ;  Richardson  v.  Ver- 
mont Central  RaUroad  Co.,  25  Vt. 
465,  opinion  of  Bbnkf*t,  J.;  Hay 
V.  Cohoes  Co.,  2N.  Y.  lo9. 

«  Rowbotham  v.  Wilson,  8  E.  A; 
B.  186 ;  Bonomi  v.  Backhouse.  E. 
L.  &  Eq.  622 ;  Thunton  v.  Han- 
cock ante. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]         Lateral  Support.  561 

takes  of  the  nature  of  an  easement,  and  is  frequently 
classed  as  such  both  by  elementary  writers  and  courts.* 
Bramwell,  B.,  in  an  English  case/  says;  ^'I  think  it 
inaccurate  to  say  that  the  plaintiff  is  claiming  any  kind 
of  easement,  qualified  or  otherwise :  an  easement  seem- 
ing to  me  to  be  somsthing  additional  to  the  ordinary 
rights  of  property J^  But  it  will  not  be  profitable  for  us 
to  discuss  this  qu§stion  here.  The  right  exists,  and 
whether  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  easement  or  a  natural 
right,  is  a  question  of  small  consequence.  It  must  not 
be  understood  that  the  right  to  support  ceases  to  exist 
when  the  land  is  encumbered  with  a  building  or  other 
erection.  It  is  true  that  the  right  extends  only  to  the 
soil  itself,  but  it  is  by  no  means  restricted,  as  is  stated  by 
some  of  the  elementary  writers,  to  *'the  land  in  its  nat- 
ural state.""  It  exists  only  as  to  the  soil,  but,  however 
the  soil  may  be  incumbered  with  buildings  or  other 
structures,  unless  they  contributed  directly  to  the  injury, 
a  right  of  action  exists  for  an  interference  with  the 
right,  precisely  as  much  with  as  without  the  buildings. 
Indeed,  I  think  the  cases  will  justify  the  broad  state- 
ment, that  in  actions  for  injuries  to  the  right  of  support, 
where  liability  is  sought  to  be  avoided,  on  the  ground 
that  there  are  erections  on  the  plaintiff's  land  that  con- 
tributed to  the  injury,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  defend- 
ant to  show  that  the  injury  would  not  have  resulted 
except  for  such  erections.* 

A  distinction  exists  between  an  injury  to  the  soil  and 
an  injury  to  the  wall  or  other  structure  erected  in  lieu  of 
it.  In  the  case  of  a  building  erected  upon  the  surface  to 
the  soil  where  no  excavation  has  been  made  for  a  foun- 
dation, a  removal  of  the  support  of  the  adjoining  soil 
would  be  actionable,  notwithstanding  the  presence  of  the 
building,  if  any  injury  to  the  soil  thus  left  unsupported 
followed,  even  though  the  excavation  was  made  in  the 

'  Gale  V.  Easements,  148.  705 ;  Thurston  v.  Hancock,  12  Mass. 

*  Bowbotham  v.  Wilson,  ante.         220 ;  Brown  v.  Robins,  4  H.  &  N. 
'Washburn  on  Easements,  481,      (Exch.)  186. 

Gale  on  Easements,  311.  -       r  Foley  v.  Wyeth,  ante  ;  Brown 

*  Foley  V.  Wyeth,  2  Allen  (Mass.)      v.  Robins,  ante. 
131 ;  Hunt  v.  Feake,  Johns.  (Eng.) 

86 


562 


Easements. 


[§27L 


exercise  of  the  highest  care  and  skill  possible.  In  such 
cases,  where  no  excavation  has  been  made  and  no  arti- 
ficial support  has  been  substituted  for  the  soil,  the  adjoin- 
ing owner  excavates  so  near  to  his  neighbor's  line  as  to 
disturb  his  soil  at  his  peril.  It  is  an  interference  with 
^  a  natural  right,  and  a  nusiance,  and  liability  attaches 
whether  the*  digging  was  accompanied  with  negligence  or 
not.'  If  by  the  increased  weight  in^sed  upon  the  soil 
by  the  building  the  damage  is  enhanced,  this  does  not 
defeat  liability  for  such  damages  as  would  have  arisen  if 
no  building  had  been  placed  there,  but  only  such  as  are 
the  direct  results  of  the  pressure  of  the  bmlding.  This 
precise  question  has  not  been  directly  decided,  but  the 
later  authorities  disclose  a  tendency  of  the  courts  in  that 
direction."  But  where  the  owner  of  an  adjoining  lot  exca- 
vates up  to  the  limits  of  his  line,  and  replaces  his  soil 
with  an  artificial  structure,  the  right  of  support  that 
existed  in  favor  of  the  soil,  ceases  to  exist,  and  the 
adjoining  owner  may,  in  the  exercise  of  reasonable  care, 
excavate  to  any  depth  upon  his  own  land,  even  though 
by  so  doing  he  withdraws  the  support  from  such  structure, 
and  causes  it  to  fall  into  the  pit,  and  no  action  lies 
against  him  therefor.' 

The  degree  of  care  required  of  a  person  excavating 
upon  his  own  premises,  near  the  foundation  of  another's 
building,  cannot  be  accurately  defined,  but  must  neces- 
sarily depend  upon  the  circumstances  of  each  case.  The 
character  of  the  soil,  the  condition  of  the  wall  and  build- 
ing, the  depth  of  the  excavation,  and  all  those  conditions 


1  Thurston  v.  Hancock,  12  Mass. 
220;  Hay  v.  Cohoes  Ck).,  2  N.  Y. 
159;  Tremain  v.  Cohoes  Co.,  id. 
164 ;  Strojnan  v.  Knowles,  6  H.  & 
N.  (Exch.)  454 ;  Hamer  v.  Knowles, 
id.  459. 

'Richardson  v.  Vermont  Cen- 
tral Raihx)ad  Co.,  25  Vt.  465.  In 
this  case  Bennett,  J.,  says  :  "  If 
there  is  any  error  in  the  decision 
of  the  case  in  the  12th  Mass. 
(Thurston  v.  Hancock),  it  is,  I  ap- 
prehend, to  be  found  in  the  courts 
not  discriminating  between  the 
soil  that  fell  into  the  excavation 


from  its  own  inherent  weight,  and 
that  which  was  pressed  in  by  the 
building."  Foley  v.  Wyefh,  d 
Allen  (Mass.)  131 ;  Brown  v. 
Windsor,  C.  &  J.  20;  2  Dane's 
Ab.  717 ;  Farrand  t.  Marshall,  19 
Barb.  (N.  Y.  Sup.  Ct.)  880. 

•Wilde  V.  Minsterley,  ante; 
Thurston  v.  Hancock,  ante;  Pan- 
ton  V.  Holland,  17  John.  (N.  Y.) 
92  ;  Rockwell  v.  Wilson,  11  Cosh. 
(Mass.)  221 ;  Dodd  v.  Hohne,  1  A<L 
&  £1.  493.  See  cases  previously 
cited. 


JL-^ 


CHAP.  ZXVL]  SXJBJACEirr  SUFPOBT. 


563 


that  a  man  of  ordinary  prudence  would  observe.*  The 
better  criterion  by  which  to  determine  the  question  of 
liability  would  seem  to  be,  that  if  the  mere  exercise  of  a 
lawful  right  to  remove  the  soil  upon  his  own  premises 
occasioned  the  fall  of  the  structure,  no  liability  exists ; 
but  if  the  fall  is  occasioned  by  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
removed,  then  Uability  attaches 'for  all  the  consequences 
of  the  act.'  The  safest  course  to  piursue  would  be  for  the 
party  excavating,  to  give  the  other  party  notice  of  the 
fact  that  he  intended  making  an  excavation,  and  thus 
give  him  an  opportunity  to  shove  up  or  otherwise  protect 
his  building.  There  must  be  an  absence  of  negligence  or 
unskillfulness  and  of  improper  motive.'  There  can  be  no 
negligence  imputed,  except  as  to  structm^s  that 
are  visible  or  known  to  the  party  causing  the  excava- 
tion to  be  made ;  and  the  degree  of  care  to  be  used  is  in 
view  of  the  circumstances  known  to  him.*  The  test  of 
liability  is  not  whether  the  party  has  used  ^uch  care  as  a 
prudent  man  would  use  if  all  the  loss  and  damage  was 
his  own,  nor  whether  he  has  used  such  care  as  a  prudent 
man  skilled  in  such  business  would  have  used.  Nor  can 
he  shield  himself  from  liability  upon  the  ground  that  he 
followed  the  directions  of  a  person  skilled  in  such  mat- 
ters, but  the  decisive  question  is,  was  he  guilty  of  negli- 
gence in  view  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case.'  Was 
the  work  managed  and  executed  with  such  care  as  a  man 
of  ordinary  prudence  usually  exercises  in  the  manage- 
ment of  his  business.* 


Sec.   272.    subjacent  support.— There  are  frequently 
two  freeholds  in  the  same  estate,  one  in  the  surface,  and 


^Panton  v.  Holland,  17  Johns. 
92;  McGuire  v.  Grant,  1  Dutch. 
(N.  J.)  856  ;  Eockwood  v.  Wilson, 
11  Gush.  (Mass.)  221 ;  Charles  v. 
Rankin,  21  Mo.  566;  Foley  t. 
Wyeth,  2  AUen  (Mass.)  131 ; 
Shrieve  t.  Stokes,  8  B.  Mon. 
^y.)  453;  Massev  v.  Gadyer,  4 
C.  &  P.  161 ;  Smith  v.  Kendrick, 
7  C.  B.  575. 

«Dodd  V.  Holme,  1  Ad:  &  El. 
493  ;  Trower  v.  Chadwick,  3  Bing. 
N.  C.  334 ;  Smith  v.  Keudrick,  7 


C.  B.  515 ;  Thurston  v.  Hancock, 
12  Mass.  220 ;  La  Sala  t.  Holbrook, 
4  Paige's  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  169 ;  Gale  on 
Easements  (3d  Lond.  ed.),  349 ; 
Walters  v.  Pfiel,  Moody  &  M.  364. 

*  McGuire  v,  Grant,  1  Dutch.  (N. 
J.)  361. 

*  Chadwick  v.  Trower,  3  Bing.  N. 
C.  334. 

» Charles  v.  Rankin,  22  Mo.  556. 

*  Smith  V.   Hardestry,  31  Miss. 
411. 


564 


EAHKiniNTO. 


[§272. 


another  in  the  minerals  that  lie  beneath  it.  These  con- 
flicting  estates,  of  course,  arise  from  a  coiaveyance  of  the 
lauds,  reserving  the  mines,  quarries,  &c.  The  rights  of 
the  several  owners  depend  largely,  of  course,  upon  the 
provisions  of  the  conveyances  under  which  they  hold. 
But  when  there  is  a  simple  reservation,  from  the  convey- 
ance of  the  surface,  of  the  minerals,  and  right  to  work  or 
mine  them,  and  no  express  right  is  reserved  to  produce 
a  subsidence  of  the  surface  if  necessary  in  the  working 
of  the  mines,  the  owner  of  the  minerals  is  boufid  at  his 
peril  not  to  cause  a  subsidence  of  the  soil,  even  though 
without  doing  so  he  cannot  work  the  mines  at  aSiy  and  if 
he  does  weaken  the  support  of  the  upper  soil,  so  that  it 
in  any  measure  subsides,  he  is  responsible  for  all  the  con- 
sequences, irrespective  of  the  question  as  to  whether  or 
not  he  was  negligent  in  his  operations.  Indeed,  the 
question  of  negligence  is  not  involved,  for,  although  he 
was  in  the  exercise  of  the  highest  degree  of  skill,  if 
the  soil  subsides  he  is  responsible  for  the  dam- 
ages;' and  a  custom  of  the  country,  as  between 
the  owner  of  the  surface  and  the  owner  of  the  mines 
to  cause  a  subsidence  of  the  surface,  if  necessary  to  the 
working  of  the  mines,  will  not  shield  the  mine-owner 
from  liability,  and  has  been  held  to  be  bad."  A  mere 
reservation  of  the  minerals  and  a  right  to  dig  for  the  same 
and  to  work  the  mines,  does  not  confer  any  power  to 
interfere  with  the  proper  support  of  the  surface.'  Such 
a  reservation  is  construed  as  merely  giving  a  right  to 
take  out  the  minerals  so  far  as  they  can  be  taken  without 
injury  to  the  surface.* 


>  Wakefield  v.  Duke  of  Buo- 
deugh,  L.  R.  4  Eq.  Caa  618 ;  Hum- 
^iries  T.  Brogdon,  15  Jur.  124; 
Harris  v.  Rydmg,  5  M.  &  W.  00 ; 
Smart  v.  Morton,  6  E.  &  B.  80 ; 
Bichards  v.  Harper,  L.  R.,  1  Excho. 
199;  Hamer  v.  Ejaowles,  6  H.  ob 
N.4od. 

«  Wakefield  v.  Duke  of  Buc- 
cleugh,  L.  R.  4  Eq.  Cas.  624 ;  L. 
R.,  4H.  L.  877 ;  Hext  v.  Gill,  L.  R. 
7  Eq.  Cas.  699. 

•  Smart  v.  Morton,  ante ;  Bell  v, 
Wilson,  L.  R.  7  Eq.  Cas.  699. 


^  Hext  V.  Gill,  ante ;  Smart  v. 
Morton,  ante.  In  the  first  case 
cited  there  was  a  conveyance  to 
the  plaintiff,  with  a  reservation  to 
the  defendants  of  all  the  mines 
and  minerals  therein,  and  a  right 
of  entry  to  work  the  mines.  There 
was  a  large  quantity  of  china  clay 
upon  the  premises,  which  the  de- 
fendant claimed  the  right  to  take 
out  of  the  land  under  his  reserva- 
tion of  minerals,  but  which  could 
not  be  taken  out  without  injury  to 
the  surface.     The  court  hdid  that 


CHAP.  ZXVI.]  SXTBJACENT  SUFPOBT. 


565 


In  one  case^'  it  was  held  that  where  lands  had  been  im- 
proved and  were  covered  with  buildings,  even  a  grant  to 
let  down  the  surface  would  be  regarded  as  repugnant, 
and  rejected  as  absurd.  And  that  decision  was  afterward 
supported  in  the  House  of  Lords.'  In  another  case,'  there 
was  a  grant  with  covenants  against  liability  for  the  sub- 
sidence of  the  surface  in  the  working  of  the  mines ;  but 
the  court  held  that  this  covenant  did  not  run  with  the 
land.  In  several  other  cases/  it  was  held  that  stipulation 
as  to  the  manner  of  working  the  mines,  and  for  compen- 
sation for  all  injuries  to  the  surface  resulting  therefrom, 
did  not  deprive  the  surface  owner  of  his  right  to  support 
from  the  mineral  strata,  or  justify  the  owner  of  the  mines 
in  depriving  him  of  it.  To  summarize,  it  may  be  said 
that  the  surface  has  a  right  to  support :  that  is  a  part  of 
the  freehold,  and  not  an  easement ; '  that  the  mine'-owner 
can  only  work  so  far  as  is  consistent  with  this  right,  and 


the  clay  was  embraced  in  the  reser- 
vation,* but  that  the  defendant  hav- 
ing neglected  to  reserve  the  right 
of  interfering  with  the  surf  ace  oy 
the  operations  of  mining,  the 
power  could  not  be  implied 
from  the  mere  fact  that  a  reservar 
tion  had  been  made.  That  the  res- 
ervation of  minerals,  with  the 
right  to  work  the  mines,  could 
omy  be  construed  as  giving  a  riffht 
to  take  out  the  minerals,  if  that 
could  be  done  without  causing  a 
subsidence  of  the  surface,  and  re- 
strained the  defendant  from  tak- 
ing out  the  clay  in  any  manner 
that  would  injure  the  surface.  In 
Smart  v.  Morton  there  was  a  reser- 
vation of  the  minerals  in  the  land, 
with  power  ''to  seek,  work  and 
win  tne  same  in  any  part  of  the 
said  premises,  and  to  drive  drift  or 
drifts,  make  water-gate  or  water- 
gates,  or  use  any  other  way  or  ways 
for  the  better  and  more  commodi- 
ous working  or  winning  the  same, 
in  the  said  hereby  granted  or  in- 
tended granted  premises,  or  any 
part  of  the  same.  A  verdict  hav- 
mg  been  rendered  in  favor  of  the 
plaintiffs,  upon  hearing  in  Ex- 
chequer, Lord  Campbell,  C.  J., 
said:  ''The  simple  reservation  of 
the  minerals  does  not  deprive  the 
grantee    of    the   surface  of  the 


right  of  support  from  the  minerals, 
and  the  defendant  must  rely  upon 
the  supposed  power  reserved  for 
the  working  of  the  minerals." 
The  judgment  of  the  lower  court 
was  affirmed.  So  in  Bell  v.  Wil- 
son the  minerals  were  reserved, 
and  it  was  held  that  certain  stones 
in  the  soil  were  embraced  under 
the  reservation ;  but,  although 
power  to  work  and  take  out  tne 
minerals  was  reserved  in  the  grant 
of  the  surface,  vet  the  lord  justices 
held  that,  as  the  stone  could  not 
be  taken  out  except  by  quarrying, 
and  a  conseauent  destruction  of 
the  surface,  tne  defendant,  under 
a  reservation  of  power  to  take  out 
the  minerals,  without  an  express 
reservation  of  a  right  to  let  down 
or  destroy  the  suiface,  would  not 
be  justified  in  injuring  the  surface. 

*  Hilton  V.  Lord  Granville,  5  Q. 

B.  781. 

'  Marquis  of  Salisbury  v.  Glad- 
stone, 4  H.  L.  C.  692. 

*  Richards  v.  Harper,  L.  B.  1  £z- 
chq.  199. 

^Humphries v.  Broken,  1  Eng. 
Law.  &  Eq.  880 ;  Harris  v.  Rvding, 

6  M.  &  W.  60 ;  Roberts  v.  Hames, 

7  E.  &  B.  625  ;  also  6  id.  648. 

&  Backhouse  v.  Bonomi,  9  H.  L 

C.  508. 


566 


Easeheitdb. 


[§272, 


is  liable  if  he  violates  it ;'  and  that  the  right  of  support 
is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  strata^  and  in  no  sense 
dependant  upon  the  fact  that  it  cannot  be  worked  with- 
out injury  to  the  surface.  This  is  the  mine-owner's 
misfortune,  and  does  not  in  any  sense  impair  the 
surface  owner's  right."  The  highest  care  and 
skiU  in  the  working  of  the  mme  is  no  defence  what- 
ever, if  injury  results  to  the  surface;  and  negli- 
gence need  not  be  proved,  even  though  it  is  alleged 
in  the  declaration.'  The  degree  of  support  must  be  in 
accordance  with  the  present  or  the  intended  use  of  the  prop- 
erty,* and  a  custom  of  the  country  will  not  uphold  an  in- 
jury thereto.'  But  the  right  may  be  waived  by  grant,  or 
by  eocpress  reservation  of  the  right  to  interfere  with  it ; 
but  the  language  must  be  such  as  clearly  to  import  the 
power  granted  or  reserved.*  The  right  exists  only  to  the 
extent  necessary  to  prevent  a  subsidence  of  the  surface  ; 
and  a  withdrawal  of  all  the  minerals,  that  does  not  injure 
the  surface,  is  not  an  interference  with  the  surface  owner's 
rights,  and  is  not  actionable  (see  all  the  cases  cited).  The 
right  is  absolute  to  the  extent  only  that  the  surface  must 
not  be  injured  by  a  withdrawal  of  the  minerads,  but  if  the 
nature  of  the  soil  is  such  above  the  minerals  as  not  to  need 
their  support,  the  entire  mineral  strata  may  be  exhausted. 
It  may  be  proper  here  to  state,  that  a  reservation  of 
mines  or  minerals  carries  with  it  a  right  reasonably  to  work 
for  the  same ;  but  there  is  this  fact  to  be  observed,  that 
minesy  according  to  the  common  and  ordinary  definition 
of  the  term,  as  well,  also,  as  in  its  legal  application,  sig- 
nifies a  "way  or  passage  underground,  a  subterranean 
duct,  course  or  passage,  whether  in  search  of  metals  or  to 


*  Caledonian  R.  R.  Go,  v.  Sprot, 
3  Macq.  (Scotch)  450. 

•Wakefield  v.  Duke  of  Buc- 
deugh,  4  H.  L.  C.  877. 

»  Hamer  v.  Knowles,  6  H.  &  N. 
459;  Smart  y.  Morton,  80  Eng. 
Law  &  Eq.  885 ;  Hunt  v.  Peake, 
Johns.  Ch.  (Eng.)  704;  Brown  v. 
Robbins,  4  H.  &  N.  186. 

*  Proud  V.  Bates,  84  L.  J.  (Ch.) 
406 ;  Berkly  v.  Shafte,  15  C.  B.  N. 
S.  70 ;  Dugdale  v.  Robertson,  8  K. 
&  J.  605. 


•  Constable  v,  Nicholson,  14  C. 
B.  N.  S.  230 ;  Wakefield  v.  Duke 
of  Buccleugh,  L.  R,  4  £q.  Oas. 
818  ;  4  H.  &  C.  877. 

'  Earl  of  Card^an  y.  Armitage, 
2  B.  &  C.  297 ;  Wakefield  y.  Di&e 
of  Buccleugh,  4  H.  L.  C.  877; 
Bowbotham  v.  Wilson,  8  H.  L.  C. 
845 ;  Bell  v.  Wilson,  L.  R.,  4  Eq. 
Cas.  308 ;  Harris  y.  Ryding,  5  H. 
&  W.  69 ;  Elliott  y.  R  R  Co..  10 
L.  C.  888 ;  Hext  v.  Gill,  L.  B.  7 
Eq.  Cas.  690. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  SUBJAOENT  SUPPORT. 


667 


destroy  fortifications,  &c.,'*and  the  word  "mineral,**  being 
derived  from  "mine,"  signifies  that  which  is  obtained  by 
imdergromid  working,  and  not  that  which  is  dug  from 
quarries,  which  are  wrought  from  the  surface.  *  But  while 
a  reservation  of  minerals  authorizes  their  being  taken  out 
in  a  reasonable  manner,'  yet  it  has  been  demonstrated  by 
the  cases  referred  to,  that  it  only  justifies  their  being  taken 
when  it  can  be  done  without  injury  to  the  surface.  But 
•where  quarries  are  reserved,  this,  without  any  express 
reservation  of  a  right  to  injure  the  surface,  carries  with 
it  such  right  as  a  necessary  incident,  because  the  natural 
and  ordinary,  as  well  as  legal,  import  of  the  word,  com- 
templates  surf  ace- working.  A  quarry  signifies  a  stone 
pity*  and  refers  to  a  place  above^  rather  than  under y  the 
ground,  and  the  intention  of  the  parties,  in  all  conveyances, 
being  gathered  from  the  language  used,  the  law  makes 
this  proper  distinction  between  the  reservation  of  a  mine 
and  a  quarry.*  Therefore,  the  reservation  of  minerals 
gives  no  right  to  take  them  out  of  the  earth,  except  where 
it  can  be  done  without  injury  to  the  surface ;  but  the  res-  > 
ervation  of  quarries  carries  with  it  the  right  to  dig  the 
surface,  because  that  power  is  necessarily  implied  as  in 
accordance  with  the  intention  of  the  parties,  because  it  is 
the  only  method  by  which  the  stone  can  be  taken  out. 
The  right  to  siibjacent  support  for  land,  it  is  said,  is  only 
applicable  to  the  land  in  its  natural  condition,  unincum- 
bered by  buildings  or  other  structures  that  sensibly  increase 
the  pressure  thereon ;  but,  as  has  previously  been  explain- 
ed, the  mere  presence  of  a  building  or  other  structure  upon 
the  surface  does  not  prevent  a  recovery  for  injuries  to  the 
surface,  imless  it  is  shown  that  the  subsidence  would  not 
have  occurred  except  for  the  presence  of  the  buildings. 
When  the  injury  would  have  resulted  from  the  act  if  no 


1  Encyclopedia  Metropolitana ; 
874;  Rex  v.  Brettel,  8  B.  &  Ad. 
424 ;  Rex  v.  Inhabitants  of  Sedge- 
ley,  2  id.  e5;  Darrill  v.  Roper,  3 
Drew,  294;  Brown  v.  Chadwick,  7 
Irish  C.  L.  701 ;  Ldstwol  v.  Gib- 
bings,  9id.  228 ;  King  v.  Dunsford, 
2  B.  &  Ad.  66 ;  Also,  see  briefs  of 
Bailst,  Q.  C,  for  plaintiffs,  and 


GiFFOBD,  Q.  C,  for  defendant,  in 
Bell  V.  Wilson,  Law  R.,  4  Eq.  Gas. 
808 ;  also  apinion  of  Tubkeb,  L.  J.y 
in  same  case. 

*  Earl  of  Gardigan  v.  Aimitage. 
2  B.  &  G.  197. 

*  Johnson's  Dictionary,  Quarry, 

*  Bell  T.  Wilaon,  Law  R.,  4  Eq. 
Gas.  808. 


568 


TiABffiTillWWTB> 


[§272 


building  exists  upon  the  surface^  the  act  creating  the 
subsidence  is  wrongful,  and  renders  the  owners  of  the 
.mines  liable  for  all  damages  that  result  therefrom,  as  well 
to  the  building  as  to  the  land  itself/ 

It  is  laid  down  in  elementary  books,  and  is  to  be  found 
in  the  dicta  of  some  of  the  cases,  that  a  person  may  ac- 
quire a  prescriptive  right  for  the  support  of  a  building, 
either  adjacent  or  subjacent/  In  the  first  case  referred 
to  in  the  last  note.  Lord  ELLENBORoaoH  said :  '^  When  a 
man  builds  to  the  extremity  of  his  land,  and  has  enjoyed 
his  building  for  more  than  twenty  years,  upon  analogy  to 
the  rule  as  to  the  lights,  he  acquires  a  right  to  support,  or, 
as  it  were,  of  leaning  to  his  neighbor's  soil,  so  that  his 
neighbor  cannot  dig  so  near  as  to  remove  his  support,  but 
otherwise  as  to  a  house  newly  built."  This  dictum  is  re- 
ferred to  in  numerous  cases ;  but  it  will  be  observed  that 
it  is  mere  dicta^  and  is  no  part  of  the  actual  judgment  in 
any  of  the  cases,"  and  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  see  how 
any  prescriptive  right  can  thus  be  created.  A  builds  a 
house  upon  his  own  land,  adjoining  the  lands  of  B ;  in 
so  doing  he  is  in  the  exercise  of  a  lawful  right,  and  no  right 
of  action  accrues  against  him  in  favor  of  B,  for  no  right 
of  B  has  been  invaded  and  no  actual  damage  done.  Then, 
upon  what  principle  of  law,  as  applicable  to  the  doctrine  of 
prescription,  can  it  be  said  that  A,  after  the  lapse  of  twenty 
years,  acquires  a  prescriptive  right  to  have  his  lands  sup- 
ported by  the  lands  of  B.  In  a  later  case,*  Pollock,  C. 
B. ,  questions  the  soundness  of  any  such  doctrine  in  a  very 


>  Brown  v,  RobbinB,  4  H.  &  N. 
186 ;  Jeffries  v.  WilliajnB,  5  Exch. 
^92;  Roberts  v.  Haines,  6  E.  &  B. 
648 ;  7  id.  6S5.  Where  the  act  is 
"wrongful,  the  injury  to  the  build- 
ings may  be  recovered  as  conse- 
quential damages.  Bonomi  v. 
Backhouse,  E.  B.  &  E.  623 ;  Hamer 
V.  Knowles,  6  H.  &  N.  459 ;  Stroy- 
nan  v.  Kuowles,  id.  454 ;  Partridge 
V.  Scott,  3  M.  &  W.  60 ;  Humph- 
ries T.  Brogden,  1  Eng.  Law  Sc  Eq. 
241 ;  Wyatt  V.  Harrison,  8  B.  &  Ad. 
871 ;  Harris  v.  Ryding,  6  M.  &  W.  60. 

« Stansell  v.  Jollard,  1  Selw.  N. 
P.  444 ;  Hide  v.  Thomborough,  3 
Car.  &  K.  250 ;  Dodd  v.  Holme,  1 


Ad.  &  El.  498 ;  Partridge  t.  Scott 
8  M.  &  W.  220. 

*Pahner  Fleshees,  1  Siderfin, 
167 ;  Hide  t.  Thomborou^,  3  Car. 
<&  K.  350 ;  Humphries  v.  Brogden, 
1  Eng.  Law  &  £q.  241 ;  Thurston 
V.Hancock,  12 Mass.  230;  LaSala 
V.  Holbrook,  4  Paige's  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
169 ;  Bonomi  v.  Backhouse,  E.  B. 
&  E.  622 ;  Brown  v.  Windsor,  1  C. 
&  J.  27 ;  Partridge  v.  Scott,  8  M« 
&  W.  220 ;  Eno  v.  Del  Vechio,  4 
Duer,  58 ;  McGuire  v.  Grant,  25  N. 
J.  856. 

*  Solomon  v.  Yinters'  Co.,  4  H. 
&  N.  597. 


CHAP,  xxvl]       Subjacbsnt  Support. 


569 


pertinent  manner.  He  sa  js : ' '  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the 
circumstance  of  the  house  having  stood  there  twenty  years 
makes  any  difference,  or  creates  a  right  where  houses  are 
supposed  to  have  heen  huilt  by  different  adjoining  owners, 
each  with  its  own  separate  and  independent  walls,  but  up- 
ward of  twenty  years  ago  one  of  them  got  out  of  the  per- 
pendicular, and  leaned  upon  and  was  then  supported  in 
part  by  the  others,  so  that  if  the  latter  were  removed  the 
other  would  fall.  It  cannot  be  a  right  by  prescription, 
which  supposes  a  state  of  things  existing  before  the  time 
of  legal  memory.  It  seems  to  us  that^  in  the  absence  of 
all  evidence  as  to  origin  or  grant,  the  only  way  in  which 
a  right  can  be  supported  is  that  suggested  by  Lord  Camp- 
bell ; '  namely,  an  absolute  rule  of  law  similiar  to  that 
which  is  stated  to  have  existed  in  the  civil  law.  But  there 
is  no  authority  for  any  such  rule  to  be  found,  at  least  none 
was  stated  to  us." 

In  this  country,  so  far  as  the  question  has  ever  been 
decided,  it  has  been  held  that  no  such  right  can  be  acquired 
by  prescription,  andt  hat  no  user  which  is  neither  pre- 
ventable by  the  owner  of  an  adjoining  estate,  nor  action- 
able, can  found  an  easement.  The  doctrine  as  stated  in 
the  text  as  to  the  essential  requisites  of  the  user  to  gain 
a  prescriptive  right,  is  fully  adopted  in  England ; '  but 
with  a  singular  inconsistency,  the  courts  of  that  country 
hold  that  this  rule  does  not  apply  to  a  case  of  lateral  sup- 
port, because,  in  the  latter  case,  the  adjoining  owner 
may,  by  building  on  his  own  land,  physically  prevent  the 
acquisition  of  the  right,  although  neither  at  law  or  in 
equity  has  he  any  redress  against  the  acquisition  of  the 


1  Hum^iries  t.  Brogden,  1  Eng. 
Law.  &  Eq.  241. 

« Mitchell  V.  The  Mayor  of  Borne, 
49  Ga.  19 ;  Napier  v.  Bulwinkie,  5 
Rich.  (S.  C.)  m.  "When,"  says 
Wasdlow,  J.,  in  the  last  case, 
"  the  enjoyment  was  in  its  nature 
hidden,  or,  although  it  was  appar- 
ent, there  were  no  ready  means 
for  resisting;  it  within  the  power 
of  the  servient  owner,  assent  toas 
not  implied^  and  the  influence  of 
tvxnty  veari^  timey  therefore^  not 
acknotvwdg&JL^^    In  the  first  case 


cited,  Trippe,  J.,  verjr  pertinently 
says:  "Statutes  of  hmitation  ap- 
ply to  cases  where  one  is  in  the 
adverse  possession  of  property  that 
may  be  claimed  by  another.  27ie 
use  cannot  be  adverse  unless  exer- 
cised  in  denial  of  the  title,  and  in 
derogation  of  the  right  of  another. 
It  cannot  be  adverse  to  another, 
unless  he  lias  a  right  of  action  on 
account  of  a  wrong  done  him," 
See  also,  PeterBoa  y#  McCullousdh, 
50  Ind,  36. 


J 


570  Easements.  [§  272. 

right.  That  is,  A,  by  building  upon  the  extremity  of  his 
boundaries,  may  compel  B  to  erect  a  building  adjoining, 
whether  he  desires  to  so  use  his  premises  or  not,  under 
the  penalty,  if  he  does  not  build,  of  having  his  premises 
burdened  with  an  easement  for  the  support  of  A's  build- 
ing.* 

>  Stniges  V.  Brtdgman,   Ct.    of        *  Angus  v.  Dalion,  L.  B.  4  Q.  B. 
AppcAk,  Jul/  Ist,  1879,  reported  in     Div.  102. 
^1.  20,  p.  8S9,  of  The  Albany  Law 
Journal 


J 


CHAP,  xzvn.]  What  Abb.  571 


CHAPTER  XXVIll 

EXCEPTIONS,  BESEBYATIOMS  Am>  OONDITIONB. 

Sec.  373.  Wliat  are  exceptions. 

Sec.  274.  Distmction  between  and  reserrationB. 

Sec.  275.  Construction  of  exceptions  and  reservationB. 

SEa  276h  Provisos  and  conditions.— Description  and  nature  of. 

Sec.  277.  Conditions  precedent  or  subsequent. 

Sec.  278.  Construction  of  conditions. 

Sec.  279.  By  what  instrument  they  may  be  made. 

Ssa  280.  By  what  words  they  may  be  created. 

Sec.  281.  Between  what  parties  binding. 

Sec.  282.  Schedules,  indorsements,  &c.— Schedule  of  fixtures,  furni- 
ture, &c, — ^When  part  of  the  lease. 

Ssa  288.  Alterations  indorsed  before  the  lease  is  executed. 

Sec.  278.  What  are  exoeptioiiB.— An  exception  must  be 
of  a  particular  thing  out  of  the  thing  demised,  which  is 
susceptible  of  severance  from  the  general  estate,  as  a 
certain  field  out  of  a  farm,  certain  rooms  in  a  house,  and 
the  like,  and  an  exception  of  that  which  is  expressly 
granted  is  inoperative  and  invalid.'  Thus,  a  demise  of 
a  mill  and  the  machinery,  except  the  machinery,  or  a 
house  and  shops,  excepting  the  shops,"  or  twenty  acres 
of  land,  excepting  ten  acres  thereof,'  is  invalid,  because 
in  each  case  it  is  an  exception  of  something  granted, 
whereas  it  should  be  an  exception  from  the  grant,  as 
"the  mill,  excepting  the  machinery  therein,"  or  "the 
dwelling-house,  No.  24  Forsythe  St.,  except  the  third 
floor, ''or  "  all  my  farm  in,  &c.,  except  the  Phelps  lot, 
so  called, "  or  "  twenty  acres  of  land,  except  the  wood 

'  Stokeley  v.  Butter,  Hob.  170 ;  h ;  Anderson  v.  Benloe,  BenL  181 ; 

Killer  t.  Pratt,  8  Dy.  264  6 ;  Cud-  S.  P.  Kenson   v.    Reading,  Cra 

lip  T.  Bundle,  4  Mod.  0.  Eliz.  244. 

^Exxmeby  v.  Clifton,  8  Dy.  264         ^Miller  t.  Pratt,  8  Dyer,  264  b. 


672 


EXCEPTIONS)  <StC. 


[§278. 


thereon, ''  &c.*  The  exception  must  relate  only  to  ^part 
of  the  estate  granted ;  if  it  embraces  the  whole  it  is 
repugnant  and  void.  Thus,  where  a  i)erson  demised  all 
his  lands  in  Landhurst,  ''  except  the  manor  of  Hothbj, " 
and  it  turned  out  that  he  had  no  other  lands  in  Landhurst 
except  the  manor,  it  was  held  that  the  manor  passed  to 
the  lessee,  as  the  exception  was  repugnant  and  void.*  So 
if  twenty  acres  of  land  is  demised,  '^  except  one  acre 
thereof,"  the  exception  is  void,  because  it  is  of  a  moiety 
of  the  l^ing  expressly  granted ;  but  if  a  particular  lot  or 
farm  is  granted,  except  one  acre,  or  any  other  quantity 
less  than  the  whole,  it  is  good,  because  the  lessee  has  a 
lot  or  farm  left,  notwithstanding  the  exception.'  So  it 
must  be  of  something  connected  with  the  estate  to  which 
the  lessor  has  a  right,  otherwise  it  is  void.  Thus,  if  a 
lessee  for  years  or  for  life  makes  an  underlease,  excepting 
the  wood,  timber,  gravel  or  clay,  or  the  benefit  and  profit 
of  mines  in  the  land,  the  exception  is  void,  because,  not 
being  a  lessee  without  impeachment  of  waste,  he  has  no 
right  to  the  things  excepted.*  But  the  rule  is  otherwise 
where  the  lessor  is  tenant  without  impeachment  for 
waste,"  or  where  the  right  to  the  things  excepted  is  ex- 
pressly conferred  upon  him.*  So  if  he  grants  a  less  estate 
than  he  has,  so  that  a  reversion  remains  in  him,  he  being 
liable  to  his  lessor  for  waste,  may  properly  secure  to  him* 
self  a  remedy  against  his  sub- tenant  therefor ;  and  where 
a  tenant  for  ten  years  sub-lets  for  five  or  any  number  of 
years  less  than  his  time,  he  may  properly  except  the 
wood,  timber,  mines,  &c.,  but  not  if  he  grants  his  whole 
estate." 


'MiUer  v.  Pratt,  8  Dyer,  264  6, 
n  40. 

'« Dowell^s  Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  6. 

•Miller  v.  Pratt,  ante. 

^Saunder*s  Case,  5  Coke,  13  a, 
but  80  far  as  open  mines  are  con- 
cerned it  would  seem  that  such  an 
exception  would  be  operative,  be- 
cause the  tenant  has  a  right  to 
work  those,  but  not  those  not 
open.  Stoughton  t.  Leigh,  1 
Taunt.  402;  Astrey  v.  Ballard,  2 
Lev.  185 ;  Whitfield  v.  Beniett,  2 
P.  Wms.  242 ;  Darey  v.  Askwith, 
Hob.  284.    But  new  shafts  or  pits 


may  be  opened  for  the  purpose  of 
working  the  old  mines.  Claver- 
ine  V.  Claverin^,  2  P.  Wm&  388. 
If  land,  *'and  aU  mines  therein," 
is  leased,  the  tenant  may  open  new 
mines.    Saunder*s  Case,  ante. 

*  Sacheverel  v.  Dale,  Latch.  268 ; 
1  Comyn*s  Digest,  607. 

*Saunder's  Case,  6  Coke,  12  a. 

''Bacon  v.  Gyrling,  Cro.  Jac 
206.  In  Percy's  Case,  18  Coke,  60» 
the  court  noted  the  diistinction  and 
the  reason  therefor  as  follows: 
'*  If  a  tenant  for  life  leaseth  for 
years,  excepting  the  timber  trees. 


■ft.: 


OHAP.  XXVIL] 


Ebsbbvations. 


678 


Sbo.  274.  Distinotion  between  and  reeervations.^The  dis- 
tinction between  an  exception  and  a  reservation  is,  an 
exception  operaies  upon  a  thing  in  essCy  which,  unless 
restricted  by  the  words  of  the  lease,  would  pass  to  the 
lessee ; '  but  a  reservation  is  always  of  a  thing  not  in  esse, 
but  newly  created  or  reserved  out  of  the  land  or  tenement 
demised.'  It  is  the  legal  effect  of  the  words  used  rather 
than  the  words  themselves  that  determines  whether  the 
lease  is  subject  to  an  exception  or  a  reservation  merely, 
as,  even  though  the  lease  contains  a  claiise  '^reserving 
the  north-east  half  of  said  lot, "  if  it  would  be  valid  as  an 
exception  it  will  be  treated  as  such.  So  if  premises  are 
demised,  ^'  except  a  right  of  way,"  this  is  a  mere  reserva- 
tion, for  such  is  the  legal  effect  and  evident  intention  of 
the  parties.'  A  reservation  cannot  be  made  in  favor  of  a 
stranger.*    A  component  part  of  the  thing  demised  can- 


the  same  is  lawfully  and  wisely 
do^e,  for  otherwise,  if  the  lessee 
cutteth  down  the  trees,  the  tenant 
for  life  should  be  punished  for 
waste,  and  should  not  have  any 
remedy  for  waste  against  the 
lessee  for  years. "  (He  may,  how- 
ever, have  a  remedv  in  case,  in  the 
nature  of  waste.  Green  v.  Cole,  2 
Saund.  252  n  7 ;  and  equity  woxQd 
restrain  the  waste  at  the  suit  of 
the  landlord.  Abraham  v.  Budd, 
2  Freem.  55.)  The  court  goes  on 
to  state  that  by  excepting  the  trees, 
&c,,  the  tenant  secures  himself  a 
remedy  a«;ainst  his  sub-tenant. 
'*And,*'  the  court  adds,  ''this  is 
not  like  Saunder's  Case,  ante, 
which  was  aflirmed  to  be  good 
law  ;  for  there,  the  lessee  assigned 
over  his  whole  interest j  and  tnere- 
fore  could  not  except  the  mines, 
&c.,  which  he  had  not,  but  as 
things  annexed  to  the  land,  and 
therefore  he  could  not  have  them 
when  he  had  parted  with  his  whole 
interest,  nor  he  could  not  take 
them  either  for  reparations  or 
otherwise;  but  when  tenant  for 
life  leaseth  for  years,  except  the 
timber,  trees,  ^.,  the  same  re- 
maineth  yet  annexed  to  his  fre&- 
hold,  and  he  may  command  the 
lessee  to  take  them  for  necessary 
reparations  of  the  houses.  And 
in  the  said  case  of  Saunder,  a 
judgment  is  cited  between  Foster 


and  Bourd,  that  where  lessee  for 
years  assigns  over  his  term,  except 
the  trees,  &c.,  that  waste  in  such 
case  shall  be  brought  against  the 
assignee.  But  in  this  case,  with- 
out question,  waste  lieth  against 
the  tenant  for  life,  and  so  there  is 
a  difference." 

^  Co.  litt.  47  o ;  Shep.  Touch.  78 ; 
Ives  V.  Van  Auken,  84  Barb.  ^ 
Y.)  566 ,  Whittaker  v.  Brown,  46 
Penn.  St.  197. 

*  Co.  Litt.  47  a ;  Bullen  v.  Den- 
ning, 5  B.  &  C.  842 ;  Ives  v.  Van 
Auken,  ante ;  State  v.  Wilson,  42 
Me.  9 ;  Marshall  v.  Trumbull,  28 
Conn.  188.  As  a  right  of  way- 
over  the  land  granted  or  demised, 
Bowen  v.  Conner,  6  Cush.  (Mass.) 
132,  or  a  right  to  enter  to  look  for 
mines,  or  to  open  and  work  quar- 
ries, ^.,  House  V.  Palmer,  9Ga. 
497,  or  any  privilege  over  or  upon 
the  land,  as  that  of  hunting,  ndi- 
ing,  &Ui,  Jeffreys  v.  Evans,  19  C. 
B.N.  8.246. 

<  Marshall  V.  Trumbull,  28  Conn. 
183.  In  Sloan  v.  Lawrence  Fur- 
nace Co.  29  Ohio  St.  468,  land  was 
granted  *' reserving  all  the  min- 
erals," and  itwas  neld  an  excep- 
tion, as  such  was  the  evident  in- 
tent of  the  parties. 

^In  Homoack  v.  Weetbrook,  9 
John.  (N.  Y.)  73,  the  grantor  re- 
served certain  rights  to  the  in- 
habitants of  R,  and  the  court  held 


574 


Exceptions,  &o. 


[§274. 


not  be  reserved  /  A  reservation  of  all  mines,  timber  trees, 
minerals,  &c.,  although  the  word  "reserving"  alone  is 
used,  is  nevertheless  an  exception,  because  it  relates  to  a 
component  part  of  the  thing  demised/  So  there  may  be 
both  an  exception  and  a  reservation  derived  from  the 
same  word,  the  legal  eflfect  being  deemed  expressive  of 
the  intention  of  the  parties.  This  was  well  illustrated 
by  an  early  case.'  In  that  case  the  plaintiff  demised  a 
house  "  eoccepting  two  rooms,  and  free  passagcy  ingress, 
egress  and  regress  to  and  from  them. "  The  passage 
having  been  shut  up  by  the  lessee's  assignee,  the  plaintiff 
brought  an  action  of  covenant.  The  defendant  contended 
that  trespass  was  the  proper  remedy.  But  the  court  held 
that  the  plaintiff's  remedy  in  covenant  was  proper,  upon 
the  distinction  that  if  the  disturbance  had  been  in  %h» 
chamber^  a  thing  excepted  and  not  reserved,  the  action 
of  covenant  could  not  have  been  maintained :  but,  that 
it  was  otherwise  m  this  case  where  the  lessee  had  agreed 
to  let  the  lessor  have  a  right  of  way,  a  thing  newly 
created,  as  it  were,  by  the  grant  of  the  lease. 

It  is  proper  to  insert  in  all  leases,  where  an  exception 
is  made,  a  provision  that  the  lessor  may  enter  or  do  any 
acts  upon  the  land  necessary  to  make  the  exception 
effectual,  but,  even  though  no  such  right  is  expressly 
reserved,  yet  it  is  implied  from  the  exception  itself  thai 
the  lessor  may  enter  upon  the  premises,  or  do  any  act 
thereon  necessary  to  make  the  exception  effectual.  *    If, 


that  it  was  roid.  See  also  2  Pres- 
ton's Ck>nve7ancmg,  462.  But  con- 
tra,  see  statement  of  Maitwood,  J., 
in  8  Leon,  85,  that  "if  a  lease  be 
made  to  A,  except  a  certain  close 
to  B,  a  stranger,  B  shall  have  it; " 
but  this  is  not  regarded  as  good 
law  by  any  of  the  text  writers,  nor 
are  there  any  decisions  to  sustain 
it. 

»  Fancy  v.  Scott,  2  Man.  &  Ry. 
885. 

^  Cardigan  v.  Armitage,  2  B.  & 
C.  197 ;  Douglass  v.  Locke,  2  Ad. 
&  El.  705. 

s  Bush  V.  Coles,  12  Mod.  24. 

*  Anonymous,  2  Mod.  817.     If 

imber   and   trees   are    reserved, 

there  is  an  implied  reservation  of 


a  right  to  enter  and  cut  and  draw 
them  awav.  If  mines,  minerals, 
quarries,  &c.,  are  reserved,  there 
is  an  impUed  reservation  of  aright 
to  enter  to  work  and  win  them, 
&c.,  &c.  In  Foster  v.  Spooner, 
Cro.  Eliz.  17,  it  was  held  byaU  the 
court,  <<  that  if  a  man  maketh  a 
lease  reserving  the  wood,  ^bc,  he 
may  justify  the  entr^r  to  cut  and 
carry  them  away.  Liford's  Case, 
11  Coke,  46  &.  In  Rich  v.  Make- 
peace, Noy.  29,  it  was  held  that 
even  though  the  trees  were  ex- 
cepted, the  lessee  had  a  right  to 
take  the  loppings  for  firebote, 
but  this  is  not  the  rule,  and  it 
seems  well  established  that  an  ex- 
ception of  the  trees  carries  with  it 


C3HAF.  XXVn.] 


Sesebyations. 


676 


however,  Bpecial  rights  are  reserved,  none  others  will 
-paaa.  As,  if  a  certain  close  is  excepted,  '^  with  all  ways 
to  the  same  belonging  or  appertaining, "  no  way  will 
pass  unless  legally  appurtenant  to  the  dose, '  or  unless  it 
appears  from  the  grant  itself  that  the  parties  meant  to 
use  the  words  ^'belonging  and  appertaining"  in  a  more 
extended  sense.  But  imder  the  words  "with  all  ways  to 
the  demised  premises  belonging,  or  with  any  part  thereof 
used  or  enjoyed^ "  any  way  which,  at  the  time  the  grant 
was  made,  is  used  with  any  part  of  the  demised  premises, 
will  pass,  whether  specifically  mentioned  or  not.  *  It  has 
been  held  that  a  mere  reservation  of  a  right  of  way  over 
the  demised  lands  is  neither  an  exception  or  a  reserva- 
tion, being  neither  parcel  of  the  thing  demised,  nor  issu- 
ing out  of  it,  but  is,  strictly  speaking,  an  easement,  and 
pleadable  as  a  grant. '  "A  right  of  way  reserved, "  says 
Tiin>AL,  C.  J.,  in  the  case  last  cited,  "  (using  that*  word 
in  a  somewhat  popular  sense)  to  a  lessor,  as  in  the 
present  case,  is,  in  strictness  of  law,  an  easement  newly 
created  by  way  of  grant  from  the  grantee  or  lessee,  in 
the  same  manner  as  a  right  of  sporting  or  fishing,  which 
has  been  lately  much  considered  in  'several'  cases."* 
But  where  the  lessee  does  not  sign  the  lease,  such  a  right 
cannot  be  said  to  be  granted  by  him,  and,  unless  sustain- 
able as  a  reservation  or  exception,  it  would  be  void ;  *  and, 
whatever  may  be  said  to  be  the  result  of  a  strict  construc- 
tion, rights  of  way,  &c.,  are  treated  as  proper  subjects 
of  reservation,  especially  if  they  are  incident  to  any  other 
exception  or  reservation  in  or  out  of  the  demised  premises. ' 


not  only  all  thb  fruits,  but  all  the 
bouffhs  or  loppings.  Goodright  y. 
Vivian,  8 East,  191 ;  Smithy.  Bale, 
Cro.  Jac.  549 ;  Shep.  Touch.  100. 

iBarlow  y,  Bhooes,  1  Cr.  &  M. 
489. 

*  KoojBtra  y.  Lucas,  5  B.  &  Aid. 
880. 

« Durham  &c.,  B.  Ck).  y.  Walker, 
2  Q.  B.  940. 

*  Douglass  y.  Lock,  3  Ad.  &  EL 
705 ;  Wickham  y.  Hawker,  7  M.  & 
W.  63. 

*  Durham  &c. ,  R.  Co.  y.  Walker, 
ante,  p.  967. 

« Fancy  y.  Scott,  2  Man.  &  R. 


285 ;  Mitcalfe  y.  Westaway,  17  a 
B.  N.  S.  958 ;  Proud  y.  Botes,  11 
Jur.  N.  S.  441.  If  a  lessor  intends 
to  reserye  a  ri^ht  of  way  oyer  the 
demised  premises  he  must  express' 
ly  reserve  it,  Qood  y.  Hill,  2Esp, 
690 ;  Brown  y.  Meady,  10  Me.  891, 
unless  it  is  implied  as  an  incident 
to  some  other  reseryation  or  ex- 
ception in  the  demise,  as  the  effect 
of  an  exception  is  to  except  all 
things  dependent  upon  or  incident 
to  it.  Fc«ter  v.  Spooner,  Cro.  Eliz. 
17;  Liford's  Case,  11  Coke,  46  5; 
Cardigan  y.  Armitage,  2  B.  &  C» 
207 ;   Sacheyerel  y.  Day,  Latch. 


576 


Exceptions^  &o. 


[§274. 


If  the  exception  or  reservation  confers  an  interest 
in  the  land,  it  is  assignable.  Thus  where  a  railway 
company  excepted  and  reserved  out  of  a  demise  of  land  a 
patent  fidip  therein,  and  the  machinery  connected  there- 
with, with  free  access  thereto  ^^for  themselves,  their 
successors  and  assigns,  officers,  servants  and  workmen :" 
it  was  held  that  a  licensee  of  the  Company  might  justify 
using  thd  sUp.'  Where  a  person  agreed  to  let  a  farm, 
except  thirty-seven  acres  (not  saying  which),  held,  that 
he  had  the  right  to  select  which  thirty-seven  acres  should 
not  be  included  in  the  lease.'  In  all  good  exceptions 
these  things  must  always  concur  :  1,  the  exception  must 
be  by  apt  words,  as  ^'saving  and  excepting,"  or  the 
like ; '  2,  it  must  be  a  part  of  the  thing  demised,  and  not 
of  some  other  thing ;  3,  it  must  be  part  of  the  thing 
only,  and  not  all;  and  not  the  greater  part,  or  the 
substance  of  the  thing  granted ;  4,  it  must  be  of  such  a 
thing  as  is  severable  from  the  premises  demised,  and  not 
of  an  inseparable  incident ;  5,  it  must  be  of  such  a  thing 
as  the  person  in  whose  favor  the  exception  is  made  may 
have,  and  which  properly  belongs  to  him  ;  thus,  it  must 
be  of  a  particular  thing  out  of  a  general,  and  not  of 
a  particular  thing  out  of  a  particular  thing ;  6,  it  must 
be  certainly  described  and  set  down ;  therefore,  if  one 
demises  a  farm  excepting  one  acre,  without  setting  forth 
which  or  what  acre  it  shall  be,  the  exception  is  void.  ^ 

If  a  man  possessed  of  a  new  and  an  old  one  makes  a 
lease  with  an  exception  of  the  new  house  for  his  use 
when  he  pleases  to  reside  there,  and  at  other  times  for 
the  use  of  the  lessee,  the  exception  is  good  a&to  the  new- 
house,  and  is  not  avoided  by  the  words  '^  at  all  times  to 


168;  Bacon  y.  Gryling.  Oo.  Jac. 
296 ;  Percy's  Case,  18  Coke,  60 ;  1 
Comyn's  Dig.  607. 

>  Mitcalfe  v.  Westaway,  17  C.  B. 
N.  S.  658.  A  third  peroon  may 
Tustdfy  under  a  grant  or  license 
from  the  grantor  or  lessor,  but  not 
under  a  general  reservation,  or  a 
special  one  to  him.  See  also  Moul- 
ton  T.  Faught,  47  Me.  695. 

« Jenkins  v.  Green,  27  BeaT.  487 ; 
Thuiston  V.  Masterson,  9  Dana 
(Ky.),   228.    But   see   Dorrell   v. 


Collins,  Cro.  Ells.  6.  Also  Mooney 
T.  Cooledge,  80  Ark.  640,  where  it 
was  held  that  the  same  certainly 
is  required  in  an  exception  and 
reservation  as  in  the  grant  itself, 
and  that  where  land  is  conveyed, 
**  excei>t  one  acre  thereof,"  with- 
out desi^ating  t/ohich  acre,  the  ex- 
ception IS  void. 

3Co.  lit.  47  a. 

^Dorrell  v.  Collins,  Cro.  Eliz.  «. 
But  see  Jenkins  v.  Green,  supra. 


CHAP,  xxvn.] 


CONSTEUCnON. 


577 


be  used  by  the  lessee,  when  the  lessor  doth  not  dweli 
there ; "  for  that  sentence  does  not  enure  as  an 
exception  out  of  an  exception  (which  sets  the  mat- 
ter at  large),  but  only  as  a  declaration  of  the 
lessor's  intention  in  making  the  exception; — ^the  lat- 
ter words,  however,  make  the  lessee  tenant  at  will. 
So  if  a  man  leases  his  houses,  excepting  his  new  house, 
during  the  terrriy  this  exception  is  good  :  but  if  he  excepts 
it  during  Zt/e,  it  is  void;  for  the  words  '*  during  life" 
qualify  the  exception,  and  show  his  intent  that  the  house 
shall  not  be  excepted  during  the  whole  term,  and  for 
that  reason  is  void. ' 


Sec.  275.  Constmotion  of  exceptions  and  reservations.— 
A  clause  in  a  lease  purporting  to  reserve  underwoods  and 
underground  produce  does  not  enure  as  a  reservation,  but 
as  an  exception.'  Thus,  a  lease  of  all  lands  excepted  all 
timber,  timber  trees  and  other  trees,  &c.,  bushes  and 
thorns,  other  than  such  bushes  and  thorns  should  be  neces- 
sary for  the  repairs  of  the  fences ;  the  lessee  covenanted 
to  keep  fences  in  repair,  and  the  lessor  covenanted  to 
find  and  provide,  if  growing  on  the  premises,  rough 
timber,  stakes  and  bushes;  it  was  held  that  the  pro- 
vision as  to  bushes  and  thorns  necessary  for  repairs  was 
not  an  exception  out  of  an  exception,  but  that  aU  trees, 
bushes  and  thorns  were  excepted  out  of  the  demise, 
whether  part  of  a  fence  or  not,  or  whether  necessary  for 
repairs  or  not.'  An  exception  of  "all  the  wood"  will  be 
an  exception  of  the  soil  whereon  the  wood  grows.*  In 
like  manner,  if  all  the  underwood  and  copse  wood  is 
excepted,  the  land  will  also  be  excepted,  unless  it 
clearly  appears  that  it  was  merely  the  intention  of  the 
parties  to  except  only  the  wood  itself.*     And   so  of 


1  CudUp  V.  HandaU,  8  Salk.  156. 
«  Douglas  V.  Locke,  2  Ad.  &  El. 
705. 
»  Jenney  v.  Brook,  6  Q.  B.  323. 

*  Ive  V.  Sams,  Cix).  Eliz.  621 ; 
Whistler  v.  Paslow,  Cro.  Jac.  489. 

*  Whistler  v.  Paslow,  supra; 
Pincomb  v.  Thomas  Cro.  Jac.  524. 
In  this  case  a  tenement  was  let 
and  a  close  connected  with  a  wood 


lot,  and  the  lessor  excepted  all 
saleable  woods  then  growing,  or 
which  should  thereafter  grow 
thereon,  with  free  entry,  <Stc.jfor 
felling  and  carrying  the  same 
away,  and  the  court  held  that  the 
soil  was  not  excepted,  but  passed 
to  the  lessee.  The  reason  for  this 
decision  is  not  given,  but,  unques- 
tionably, it  was  predicated  upon 

37 


m 


Exceptions,  &c. 


[§275- 


an  exception  of  fruit  trees.'  But  where  timber  treed 
are  excepted,  the  soil  in  which  they  grow  will  not 
be  covered  by  the  exception."  Under  an  exception 
of  "all  wood  and  underwood,"  trees,  great  and  small, 
are  generally  excepted ;  but  not  fruit  trees.'  A  parol 
demise  of  land,  reserving  to  the  landlord  "all  the  hedges, 
trees,  thorn  bushes,  fences,  with  lop  and  top,"  operates 
as  a  Ucense  to  enter  the  land  for  the  purpose  of  cutting 
and  carrying  away  the  trees.*  Where  a  lessee  for  life 
made  a  lease  for  years,  excepting  the  wood,  underwood 
and  trees  growing  upon  the  land,  it  was  held  a  good  excep- 
tion, although  he  had  no  interest  in  them  but  as  lessee ;  ' 
because  he  remained  always  tenant,  and  was  chargeable 
in  waste — ^wherefore  to  prevent  it  he  might  make  the 
exception :  but  if  a  lessee  for  years  assign  over  his' term 
with  such  an  exception,  it  is  a  void  exception.  *  An  excep- 
tion of  "all  trees,  woods,  coppice-wood  grounds,  of  what 
kind  or  growth  soever,"  does  not  extend  to  apple-trees  ;* 
an  exception  of  "all  timber-trees  and  other  trees,  but 
not  the  annual  fruit  thereof,"  does  not  include  apple- 
trees.^    By  a  lease  of  a  tenement  described  as  containing 


the  fact  that  a  right  of  entry  was 
reserved,  which  show  that  the 
parties  did  not  understand  that  the 
soil  was  reserved,  as  in  that  case  a 
reservation  of  the  right  of  entry 
would  have  been  unnecesssry. 

1  Smith  V.  Bole,  Oro.  Jac.  458. 

•Whistler  v.  Paslow,  Cro.  Jac. 
487.  Elxcept  so  much  as  is  neces- 
sary for  the  vegetation  of  the  trees 
excepted.  liford's  Case,  11  C!oke. 
46  6;  Whistler  v.  Paslow,  Cro. 
Jac.  487.  The  lessee,  where  only 
trees  are  excepted,  is  entitled  to 
the  underwood  and  herbage  where 
the  trees  grow.  Dyer,  79  a,  pL  78. 
If  the  trees  are  excepted  the  lessor 
holds  them  as  an  inheritance,  and 
not  as  a  chattel.  They  are  an- 
nexed to,  and  will  pass  with,  the 
reversion.  Stamp  v.  Clinton,  1 
Roll.  95.  (See  Liford's  Case,  cited 
antoy  which  is  the  same  as  the  one 
last  cited,  under  a  different  name.) 
When  trees  are  not  excepted,  al- 
though the  property  therein  re- 
mains in  him,  ne  cannot  enter  to 
cut  them,  nor  can  he  sell  them  so 
as  to  defeat  any  of  the  tenant's 


rights  therein,  or  authorize  a  per- 
son to  enter  and  take  them.  But, 
while  there  are  several  cases  in 
which  it  is  said  generally  that  the 
lessor  cannot  sell  the  trees  during 
the  lease.  Waller  v.  Petty,  Oo. 
Car.  274 ;  Berry  v.  Heard,  Palm. 
828 ;  liford's  Case,  11  Coke,  48  b, 
vet  it  is  evident  that  while  the 
lessor  cannot  sell  the  trees  during 
the  lease,  so  as  to  entitle  the  pur- 
chaser to  enter  and  take  them,  or 
so  as  to  defeat  any  of  the  tenants 
rights  therein,  yet,  a  sale  of  them 
would  be  operative  as  an  estoppel, 
after  the  lease  had  expired, 
'  »  London  V.  Southwell,  Hob.  804, 
and  where  all  the  large  trees  are 
excepted,  trees  that  become  large 
are  included.  Gku^ock  v.  Cliff,  1 
Leon,  61. 

*  Hewitt  V.  Isham,  7  Exch.  77 ; 
Liford's  Case,  11  Co.  R.  51  6. 

*  Bacon  v.  GyrUng,  Cro.  Jac 
296. 

•London  v.  Southwell,  Hob.  304 ; 
WjTidham  v.  Way,  4  Taunt.  816. 

^Bullen  V.  Denning,  5  B.  &  CL 
842. 


^vi 


'&^ 


G&AP.  xxvn. 


CONSTRUCfttON. 


679 


nineteen  acres,  "except  all  timber-trees,  wood,  under- 
wood, &c.,"  six  acres  of  the  soil,  which  were  then  cov- 
ered with  growing  wood,  are  not  excepted.*  A  parol 
demise  of  land,  reserving  to  the  landlord,  "all  the 
hedges,  trees,  thorn-  bushes,  fences,  with  lop  and  top : " 
held,  that  such  reservation  operated  as  a  licence  to  enter 
the  land  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  and  earring  away  the 
trees.'  A  clause  purporting  to  reserve  and  except  to  the 
lessor  the  power  of  hunting,  &c.,  over  the  demised  prem- 
ises, enures  as  a  grant  from  the  lessee  to  the  lessor  of  a 
right  or  privilege,  and  not  as  a  reservation  or  exception.' 
Any  one  may  lease  or  convey  his  land,  and  reserve  to 
himself  the  right  of  entering  for  any  purpose,  without 
being  subject  to  be  sued  as  a  trespasser ;  but,  in  this,  as 
well  as  in  all  other  exceptions,  the  intent  of  the  parties 
controls,  and  in  ascertaining  such  intention,  the  circum- 
stances surrounding  the  parties  and  the  property  is  to  be 
considered.  Thus,  an  exception  in  a  deed,  made  in  1653, 
of  the  free  liberty  of  hunting  and  hawking,  was  held  not 
to  extend  to  shooting  feathered  game  tuith  a  gun,  because 
gunsy  not  being  in  common  use,  could  not  be  in  the  con- 
templation of  the  parties.*    A  demise  of  lands,  excepting 


^  Leigh  Y.  HeaJd,  1  B.  &  Adol. 
623. 

•  Hewitt  T.  Isham,  7  Bxch.  77, 

'  Doe  d.  Douglas  t.  Lock,  2  Ad. 
&  El.  706,  748 ;  Wickham  t.  Haw- 
ker, 7  M.  &  W.  103 ;  Ewart  v. 
Graham,  7  H.  L.  Cas.  888. 

*  Moore  v.  Earl  of  Plymouth,  7 
Taunt.  614  ;  Shep.  Touch.  80.  All 
the  facts  must  be  taken  together, 
Lewis  V.  Baird,  8  McLean  (U.  S.), 
56,  and  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  instrument  was  exe- 
cuted, and  all  extraneous  facts  are 
to  be  looked  at.  Stanley  t.  Green, 
13  Cal.  148  ;  French  v.  Carhart,  1 
N.  Y.  96 ;  Mulf ord  v.  Le  France, 
26GaL  88;  Dunn  v.  English,  28  N. 
J.  L.  126 ; '  Salisbury  v.  Andrews, 
19  Pick.  (Mass.)  250 ;  Bradford  v. 
Gressy,  45  Me.  9 ;  Winnipiseogee 
Co.  V.  Mathieson,  46  N.  H.  88 ; 
Hadden  t.  Shouty,  15  Bl.  581; 
AdacQS  T.  Frothingham,  8  Mass. 
852.  But,  where  the  terms  of  the 
deed  are  clear  and  explicit,  or  the 
instrument  can   operate,  neither 


the  acts  of  the  parties  nor  any  other 
extraneous  circumstances  are  ad- 
missible, but  the  deed  itself  must 
control.  Hutchings  v.  Dixon,  11 
Md.  29  ;  Dunn  v.  Bank  of  Mobile, 
2  Ala.  162  ;  Means  v.  Church,  8  W. 
&  S.  (Penn.)  803.  Where  the  in- 
strument is  clear  in  its  terms,  the 
intent  of  the  parties  as  gathered 
from  the  language  used  is  to  con- 
trol. Chouteau  v.  Snydam,  21  N. 
Y.  179;  Payton  v.  Ayres,  1  Md. 
Ch.  64;  Mills  V.  Cotton,  22 Vt.  98; 
Dames  v.  Prentice,  16  Pick.  (Mass.) 
485 ;  Purbush  v.  Goodwin,  25  N. 
H,  428 ;  Benedict  v.  Gaylord,  11 
Conn.  882  ;  Pike  v.  Monroe,  86  Me. 
809.  The  grammatical  sense  is  not 
adhered  to,  where  a  contrary  in- 
tent is  apparent.  Hancock  v.  Wat- 
son 18  Cal.  187 ;  Jackson  v.  Tap- 
ping, 1  Wend.  (N,  Y.)  888.  And 
m  the  absence  oi  any  other  mode 
of  ascertaining  the  utention  of  the 
parties,  it  will  be  taken  most 
strongly  against  the  lessor.  Bee- 
san  Y.  Patterson,  86  Peim.  St.  24. 


680  ExOBFnONS,  i&C.  [§  276. 

and  reserving  all  ro^oZ^ies^  with  a  clause  for  the  lessor  to  be 
allowed  to  prosecute  actions  against  persons  trespassing 
for  the  purpose  of  hunting,  &c. ,  does  not  amount  to  a  grant 
by  the  lessee  of  a  liberty  for  the  lessor  to  enter  for  the  pur- 
pose of  pursuing,  killing  and  taking  birds  of  warren. '  A 
demise  was  made  of  a  mansion-house  and  land,  with  the 
sole  license  of  sporting  over  all  other  lands  of  the  lessor's, 
subject  to  the  liberty  for  each  tenant  on  his/arm  to  kill 
rabbits  thereon;  this  exception  extends  not  only  to 
farms  existing  at  the  time  of  the  demise,  but  also  to  other 
lands,  as  plantations,  subsequently  let  as  farms.'  Where 
a  lease  was  made  subject  to  a  right  of  way  on  foot  for 
horses,  oxen,  cattle  and  sheep,  no  right  of  way  to  draw 
manure  is  reserved.*  Notwithstanding  an  exception  in 
a  lease  of  certain  closes  or  rooms,  which  the  lessee  is 
not  to  use,  he  may  pass  and  repass  through  them  if  they 
are  so  situated  that  he  cannot  otherwise  have  the  com- 
plete enjoyment  of  the  lands  or  premises  demised  to  him/ 
Where  there  was  a  lease  of  certain  lands,  together  with 
all  houses,  watercourses,  &c.,  excepting  '* a  watercourse 
flowing  or  descending  from  "  a  certain  spot,  through  a 
meadow,  it  was  held  in  the  particular  case  to  be  an  ex- 
ception of  the  water  itself,  not  of  the  channel  through 
which  it  flowed/  Where  there  was  a  demise  of  a  mill 
and  a  stream  of  water,  except  so  much  water  as  should 
be  sufBcient  for  the  supply  of  persons  already  contracted 
with  whom  the  lessor  had  or  thereafter  should  contract  to 
supply,  provided  that  such  a  quantity  should  be  left  as 
should  be  suflBicient  to  supply  the  mill  for  twelve  hours 
a  day ;  it  was  held,  that  this  was  not  an  absolute  under- 
taking to  supply  water  to  work  the  mill  twelve  hours  a 
day,  but  that  it  was  a  demise  of  the  mill  as  the  water 
was  flowing  at  the  time  of  the  demise.* 

Sec.    276.  Provisos    and    oondition.  —  Desoription    and 
nature   of— The  terms  ''proviso"  and  '^ condition"  are 

1  Pannell  v.  Mill,  8  C.  B.  626.  *  Doe  d.  Earl  of   E;gremont  y. 

«  Newton  v.  Wilmot,  8  M.  &  W.  Williams,  11  Q.  B.  688. 

711.  *Blatchford  t.  Mayor,  &c.,  of 

« Brunton  v.  HaU,  1  Q.  B.  792.  Plymouth,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  691. 
Ml  Co.  E.  52  a. 


.r. 


CBAP.  xxvn.]   Pbovibos  and  Condition. 


681 


synonymous,  and  signify  some  quality  annexed  to  real 
estate,  by  virtue  of  which  it  may  be  defeated,  enlarged 
or  created  upon  ,  an  imcertain  event.  Such  qualities 
annexed  to  personal  contracts  and  agreements  are 
generally  called  conditions.'  A  proviso  or  condition  of 
re-entry  may  be  inserted  in  a  new  agreement  for 
a  lease  not  under  seal.*  It  will  even  form  part  of 
a  new  implied  tenancy  from  year  to  year  upon 
the  terms  of  a  previous  lease  or  agreement. '  A  con- 
dition may  be  annexed  to  an  estate  of  inheritance,  of 
freehold,  or  for  years.  *  A  proviso  or  condition  differs 
from  a  covenant  in  this,  that  the  former  is  in  the  words 
of  and  binding  upon  both  parties,  whereas  the  latter  is  in 
the  words  of  the  covenantor  only.  It  is  a  rule  in  refer- 
ence toprovisosy  that  where  a  proviso  is,  that  the  lessee 
shuU  perform  or  not  perform  a  thing,  and  no  penalty  is 
annexed  to  it,  that  it  is  a  condition,  otherwise  it  would 
he  void  j  hut  if  a  penalty  is  annexed,  it  is  a  covenant.  * 
The  word  "provided,''  of  itself  imports  a  condition, 
imless  the  language  is  such  as  to  strip  it  of  that  effect ;  r 
as,  if  a  lease  contains  ^  clause  as  follows :  "  Provided, 
however  the  said  John  Doe  shall  at  all  times  keep  the 
buildings  and  premises  in  good  repair, "  the  keeping  of 


>  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Condition.  A 
condition  may  be  said  to  be  a 
qualification  annexed  to  an  estate 
by  the  lessor,  by  which  the  estate 
may  be  defeated,  enlarged,  or  cre- 
ated, upon  an  uncertain  event, 
and  upon  which  the  vesting  or 
continuance  of  the  estate  depends. 
Strictly  speaking,  its  object  is  to 
defeat  the  estate  in  a  certain  con- 
tingency, but,  if  an  estate  is  to  be 
enlarged  or  created,  its  office  is  to 
mark  the  event  or  period  of  its 
commencement  and  its  extent  or 
duration.  Co.  litt.  214  h;  Mary 
Portington^s  Case,  10  Coke,  41.  In 
order  to  create  an  effectual  condi- 
tion, the  vesting  or  ending  of  the 
estate  must  depend  upon  an  imcer- 
tain contingency.  It  may  be  intro- 
duced into  a  lease  by  parol,  where 
the  lease  is  bv  parol,  and  a  parol  is 
valid,  Henniker  v.  Watts,  8  B.  & 
C.  908,  or  may  be  contained  in  the 
body  of  the  lease,  or  endorsed  there- 


on, provided  that,  in  the  latter  in- 
stance, the  endorsement  must 
precede  the  execution  of  the  lease, 
as  in  such  a  case  the  endorsement 
is  treated  as  a  part  of  the  lease. 
Griffin  v.  Stanhope,  Cro.  Jac.  456. 
But  if  endorsed  after  the  lease  is 
executed,  unless  it  is  under  seal 
and  executed  with  all  the  formali- 
ties required  by  law  for  the  execu- 
tion of  the  lease  itself,  it  reduces 
the  whole  contract  to  a  simple  con- 
tract, and  defeats  the  remedies 
peculiar  to  specialties.  Hydeville 
Slate  Co.  V.  Eagle  R.  R.  Slate  Co., 
40  Vt.  884. 

•  Hayne  v.  Cummings,  16  C.  B. 
N.  S.  421. 

«  Thomas  v.  Packer,  1  H.  &  N. 
669. 

*  Com.  Dig.  Tit.  Condition  (A),  7. 
»  Simpson  v.  Titterell,  Cro.  Eliz. 

242.  Gray  v.  Blanchard,  8  Pick. 
(Mass.)  284;  Jackson  v.  Allen,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  221. 


552 


EZGEPnONSy  Sco. 


[§  276. 


the  buildings  and  premises  in  good  repair  is  a  condition  to 
the  tenant's  right  to  retain  possession  during  the  term 
fixed  in  the  lease,  and  upon  his  failure  to  do  so  the  land- 
lord may  bring  ejectment ;  but,  if  after  the  word  repair 
there  is  added,  ''or  shall  pay  the  sum  of  five  dollars  for 
each  month  that  he  shall  neglect  to  do  so,  "  in  the  latter 
case  there  is  no  condition,  because  the  right  of  re-entry 
is  not  reserved,  but  a  penalty  is  provided  for  the  breach.  * 
A  condition  that  affects  the  estate  runs  with  the  land. 
Thus,  a  condition  in  a  lease,  that  if  the  rent  shall  be  in 
arrear,  or  if  the  lessee  shall  neglect  or  fail  ta  perform 
and  observe  any  or  either  of  his  covenants  therein, 
the  lessor  may,  at  any  time,  while  such  neglect  or 
default  continues,  enter  upon  the  premises  and  re- 
possess the  same  as  of  his  former  estate,  is  applica- 
ble to  covenant  that  the  lessee  shall  not  occupy  the 
buildings,  or  in  any  manner  suffer  them  to  be  occupied, 
for  dwellings,  or  for  any  unlawful  purpose.  Such  cove- 
nant runs  with  the  land,  and  is  binding  upon  the  estate 
in  the  hands  of  the  sub-tenants  of  the  lessee,  whose  use 
of  the  same  for  imlawf ul  purpose  will  be  a  breach  of  the 
covenant,  and  work  a  forfeiture.'  Insensible  words  will 
not  be  construed  as  constituting  a  condition ;  as,  if  a 
lease  is  made  to  a  woman  for  a  certain  number  of  years, 
''provided  she  lives  so  long  and  keeps  herself  such," 
because  there  is  nothing  from  which  the  court  can  ascer- 
tain how  she  was  to  keep  herself.  But  if  the  words 
"unmarried, "  or  "widow, "  had  been  used  in  place  of 
the  word  "  such, "  a  condition  would  have  been  created ; 
nor  will  a  mere  covenant  be  construed  as  having  the 
effect  of  a  condition^  unless  a  clause  of  re-entry  for  its 


^Gray  v.  Blanchard,  8  Pick. 
(Mass.)  284.  In  Jackson  v.  Allen, 
8  Ck)w.  (N.  Y.)  221,  the  words 
*'  cmd  these  jiiresents  are  upon  this 
condition,  viz,^  that  the  lessee 
shall  suffer  the  lessor  to  enjoy  a 
right  of  way  through  the  demised 
premises  without  obstruction,*' 
make  the  estate  upon  condition, 
on  breach  of  which  the  lessor  haa  a 
right  to  re-enter,  or  bring  eject- 
ment.   While  a  lessor  may  re-en- 


ter for  the  breach  of  a  condition 
yet  the  lease  is  not  by  such  breach 
rendered  absolutely  Toid,  but  is 
voidable  at  the  election  of  the  les- 
sor. Western  Bank  v.  Kyle,  6 
Gill.  (Md.)  848 ;  Clark  t.  Jones,  1 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  ^16. 

*  Wlieeler   y.    Earle,    6    Cash. 
(Mass.)  81. 

*  Comyn*s  Digest,  Condition  (A), 
6  ;  Hardy  v.  Sayer,  Cro.  El.  414. 


CHAP,  xxvn:]      Provisos  ah^d  Conditions. 


588 


breach  is  inserted  in  the  lease.  Thus,  a  clause  in  the  lease, 
"provided,  however,  the  said  John  Doe  covenants  and 
agrees,  upon  six  months'  notice,  and  payment  to  him, 
&c.,  to  surrender  the  premises"  to  the  landlord,  is  a 
mere  covenant,  and  not  a  condition ;  *  nor  do  mere  words 
of  limitation  or  restraint  create  a  condition ;  as,  where 
the  lease  authorizes  the  tenant  to  cut  firewood  or  timber 
for  the  use  of  the  premises,  provided  he  does  not  take 
the  great  trees.  In  this  case,  if  the  tenant  cuts  trees  or 
timber  that  ought  not  to  be  cut,  it  might  amount  to 
waste,  but  a  right  of  re-entry  does  not  exist  unless  he 
cuts  the  "  great  trees " '  Where  an  active  condition  is 
annexed  to  an  estate,  the  lessee  forfeits  his  estate  unless 
he  i>erf  orms  it  within  the  time  limited ;  or,  if  no  time  is 
specified,  within  a  reasonable  time,*  in^view  of  the  nature 
of  the  estate  created,  the  importance  of  performance,  and 
the  evident  intention  of  the  parties.*  If  there  are  acts 
to  be  done  by  the  lessor  that  precede  performance  of 
the  condition,  performance  cannot  be  required,  nor  a 
breach  set  up,  until  such  precedent  act  is  performed.*/ 
Where  a  condition  is  to  the  alternative,  giving  the  lessee 
his  election  to  do  either  of  two  things,  as  "to  build  a 
new  bam  or  repair  the  one  now  upon  the  premises," 
if  the  lessor  puUs  down  the  old  bam,  rendering  it  im- 
possible for  the  lessee  to  exercise  his  election,  he  is  dis- 
charged from  the  condition,  under  the  rule  that,  "when 
a  condition  becomes  impossible  of  performance  by  the 
default  of  one  party,  the  other  is  excused  from  perform- 
ing at  all ; "  ^''  and  the  same  rule  prevails  as  to  conditions 
subsequent  when  performance  is  illegal,  or  becomes  im- 
possible, either  by  the  act  of  God  or  operation  of  law,  or 
is  repugnant  to  the  estate  granted,  and  the  estate  vests 
as  though  the  lease  contained   no  condition  ."^    Where, 


>  Tallman  v.  Coffin,  4  N.  Y.  184. 

'  Ck>myn's  Digest,  Condition  (A,) 
6.  See  also,  Jackson  v.  Harrison, 
17  John.  (N.  Y.)  66 ;  Hardy  v. 
Seyer,  Cro.  Eliz.  414 ;  Jackson  t. 
McClallan,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  266. 

*  Hamilton  v.  Elliott,  5  S.  &  R. 
(Penn.)  884. 

*  Finlay  V.  King,  8  Pet.  (U.  S.)  876. 
■Memtt   V.   Ihnery,    10   Pick. 


g 


Mass.)  507;  People  v.  Manning, 
Cow.   (N.  Y.)   2»7;    Scovell  v. 

Cabell,  Cro.  El.  107 ;  McLachlan  v. 

McLachlan,  9  Paige  Ch.  (N.    Y.) 

584 ;  HoUand  v.  Bouldin  4  T.   B. 

Mon.  (Ky.)  147. 
*  Moore  v.  Sauel,  2  Leon  182 ; 

Comjrn's  Digest,  Condition  (K)  2. 
'  Scovell  V.  Cabell,  Cro.  El.  107 ; 

Peope  y.  Manning,  ante ;  De  Pey 


.584 


Exceptions,  &o. 


[§  277. 


however,  the  conditioii  is  in  the  alternative,  and  per- 
formance of  one  alternative  was  impossible  when  the 
lease  was  madey  the  lessee  is  still  bound  to  perform  the 
other.*  As  to  conditions  precedent,  strict  performance 
is  required,  and  if  it  becomes  impossible /rom  any  caiise^ 
the  estate  cannot  vest ;  and  this  is  the  rule  whether  the 
lessee  is  an  infant  or  feme  covert^  or  a  person  laboring 
under  any  legal  disability.*  Where  the  condition  is,  that 
a  certain  thing  shall  not  be  done  without  the  lessor's 
consent,  consent  once  given  dispenses  with  the  condition, 
if  the  license  is  given  in  the  manner  provided  in  the 
lease.' 

Sec.  277.  Conditions  precedent  or'subsequent.— Conditions 
are  either  precedent  or  subsequent.  Where  a  condition 
must  he  performed  before  the  estate  can  commence^  it  is 
caUed  '*a  condition  precedent ; "  hut  where  the  effect  of  the 
condition  is  either  to  enlarge  or  defeat  an  estate  already 
createdy  it  is  then  called  '*a  condition  subsequent, ^^*  As 
to  whether  a  condition  is  to  be  regarded  as  precedent  or 


Bter  V.  Michael,  6  N.  Y.  467 ;  Mitch- 
ell V.  Reynolds,  1  P.  Wmft.  189. 

*  Comyn's  Digest,  Condition 
(Ky.)  2. 

«  WiUiams  v.  Fry,  2  Lev.  21. 

'  Dumpor's  Case,  4  Coke,  119  h ; 
Dakin  v.  Williams,  17  Wend.  (N. 
Y.}  447  ;  Bleeckner  V.  Smith,  13  id. 
680;  Chipman  v.  Emeric,  5  CaL 
49 ;  Lynde  v.  Hough,  27  Barb.  N.j 
Y.)  415  ;  Pennock  v.  Lyons,  118 
Mass.  92 ;  McKildoe  v.  Darracott, 
laGratt.  (Va.)  278;  Dougherty  v. 
Matthews,  65  Mo»  520  ;  Gannett  v. 
Albree,  103  Mass.  272.  In  England, 
however  the  rule  has  been  clumged 
by  statute  22  Vict.,  chap.  28,  so 
that  a  license  will  only  discharge 
a  condition  by  express  words  to 
that  effect ;  but  in  tnis  country  the 
rule  in  Dumpor^s  Case  is  followed, 
and  a  license  for  one  breach  dis- 
charges the  condition,  whether  the 
condition  relates  to  a  single  or  con- 
tinuous duty.        

*  Cruise's  Dig.  Xn.  Tit.  1,  s.  6; 
1  List.  16  a,  2S7  a,  n,  1.  Con- 
ditions subsequent  are  not  favored 
in  law,  and  can  be  raised  only  by 
apt  words,  and  they  must  them- 


selves import  a  condition  and  be 
BO  connected  with  the  grant  as  to 
qualify  or  restrain  it,  ^uthard  v. 
Central  R.  R.  Co.,  26  N.  J.  L.  13 
Larabee  v.  Castleton,  56.  Me.  211 
Emersonv.  Simpson,  48  N.  H.  475 
Ludlow  V.  N.  Y.,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co., 
12  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  440,  and  equity 
will  often  relieve  against  them, 
but  will  never,  except  in  extreme 
cases,  aid  to  divest  an  estate  be- 
cause of  a  breach*'thereof.  They 
are  never  to  be  presumed,  nor  can 
they  be  established  by  proof  ali- 
undey  except  to  convert  a  deed 
absolute  upon  its  face  intoamcxt- 
gage.  Thompson  v.  Thompson,  9 
Ind.  328  Rogers  v.  Sebastian,  21; 
Ark.  440.  If  a  conveyance  is  made 
upon  a  condition  subsequent  and 
I)erformance  becomes  impossible, 
the  estate  will  vest  without  per- 
formance, Jones  V.  Doe,  2  EL  276 ; 
Hughes  V.  Edwards,  9  Wheat.  (IT. 
S.f489,  whether  performance  was 
rendered  impossible  by  the  act  of 
the  grantor,  Whitney  v.  Spencer, 
4  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  39,  or  the  act  of 
God.  Merritt  v.  Emery,  10  Fick« 
(Mass.)  507. 


.*. 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


Conditions. 


685 


subsequent  does  not  depend  upon  the  order  in  which  it 
appears  in  the  lease,  but  upon  the  time  of  its  performancey 
and  in  determining  the  question,  regard  will  be  had  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  transaction,  and  the  evident  inten- 
tion of  the  parties.  Thus,  if  there  is  a  provision  in  the 
lease  that  '^  at  the  end  of  the  term  cUl  rents  and  covenants 
being  complied  with "  on  the  part  of  the  lessee,  he  shall 
have  the  right  to  remove  all  buildings,  &c.,  by  him  erected 
on  the  land  during  the  term,  performance  by  the  lessee 
is  a  condition  precedent  to  the  removal  of  the  buildings, 
and  in  the  case  cited  below  it  was  held  that  a  tender  of 
performance  of  the  condition,  upon  condition  that  the  les- 
sor would  permit  the  removal,  was  not  good.*  So,  where 
the  lease  provides  that  the  te4ant  may  put  an  end  to  the 
term  by  giving  notice  of  a  certain  duration,  as  one,  two 
or  six  months,  and  paying  all  rents  and  performing  aU 
the  covenants,  the  payment  of  rent  and  performance  of 
all  the  covenants  is  a  condition  precedent  to  his  right  to 
determine  the  estate."  So,  where  the  lease  provides  that 
upon  the  tenant's  performance  of  all  the  covenants  of  the 
lease,  the  landlord  shall,  upon  the  termination  of  the  term, 
pay  to  liim  the  appraised  value  of  all  buildings  erected, 
or  improvements  made  upon  the  premises,  and  the  lease 
among  other  things  provides  that  the  tenant  shall  pay  all 
taxes,  the  payment  of  the  taxes  is  a  condition  precedent 
to  his  right  to  recover  such  appraised  value,'  and  generally 
it  may  be  said  that  where  it  appears  by  the  terms  of  the 
lease  that  the  performance  of  some  act  by  the  lessee  forms 
the  p^-oundwork  or  consideration  for  the  exercise  of 
some  right  by,  or  of  some  obligation  in  his  favor 
against  the  lessor,  performance  of  such  act  is  a  condition 
precedent  to  the  exercise  of  such  right  or  the  enforce- 
ment of  such  obligation,*  and  the   same  rule  applies 


1  Clemens  v.  Murp^,  40  Mo. 
121 ;  Friar  v.  Gray,  5  Exchq.  584  ; 
aflTd  4  H.  L.  Cas.  o65. 

*  Hotham  v.  East  India  Co.,  1  T. 
B.  645 ;  Parmalee  v.  Oswego  R.  R. 
Co.,  6  N.  Y.  74 ;  Powers  v.  Ware, 
2  Pick.  (Mass.)  451 ;  Gardner  v. 
Corson,  15  Mass.  600;  Hopkins  v. 
Young,  11  id.  802 ;  NicoU  v.  N.  Y. 
&Erie  R.  R.  Co.,  12  N.  Y.  121. 


*  People's  Bank  v.  Mitchell,  6  N 
Y.  Weekly  Reprter,  476. 

*  Friar  v.  Gray,  ante.  Where 
one  act  is  to  be  aone  by  one  party 
before  another  act,  which  is  the 
consideration  of  it,  is  to  be  done 
by  the  other,  i)erformance  by  such 
party  is  a  condition  precedent  to 
performance  by  the  other.  Til- 
eston  V.  Newell,    18    Mass.  410; 


686 


ExdEPHONS,  i&C. 


[§377. 


where  the  landlord  coyenants  to  do. some  act  which  is 
apparently  intended  as  an  act  precedent  to  the  perform- 
ance of  a  certain  act  by  the  tenant.  As,  if  he  covenants 
to  fit  up  a  building  for  a  certain  purpose  before  a  certain 
day,  before  the  term  commences,  if  he  fails  to  perform 
by  the  time,  the  tenant  is  absolved  from  the  lease,  or  if 
he  covenants  to  do  such  acts  within  a  certain  time  after 
the  term  commences,  the  tenant  may,  upon  his  failure 
to  perform,  give  up  possession  within  a  reasonable  time 
thereafter,  and  is  not  liable  for  rent  for  the  time  he 
occupied.  Thus,  where  a  landlord  agreed  to  let  a  house 
completely  furnished,  and  to  send  in  sufficient  furniture^ 
and  the  tenant  agreM  to  take  the  house  on  those  terms, 
and  pay  a  certain  rent  therefor,  and  the  landlord  put  the 
tenant  in  possession,  but  neglected  to  send  in  the  furni- 
ture, it  was  held  that  the  contract  to  furnish  and  to  pay 
rent  could  not  be  separated,  and  that  the  landlord  could 
not  distrain  for  the  rent.'  It  is  only,  however,  when 
covenants  go  to  the  whole  consideration  that  they  can  be 
said  to  be  conditions  precedent,  or,  in  other  words,  when 
they  are  entire  and  indivisible,  and  it  appears  to  have 
been  the  intention  of  the  parties  that  the  whole  of  what 
one  had  undertaken  to  perform  should  be  done  before 
any  liability  should  attach  to  the  other,  although  the 
one  had  partly  performed,  and  the   other  had  derived 


Mullins  Y.  Cabiness,  Minor,  (A^) 
21 ;  C!ouch  v.  Ingersoll,  3  Pick. 
(Mass.)  800 ;  Craddock  v.  Aldridge, 
2  Bibb  (Ky.)  15 ;  Goodwin  v.  Hol- 
brook,  4  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  877 ;  Cun- 
niagham  v.  Morrell,  10  John.  (N. 
Y.)  203 ;  Mecum  v.  Peoria,  &c.,  R. 
B.  Co.,  21  BL  533r  Thompson  v. 
Gray,  3  S.  &  P.  (Ala.)  60.  But 
covenants  may  be  both  dependent 
and  independent.  Thus,  if  it  is 
covenanted  that  the  lessee  or  lessor 
shall  do  a  certain  act  before  the 
lease  is  made,  and  a  certain  other 
act  upon  the  day  when  it  is  to  be 
made,  and  a  certain  other  act  upon 
a  day  subsequent,  the  covenant  to 
do  the  first  act  is  independent, 
while  the  covenant  as  to  tne  other 
two  acts  is  dependant.  Bean  v. 
Atwater,  1  Conn.  8 ;  Leonard  v. 
Bates,  1  Blackf.  (Ind.)  175 ;  Kane 


V.  Hood,  18  Pick.  (Mass.)  281; 
Bobb  V.  Montgomery,  20  John.  (N. 
Y.)  15;  Gardner  v.  Corson,  15 
Mass.  500,  And  where  covenants 
are  simultaneous,  and  each  forms 
the  consideration  for  the  other, 
they  are  dependent,  and  both  must 
peiiorm,  or  neither  is  re(}uired  to 
do  so.  Dorkin  v.  WilliamB.  11 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  67 ;  Hounsford  ▼. 
Fisher,  Wright  (Ohio.)  150 ;  Ptoker 
V.  Parmalee,  20  John.  (N.  Y.)  130. 
But  where  each  covenants  to  do 
concurrent  acts,  and  the  covenant 
of  one  party  rests  upon  a  consider- 
ation independent  of  the  covenant 
of  the  other,  the  covenants  are  in- 
dependent. Day  V.  Essex  Bank, 
Vt.  97. 

1  Mechelen  v.  Wallace,  7  Ad.  /k 
£1.  54n. 


CHAP,  xxvn.] 


CONBinONS. 


587 


some  benefit  or  advantage  therefrom ; '  and  where  one 
party  covenants  to  do  merely  one  thing,  and  the  other 
covenants  to  do  another,  they  are  mutual  covenants  and 
not  conditions  precedent."  Indeed,  covenants  will  be 
construed  as  dependent  or  independent  according  to  the 
evident  intent  of  the  parties  and  the  good  sense  of  the 
case,  and  technical  words  will  not  be  permitted  to  stand 
in  the  way  of  giving  effect  to  such  intention." 

In  all  c£tses  where  the  obligation  of  one  party  precedes 
performance  by  the  other,  or  in  other  words,  from  the 
language  used,  it  is  evident  that  one  act  is  to  be  done  as 
a  consideration  for  the  doing  of  some  other  act  by  the 
other  party,  such  act  is  a  condition  precedent  to  per- 
formance by  the  other.  As  if  a  lessor  covenants  to 
repair  the  premises  in  the  first  instance,  and  the  tenant 
covenants  thereafter  to  keep  them  in  repair,  the  tenant's 
obhgation  does  not  attach  until  after  the  landlord  has 
repaired ;  *  or  where  the  tenant  accepts  a  lease,  provided 
the  lessor  puts  the  premises  in  repair,  or  fits  them  up  for 
a  certain  business,  liability  for  refusing  to  take  possession 
under  the  lease,  or  for  the  rent  thereof,  he  not  having 
occupied  the  premises  in  such  a  manner  as  to  waive  per- 
formance by  the  lessor,  does  not  attach  unless  the  land- 
lord performs.*  But,as  previously  stated,  where  the  obhga- 
tions  are  concurrent,  even  though  one  act  is  partly  to 
precede  another,  it  does  not  amount  to  a  condition. '  Thus, 
where  there  was  a  stipulation  in  a  lease  for  five  years 
that  it  should  be  renewed  for  five  years  more  if  the 


>  Mechelen  v.  Wallace,  ante ;  Til- 
lotson  V.  Newell,  18  Mass.  806; 
Grant  v.  Johnson,  6  N.  Y,  247; 
Carpenter  v.  Cresmell,  8  Bing.  409; 
Bennett  v.  Pixley,  7  John.  (N.  Y.) 
249 ;  Poppin  v.  Maight,  20  Barb. 
(N.  Y.}m 

*  Palethorp  v.  Bergner,  52  Penn. 
St.  149;  Carpenter  v.  Creswell, 
ante;  Boone  v.  Eyre,  2  W.  Bl. 
1812. 

*McCrelish  t.  Churchman,  .4 
Rawle  (Penn.)  21 ;  Todd  v.  Sum- 
mers, 2  Gratt.  (Va.)  167 ;  Barruso 
V.  Maddan,  2  John.  (N.  Y.}  146 ; 
Howland  v.  Leach,  11  Pick.  ^Mass.) 
154 ;  Dwiggins  y.  Shaw.  4  Ired. 
(N.  C.)L.46. 


*  Neale  v.  Ratcliffe,  15  Q.  B.  916 ; 
Hutchinson  v.  Read,  4  Exchq. 
761 ;  Hunt  v.  Bishop,  8  id.  675. 

*  Hickman  v.  Boyl,  55  Ind.  551 ; 
Wright  V.  Lattin,  88  Dl.  293  ;  Tidey 
V.  Itollet,  16  C.  B.  N.  S.  268 ;  Cow- 
ard V.  Gregory,  L.  R.,  2  C.  P.  158. 

*  Northrup  v.  Northrup,  6  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  296 ;  Cannock  v.  Jones,  8 
Exchq.  288 ;  Lewis  v.  Welden,  8 
Rand.  (Va.)  71 ;  Alexander  v. 
Mann,  6  T.  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  800; 
Gazely  v.  Price,  16  John.  (N.  Y.) 
267 ;  Hopkins  v.  Young,  11  Mass. 
802 ;  Dean  of  Bristol  v.  Jones,  1 
E.  &  E.  484. 


•# 


588 


ExcspnoKS,  &c. 


[§278. 


tenant  desired  to  have  it,  provided  all  improvementB 
were  done  by  him,  it  was  held,  that  the  doing  of  such 
improvements  during  the  first  five  years  was  not  a  con- 
dition precedent  to  his  right  to  a  renewal,  but  that  such 
improvements  might  be  done  during  the  last  five  years/ 
So,  where  the  lease  provides  that  the  tenant  shall  sur- 
render, and  that  the  lessor  may  take  possession  upon 
giving  notice  of  a  certain  duration,  and  paying  the  ten- 
ant the  damages  he  sustains  by  being  prevefated  from 
occupying  for  the  fuU  term,  the  payment  of  compensa- 
tion is  not  a  condition  precedent  to  the  landlord's  right 
to  re-enter/  But  where  a  lease  contains  a  proviso  that 
the  tenant  may  put  an  end  to  the  term  by  giving  a  certain 
notice  and  performing  ail  his  covenants,  performance 
of  aM  his  covenants  is  a  condition  precedent  to  his  right 
to  give  up  possession ." 

Sec.  278.  Ctonstruotlon  of  oonditions.— Condition  as  wdl 
as  covenants  are  to  be  construed  according  to  the  real 
intentions  of  the  parties  ;*  but  a  condition  will  not  be  con- 
strued to  extend  to  things  of  common  right ;  as  if  the 
condition  is,  that  one  shall  enjoy  such  land  immediately 
upon  the  grantor's  death — here,  if  the  executor  takes  the 
emblements,  the  condition  does  not  extend  to  them.* 
The  court  will  not  decide  as  to  the  meaning  of  an  insensi- 
ble condition  or  proviso  for  re-entry.*  Whether  particu- 
lar words  in  a  lease  amount  to  a  condition  or  a  covenant 
is  a  matter  of  construction  and  enrasures  may  be  consid- 
ered in  determining  the  intention/ 

Sec.  279.  By  what  instmment  they  may  be  made.— A  con- 
dition may  be  contained  in  the  same  deed,  or  indorsed 
upon  the  deed  ;  or  may  be  contained  in  another  deed  ex- 
ecuted the  same  day  ;  >   thus,  a  condition  indorsed  upon 


*  Palethorpe  V.  Bergner,  52  Pen  n 
St.  149. 

«  Parsons  v.  MiUer,  15  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  561 ;  Bartlett  v.  Greenleaf,  11 
Gray  (Mass.)  »8. 

» Hotham  v.  E.  India  Co.,  1  T. 
R.  645 ;  (Gardner  v.  Corson,  15 
lAauBB.  500 ;  Powers  v.  Ware,  2 
Pick.  (Mass.)  451 ;  People's  Bank 


V.  MitcheU,  6  N.  Y.  Weekly  Re- 
porter, 476. 

*  Cole  Ejec.  407 ;  Shinn  v.  Rob- 
erts, 50  N.  J.  L.  485. 

*  Com.  Dig.  Tit.  Condition  (E). 

*  Wynham  v.  Carew,  2Q.  B.  »17 ; 
^Langley  v.  Ross,  56  Mich.  16S. 

Darke  v.  Bowditch,  82  B.  078. 
« Com.  Dig.  Tit.  Condition  (A)9. 


I* 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  How  Made.  689 

the  back  of  a  lease  before  the  sealing  and  delivery  was 
held  of  equal  force  with  a  condition  within  the  deed  ; ' 
but  where  a  lease  for  years  was  made,  rendering  rent, 
and  the  lessee  covenanted  to  repair,  &c.,  and  afterwards 
the  lessor  devised  to  the  lessee  for  more  years,  yielding 
the  same  rent,  and  under  such  covenants  as  were  in  the 
first  lease,  it  was  considered  not  to  be  a  condition  ;  for 
although  after  the  first  lease  was  ended,  the  lessee  would 
not  be  bound  by  the  covenants,  yet  the  will  expressing 
that  the  lessee  should  have  the  lands,  observing  the  fii*st 
covenants,  it  could  not  be  taken  to  be  a  condition  by  any 
intent  to  be  collected  out  of  the  will.'  If  it  is  doubtful 
whether  a  clause  is  a  covenant  or  &  condition,  the  bene- 
fiit  of  the  doubt  will  be  given  to  the  tenant,  and  it  will  be 
construed  as  a  covenant,  because  such  a  construction  is 
most  favorable  to  the  lessee.  But  if  the  clause  is  suscep- 
tible of  performing  the  o£Bce  of  a  covenant  and  a  condi- 
tion, and  such  was  the  obvious  intent  of  the  parties,  it 
will  be  given  that  effect,  as  if  a  lease  is  made  for  a  term 
of  years,  provided  that  the  tenant  shall  annually  pay  a 
certain  rent,  it  is  a  covenant  for  the  payment  of  rent, 
and  a  condition  upon  the  non-performance  of  wtiich  the 
estate  may  be  defeated.*  Conditions  precedent  will  be 
liberally  construed,  and  the  intent  of  the  parties  wUl  be 
iriven  effect  so  far  as  can  be  done  consistently  with  the 
Lguageused;'  and  if  it  has  been  performed  as  nearly 
in  accordance  with  the  intent  of  the  parties  as  possible,  it 
will  be  treated  as  sufficient,  although  the  performance 
does  not  accord  with  a  strict  construction  of  the  condi- 
tion ;  but  conditions  that  defeat  the  estate  will  be  con- 
strued strictly,  as  forfeitures  are  not  favored  in  law.' 

Sec.  280.  By  what  worda  they  may  be  created.— Condi- 
tions are  most  properly  created  by  using  the  word  **  con- 
dition, "  or  the  words  "on  condition;"  but  the  word 

"GriflSn  v.  Stanhope,  Cro.  Jac.  *Co.  Litt.  220  a. 

456;    Goodright    d.    NichoUs    v.  'Wadham  v.  Post  Master  Gexil., 

Mark,  4  M.  &  S.  80.  L.   R.,   6  Q.   B.  644 ;  Crawley  v. 

« Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Condition  (G.).  Rice,  L.  R,  10  Q.  B.  302. 

*  Livingston  v.  Stickles,  8  Paige 
(N.  Y.)  m. 


590  Exceptions,  &c.  [§280. 

commonly  and  as  effectually  made  use  of,  is,  that  of 
*  *  provided.  '^  *  The  words  ' '  covenant "  and  *  *  condition, " 
when  used  in  an  agreement,  do  not  necessai*ily  mean  a 
covenant  under  seal,  or  a  condition  in  the  strict  legal 
sense  of  the  word,  but  may,  in  order  to  effectuate  the 
intention  of  the  parties,  be  construed  to  mean  ^'contract 
or  stipulation."*  The  following  words,  in  an  agreement 
for  letting,  do  not  create  a  condition ; — "  The  tenant 
hereby  agrees  that  he  wiU  not  underlet  the  premises 
without  the  consent  in  writing  of  the  landlord."*  A 
covenant  by  the  lessor  for  quiet  enjoyment  by  the 
lessee,  his  executors,  administrators  and  assigns,  during 
the  term,  he  or  they  paying  the  rent  thereby  reserved 
and  perf ormiiig  the  covenants  on  his  and  their  part  con- 
tained, is  not  a  covenant  subject  to  a  condition  pre- 
cedent.* If  a  proviso  or  condition  has  dependence  upon 
another  clause  of  the  deed,  or  if  the  words  of  the  lessee 
be  to  compel  the  lessor  to  do  something,  then  it  is  not  a 
conditiorij  but  a  covenant  only ;  as  if  there  be  in  the 
deed  a  covenant  that  the  lessee  should  scour  the  ditches 
and  then  these  words  follow,  '^  provided  that  the  lessor 
should  carry  away  the  earth."  If  the  words  run  thus : 
'^  provided  always,  and  the  lessee,  &c.,  doth  covenant, 
&c.y  that  neither  he  nor  his  heirs  shall  do  such  an  act ; " 
this  is  both  a  condition  and  a  covenant :  *  so  if  the  words 
are  ^^  provided  always,  and  it  is  covenanted  and  agreed 
between  the  parties,  that  the  lessee  shall  not  alien,"  this  is 
both  a  condition  and  a  covenant ;  for  it  is  a  condition 
by  force  of  the  proviso,  and  a  covenant  by  force  of  the 
other  words.*  Where  in  an  agreement  to  demise  land 
for  a  term  of  years  at  a  certain  annual  rent,  in  which 
there  was  no  clause  of  re-entry,  there  was  a  stipulation 
*'  that  in  case  the  said  lessor  should  want  any  part  of  the 
said  land  to  build  or  otherwise,  or  cause  to  be  built,  then 

»Shep.  Touch.    122;    Co.  Litt.  « Dawson    v.    Dyer,    5    B.    & 

146 ;  Crawley  v.   MuLLin,  48  Mo.  Ad.  584 ;  and  see  Jjocke  t.  Forae, 

517.  19  C.  B.  N.  S.  »6. 

«nayne  v.  Cummings,  16  C.  B.  «  Shep.  Touch.  122;  Co.  lit.  14(L 

N.  S.  421.  •  Co.  lit.  103  b, 

»Shaw  V.  Coffin,  14  C.  B.  N.  S. 
872. 


CHAP,  xxvnj  How  Created.  691 

the  lessee  shall  give  up  that  part  of  the  said  land  as 
should  be  requested  by  the  lessor,  by  his  making  an 
abatement  in  proportion  to  the  rent  charged  ;  and  also 
to  pay  for  so  much  of  the  fence  at  a  fair  valuation,  as  he 
should  have  occasion  from  time  to  time  to  take  away, 
by  his  giving  or  leaving  six  months'  notice  of  what  he  in- 
tended to  do : "  it  was  held  that  this  was  merely  a  covenant, 
and  not  a  condition. '  But  where  a  proviso  in  a  lease  was 
that  in  case  the  lessor  at  any  time  shall  be  desirous 
of  having  any  part  of  the  land  deUvered  up  to  him  and 
shall  sign  three  months'  notice,  the  lessee  covenants  to 
give  it  up,  and  that  the  lessor  shall  and  may  take  peace- 
able 3nd  quiet  possession,  paying  a  fair  compensation, 
and  the  rent  being  reduced  at  a  certain  rate  per  acre,  it 
was  held  not  to  be  a  covenant  merely.'  By  an  agree- 
ment, in  consideration  of  the  rent  and  conditions  there- 
inafter mentioned,  A  was  to  have,  hold  and  occupy,  as 
on  lease,  certain  premises  therein  specified,  at  a  certain 
rent  per  acre ;  and  it  was  stipulated  that  no  buildings 
should  be  included  or  leased  by  virtue  of  the  agreement ; 
and  it  was  further  agreed  and  stipvlatedy  that  A  should 
take,  at  the  rent  aforesaid,  certain  other  parcels,  as  the 
same  might  fall  in  ;  and  lastly,  it  was  stipulated  and  con- 
ditionedy  that  A  should  not  assign,  transfer,  or  under  let 
any  of  the  said  lands  and  premises  otherwise  than  to  his 
wife,  child  or  children ;  it  was  held,  that  by  the  last 
clause  a  condition  was  created  for  the  breach  of  which 
the  lessor  might  maintain  an  ejectment.  But  the  follow- 
ing words  in  an  agreement  for  letting  do  not  constitute 
a  condition  : — **  The  tenant  hereby  agrees  that  he  will 
not  underlet  the  premises  without  the  consent  in  writing 
of  the  landlord."*  In  a  lease  for  years  no  precise  form 
of  words  is  necessary  to  make  a  condition.  It  is  suffi- 
cient if  such  language  is  used  as  shows  that  the  parties 
intended  that  it  should  have  that  effect.  *   Thus  if  it  is  stip- 

»  Wilson  V.  Phillips,  2  Bing.  13 ;  «  Henniker  v.  Watt,  8  B.  &  O. 

Gardner  v.  Kennard,  12  Q.  B.  244 ;  808. 

9  Moo.  46  ;  Doe  d.  Wilson  v.  Abel,  *  Shaw  v.  Coffin,  14  C.  B.  N.  S. 

3  M.  &  S.  541.  372. 

*  Gardner  v.  Kennard,  12  Q.  B.  «  Henniker  v.  Watt,  8  B.  &  0. 

244.  815. 


692 


Exceptions,  &c. 


[§  281. 


ulated  and  conditioned  that  the  lessee  shall  not  assign  or 
underlet,  a  condition  is  created  for  the  breach  of  which 
ejectment  may  be  maintained.'  But  the  words  "yield- 
ing and  paying  "  do  not  create  a  condition/  nor  does  a 
stipulation  in  a  lease  not  to  alter  buildings  without  the 
lessor's  consent,  unless  the  language  is  such  as  to  show 
that  the  parties  intended  it  as  a  condition  ; '  nor  do  mere 
words  of  contract  amount  to  a  condition  imless  there  is 
a  clause  of  re-entry.*  But  even  a  covenant,  if  a  right 
of  re-entry  for  its  breach  attaches,  has  all  the  force  and 
effect  of  a  condition,*  even  though  the  covenant  is  n^a- 
tive.' 

Sec.  281.  Between  what  parties  binding.— Estates  made 
by  deed  to  infants  and  married  women  upon  condition 
are  binding  upon  them,  becatise  the  charge  is  on  the  UmdJ' 
The  heir,  though  not  named,  may  take  advantage  of  a 
condition  annexed  to  a  real  estate :  and  where  the  con- 
dition of  an  obligation  was  to  make  a  lease  or  pay  a  cer- 
tain sum  as  a  penalty,  the  obligee  dying,  though  the 
election  was  taken  away,  it  was  held,  that  the  executor 
should  have  the  penalty,  agreeably  to  the  rule  in  case  of 
heirs,' 

Sec.  282.  Schedules,  indorsements,  &c.— Schedule  of  fix- 
tures, fOmiture,  &c.— When  part  of  the  lease.— When  a  house 
is  let,  together  with  fixtures,  furniture  or  other  articles 
therein,  it  is  usual  to  make  a  schedule  or  inventory  there- 
of, with  a  covenant  or  promise  from  the  lessee  to  re-deliver 
them  at  the  end  of  the  term.  Such  covenant  or  promise 
will  give  the  landlord  a  better  remedy  (with  clearer  evi- 


>  Henniker  v.  Watt,  ante ;  Co. 
Lit.  205  h;  Simpson  v.  literell, 
Cro.  Eliz,  342  ;  Pembroke  v.  Berk- 
ley, id.  384;  Harrington  v.  Wise, 
id.  486.  But  while  the  tenant 
under  such  a  provision  cannot 
assign  or  xmderlet,  yet  he  may  as- 
sociate others  with  him  in  the  oc- 
cupancy without  incurring  a  for- 
feiture ;  or,  if  the  provision  merely 
provides  that  he  shall  not  assign, 
lie  may  underlet.  Hargrave  v. 
King,  5  Ired.  (N.  C.)  Eg.  430. 


*  Delancy  v.  Ganong,  9  N.  Y.  9. 
'  Jackson  v*  Harrison,  17  John. 

(N.  Y.)  66. 

<  Crawley  v.  Rice,  L.  R.,  10  Q. 
B.  802 ;  Shaw  v.  CJoflSn,  14  C.  B. 
N.  S.  872. 

'  Jackson  v.  Mclallan,  8  Cow. 
(N.  Y.)  295. 

*  Wadham  v.  Post  Master  GenL, 
L.  R.,6Q.  B.  644. 

'  2  Danv.  30. 

*  Hodgson  V.  Rawson,  1  Vee. 
sen.  47  ;  Anon.,  1  Salk.  170. 


A 


G&AP.  Ixxvn.] 


SClBSDXTLE&y  &6. 


592; 


dence)  than  he  would  otherwise  have.'  The  schedule  or 
inventory  is  generally  written  at  the  foot  or  end  of  the 
lease,  or  it  is  indorsed  thereon,  or  annexed  thereto ; 
in  either  case  it  forms  part  of  the  instrument  and  must 
he  counted  (figures  as  words)  in  estimating,  whether  any 
and  what  progressive  duty  is  payable.  But  when  any 
schedule,  inventory  or  catalogue  is  separate  and  distinct 
from  the  lease,  and  not  indorsed  thereon  or  annexed 
thereto,  but  only  referred  tOy  it  is  not  to  be  counted  as 
part  of  the  lease.' 

If  a  schedule  referred  to  in  a  deed  as  annexed  thereto 
is  not  in  fact  annexed  when  the  deed  is  executed,  yet  the 
deed  will  operate  and  take  effect,  so  far  as  may  be,  with- 
out the  assistance  of  the  schedule.'  But  if  it  is  insensible 
as  to  the  part  without  the  aid  of  the  schedule,  it  will  be 
inoperative.  *  The  articles  comprised  in  the  schedule  should 
be  specified  in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  all  doubt  as  to 
what  was  intended  to  be  included.  *  When  they  are  num- 
erous and  comprise  items  of  small  value,  the  operative 
words  should  be  general  enough  to  include  all  the  property 
after  which  may  be  added  **  the  principal  articles  where- 
of are  particularly  enumerated  and  described  in  the  sched- 
ule hereunder  written,  or  hereunto  annexed, "  or  to  that 
effect.*  But  sometimes  the  schedule  may  be  referred  to 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  exclude  anything  not  therin  speci- 
fied.^  A  deed  is  not  avoided  by  subsequently  annexing 
the  schedule  therein  referred  to.* 

The  usual  attestation  clause  should  not  be  omitted, 
especially  when  the  lease  is  granted  in  pursuance  of  a  pow- 
er. Alterations  in  the  deed  should  be  specially  mentioned 
in  the  attestation,  or  marked  in  the  margin  with  the  in- 
itials of  the  attesting  witnesses.* 


'  Dampier  v.  Pole,  4  Exch.  678. 

'Sneezam  v.  Marshall,  7  M.  & 
W.  417 ;  9  DowL  267. 

•Dyer  v.  Green,  1  Exch.  71; 
Dames  v.  Heath,  8  C.  B.  988; 
Daiupier  v.  Pole,  4  Exchq.  678. 

*  Weeks  V.  Maillerdet,  14  East,568. 

•Wood  V.  Rowcliffe,  6  Exch. 
407  ;  CoTt  V.  Sa^r,  3  H.  &  N.  370 ; 
Hutchinson  v.  Aay,  28  Beav.  413  ; 
cited  8  H.  &  N.   872;    Baker  v. 


Richardson,  4  W.  R.  668,  Q.  B. ; 
Walsh  V.  Trevanion,  15  Q.  B.  733 ; 
Barton  v.  Dawes,  10  C.  B.  261. 

•Dyer  v.  Green,  1  Exch.  71. 

•J  Wood  V.  Rowcliflfe,  6  Exch. 
407;  Baker  v.  Richardson,  6  W. 
R.  663,  contra, 

8  West  V.  Stewart,  14  M.  &  W.  47, 

» Dames  y.  Heath,  8  C.  B.  938; 
Dyer  v.  Green,  1  Exch.  71. 

38 


594 


Exceptions,  &o. 


[§  283. 


Sec.  283.  Alterationfl  indorsed  before  the  lease  is  executed. 
It  sometimes  happens  that  after  a  lease  has  been  made, 
but  before  it  is  executed,  some  additional  covenant  or 
stipulation  is  agreed  on,  which  cannot  conveniently  be 
interlined.  In  such  case  it  may  be  indorsed  on  the  lease, 
and  referred  to  in  the  proper  place,  thus: — "See  back 
(A)."  Memorandums  indorsed  upon  leases,  if  made  pre- 
viously to  the  execution  of  the  lease,  are  consitlered  in 
construction  and  effect  as  part  of  the  instrument,  although 
they  add  to  or  change  the  provisions  of  the  deed.*  An 
indorsement  upon  a  deed,  or  other  alteration  therein, 
shall  be  taken  to  have  been  made  before  the  execution  of 
the  deed  and  to  be  parcel  of  it,  in  the  absence  of  proof  to 
the  contrary.*  It  is  no  objection  to  a  lease  that  an  alter- 
ation therein  was  made  and  signed  after  the  lease  was 
signed,  but  before  it  was  sealed  and  deUvered.'  In  Eng- 
land, it  is  held  that  a  memorandum  indorsed  upon  a  lease 
after  its  execution,  although  it  refers  thei-eto,  is  a  new 
instrument  and  must  be  sta^nped  as  such.'  The  terms 
of  a  lease  may  be  changed  by  parol.  If  a  written  lease 
provides  that  the  lessor  shall  provide  the  tenant  a  certain 
staircase,  and  he  fails  to  do  so,  but  agrees  orally  to  per- 
mit him  to  use  a  certain  existing  staircase,  it  is  held  that 
the  oral  agreement  is  good,  and  if  the  landlord  deprives  the 
tenant  of  the  use  of  such  existing  staircase,  he  is  liable  to 
the  tenant  for  such  damages  as  he  sustains  from  its  breach.* 


*  Griffin  v.  Stanhope,  Cro.  Jac, 
456;  Ooodright  d.  NichoUs  v. 
Mark,  4  M.  &  S.  80 ;  Frogley  v. 
Earl  Lovelace,  1  Johns.  888.  In 
Preston  v.  Huntington,  (Mich.)  10 
Westn.  Rep.  875,  at  the  time  of 
the  execution  of  a  lease,  a  person 
executed  upon  the  back  thereof, 
under  seal,  an  agreement  to  be- 
come surety.  The  court  held  that 
he  might  be  sued  jointly  with  the 
lessees  for  the  rent,  and  it  was 
also  held  that  a  reduction  of  the 
rent  from  $75  to  $50  a  month  did 
not  affect  his  liability. 

*  Brewster  v.  Kidgell,  Caxth. 
438 :  Flint  v.  Brandon,  1  Bos.  & 
P.,  N.  R.  73  ;  Doe  d.  Tatum  v.  Cat- 
amore,  16  Q.  B.  745.  But  the  pre- 
sumption is  the  other  way  with  re- 
spect to  a  will  or  codicil.    Doe  d. 


Shallcroes  v.  Palmer,  16  Q.  B.  747 ; 
Cooper  V.  Bockett.  4  Moo.  P.  C.  C. 
419 ;  Ckile  Ejec.  504. 

•  Lybum  v.  Warrington,  1  Stark. 
162. 

«Reed  v.  Deene,  7  B.  &  C.  261 ; 
French  v.  Patten,  9  East,  351; 
Hill  V.  Patten,  8  id.  878.  The 
courts  in  Pennsylvania  hold  tint 
a  lease  under  seal  may  be  modified 
by  a  parol  agreement  where  there 
is  a  sufficient  consideration  there- 
for, and  an  agreement  to  change 
the  time  for  the  payment  of  the 
rent  from  the  first  to  the  last  dav 
of  the  month,  was  binding.  Wif- 
gus  V.  Whitehead,  89  Pum.  St.  181. 
But  see  Louch  v.  Famum,  90  JQL 
868. 

^  Blumenthal  v.  Bloomingdale, 
100  N.  Y.  558. 


CHAP.  XXVU.]  AUTERATIOm.  595 

Where  lease  recites  that  the  lessee  is  to  pay  a  certain 
sum  as  rent  for  the  premises,  his  acceptance  of  the  lease 
makes  him  a  direct  obUgor  or  promisor  to  pay  the  rent, 
although  he  has  not  signed  or  executed  the  instrument.* 
Such  an  instrument  is  not  an  mulateral  contract. 

An  agreement  contained  in  a  deed  poll  will  be  en- 
forced, notwithstanding  that  it  is  an  of  unilateral  nature.' 

The  promise  to  pay  rent  is  a  sufficiently  valuable  con- 
sideration for  the  promise  to  lease.* 

1  Kershaw  v.  Kershaw,  102  Ul.  166.    See  also  Old  Colony  R  Co. 

807 ;  Atlantic  Dock  Co.  v.  Leavitt,  v.  Evans,  6  Gray  25. 
54  N.  Y.  85 ;  Suchmuker  v.  Sibert,         »  Chitty  Cont.  11th  Ain.  ed.  50, 

18  Kan.  104.  note  d  ;  McFarlane  v.  Williams, 

« Otaway  v.  Braithwaite,  1  Finch,  88  UL 
405 ;  Butler  v.  Powis,  3  CoL  (Mass.) 


J 


69e 


The  Estah^ 


[§284 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 


THE  ESTATE. 


Sec.  284.  Habendum.— Office  of. 

Sec.  285.  Commencement  of  term. 

Seo.  286.  Cominencement  from  the  date  of  the  lease. 

Sec.  287.  Ck>mmenoement  with  reference  to  entry. 

Sec.  288.  Duration  of  terms  for  years.— What  certainty  is  requisite 

generally. 

Sec.  289.  Certainty  with  reference  to  collateral  matters. 

Sec.  290.  Where  there  is  an  optional  number  of  years  fixed. 

Sec.  291.  Where  there  is  a  recurring  number  of  years. 

Sec.  292.  Where  the  term  depends  on  a  contingency. 

Sec.  298.  Leases  for  life  or  lives. 

Sec.  294.  Reddendum. 

m 

Sec.  295.  Bent  payable  in  advance. 

Sec.  296.  Certainty  as  to  amount  of  rent. 

Sec.  297.  Mode  of  reservation. 

Sec.  298.  "  Net  rent." 

Sec.  284.  Habendum— Offioe  of.-*The  office  of  an  haben- 
dum in  a  lease,  is  to  point  out  with  certainty,  and  limit,  the 
estate  conveyed. '  But  it  cannot  cut  down  the  grant  so  as 
to  change  the  nature  of  the  estate  or  interest  mentioned 


>Shep.  Touchstone,  76.  The 
hdbencmm  is  that  part  of  a  deed  or 
lease  that  begins  with  the  words 
*'to  have  and  to  hold,"  and 
immediately  succeeds  the  premi- 
ses. In  4  Cruise's  Digest,  title  82, 
Deed  Ch.  21,  it  is  said,  "With 
respect  to  the  habendum,  its  office 
is  to  limit  the  certainty  of  the  es- 
tate granted ;  therefore  no  person 
can  take  an  immediate  estate  by 
the  habendum  of  a  deed,  where  he 
is  not  named  in  the  premises  :  for 
it  is  in  the  premises  of  a  deed  that 
the  thing  is  reaUy  granted"  and  in 


the  same  work.  Sect.  76,  p.  273,  the 
author  continues:  "If  lands  are 
given  in  the  premises  of  a  deed  to 
A  and  his  heirs,  habendum  to  A  for 
life,  the  habendum  is  void,  because 
it  is  utterly  r^ouqnant  to  and  ir- 
reconcilable with  the  premises,'"  and 
the  author  cites  Throckmorton  v. 
Tracey,  Plowd.  146.  In  Stockton 
V.  Martin,  2  Bay  (S.  C.)  471,  the 
court  define  an  habendum  to  be 
"  that  part  of  a  deed  which  limits 
the  use  of  the  thing  conveyed." 
In  general,  the  habendum  refers  to 
the  premises,  and  declares  the  €»• 


CHAP.  JULVm,] 


Habendum. 


597 


in  the  premises.'  Thus,  in  the  case  last  cited,  land  was 
conveyed  to  W  in  fee,  but  the  habendum  was,  "  to  have 
and  to  hold  to  him  the  said  W  in  fee,  after  the  death  ofHj^^ 
and  it  was  held  that  W  took  an  immediate  fee,  and  that 
the  habendum  could  not  cut  down  the  grant  so  as  to 
make  the  whole  a  freehold  conveyance ;  and  Abbott,  0. 
J.,  in  delivering  an  opinion  in  the  case,  very  aptly  sum- 
marized the  ofSce  and  force  of  an  habendum.  He  said  : 
^Hf  no  estate  he  mentioned  in  the  premises^  the  grantee  will 
take  nothing  under  that  part  of  the  deed,  except  by  im- 
phcation  and  presiunption  of  law  ;  but  if  an  habendum 
follows,  the  intention  of  the  parties  as  to  the  estate  to  be 
conveyed  will  be  found  in  the  habendum,  and  consequent- 
ly, no  implication  or  presumption  of  law  can  be  made ; 
and  if  the  intention  so  expressed  be  contrary  to  the  rules 
of  law,  the  intention  cannot  take  effect,  and  the  convey- 
ance will  be  void.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an  estate  be 
mentioned  in  the  premises,  the  intention  of  the  parties  is 
shown,  and  the  deed  may  be  effectual  without  any  haben- 
dum ;  and  if  an  habendum  follows  which  is  repugnant  • 
to  the  premises^  or  contrary  to  the  rules  of  law  and  incap- 
able of  a  construction  consistent  with  either^  the  haben- 
dum will  he  rejected  and  the  deed  will  stand  upon  the 
premises. " '  As  stated  by  Abbott,  C.  J. ,  where  the  haben- 
dum is  repugnant  to  the  premises,  it  is  void  ;  but  where  it 
merely  qu^difies  them,  it  will  be  effective.    Lord  Coke 


tate  which  the  grantee  shall  hold 
in  them,  but  it  may  sometimes  en- 
large or  diminish  the  grant,  when 
it  is  so  worded  as  to  show  a  clear 
intention  to  do  so.  Corbin  v. 
Healey,  20  Pick.  (Mass.)  514.  And 
it  may  qualify,  expound  or  vary 
the  estate  eiven  by  the  premises. 
Moss  V.  Sheldon,  8  M.  &  S.  (Penn.) 
160.  Where,  in  a  deed  for  land,  a 
life  estate  only  is  mentioned  in  the 
premises  and  the  habendum,  this 
cannot  be  enlarged  into  a  fee,  either 
by  a  warranty  in  fee,  or  by  a  cove- 
nant for  qmet  enjoyment  to  the 
CTantee  and  his  heurs.  Snell  v. 
Young,  8  Ired.  (N.  C.)  879. 

»  Dodwell  V.  Gibbs,  5  B.  &  C. 
709. 

'  See  also  Timmis  v.  Steele,  4  Q. 


B. ,  where  a  tenant  in  fee  conveyed 
lands  to  ''Hannah  Timmis,  ner 
heirs  and  assigns,**  with  an  haben- 
dum "to  have  and  to  hold  to  H 
and  her  assigna  for  and  during  the 
natural  life  of  Geoige  Timmis." 
The  executors  of  Hannah  Tinunis 
claimed  that  the  effect  of  the  haben- 
dum was  to  qualify  the  Estate 
named  in  the  premises,  so  as  to 

five  the  same  to  her  executors 
uring  the  balance  of  the  life  of 
George  Timmis,  instead  of  to 
George  Timmis  her  heir.  But  the 
court  held,  that  after  Hannah  Tim- 
mis* death  the  heirs  took  the  estate. 
Lord  Denman,  C.  J. ,  saying ;  "  The 
words  in  the  habendum  are  mani- 
festly contradictory  and  repugnant 
to  the  words  in  the  premises,  suad 


598 


THxlteAseB. 


[§284. 


it 


says :'  **  The  office  of  the  premisesis  two-fold:  ttrst,riiJtsOj' 
to  name  the  feoffor  and  the  feoffee  ;  and,  secondly,  to  com- 
prehend the  certainty  of  the  lands  or  tenements  to  be  con- 
veyed by  the  feoffment,  either  by  express  words,  or  which 
may  by  reference  be  reduced  to  a  certainty ;  for  certum 
est  quod  cerium  reddi  potenV    The  habendjim  hath  also 


must,  according  to  the  general  rule 
of  confitruction  in  sudi  cases,  be 
disregarded."  The  only  case  to  be 
found  where  the  habendum  has 
been  permitted  to  chan^  the  I^b^ 
effect  of  the  premises  is  Spyre  v. 
Topham,  8 'East,  115,  in  which  the 
words  in  the  premises  were  '*  to  J. 
Topham,  his  heirs  and  assig^," 
and  those  in  the  habendum  were 
'^  to  G.  Bass,  his  heirs  and  assigns." 
The  deed  was  a  release :  and  the 
lease  for  a  year  was  to  G.  Bass. 
In  the  release  Bass  was  described 
as  trustee  for  Topham.  The  words 
"  J.  Topham "  in  the  premises, 
from  an  inspection  of  tn&  whole 
instrument,  was  evidently  a  cleri- 
cal error.  If  effect  had  been  given 
to  them,  nothing  could  have  passed 
to  anyone  by  tne  release,  and  the 
whole  purpose  and  object  of  the 
parties  would  have  been  defeated. 
The  court,  therefore,  read  the  re- 
lease as  if  the  words  in  the  premi- 
ses had  been  *'  G.  Bass  "  instead  of 
*'J.  Topham,"  Lobd  Ellenbob- 
OUGH,  C.  J.,  saying  that  the  cases 
cited  were  sufficient  to  authorize 
the  court  in  putting  a  construction 
upon  the  deed  in  support  of  it, 
**  which,  from  the  good  sense  of 
the  thing,  we  should  probably 
have  done  without  such  authori- 
ties." The  case  was  determined 
upon  its  peculiar  circumstances, 
and,  as  was  said  by  Lord  KbnYon, 
in  Timmis  v.  Steele,  ante,  refer- 
ring to  it,  '*  is  no  rule  for  any  case 
not  exactly  like  it.'^ 

'  Co.  litt.  6  a.  Patterson,  J. ,  in 
Timmis  v.  Steele,  4Q.  K  666,8aid: 
''  If  a  man  give  land  to  me  and 
my  heirs f  habendum  to  me  and  the 
heirs  of  my  body,  there  is  no  re- 
pugnancy because  the  habendum 
explains  the  sense  in  which  the 
word  *  heirs*  is  usedJ* 

*  The  office  of  the  premises  in  a 
deed  is  to  state  the  piuties,  the  de- 
scription of  the  property,  and  the 
grant ;  that  of  tne  habendum  is  to 
Emit  the  estate  with  certainty.    2 


Rolle's  Abr.  65  ;  Wrastly  v.  Adam, 
Plowd.  196  a ;  The  Earl  of  Shrews- 
bury's Case,  9  Coke,  47  b;  1  Inst 
6 a; 2  id.  240.  It  follows,  there- 
fore, that,  if  the  premises  grant 
an  estate  at  will,  the  habenduni 
may  erUarae  it  into  an  estate  for 
years,  or  that,  if  an  estate  for 
years  or  for  life  is  given,  it  may 
enlarge  it  into  a  fee.  1  Inst.  299  a; 
2  id.  584  ;  Poph.  188.  Thus,  if  lands 
are  granted  to  A  and  the  heirs  of 
his  body,  habendum  to  him  in  fee, 
he  has  oy  the  premises  an  estate 
tail,  and  by  the  habendum  a  fee 
simple  expectant  thereon.  Al- 
tham'S  Case,  8  Coke,  1546;  Turn- 
ham  V.  Cooper,  Cto.  Jac.  476 ; 
Beck's  Case,  Litt.  845 ;  Comyn's 
Dig.  Faits.  (E.)  9 ;  Doe  v.  Ellis,  9 
East,  886  ;  Anonymous,  Moore,  26  ; 
Corbin  v.  Healey,  20  Pick.  (Mass.) 
514 ;  Sanderson  Uses,  note  1.  The 
rule  is,  that,  where  a  deed  at  the 
first  contains  special  words,  and 
afterwards  concludes  with  general 
words,  both  shall  stand,  but,  while 
subsequent  words  mayoualify  and 
abridge,  they  shaU  not  aestroy  the 
merality  of  precedent  words 
rer,  56  ;  Altham's  Case,  154  h ; 
iomas  V.  Howell,  4  Mod.  69; 
Vmer's  Abr.  Grants  H.  18,  pi.  41 
et  seq.;  Payler  v.  Hamershaw,  4 
M.  &  S.  427.  The  habendum  may- 
qualify  and  restrain  the  import  of 
words  in  the  granting  part  of  the 
premises.  Thus,  when  the  grant 
IS  to  A  and  his  heirs,  habenduni 
to  him  and  the  heirs  of  his  body^ 
or  to  him  during  the  lives  of  B  and 
C,  the  habendum  qualifies  the 
premises  so  as  to  restrain  the  grant 
therein  to  the  heirs  described  in 
the  habendum,  so  that  in  the  one 
case  the  grantee  will  take  an  estate 
tail,  and  in  the  other  a  descendible 
freehold.  Mortimer's  Case,  8  Coke, 
154  b;  Pillsworth  v.  PVatt,  T. 
Jones,  4 ;  1  Inst.  21  a ;  2  Sanders* 
Uses,  260 ;  Preston's  Shep.  Touch. 
118.  If  no  express  estate  IS  granted 
in  the  premises,  but  it  is  defined 


•^i 


CHAP,  xxvm.] 


Habendxtm. 


59» 


two  parts^  to  wit :  first,  to  name  again  the  feoffee  ;  and, 
secondly,  to  limit  the  certainty  of  the  estate ." '    It  cannot 


in  the  habendum,  the  estate  named 
in  the  habendum  will  control  it  to 
that  extent,  qualifies  the  intend- 
ment of  the  premises.    8  Bacon's 
Abr.  Tit.  Feoffment  (C) ;  2  RoUe's 
Abr.  Tit,  d5 ;  Hogg  t.  Cross,  Cro. 
Eliz.  254.    If  the  grant  is  to  two, 
the  habendum  may  limit  a  moiety 
to  one  and  the  other  moiety  to  the 
other,  and  make  them  tenants  in 
common,    even    though    by   the 
premises  they  were  joint  tenants. 
1  Inst.  183  5,  190 b, 772  ;  2id.  241  ; 
Comyn's  Dig.   Fait.    (E)  9.    But, 
although  the  habendum  is  allowed 
to  ascertain  and  fix  the  meaning 
of  the  premises,  it  must  not  con- 
tradict them.  Cocking  v.  Heath- 
cote,  Lofft.   191,  or  be  repugnant 
thereto.    Thus,  if  an  estate  m  fee 
is  expressly  given  in  the  premises, 
an  habendum  to  the  grantee  for 
his  own  life,  or  to  him  and  his  ex- 
ecutors and  administrators,  or  for 
years,  will  be  repugnant  and  void, 
and  the  grantee  will  take  the  es- 
tate in  fee   notwithstanding  the 
habendum.    So  if  a  grant   is  to 
two,  an  habendum  to  one  for  life, 
remainder  to  the  other  for  life,  is 
void,  because  by  the  premises  they 
are  made  joint  tenants,  and  the 
habendum    severs    the    jointure. 
Where  the  premises  and  the  ha- 
bendum are  equally  clear,  the  for- 
mer will  not  be  controlled  by  the 
latter,  but  both  will  be  allowed  to 
have  an  operation  when  it  can  be 
done  without  conflicting  with  the 
evident  intent  of  the  parties,  in 
accordance  with  the  rule  that  a 
deed  shall  be  construed  in  such  a 
manner  that  each  part   shall  be 
made  effectual  if  they  can  stand 
together.    Shelly's  Case,  1  Coke, 
95 b;  1  Inst.  21  a;  1  Wood's  Con- 
veyancing, 224  a.  But  where  there 
are  words  in  a  deed  evidently  re- 
pugnant to  each  other,  and  to  the 
general  intention  of  the  parties, 
they  will  be  rejected.    Barrington 
V.  Parkhurst,  8  Atk.   135.    Or  if 
words  are  omitted  by  mistake,  they 
will  be  supplied.    Lloyd  v.  Say,  1 
Salk.  341 ;  Uredall  v.  Halfpenny,  2 
P.  Wms.  151 ;  Targus  v.  Paget,  2 
Yes.   194.     And  the   courts   will 
modify  in   construction   the   dif- 
ferent parts  of  an  instrument,  so 


as   to  carry  the  intention  of  the 
parties  into  effect,  so  far  as  it  can 
be  done  without  doing  violence  to 
any  rules  of  law.    Spyne  v.  Top- 
ham,  8  East,  116.    But  when  the 
habendum   is   repuf^nant    to   the 
premises,    it   is    void,    Baldwin's 
Case,  2  Coke^  23  &,  upon  the  prin- 
ciple, or  rather  under  the  rule  that, 
where  there  are  two  clauses  in  a 
deed  repugnant  with  each  other, 
theirs/  shall  prevail ;  Leicester  v. 
Bigffs^  2  Taunt.  118  ;    and  every 
deed  is  construed   most  strongly 
against  the  grantor  and  most  tor 
the   advantage   of    the   grantee ; 
therefore   the  ^antee   wiU  take 
under  the  premises  if  that  U  mofA 
favorable  to  him,  and  not  by  the 
habendum,    because   the   grantor 
havihg  given  the  estate,  cannot  by 
any  subsequent  words  detract  from 
it,  1  Inst.  299  a,  but  he  may  add  to 
it  by  the  habendum,  and  such  ad- 
dition will  inure  to  the  benefit  of 
the  grantee.    Where  the  grant  in 
the  premises  admits  of  tvx>  mean- 
ings, the  habendum  will  control,  ^ 
as  where  a  ^iknt  is  made  to  a  man 
and  his  heirs,  habendum  to  him 
and  the  heirs  of  his  body ;  here  the 
word  heirs    being   an    equivocal 
term,  applicable  either  to  general 
or  special   heirs,   the   habendum 
properly    explains    the    sense  in 
which  it  is  used.    1  Wood's  Con- 
veyancing, 200  n.    When  the  ha- 
bendum clause  in  a  deed  is  contra- 
dictory to  the  premises,  it  is  void, 
but  when  it  simply  explains,  limits 
or  qualifies  the  premises,  it  peiv 
forms  its  proper  office.    Con^e- 
gational  Society  v.  Stark,  84  vt. 
248.    The  word  appurtenances  in 
the   habendum  oi  a  deed,  when 
none  are  specified,  wiU  not  convey 
anything  except  what  was  legally 
appurtenant   to  the   land  in  the 
hands  of  the  grantor;  and  there- 
fore will  not  convey  an  easement 
in  the  land  of  another,  which,  by 
reason  of  not  having  ripened  into 
a  legal  right,  had  not  oecome  le- 
gally attached  to  the  premises  con- 
veyed, unless  properly  described 
by  words.     Swazy  v.  Brooks,  84 
Vt.  451. 

*  See  Cocking  v.  Heathcote,  Lofft. 
190 ;  Bird  v.  Baker,  1  £.  &  £.  12, 


6oa 


The  Estate. 


[§284, 


introduce  psurcete  not  named  in  the  premises.  Thus,  if  a 
brick  house  is  demised,  habendum  together  with  another 
house,  the  other  house  not  having  been  named  in  the  prem- 
ises, will  not  pass  imder  the  lease.  But  if  a  thing  is  com- 
prehended in  the  premises,  the  fact  that  it  is  called  hj  a 
different  name  in  the  habendum  does  not  invalidate  the 
latter,  for  the  estate  is  the  same.'  If  some  parcels  are 
named  in  the  premises,  but  not  included  in  the  habendum, 
the  operation  of  the  deed  as  to  those  depends  upon  the 
premises,  the  same  as  though  the  deed  contained  no  haben- 
dum.' The  object  of  the  habendum  is  not  to  designate 
the  parties  who  take  under  the  grant,  but  to  designate  and 
limit  the  quantity  of  interest  conferred. '  If  the  lessee  is  not 
named  in  the  premises,  but  is  named  in  the  habendum, 
the  lease  will  be  good  ;  *  and  such  is  also  the  case  if  he  is 
named  in  the  premises,  but  not  in  the  habendum.*  If  the 
lessee  is  named  in  the  premises,  another  person  cannot 
take  under  the  lease  who  is  named  in  the  habendum,  but 
not  in  the  premises,*  except  by  way  of  remainder,  nor 
then,  unless  the  order  of  succession  is  clearly  pointed  out.' 
Neither  the  prerhises  6r  the  habendum  are  anything  more 
than  formal  parts  of  a  deed ;  and  if  either  or  both  be 
omitted,  the  deed  will  be  good  ; "  but  either  or  both,  when 
used,  exercise,  as  we  have  seen,  a  most  important  influence 
upon  the  construction  of  the  deed,  and  great  care  should 
be  taken  to  give  to  each  the  efficacy  and  purpose  for  which 
they  are  employed.  An  ignorant  or  careless  conveyancer 
may  so  use  them  as  to  defeat  entirely  the  intention  of  the 


Upon  the  point,  and  holding  that 
the  habendum  fixes  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  the  estate  and  as- 
certams  the  meaning  of  the  prem- 
ises, but  cannot  contradict  or  de- 
feat them.  Ashton  v.  Underbill, 
Cald.  416. 

» Neld  V.  Cooper,  Toth.  186  ; 
Throckmorton  v.  Tracey,  Plowd. 
153 ;  Shep.  Touch.  76 ;  3  Rollings 
Abr.  65  (J)  pi.  2. 

*  Piatt  on  Leases,  48. 

*  Becklin^s  Case,  2  Coke,  68  a ; 
Lofleld's  Case,  10  id.  1076 ;  Strick- 
land V.  Maxwell,  2  Cr.  &  M.  589. 

*  Butler  V.  Doddineton,  Toth.  194, 
S.  C.  sub  nom ;  Butler  v.  Dodson, 
Gary,   122;  Ellis  v.  Lambert,  AL 


88  ;  Co.  litt.  7  a  ;  Shep.  Touch. 
75 ;  Cruise's  Dig.  290 ;  1  Preston's 
Abstracts,  79.  But  contra,  and 
holding  that  if  the  lessee  is  named 
only  in  the  habendum  the  lease  is 
inoperative.  See  Anonymous,  8 
Leon.  32  ;  2  RoUc's  Abr.  66,  pL  13, 
tit.  Grants;  Bustard  t.  Coulter, 
Cro.  Eliz.  902. 

*  Anonymous,  8  Leon,  82. 

•Windsmere  v.  Hobart,  Hob, 
818 :  Kirkmanv.  Reignold,  2  Leon, 
1  ;  Haffner  v.  Irwin,  4  Dev.  &  B. 
(N.  C.)  488. 

'  Windsmere  v.  Hobart,  ante  ; 
Wheadon  v.  Sugg,  Cro.  Jac,  872. 

>Inst.  7  a;  ^eppard's  Toucb- 
stone,  75. 


CHAP,  xxvra.] 


GOHHENCEMEKT. 


601 


parties,  while,  if  properly  used,  they  are  instrumentalities 
through  which  the  intention  of  the  parties  is  eflfectuated 
and  made  clear. 

Sec.  286.  Commenoement  of  term.— Certainty  of  com- 
mencement,  of  duration,  and  of  termination,  is  essential 
to  the  validity  of  a  lease  for  years,'  but  this  applies  to 
certainty  of  the .  time  when  the  interest  or  enjoyment 
under  the  lease  is  to  begin,  rather  than  to  commence- 
ment in  computation  of  time,  as  the  two  do  not  neces- 
sarily run  together.  Thus,  a  lease  for  years  may  be 
made  to  commence  in  interest  from  a  future  day,  al- 
though in  computation  of  time  it  commences  from  its 
date.'  So  a  lease  in  computation  of  time  may  be  made 
to  commence  from  a  day  past,  although  it  is  not  to  com- 
mence  in  interest  until  a  future  day,  or  until  the  hap- 
pening of  a  certain  contingency.*    A  lease  for  five  yeaiSy 


1  Go.  litt.  46  b;  Foote  v.  Berk- 
ley, 1  Vint.  88  ;  Chidington's  Case, 
2  Coke,  156  a ;  4  Bacon's  Abr. 
Leases,  55 ;  2  Blaekstone*s  Com. 
148 ;  Sheppard's  Touchstone,  271 ; 
Comyn's  DiK.Tit.  Estates  (G)  8; 
Say's  Case,  Plowd.  2T0.  A  lease 
becomes  operative  from  the  day  of 
its  execution  and  delivery,  in  the 
absence  of  any  words  fixing  a  dif- 
ferent period,  and  not  from  the 
date  oi  the  lessee  entry,  Chung 
You  V.  Hop  Chon^,  11  Or.  220. 

'  Enys  V.  Donnithome,  2  Burr. 
1190.  In  the  Bishop  of  Bath's  Case, 
6  Coke,  85  a,  it  was  resolved  by  the 
court  that  '*  every  lease  for  years 
should  have  a  certain  beginnmg  is 
to  be  intended  when  it  is  to  takeef- 
fectininterest  or  possession,  A  lease 
for  years,  being  a  mere  chattel  in- 
terest, may  be  made  on  a  condi- 
tion or  contingent  precedent :  as, 
if  I  grant  to  you  that,  if  y<ju 
pay  me  twenty  poimds  at  Michael- 
mas next  following,  you  shall 
have  my  manor  of  D  for  one  and 
twenty  years ;  now  it  is  uncertain 
whether  it  will  commence  or  not, 
and  in  the  meantime,  imtil  the 
payment  of  the  money,  it  is  not 
any  lease,  but  it  is  sufficient  that 
the  conmiencement  by  certain 
when  it  is  to  take  effect  in  interest 
or  possession.    So  it  is  true  that 


the  continuance  of  it  ought  to  te 
certain ;  but  that  it  is  to  be  intendeel 
either  when  the  time  is  made  cer* 
tain  by  express  mtTnbering  of  yearsy. 
or  by  reference  to  a  certaiiUy„  or 
by  reducing  it  to  a  certainty  by 
matter  ex  post  facto,  or  by  com- 
struction  in  law  by  express  Uni- 
tation.  At  first,  if  a  lease  be  made 
for  twenty-one  or  any  other  osr- 
tain  number  of  years,  it  is  goodlor 
the  certain  enumeration  from  the 
first. "  See  also  Boraston's  Case„  19 
o ;  Co.  Litt.  45  6 ;  RoU.  Arb.849 ;  Sky 
V.  Smith,  Plowd.  271 ;  Shep.  Touch. 
278.  Until  the  former  lease  ter- 
minates, the  second  lease  has  a 
mere  interesse  termini,  and  such 
lease  does  not  operate  as  an  as- 
signment of  the  reversion  expect- 
ant on  such  lease.  Smith  v.  Day, 
2  M.  &  W.  684;  Locke  v.  Furze,  19 
C.  B.  N.  S.  96.  But,  after  the  day 
appointed  for  the  commencement 
of  the  term,  an  interesse  termini 
is  sufficient  to  support  an  entnr  or 
ejectment.  Agar  v.  Brown,  s  K 
&  B.  881. 

•  Li  Enys  v.  Donnithome,  2  B«rr. 
1192,  a  lease  to  hold  from  a-  day 
past,  for  fifty  years  therein  next 
ensuing,  the  said  term  to  ODm- 
mence  and  begin  from  and  imme- 
diately after  the  surrender,  forfeit- 
ure, or  other  determination  of  an 


eo2 


The  Estate. 


[§285. 


to  coHunence  upon  the  death  of  a  person  then  living,  is 
good ;  for,  although  it  is  uncertain  when  the  term  will 
begin,  yet  it  is  reduced  to  a  certainty  by  the  death  of 
the  person  named,  and  is  aided  by  the  maxim  id  cerium 
est  quod  cerium  reddi  poiest.^  So,  if  one  leases  prem- 
ises "as  many  years  as  A  has"  other  premises,  the  lease 
is  good  for  a  term  as  long  as  that  which  A  has  in  the 
premises  named.'  So,  if  a  lease  is  piade  during  the  mi- 
nority of  a  person  named,*  or  for  a  certain  term,  to  com- 
mence at  the  lessor's  death,'  or,  indeed,  upon  b:dj passu 
hie  event  or  contingency ; '  but  a  lease  made  upon  a  con- 
tingency that  is  impossible,  or  that  is  dependent  upon 
another  contingency,  is  bad.*  A  lease  for  such  a  period 
as  a  certain  person,  designated  in  the  lease,  shall  name, 


existang  lease  of  the  same  premi- 
ses, was  held  not  uncertain  in  its 
commenoement,  and  was  upheld 
as  a  void  lease.  On  the  determi- 
nation of  the  former  lease,  either 
from  efflux  of  time,  siurender, 
forfeiture,  or  any  cause,  the  sec- 
ond lease  immediately  takes  effect 
in  possession^  for  the  residue  of 
the  term:  for,  on  its  creation  it 
was  good  as  a  present  demise,  hv 
reason  of  the  estoppel  to  both 
parties,  by  the  indenture,  and 
therefore  shall  come  into  possess- 
ion whenever  the  first  lease  is  out 
of  the  wav.   4  Bacon's  Abr.  Leases 

r.) ;  Read  v.  Ervington,  Cro.  Eliz. 

i2.  But  by  the  common  law,  be- 
fore the  Statute  4  &  5  of  Anne, 
chap.  16,  attornment  was  requi- 
site to  make  the  second  demise 
enure  as  a  lease  of  the  reversion  so 
as  to  entitle  the  second  lessee  to  the 
Tents  and  services  reserved  on  the 
first  lease,  imless  it  was  by  way 
of  bargain  and  sale  for  years. 
Malorie's  Case,  6  Coke,  113,  1 
Inst.  809  a ;  812  a ;  2  Inst.  856  n. 
<B.)  In  some  measure,  at- 
tornment was  avoided  by  the 
Statute  of  Uses,  27  Hen.  8. 
chap.  10,  and  by  the  Statute  of 
Wills,  85  Hen.  8,  chap.  6;  but  it 
was  not  until  the  Stat,  of  Anne 
previously  referred  to,  and  11  Geo. 
2,  chap.  19,  that  this  formality  was 
almost  entirely  dispensed  with. 
Previous  to  the  Statute  of  Anne, 
^«upra,  if  the  second  demise  was 


by  deed  poll,  without  such  attorn- 
ment, it  could  only  take  effect  in 
possession  upon  the  determinaticm 
of  the  first  lease,  hy  the  death  of 
the  first  lessee,  according  to  the 
express  limitation,  and  did  not  be- 
come operative  upon  its  determinar 
tion  by  surrender  or  forfeiture,  or 
other  cause;  for  during  the  first 
lease  the  lessor  had  no  power  to 
contract  fortmvthing  but  his  own 
reversion;  and  therefore,  unless 
the  second  lessee  could  obtain  tiie 
reversion  hy  attornment^  the  con- 
tract could  not  take  effect  until  the 
death  of  the  first  lessee ;  and  the 
same  was  true  in  reference  to 
parol  leases,  which,  prior  to  the 
Statute  29,  Car.  2,  chap.  8,  enured 
by  way  of  interesse  termini  for 
such  part  of  the  time  as  was  not 
named  in  the  former  lease. 

1  Hall  V.  Richardson,  8T.  R  462  ; 
Child  V.  Bayhe,  Cro.  Jac.  459; 
Grute  V.  Locroft,  Cro.  Eliz.  287  ; 
Anonymous,  Poph.  4. 

«  Co.  Litt.  45  b;  1  Roll.  Ab.  849  ; 
The  Bishop  of  Bath's  Case,  6  Coke, 
85  a. 

*  Braston*s  Case,  8  Coke,  19  b ; 
Sav  V.  Smith,  Plowd.  278  a  3. 

^ Grute  V.  Locroft,  Cro.  Eliz.  287  ; 
Herbin  v.  Chard,  Poph.  97 ;  Chad* 
ington's  Case,  1  Coke,  153  a. 

»  Shep.  Touch.  278 ;  The  Rector 
of  Cheoington's  Case,!  Coke,  156  a. 

•  Child  V.  Baylie,  Cro.  Jac  461 ; 
Chedington's  dase,  ante* 


't^JR^icSiSHfc 


i 


CHAP,  zzvul] 


Coi 


r'i:naw:><'i:n. 


608 


is  inoperative  until  sach  i)er8on  names  the  doiation  of 
the  term ;  bnt,  after  the  term  has  been  named  by  him, 
it  attaches  as  a  Talid  lease  ab  initio  for  tibat  period.'  If 
a  lease  is  made  of  premises  to  commence  when  a  former 
lease  recited  therein  is  ended,  and  in  fact  no  such  lease 
exists,  the  lease  will  attach  and  the  term  commence  im- 
mediately ; '  bat  if  there  is  a  former  lease,  but  it  has 
been  mis-recited  in.  an  essential  respect  in  the  second 
lease,  the  second  lease  will  have  merely  an  interesse  ter- 
miniy  and  his  lease  can  commence  presently  only  in  the 
enumeration  of  years,  and  not  in  interest,  until  such 
former  lease  is  determined.* 


Seo.  286.  Gommenoement  from  the  date  of  the  lease.— It 
was  formerly  held  that  a  lease  to  commence  a  datu  in- 
cluded the  day  of  the  date,  but  that  a  die  datus  ex- 
cluded the  day ;  *  but  it  is  now  considered  that  the 
words  "from  the  day  of  the  date''  mean  either  mcZ2^ 
sive  or  exclrisive^  according  to  the  context  and  the  ap- 
parent intention  of  the  parties ;  and  the  court  will  con- 
strue them  so  as  to  effectuate  such  intention.*    And  in 


»  Goodright  v.  Richardson,  8  T. 
R.  468.  A  lease  to  another  until 
a  child  en  ventre  sa  mere  shaU  ar- 
rive at  the  age  of  twenty-one 
years,  is  not  good  as  a  lease  for 
years,  but  only  at  wiU.  Say  v. 
Smith,  Plowd.  271  ;  Bishop  of 
Baths  Case,  6  Coke,  85  & :  4  Ba- 
con's Abr.  tit.  Leases  (L)  8. 

» 4  Bacon's  Abr.  Tit.  LeasesOL)  1. 

» Co.  Lit.  46  b ;  Rowe  v.  Hunt- 
ington, Vaugh  78. 

^Haths  V.  Ash,  2  Salk.  418; 
Macdonnel  v.  Weldon,  Stra.  650; 
Anon.,  Lofft.  275 ;  Cornish  v.  Caw- 
sey,  RoU.  Abr.  850,  pi.  12  :  Doug- 
lass V.  Shank,  Cro.  Eliz.  766  ;.  Ver- 
non V.  West,  2  Wils.  166 ;  Macdon- 
nel V.  Weldon,  8  Mod.  54 ;  Llew- 
elyn V.  Williams,  Cro.  Jac.  258 ; 
MeUows  V.  May,  Cro.  EBz.  878 ; 
Howard's  Case,  2  Salk.  625 ;  Ba- 
con V.  Waller,  1  Rol.  887  ;  Bayn- 
tumv.  Watton,  Cowp.  728:  BuU 
V.  Wyatt,  Cro.  Car.  886  ;  Osboum 
V.  Rider,  Cro.  Jac.  185 ;  Warren  v. 
Feamside,  1  Wils.  176 ;  Haths  v. 
Ash,  2  Salk.  918.  The  cases  are 
not  uniform.  In  Bacon  v.  Waller, 
ante,  ''from  date"   and   ''from 


the  day  of  the  date,"  were  held  to 
be  one  and  the  same  thing.  See 
also,  to  the  same  effect,  lucks  y. 
Harvey,  Comb.  899 ;  Signorette  v. 
Maguire,  2  Ld.  Rayd.  1241.  *'From 
the  making"  has  been  held  to 
commence  only  from  delivery, 
Norris  v,  (Jawtry,  Hob.  140 ; 
Hicks  V.  Harvey,  ante ;  Anony- 
mous, Dyer,  286  a,  pi.  48,  and  m 
Barwick's  Case,  5  Coke,  94  a,  was 
held  to  exclude  the  day  of  making. 
See  also,  Anonymous,  Lofft.  275; 
Umble  V.  Fisher,  Cro.  Eliz.  702 ; 
Jenk.  Cent.  186,  case  78,  where  the 
word  *'from"  is  construed  as  ex- 
cluding the  day  of  date.  **  Hence- 
forth" includes  the  day  of  date, 
Llewelyn  v.  Williams,  Cro.  Jac. 
250,  but  **  from  henceforth  "  passes 
the  estate  from  the  time  of  the  de- 
hverv  of  the  lease.  Clayton's  Case, 
5  Coke,  1. 

'  Pugh  V.  Duke  of  Leeds,  Cowp. 
714 ;  Ackland  v.  Lutley,  9  Ad.  & 
El.  879  ;  4  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Leases 
(L)  1 ;  Smith  L.  &  T.  104,  105,  (2d. 
ed.)  A  lease  for  a  term  of  years 
"  from  the  first  day  of  July.^'  be- 
gins on  the  2d  of  July<    Atkins  y. 


%04 


The  Estate. 


[§  286. 


compnting  time  from  an  act  or  event,  there  is  no  general 
rule  that  the  day  is  to  be  inclusive  or  exclusive ;  but  the 
question  whether  it  shall  be  included  or  excluded  de- 
pends upon  the  reason  of  the  thing  according  to  the  cir- 
cumstances.* And  in  case  of  doubt  the  construction  will 
be  made  so  as  to  save  the  right  or  estate.  Thus,  where 
lands  were  devised  to  a  person  upon  condition  that  he 
should  pay  a  certain  sum  to  a  certain  j)erson  "within 
one  year  after  ^^  the  testator's  decease,  and  the  testator 
died  Oct.  2,  and  the  devisee  tendered  the  money  Oct.  3d, 
of  the  next  year  (the  2d  being  Sunday)  the  tender  was 
held  in  time,  the  court  saying;  "There  is  no  invariable 
sense,  however,  to  be  attached  to  the  word  *  after,'  when 
used  in  such  a  connection,  hut  it  is  to  be  taken  to  be  ex- 
elusive  or  inclusive^  according  as  it  wiUj  in  the  partic- 
ular casCy  effectuate  the  intention  of  the  parties ;  and 
in  ascertaining  that  intention,  the  context  and  the  sub- 
ject matter  are  to  be  regarded,  as  well  as  the  effect  of  the 
construction  to  uphold  or  destroy  the  instrument  in 
question,  and  the  rights  depending  upon  it,  the  pre- 
sumption being,  that  instruments  are  designed  to  be  ef- 
fectual, and  not  futile."  In  cases  of  doubt,  the  con- 
struction is  to  be  such  as  will  save  the  right  or  estate, 
such  being  the  presumed  intention.'  And  in  construing 
the  word  "from"  a  similar  rule  exists,*  especially  when 
it  will  prevent  an  estoppel  or  save  a  forfeiture,*  and  both 
the  day  from  which  the  reckoning  commences  and  that 
on  which  it  terminates  may  be  included  or  excluded,  as 
best  serves  the  interests  of  the  parties  in  saving  a  right 
or  preventing  a  forfeiture.'    A  distinction  is  made  be- 


Sleeper,  7  Allen  (Mass.)  487  ;  Doe 
V.  Smith,  Anth.  (N.  Y.)  179. 

*  Lester  v.  Oarland,  15  Ves.  24 ; 
Doe  V.  Day,  10  East,  427  ;  Sands  v. 
Lyon,  18  Conn.  80 ;  Sims  v.  Hamp- 
ton, 1  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  411 ;  Wind- 
Bor  V.  China,  4  Me.  298 ;  People  v. 
Robertson,  39  Barb.  (N.  Y.)9  ;  Pel- 
laer  v.  Wauford,  9  B.  &  C,  134 ; 
Bennett  v.  Nichols,  4  T.  &  R.  121 ; 

*  Sands  v.  Lyon,  ante ;  Kellc^g 
V.  Currico,  47  Mo.  157  ;  Protection 
Life  Ins.  Co.  v.  Palmer,  81  m.  88  ; 
but  it  is  a  general  rule  that  where, 


by  the  terms  of  a  contract,  an  act 
is  to  be  done  within  a  certain  time 
and  the  last  day  is  Sunday,  per- 
formance on  Monday  is  good. 
Stryper  v.  Yanderbilt,  35  N.  J.  Lw 
68. 

•  Cornell  v.  Moulton,  3  Dei.  (N. 
Y.)  12. 

*  Windsor  v.  China,  4  Me.  298  ; 
State  V.  Gasconde,  83  Mo.  102. 

^  State  V.  Schnierle,  5  Rich.  (3. 
C.)  299 ;  O'Connor  v.  Towns,  1 
Tex.  107. 


objlp.  xxvm.] 


CpMHENCElfENt. 


605 


tween  a  lease  or  other  contract,  where  it  is  to  commence 
from  or  after  a  certain  act  done  or  from  the  day  itself. 
In  the  former  case,  the  day  in  which  the  act  is  done  is 
excluded/  but  in  the  latter  case  the  day  itself  will  be  in- 
cluded or  excluded  according  to  the  intention  of  the 
parties,  or  as  it  wiU  best  serve  their  interests  or  preserve 
their  rights.'  Generally,  however,  either  the  first  day  or 
the  last  one  wiU  be  excluded,  and  the  other  included, 
according  to  the  intention  of  the  parties.*  Generally 
speaking,  a  lease  from  25th  March  commences  the  next 
day  and  ends  on  25th  March,  otherwise  the  day  on  which 
the  last  quarter's  rent  is  usually  reserved  would  be  sub- 
sequent to  the  expiration  of  the  lease.'  A  lease  **from 
the  day  of  the  date,''  and  "from  henceforth,"  is  the 
same  thing/  Sometimes  a  lease  "from  the  day  of  the 
date"  will  be  construed  to  mean  "from  the  day  of  the 
execution  of  the  deed,"  •  but  the  more  literal  construc- 
tion is  usually  adopted.^     As  to  an  impossible  or  uncer- 


1  Handlej  t.  Cuimiiigham.  12 
Buflh.  (Ky.)  402  ;  Protection  life 
Insurance  Co.  v.  Palmer,  ante ; 
Lang  ▼.  PhiUips,  27  Ala.  811 ;  Burr 
V.  Lewis,  6  Tex.  76  ;  Kimm  v.  Os- 
good, 19  Mo.  60 ;  ComeUv.  Moul- 
Km,  ante ;  Weeks  v.  Hull,  19 
Conn.  876;  Windsor  v.  China, 
ante ;  Bissell  v.  Bissell,  11  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  96 ;  Irving  v.  Humphrey, 
Hop.  Ch.  (N.  Y.3  864;  State  v. 
Gkisconde,  ante ;  Homes  v.  Smith, 
16  Me.  181 ;  Thome  ▼.  Masher,  20 
N.  J.  Eq.  257 ;  Page  v.  Waymouth, 
47  Me.  288 ;  Carruthers  v.  W heeler, 
1  Orey,  194 ;  but  see  Hampton  v. 
Evenzeller,  2  Browne  (Penn.)  18  ; 
Wagner  v.  Duffy,  1  Phila.  (Penn.) 
867  ;  Chiles  v.  Smith,  18  B.  Mon. 
^y.)  460;  White  v.  Crutcher,  1 
bush.  (Ky.)  472.  where  it  was  held 
that  the  day  on  which  the  act  is 
done  is  included. 

» Goode  V.  Webb,  52  Ala.  452 
Bemis  v.  Leonard,  118  Mass.  502 
Wood  V.  Com,,  11  Bush.  (Ky.)  220 
Corawin^er,  &c.,  Co.  v.  Cunning- 
ham, 75  Fenn.  St.  138  ;  Ewing  v. 
Bailey,  5  lU.  420 ;  Bigelow  v.  WiU- 
8on,  1  Pick.  (Mass.)  485 ;  Wiggin 
V.  Peters,  1  Met.  (Mass.)  187 ;  Bow- 
man V.  Wood,  41  HI.  208  ;  Pyle  v. 
Mouldmg,  7  J.  J.  Mar.  (Ky.)  202 ; 
Laurent  y.  Ins.  Co.,  1  K  &  M. 


(S.  C.)  505 ;  Jacobs  v.  Graham,  1 
Blackf.  (Ind.)  892  ;  GoswiUers 
Case,  8  Penn.  200 ;  Arnold  ▼.  U. 
S.,  9  Cranch  (U.  S.),  104.  But  see 
Shuts  V.  Selden,  2  Wall.  (U.  S.) 
190,  overruling  this  case  ;  Rand  ▼. 
Rand,  4  N.  H.  267 ;  Sands  v.  Lyon, 
ante;  People  v.  New  York,  28 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  284. 

'  Kendall  v.  Kingsley,  120  Mass. 
94 ;  Higgins  v.  Halligan,  46  111. 
178;  Cornell  v.  Moulton,  8  Den. 
(N.  Y.)  12 ;  Farwell  v.  Rogers,  4 
Cush.  (Mass.)  460 ;  Small  v.  Ed- 
rick,  5  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  137.  •  The 
rule  most  prevalent  is  to  exclude 
the  first  day  and  include  the 
whole  of  the  last,  Webb  v.  Fair- 
maner,  8  M.  4&  W.  478 ;  Sands  v. 
Lyon,  ante ;  Himter  v.  Sar,  C.  S. 
Co.,  4  Mer.  158;  People  v.  R.  R. 
Co.,  28  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  m ;  Bemis  v. 
Leonard,  118  Mass.  502,  but  this  is 
governed  largely  by  the  intention 
and  apparent  interest  of  the  par- 
ties. Wiggin  V.  Peters,  1  Met. 
(Mass.)  127 ;  also  cases  cited,  ante. 

•  Ackiand  v.  Lutley,  ante  ;  Wil- 
kinson V.  Gaston,  9  Q.  B.  187. 

•  Llewelyn  v.  Williams,  Cro. 
Jac.  258  ;  Clayton's  Case,  5  Coke,  1. 

•  Underwood  v.  Horwood,  10 
Ves.  209. 

'  Shep.  Touch.  108  ;  Cox  v.  Day, 


606  The  Estate.  [§  286- 

tain  date,  there  is  this  distinction,  that  if  a  lease  is  made 
to  begin  from  an  impossible  date,  as  from  the  30th  of 
Feb.,  or  the  31st  of  April,  or  from  the  Nativity  of  our 
Lord,  not  saying  from  the  feast  of  the  Nativity,  especi- 
ally if  it  be  by  deed,  it  sJiaU  take  effect  from  the  delivery. 
So  if  it  is  dated  and  is  to  commence  from  the  '^making 
hereof,"  or  '*from  henceforth,"  *  or  from  the  executing 
of  a  former  lease,  and  no  such  lease  in  fact  exists,  or  if 
the  prior  lease  is  void  in  law ;  *  but  where  the  limitation 
is  uncertain,  as  a  lease  made  the  10th  day  of  Oct.,  to 
hold  from  the  20th  day  of  Nov.,  without  saying  what 
Nov.  is  meant,  the  lease  is  thereby  vitiated,  because  the 
limitation  is  part  of  the  agreement,  and  the  court  cannot 
determine  it,  not  knowing  the  terms  of  the  contract.* 
Where  a  deed  has  no  date,  or  an  impossible  date,  as  the 
30th  of  Feb.,  and  in  the  deed  reference  is  made  to  the 
date,  that  word  must  be  construed  "  delivery ; "  but  if  it 
has  a  sensible  date,  the  word  date  occurring  in  other 
parts  of  the  deed  means  the  day  of  the  date  and  not  of 
the  delivery ;  and,  therefore,  in  covenant  on  an  indent- 
ure of  lease,  dated  the  24th  day  of  Dec.,  1822,  whereby 
the  defendant  agreed,  within  twenty-four  calendar 
months  then  next  after  the  date  of  the  indenture,  to  pro- 
cure a  certain  thing  to  be  done :  it  was  held,  that  the 
deed  took  effect  from  the  day  of  the  date,  and  that  the 
twenty-four  calendar  months  reckoned  from  the  date.* 
Where  a  lease  was  dated  25th  March,  1783,  habendum 
^'froin  the  13th  March  n&m  last  pa^ty^  and  it  was 
proved  that  the  deed  was  not  executed  until  some  time 
after  the  date,  it  was  held,  that  the  term  commenced  on 
the  25th  March,  1783,  and  not  in  1782.'  A  deed  having 
been  made  in  the  month  of  August  in  a  leap  year,  the 
words  "the  29th  February  then  next  ensuing"  were 
construed  to  mean  the  29th  February  in  the  next  leap 

10  East,  427 ;  Steele  v.  Mart,  4  B.        «  Miller    v.    Maynwaring,   Cro. 

&  C.  272  ;   Styles  v.  Wardle,  id.  Car.  397  ;  Bassett  v.  Lewis,  1  Lev. 

908 ;  Cooper  v.  Robinson,  10  M.  &  77. 

W.  694  ;  Darlington  v.  Ulph,  18  Q.        » 4  Bac.  Abr.  Tit,  Leases  (L)  1 ; 

B.  204;    Bird  v.  Baker,  1  E.  &  Anon.,  1  Mod.  180;  Foote  v.  Ber- 

E.  12.  keley,  1  Sid.  461. 

»  Co.  Lit.  46  h  ;  Styles  v.  W.jrdle,        *  Styles  v.  Wardle,  4  B.  &  C.  908. 
4  B.  &  C.  908.  »  Steele  v.  Mart,  4  B.  &  C.  272. 


CHAP.   XXVm.]  OOMMENCBMEKT.  607 

year.'  A  lease  operates  as  a  grant  only  from  the  time  of 
its  execution,  and  the  tenant  is  not  liable  for  previous 
breaches  of  covenant,  although  committed  after  the  date 
of  the  deed.*  But  the  duration  of  the  term  is  to  be  com- 
puted from  the  day  in  that  behalf  mentioned  in  the 
lease.  Thus,  where  J  by  indenture  dated  and  made 
19th  July,  1861,  demised  to  A  certain  premises,  haben- 
dum from  26th  Dec.,  1849,  for  fourteen  years  thence 
next  ensuing,  determinable  at  the  end  of  the  first  seven 
years  by  six  months'  previous  notice:  held,  that  the 
seven  years  were  to  be  reckoned  from  26th  Dec,  1849, 
and  that  the  lease  might  be  determined  on  26th  Dec, 
1866.  • 

Sec.  387.  Commencement   with  reference  to  entry In 

general,  a  letting  by  parol  will  be  considered  to  com- 
mence from  the  day  of  the  tenant's  entering,  and  not 
with  reference  to  any  particular  quarter-day.*  But  where 
a  tenant  entered  in  the  middle  of  a  quarter,  and  after- 
wards paid  for  that  time  to  the  beginning  of  a  succeeding 
regular  quarter,  from  which  time  he  paid  half -yearly, 
his  tenancy  Was  held  to  commence  from  the  quarter  suc- 
ceeding his  totering.*  Where,  however,  the  tenant 
entered  in  the  middle  of  a  quarter,  upon  an  agreement 
to  pay  rent  *' quarterly  and  for  the  half -quarter,"  the 
jury,  under  the  jadge^s  directLwi,  found  that  the  tenancy 
commenced  from  the  quarter-day  preceding  the  entry/ 
A  party  having  taken  possession  on  the  1st  of  August, 
and  at  the  Michaelmas  following  paid  the  half -quarter's 
rent,  and  continued  afterwards  to  pay  quarterly  on  the 
usual  feast  days,  it  was  held,  that  a  notice  to  quit  at 
Michaelmas  was  sufficient ;  and  that  although  the  land- 
lord had  at  first  given  notice  expiring  with  the  half- 
quarter,  it  was  not  necessarily  to  be  inferred  from  that 
circumstance  that  the  tienancy  from  year  to  year  com- 

»  Chapman  v.  Beecham,  8  Q,  B.  »  Bird  v.  Baker,  1  E.  <&  E.  12 ; 

723.  28  L.  J.  Q.  B.  7. 

*  Shaw  V.  Kay,  1  Exch.  412  ;  *  Kemp  v.  Derrett,  8  Camp,  610. 
Jervis  v.  Tompkmson,  1  H.  &  N.  '  Holcomb  v.  Johnson,  6  Esp.  10. 
195,  206.  •  Wadmore   v.  Selwin,  Hill.  T. 

1807 ;  Adams  Ejec.  107  (4th  ed.). 


eo8 


The  Estate. 


[§  288. 


menced  on  that  day.*  Where  a  tenant  under  a  lease 
continued  to  hold  after  the  expiration  of  it  as  a  tenant 
at  will,  and  assigned  it  to  another,  the  tenancy  of  the 
assignee  was  held  to  commence  at  the  day  on  which  the 
original  tenancy  commenced  under  the  lease,  notwith- 
standing the  assignee  came  in  on  a  different  day.' 

Sec.  288.  Duration  of  terms  for  years.— What  certainty  is 
requisite  generally.— The  duration  of  leases  for  years  is 
ascertained  either  by  the  express  limitation  of  the  parties 
at  the  time  of  making,  or  by  reference  to  some  collateral 
act  which  may  with  equal  certainty  measure  their  contin- 
uance, otherwise  they  will  be  void.*    And  the  same  rule 


>  Savage  v.  Stapleton,  8  C.  &  P. 
375. 

*  Castleton  v.  Samuel,  5  Esp.  178. 

» Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Leases  (L)  3.  It 
ifi  a  rule  that,  in  order  to  support  a 
lease  for  years  by  reference,  the 
reference  ought  to  be  to  a  thing 
which  has  express  certainty  at  the 
time  of  the  lease  made,  and  not 
to  a  possible  or  casual  certain^ ; 
and,  therefore,  if  the  wife  of  J  S 
be  endente  and  a  lease  is  made 
until  the  issue  in  ventre  aa  mere 
shall  attain  twenty-one  ;  The 
Bishop  of  Bath's  Case,  6  Coke,  85 
d ;  or  if  a  lease  is  made  to  one  who 
has  execution  under  a  statute 
merchant,  until  he  is  satisfied  the 
duty  for  which  he  has  sued  the 
execution  ;  Say  v.  Smith,  Plowd. 
278  ;  or  if  a  man  makes  a  lease  of 
lands  of  the  value  of  twenty  shil- 
lings per  annum,  till  one-and- 
twenty  pounds  be  levied  of  the 
issues  and  profits;  The  Bishop  of 
Bath's  Case,  6  Coke,  85  6 ;  in  nei- 
ther of  these  cases  does  the  grant 
amount  to  a  lease  for  years,  on  ac- 
coimt  of  the  uncertainty ;  in  the 
first  case  put,  when  the  son  will  be 
bom,  and  in  the  second,  whether 
the  land  will  continue  for  twenty- 
one  yeai-s  of  the  same  annual  value. 
So,  if  one  makes  a  lease  of  land 
for  so  many  years  as  A  B  shall  be 
parson  of  D,  it  cannot  be  made 
certain  by  any  means,  for  nothing 
can  be  less  certain  than  the  time 
of  his  death,  or  the  period  of  his 
ceasing  to  be  parson.  Co.  Lit.  45  b; 
So,  if  a  demise  is  made  to  A  for 
eighty  years,  and  after  his  death 


to  B  for  80  many  years  as  shall  be 
then  unexpired,  it  is  void  for  un- 
certainty, as  to  B's  interest.  So, 
if  a  grant  is  made  by  one  possessed 
of  a  lease  for  forty  years  to  B  for 
as  many  of  the  years  as  shall  be 
unexpired  at  the  time  of  his  (the 

frantor's)  death,  the  lease  is  void ; 
he  Rector  of  Chedington*s  Case, 
1  Coke,  158  a ;  Caponhurst  v.  Cap- 
onhurst,  T.  Raym.  27 ;  but  it  is 
otherwise  where  the  owner  of  a 
term  of  ninety  years  demises  the 
land  for  seventy,  to  commence 
after  his  decease ;  for,  to  use  Hf. 
Justice  Qawdy's  words,  so  much 
of  the  term  was  granted  as  should 
be  behind  at  the  time  of  the  grant- 
or^s  death,  which  was  alto^ther 
uncertain  in  the  grant  itself; 
while,  in  the  latter,  the  land  was 
demised,  habendum  after  the 
death  of  the  lessor  for  seventy 
years,  in  which  there  was  suf- 
ficient certainty ,  and  no  apparent 
uncertainty  in  the  deed.  And, 
though  a  person  cannot  make  a 
lease  of  his  land  for  so  many  years 
as  A  B  shall  continue  parson  of  D, 
yet  he  may  make  a  lease  for  three 
years,  and  so  from  three  years  to 
three  years,  so  long  as  he  shall  be 
parson ;  and  the  lease  will  be  good 
for  six  years,  if  he  continues  par- 
son so  long,  first  for  three  years, 
and  after  that  for  three  years,  and 
for  the  rest  uncertain.  Co.  Lit.  45 
h.  The  term  may  be  rendered 
certain  by  matter  ex  post  facto. 
The  Bishop  of  Bath's  Case,  6  Coke, 
34  6,  85  6 ;  Goodright  v.  Richard- 
son, 8  T.  R.  408.    for  instance,  it 


5.-K 


CHAP,  xxvra.]      Duration  op  Terms. 


609 


applies  to  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  or  for  an  underlease, 
to  save  it  from  the  operation  of  the  Statute  of  Frauds.' 
A  lease  for  '^one  year  certain,  and  so  on  from  year  to 
year,"  creates  a  tenancy  for  two  years  at  the  least.*  So 
a  lease  "for  six  months,  and  so  on  from  six  months  to 
six  months  until  determined  by  either  party,"  creates  a 
tenancy  for  one  year  at  the  least.'  So  a  demise  may  be 
made  from  two  years  to  two  years,  or  from  three  years  to 
three  years,  or  the  like.*  In  one  case  a  lease  was  made, 
to  hold  ''  from  seven  years  to  seven  years,  for  and  during 
the  term  of  forty-nine  years." '  So  for  seven  years,  and 
afterwards  from  year  to  year.'  An  instrument,  by  which 
A  agreed  to  let  and  B  to  take  certain  premises,  on  the 
terms  that  B  should  pay  certain  specified  sums,  vary- 
ing in  amount  at  the  end  of  every  three  years  up  to  a 
specified  date,  and  which  provided  that  from  and  after 
that  date  '^he  shovZd  pay  the  clear  annual  rent  of  91. 
till  the  end  of  the  lease^^^  without  mentioning  any  period 
at  which  the  lease  was  to  terminate,  was  held  good  only 
for  the  time  previous  to  the  date  at  which  the  9Z.  was  to 
commence.* 


may  be  granted  for  so  many 
Years  as  A  B  shaU  name ;  and  the 
lease,  though  imcertain  at  the  be- 
ginning, wiU  be  valid  db  inito 
after  the  naming  of  the  years. 
The  Bishop  of  Bath's  Case,  Hob. 
174 ;  Plowd.  6  a  5;  Sparkev.  Sparke, 
Mo.  666  ;  Co.  lit.  456 ;  1  RoL  Ab. 
849,  Estate  (Y)  11.  The  term, 
however,  must  be  specified  in  the 
lifetime  of  both  the  lessor  and  les- 
see ;  The  Bishop  of  Bath's  Case, 
ante;  Say  v.  Smith,  Plowd.  273 
h;  The  Rector  of  Chedington's 
Case,  1  Coke,  155  a  ;  and,  there- 
fore, a  lease  for  so  many  years  as 
the  lessor's  executors  shsdl  name 
is  void ;  because  no  interest  can 
pass  out  of  the  lessor  during  his 
life  ;  and  after  his  death  the  nam- 
ing of  the  years  wiU  come  too  late. 
Savel  V.  Cordell,  Godb.  24-5  ;  Porry 
V.  Allen,  Cro.  Eliz.  173  ;  Perryn  v. 
Allen,  Ow.  97.  So,  where  A  de- 
mised certain  lands  to  B  for  eightj 
years,  if  he  so  long  lived ;  and  if 
it  should  happen  that  B  should 
die  or  alien  the  premises  within 
the  term,    then    A  granted   the 


premises  to  C  for  so  many  of  the 
said  ei^hty^  years  as  should  be  then 
unexpired ;  and  C  died  in  the  life- 
time of  A ;  it  was  held  that,  as  the 
demise  to  C  depended  u^n  a  con- 
tingency precedent,  the  interest  or 
term  intended  to  be  demised  was 
not  certain ;  that  the  kmd  was  not 
boimd  with  it;  and  that,  as  he 
died  before  it  was  reduced  to  a 
certainty,  it  could  never  take  effect 
nor  vest  in  his  executors.  The 
Rector  of  Chedington's  Case,  1 
Coke,  155  a. 

»  29  Car.  2,  c.  8,  s.  4 ;  Bayley  v. 
Fitzmaurice,  8  E.  <&  B.  664 ;  Clinan 
V.  Cooke,  1  Sch.  &  Lef.  22r;  Clarke, 
app.,  V.  Fuller,  resp.,  16  C.  B.  N. 
0.  24. 

«  Chadbom  v.  Green,  9  Ad.  &  EL 
658 ;  Monck  v.  Geekie,  5  Q.  B.  841. 

»  Reg.  V.  Chawton,  1  Q.  B.  247. 

*  Hennings  v.  Brabason,  2  Lev. 
45  ;  Bree  v.  Lees,  2  W.  Blac.  1171 ; 
3  Prest.  Conv.  76. 

*  Richards  v.  Sedy,  2  Mod.  80. 

*  Brown  V.  Trumper,  26  Beav.  11. 
■^  Gwymie  y.  Maynestone,  8  C. 

&  P.  302. 

39 


610 


The  Estate. 


[§  289. 


Seo.  289.  Certainty  with  reference  to  collateral  matters.— 
If  a  lease  of  land  is  made  for  ten  years,  with  a  provision 
that  if  at  the  end  of  every  ten  years  he  shall  pay  the  les- 
sor a  certain  quantity  of  tiles,  or  do  any  other  si)ecific  act, 
then  he  shall  have  a  perpetnal  demise  of  the  land  from 
ten*years  to  ten  years  continually  following ;  it  is  good 
for  ten  years  only,  and  bad  as  to  the  rest  for  uncertainty.* 
So,  if  a  man  makes  a  lease  for  years,  without  saying  how 
many,  it  is  good  for  two  years  certain ;  because  for  more 
there  is  no  certainty,  and  for  less  there  can  be  no  sense 
in  the  words : '  but  if  a  man  leases  lands  for  such  a  teim 
as  both  parties  shall  please,  it  is  only  a  lease  at  wUl.'  A 
tenancy  from  year  to  year  is  determinable  at  the  end  of 
the  first  as  well  as  of  any  subsequent  year,  unless  in 
creating  the  tenancy  the  parties  use  words  showing  that 
they  contemplate  a  tenancy  for  two  years  at  least.*  li 
premises  are  taken  * '  for  twelve  months  certain,  and  six 
months'  notice  to  quit  afterwards,"  the  tenancy  may  be 
determined  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  by  a  six  months' 
previous  notice  to  quit.*  A  lease  for  one  year,  and  so 
on  from  year  to  year  until  the  tenancy  thereby  created 
shaU  be  determined  as  after  mentioned,  with  a  provision 
that  either  party  may  determine  the  tenancy  by  three 
months'  notice,  creates  a  tenancy  for  two  years  certain. 
A  demise  for  a  year,  and  so  from  year  to  year,  is  a  lease 
for  two  years  certain  at  least.'  So,  if  a  parson  makes  a 
lease  for  a  year,  and  so  from  year  t©  year  as  long  as  he 
continues  parson,  or  as  long  as  he  lives,  it  is  a  lease  for 
two  years  at  least,  if  he  lives  or  continues  parson  so  long.' 
So,  a  lease  ' '  for  the  term  of  six  months  from  the  1st  of 
January,  and  so  on  for  six  months  to  six  months,"  until 


»  Say  V.  Smith,  Plowd.  271. 

«  Bishop  of  Bath's  Case,  35  ;  4 
Bac.  Abr.  Leases  (L)  3. 

'  4  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (L)  8  ; 
Bishop  of  Bath's  Case,  supra ; 
Com.  Dig.  Estates  (H)  1  ;  Richard- 
son V.  Langridge,  4  Tamit.  128 ; 
ColeEjec.  448. 

♦Clarke  v.  Smaridge,  7  Q.  B. 
S57 ;  Plumer  v.  Nanby,  10  Q.  B. 
478 ;  4  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (L)  8 ; 
Agard  V.   King,    Cro.  Eliz.    775 ; 


L^g  v.  Studwick,  2  Salk.  414; 
Demi  V.  Cartwright,  4  East,  29, 82 ; 
Harris  v.  Evans,  1  Wils.  262 ;  Biich 
V.  Wright,  1  T.  R.  380  ;  Fox  t. 
Nathan,  32  Conn.  348. 

'  Thompson  v.  Maberly,  2  Camp. 
573. 

«  Chadbom  v.  Green,  9  Ad.  &  El. 
658  ;  Monck  t.  Geekie,  5  Q.  & 
841. 

1  4  Bac.  Abr.  tit  Leasra  (L)  8. 


CHAP*  xxvm.]      Duration  op  Tbbms.  eil 

six  calendar  months'  notice  is  given,  the  first  payment 
of  rent  to  be  on  the  first  of  July,  is  a  tenancy  for  twelve 
calendar  months  at  least.*  In  legal  proceedings,  the 
word  "months  "  means  lunar  months,  unless  the  contrary 
appear  to  be  the  meaning  from  the  subject-matter  to 
which  that  term  is  applied/ 

Seo.  290.  Where  there  is  an  optLonal  number  of  years  fixed. 
— ^A  lease  '*for  seven,  fourteen  or  twenty -one  years,  as 
the  lessee  shall  think  proper,"  is  good  for  at  least  seven 
years,"  and  a  lease  made  in  1785,  for  ** three,  six  or  nine 
years,  determinable  in  1788,  1791  or  1794,"  is  good  for 
nine  years,  determinable  at  the  end  of  three  or  six  years.* 
But  the  lessee  alone  has  the  option  to  determine  such  a 
lease  at  the  earlier  periods,  on  the  ground  that  every 
doubtful  grant  must  be  construed  in  favor  of  the  grantee.* 
The  usual  form  of  making  such  leases  is  to  insert  the  full 
term  in  the  habendum,  and  add  a  proviso  at  the  end  for 
one  or  either  of  the  parties  to  put  an  end  to  the  term  at 
the  shorter  periods.  If  the  option  is  given  expressly  to 
each  party,  the  lease  may  be  determined  by  either,  or  by 
his  representative  entitled  to  the  reversion  or  term ;  •  and 
where  the  option  was  given  to  the  respective  parties, 
their  executors  and  administrators,  it  was  held  that  the 
devisee  of  the  lessor  might  determine  the  lease."  But 
where  the  lease  contained  a  proviso  that  if  either  of  the 
parties,  their  respective  heirs  or  executors,  should  wish 
to  put  an  end  to  the  term  at  the  end  of  seven  or  fourteen 
years,  six  months'  notice  in  writing  should  be  given 
under  ^'his  or  their  respective  hands,"  and  the  lessor 
died,  leaving  three  executors ;  it  was  held,  that  a  notice 
signed  by  two  of  them  only,  although  given  on  behalf  of 
themselves  and  the  other  executor,  was  not  a  good  notice 
within  the  terms  of  the  proviso."    A  lease  for  twenty- one 

J  Reg.  V.  Chawton.  1  Q.  B.  247 ;  Webb  v.  Dixon,  9  East,  15 ;  Price 

Simpeon  v.  Margison,  112  B.  28.  v.  Dyer,  17  Ve8. 856 ;  Cole  Eiec.  898. 

*  Johnstone  v.  Hudlestone,  4  B.  *  Gk)odright  v.  Mark,  4  M.  &  S. 

&  C.  922.  30 ;  Bird  v.  Baker,  1  E.  &  E.  12. 

'Ferguson   v.   Cornish,  2  Burr.  ^Bamfordv.  Hayley,  12East,464. 

1082.  »  Right  V.  Cuthell,  6  East,  491 ; 

^Goodrightv.  Richardson,  8  T.  R.  Aslin  v.  Summersett,  1  B.  &  Ad. 

462.  189. 

•Dannv.  Spurrier, 8 B.  A;P.  899; 


612  The  Estate.  [§  291. 

years,  expressed  to  ^*be  determinable  nevertheless  in 
seven  or  fourteen  years  if  the  said  parties  hereto  shall  so 
think  fit,"  is  determinable  only  by  consent  of  both  the 
parties,  although  it  may  have  been  their  intention  to  give 
the  option  to  either  of  them."  The  notice  mnst  end  with 
the  first  seven  or  fourteen  years  (or  other  stipulated 
period),  according  to  the  terms  of  the  proviso,  and  not  at 
any  other  time.*  It  must  not  end  at  noon  on  the  right 
day.'  Sometimes  it  is  made  a  condition  precedent  that 
the  tenant  shall  not  only  give  the  notice,  but  also  pay 
all  the  rent,  and  x)erf orm  all  the  covenants  on  his  part, 
to  the  termination  of  the  notice.*  But  such  a  condition 
is  unreasonable,  and  ought  to  be  objected  to  in  the  first 
instance,  or  it  will  be  binding.'  A  lease  for  three,  seven 
or  ten  years,  determinable  on  notice,  stipulated  that  a 
quarter's  rent  should  be  paid  by  the  tenant  on  taking 
possession,  the  same  to  be  allowed  him  for  the  last  quar- 
ter's  rent,  "  on  the  determination  of  the  said  tenancy ;" 
after  a  notice  to  determine  the  lease  at  the  expiration  of 
the  third  year  had  been  given,  and  before  its  expiration, 
the  parties  verbally  agreed  that  the  party  should  con- 
tinue tenant  for  another  year,  no  express  mention  being 
made  of  the  terms  of  the  tenancy ;  it  was  held,  that  the 
tenant  continued  to  hold  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  orig- 
inal lease,  and  consequently  that  the  payment  on  taking 
possession  was  applicable  to  the  last  quarter  of  the 
fourth  year/ 

Sec.  291.  Where  therd  is  a  recurring  number  of  years.— If 
a  lease  is  made  for  twenty -one  years,  with  a  further  cove- 
nant by  the  lessor,  '^that  the  lessee  shall  have  the  same 
for  twenty-one  years  more  after  the  expiration  of  the 
said  term,  and  so  from  twenty-one  years  to  twenty-one 
years,  until  ninety -nine  years  thence  next  ensuing  shall 
be  complete  and  ended,"  the  first  twenty-one  years  will 

> FoweU  V.  Frank,  8  H.  &  C.  458.  *Friar  v.  Grey,  6  Exch.  584,  597 ; 

>  Cadby  v.  Martmez,  11  Ad.  &  El.  Friar  v.  Grey,  15  Q.  B.  891 ;  Parker 

720 ;  Bird  v.  Ba^er,  1  £.  &  £.  12 ;  v.  Shepherd,  6  T.  K.  665. 

Cole  Ejec.  898.  «  Cole  Ejec.  897. 

'Page  V.  More,  15  Q,  B.  684.  •Finch  v.  MiUer,  5  C.  B.  428, 


J  i. 


CHAP.  JUCVUl.]         DUBATION  OF  TbBM.  613 

not  be  reckoned  as  a  part  of  the  niBetj^mne  years/  So, 
where  a  lease  is  made  for  three  years,  and  so  from  three 
years  to  three  years  until  ten  years  expire,  it  is  a  lease 
for  nine  years  only,  and  the  odd  year  is  rejected,  because 
it  could  not  come  to  fall  within  any  three  entire  years 
according  to  the  limitation/  Where  a  lease  was  made 
of  freehold  and  copyhold  lands  at  an  entire  rent,  to  hold 
so  much  as  was  freehold  for  twenty-one  years  and  so 
much  as  was  copyhold  for  three  years,  and  there  was  a 
covenant  for  renewal  of  the  lease  of  the  copyhold  every 
three  years  toties  gvoties  during  the  twenty-one  years 
under  the  like  covenants ;  and  that  in  the  mean  time, 
and  until  such  new  leases  should  be  executed,  the  lessee 
should  hold  the  said  lands,  as  well  copyhold  as  freehold, 
&c. ;  it  was  held,  that  this  was  only  a  lease  of  the  copy- 
hold for  three  years,  and  that  the  lessor,  after  the  three 
years,  might  recover  the  premises  in  ejectment  against 
the  lessee,  there  not  having  been  any  fresh  lease  granted/ 

Ssc.  292.  Where  the  term  depends  on  a  contingency •—  > 
Sometimes  a  term  is  limited  conditionally,  as  for  ninety- 
nine  years  if  the  lessee  or  some  other  person  or  persons 
therein  named  shall  so  long  live/  and  where  one  made  a 
lease  for  forty  years,  *'if  his  wife  or  any  of  their  issue 
should  so  long  live ;  '^  it  was  held,  that  the  lease  was  not 
determined  by  the  death  of  one  of  them,  but  continued 
imtil  all  were  dead,  by  reason  of  the  disjunctive  or,  which 
goes  to  and  governs  the  whole  limitation:  but  if  the 
words  had  been  ''if  his  wife  and  issue  should  so  long 
live,"  then  clearly,  by  the  death  of  any  of  them  within 
the  forty  years,  the  term  would  have  been  at  an  end,  by 
reason  of  the  copulative  andy  which  conjoins  all  together, 
and  makes  aU  their  hves  jointly  the  measure  of  the 
estate/  If  a  lease  is  made  to  two  for  years,  if  they  so 
long  live,  it  determines  by  the  death  of  one  of  them, 
because  their  life  is  but  a  collateral  condition  and  limita- 

^'Manchester  Ck>llege  v.  Trafford,  *  Hughes  and  Crowther's  Case,  18 

2  Show.  81.  Coke,  66  ;  Brudnell's  Case,  5  Coke, 

«4  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (L)  8  ;  9  a;  Cole  Ejec.  402. 

Sav  V.  Smith,  Plowd.  273,  522  a.  » Co.  lit.  226  ;  a ;  Lord  Vaux's 

'Fenny  v.  Child,  2  M.  &  S.  255.  Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  269. 


614  The  Estate.  [§  292. 

tion  of  the  estate,  which  is  broken  when  one  dies.  This 
differs  from  a  lease  to  two  persons  for  their  lives,  for  that 
gives  an  estate  to  both  for  their  lives,  and  both  have  an 
estate  of  freehold  therein  in  their  own  right ;  which  can- 
not determine  by  the  death  of  one  of  them,  for  then  the 
other  could  not  be  said  to  have  an  estate  for  his  life,  as 
the  lessor  at  first  gave  it.  *  Where  a  lease  was  made  for 
twenty -one  years,  if  the  lessee  should  live  so  long  and 
ccmtinue  in  the  lessor^s  service^  it  was  held,  that  it  did 
not  determine  on  the  lessor's  death.'  If  a  lease  is  made 
for  a  certain  number  of  years,  provided  the  lessee  shcdl  so 
long  continue  to  occupy  the  premises  personally y  it  will 
cease  and  determine  whenever  he  parts  with  the  posses- 
sion, even  by  compulsion  of  law."  If  a  lease  be  made  to 
J  S  for  twenty  years,  if  the  coverture  between  A  and  B 
shall  so  long  continue,  it  is  good  for  twenty  years, 
although  the  dissolution  of  the  coverture  may  determine 
it  sooner.*  But  a  lease  to  one  generally  during  the  cov- 
ertiu-e  of  A  and  B  would  create  but  a  tenancy  at  will, 
because  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  duration  of  the  cover- 
ture.* Where  a  lease  for  years  is  made  to  A  and  B,  "if 
they  should  so  long  live ; "  or  to  A,  "  if  he  and  B  should 
so  long  live ;"  or  "if  the  lessor  and  lessee,  or  the  lessor 
and  J  S  should  so  long  live ;"  in  any  of  these  cases,  if 
one  dies  the  lease  is  determined.'  So,  if  a  lease  is  made 
during  the  minority  of  J  S,  or  until  J  S  shall  come  to  the 
age  of  twenty -one  years,  it  is  good ; '  and  if  J  S  dies 
before  he  comes  to  his  full  age,  the  lease  is  ended ;  so,  if 
a  man  makes  a  lease  for  twenty -one  years,  "if  J  S  live 
so  long,"*  or  "if  J  S  shall  continue  to  be  parson  of  Dale 
so  long,"  they  are  good.*  If  A  makes  a  lease  to  B  for 
as  many  j^ears  as  A  and  B  or  either  of  them  shall  live,  not 
naming  any  certain  number  of  years :  or  if  the  parson  of 

» 4  Bac.  Abr.  tit  Leases  (L)  4 ;  Daniel  v.  Hill,  Cro.  Jac  877 ;  1 

Roll.  Rep.  309.  Roll.  R.  197 ;  BaUes  v.  Wenman,  3 

«  Wrenford  v.  Gyles,  Cro.  Eliz.  Ventr.  74. 

648 ;  Cole  Ejec.  402.  ^  Bishop  of  Bathes  Case,  6  Coke, 

'  Lockwood  Y.    Clarke,  8  East,  85 ;  Boraston's  Case,  3  Coke,  19 ; 

185.  Whittome  v.  Lamb,  12  M.  &  W.  818. 

*  Sav  V.  Smith,  Plowd.  278.  ^  bright  v.  Cartwright,  1  Burr. 
»  4  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Leases  (L)  3.  282. 

•  Brudnell's  Case,  5  Coke,  9  &;  '4  Bac.  Abr.  tit  Leases  (L)  2,  8. 


;*&£. 


OHAP.  xxvm.]       Duration  op  Term. 


615 


Dale  makes  a  lease  of  his  glebe  for  so  many  years  as  he 
shall  be  parson  there :  they  are  not  certain^  neither  can 
they  be  made  so  by  any  means ;  and  yet  if  a  parsou 
makes  a  lease  from  three  years  to  three  years,  so  long  as 
he  shaU  be  parson,  it  is  good  for  six  years,  if  he  continues 
parson  so  long,  and  for  the  residue  is  void  for  uncertain- 
ty^'^ and  the  general  rule  is,  that,  if  a  person  makes  a 
lease  for  a  term  longer  than  he  has  power  to  grant,  the 
lease  will  be  good  for  such  part  of  the  term  as  he  had 
power  to  demise.* 

Leases  for  long  terms  were  formerly  discouraged,  and 
leases  for  more  than  forty  years,  at  the  common  law 
were  held  to  be  void,  because  they  tended  to  disinherit 
men."  But,  says  Mr.  Platt,*  if  such  a  rule  ever  existed 
it  soon  became  obsolete,*  and  now  both  in  this  country 
and  in  England  there  is  no  restraint  or  limitation  upon 
the  duration  of  leases  by  the  common  law  ;  *  and  a  lease 
for  99  years,  or  for  999  years,  is  of  no  higher  character 
than  one  for  two  years.^  In  New  York,  by  a  constitutional 
provision,  agricultural  leases  cannot  be  made  for  a  longer  ^ 
term  than  twelve  years,"  but  this  does  not  apply  to  leases 
of  city  or  other  property,  for  other  than  agricultural  pur- 
poses.'   If,  however,  under  this  constitutional  provision 


»Id.  (L)8. 

« Martin    V.    Sterling,    1    Root 
(Conn.)  210.  In  Law  v.  Hempstead, 

10  Conn.  28,  the  court  held  that 
-(vhere  a  right  of  way  was  granted 
14  feet  6  inches  in  width  for  car- 
riages, carte,  &c.,  and  11  feet  of 
Hiich  was  covered  by  an  outstanding 
Tnortgage,  that  the  grantee  took  a 
right  of  way  in  the  remaining  3 
feet  and  five  inches  for  such  vehicles 
as  the  width  of  the  way  would 
allow  to  pass.  See  also,  Williams 
V.  Robinson,  16  Conn.  522,  where 
a  mortgage  made  to  cover  more 
land  tb^  the  mortgagor  owned, 
was  held  good  as  to  that  which  he 
did  own.  See  also,  Rogers  v.  Moore, 

11  id.  688 ;  Wooden  v.  Havilaod,  18 
id.  107 ;  Chamberlain  v.  Thompson, 
10  id.  248.  Indeed,  this  doctrine  has 
been  held  from  an  early  period. 
In  Foord'sCaae,  Dyer,  338  6,  pi.  48, 
a  lease  made  by  a  prebendary 
for  70  years,  but  whicn  was  con- 
firmed by  the  bishop,  &c.,  for  only 


fifty-one  years,  was  held  good  for 
the  fifty  one  years,  Geffrey 
doubting  ;  but  according  to  the  re- 
port of  tnis  case  in  5  Coke,  81  a,  the 
confirmation  was  held  good  for  the 
whole  term,  and  in  the  report  of  the 
same  case  by  Croke  and  oy  Ander- 
son, they  agree  with  Coke.  Tom- 
linson's  Case,  Helt.  75. 

» Co.  Lit.  45  h ;  Theobald  v.  Duffy. 
The  ordinary  husbandry  lease  was 
for  21  years.  Attomey-Genl.  v. 
Owen,  10  Ves.  560  ;  2  Blackstone's 
Com.  142 ;  Risden  v.  Tufflin,  Toth. 
187. 

^  1  Piatt  on  Leases,  668. 

B  2  Blackstone's  Com.  142. 

•  Brown  v.  Tighe,  8  Bli.  P.  C.  N. 
S.  272. 

^  Both  are  mere  chattels  and  go  to 
the  executor.  Dillingham  v.  Jen- 
kins, 15  Miss.  479. 

®  Const,  of  New  York,  Art.  1, 
Sec.  14. 

» bdell  V.  Durant,  62  N.  Y.  624. 


616 


The  Estate. 


[§298. 


a  mere  right  in  agricultural  land  is  let  for  purposes  other 
than  that  of  agriculture^  as,  for  mining  purposes  simply, 
in  order  to  take  the  lease  out  of  the  provision  of  the  con- 
stitution, there  must  he  an  express  restriction  to  such  pur- 
pose  in  the  lease,'  and  the  right  to  use  it  for  agricultural 
purposes  should  be  expressly  excepted  from  the  lease/ 

Sec.  293.  Leases  for  life  or  liyes.— At  the  common  law, 
an  estate  for  life  cannot  be  made  to  commence  from  a 
future  day,  as  an  estate  of  freehold  cannot  commence 
infuturo.^  Thus,  a  lease  to  A  for  life,  from  the  1st  day 
of  April  next,  &c.,  at  the  common  law,  would  be  void. 
But,  under  the  later  decisions,  the  word  "from"  is  con- 
strued either  as  exclusive  or  inclusive,  according  to  the 
circumstances  and  evident  intent  of  the  parties ;  conse- 
quently, such  a  lease  for  life  **from  the  day  of  the  date 
hereof,"  is  construed  as  conveying  a  present  estate,  and 
such  a  lease  will  be  upheld.*  So,  a  lease  to  hold  for  the 
lessee's  life,  which  term  shall  begin  after  the  determina- 
tion of  a  previous  term  for  their  lives,  is  good.'  Under 
the  statute  of  uses,  an  entirely  different  rule  prevails  in 
cases  of  limitations  as  to  demise  or  trusts  taking  effect 
under  such  statute,'  and  in  most,  if  not  in  all  the  States, 
estates  in  freehold  may  lie  in  grant  as  well  as  in  livery  of 
seizin,  and  such  is  the  condition  of  such  estates  in  Eng- 
land imder  the  statute  8  &  9  Vict.  chap.  106,  sec.  2.'  A 
lease  for  life,  without  mentioning  whose  life,  is  a  lease 
during  the  life  of  the  lessee.*    A  lease  for  life  to  A  during 


*Rapello,  J.,  in Odell ▼. Durant, 
ante. 

«Id. 

>  2  Blackfitone's  Com.  144,  315  ; 
Shep.  Touch.  272. 

*  Freeman  v.  West,  2  WilB.  165  ; 
Ackland  v.  Luttey,  9  Ad.  Sc  EL 
879  ;  Pugh  v.  Duke  of  Leeds,  Comp. 
714.  In  the  last  named  case,  Lord 
Mansfield,  after  a  review  of  all 
the  previous  cases,  said :  *'  The 
ground  of  the  opinion  and  judg- 
ment which  I  now  deliver  is,  that 
*from^  may  in  vulgar  use,  and 
even  in  the  strict  propriety  of  lan- 
guage, mean  eitner  inclusive  or 
exclusive;  that  the  parties  neces- 


sarily understood  and  used  it  in 
that  sense  which  made  their  deed 
effectual ;  that  courts  of  justice  are 
to  construe  the  words  of  parties  so 
as  to  effectuate  their  deeds  and  not 
destroy  them  ;  more  especially 
where  the  words  themselves  ab- 
stractedly may  admit  of  either 
meaning. 

•  Underhay  v.  Underhay,  Cro. 
Eliz.  296. 

<  Gilhertson  v.  Richards,  4  H.  & 
N.  277 ;  Rivis  v.  Watson,  5  M.  & 
W.  256. 

'  1  Saunders  on  Uses,  142 ;  1  Piatt 
on  Leases,  692. 

•  Ck).  Lit,  42  a. 


CHAP,  xxvm.] 


BEDDS3n>X7M. 


617 


the  life  of  B  and  C,  continues  so  long  as  either  lives ; ' 
but  a  lease  for  a  term  of  years  if  A  and  B  shall  so  long 
live,  is  determined  by  the  death  of  either,*  and  the  distinc- 
tion upon  the  difference  between  a  limitation  and  a  con- 
dition. In  the  case  last  cited  Lord  Coke  says :  ^' And 
two  differences  were  taken  and  agreed  in  this  case.  1st. 
Between  a  limitation,  as  the  case  before,  and  a  condition : 
for  if  a  man  leases  land  for  one  hundred  years,  *  if  A  and 
B  shall  so  long  live,'  in  that  case,  if  one  of  them  dies  the 
lease  is  ended,  for  the  lease  was  conditionaly  and  not 
determinable  by  Umitation  of  estate ;  and  the  life  of  a 
man  is  collateral  as  to  the  lease,  which  is  but  a  chattel. 

"The  second  difference  was  between  a  limitation  of  an 
estate  of  freehold  during  lives  (which  is  the  usual  and 
ordinary  limitation  of  freehold)  and  a  collateral  deter- 
mination, as,  during  the  time  that  C  and  D  shall  be  of 
the  Inner  Temple,  or  during  the  time  that  C  and  D  shall 
be  dwelling  in  Norfolk,  or  shall  be  justice  of  the  peace,  and 
the  like ;  for  in  these  cases  the  failure  of  the  one  shall 
determine  the  estate." 


Sec.  294.  Beddendum.— The  reddendum  fixes  the 
amount  and  kind  of  compensation  to  be  paid  by  the  lessee 
to  the  lessor  for  the  use  and  possession  of  the  premises 
demised,  and  usually  specifies  the  period  at  which  such 
recompense  is  to  be  paid  or  rendered. 

No  special  form  of  words  is  essential.  A  proviso,*  or 
a  covenant,*  may  constitute  a  good  reservation  of  rent, 
and  a  letting  "af  and  under  the  rent  o/"  any  sum  named, 
is  an  agreement  by  the  tenant  to  pay  that  rent.*  Under 
the  words  yielding  and  paying j  a  covenant  for  payment 
of  the  rent  is  implied.* 


>  Pritchard  v.  Dodd.  5  B.  &  Ad. 
693. 

*  BrudneU's  Case,  5  Coke,  9. 

» Harrington  v.  Wise,  Cro.  Eliz. 
486. 

*  Drake  V.  Munday,  Cro.  Car.  207. 

*  Doe  V.  Kneller,  4  C.  &  P.  8. 

*  Iggulden  V.  May,  9  Ves.  880  ; 
Hellier  v.  Casbard,  1  Sid.  266; 
Porter  v.  Swetnam,  Styles,  406. 
In  Kemble  Coal  and  Iron  Co.  t. 


Scott,  90Penn.  St.  882,  the  plaint- 
iffs agreed  to  '*  grant,  let,  and 
lease,"  for  the  term  of  eleven 
years,  ''the  exclusive  right  to 
mine,  dig,  and  J;ake  away  the 
iron  ore  from  four  tracts  of  land ; 
also  the  right  to  make  tramroads, 
erect  machinery,  open  tunnels,  de- 
posit dirt,  and  do  all  things  neces- 
sary and  appertaining  to  the  min- 
ing of  said  ore."    In  consideration 


618 


Eent  in  Advance. 


[§  295. 


Sec.  295.  Rent  payable  in  advance.— Kent  may  be  made 
payable  in  advance,  but  in  that  case  the  reddendum 
should  state  expressly  that  the  rent  is  so  payable /row 
time  to  time,  or  always,  in  advance,  or  the  stipulation 
for  payment  in  advance  may  be  held  to  relate  to  the 
first  quarter's  rent  only. ' 

Sec.  296.  Certainty  as  to  amoimt  of  rent.— 7%6  amount  of 
the  rent  must  he  either  expressly  stated,  or  otherwise  ren- 
dered capable  of  being  ascertained  with  certainty,*  In 
some  cases  there  may  be  a  certainty  in  uncertainty ;  as 
a  man  may  hold  the  premises  of  his  landlord  to  shear  all 
the  sheep  depasturing  upon  the  premises ;  and  this  is  cer- 
tain enough,  although  the  landlord  has  sometimes  a  great 
and  sometimes  a  smaU  number  there.*  A  royalty  of  so 
much  quarterly  per  yard  for  marl  got,  and  so  much  per 
thousand  for  all  bricks  made,  or  so  much  per  square  for 
slate  quarried,  or  so  much  per  bushel  for  each  bushel  of 


therefor,  defendants,  an  iron  com- 
pany, bound  themselves  and  their 
successors  to  pay  to  plaintiffs,  their 
heirs  or  assigns,  on  the  fifteenth 
day  of  each  month,  fifty  cents  per 
ton  for  every  ton  of  ore  mined  and 
taken  away  the  month  previous. 
It  was  further  provided,  that  for 
the  first  year,  defendants  should 
pay  rent  on  as  many  tons  as  they 
might  be  able  to  mine,  but,  for 
any  period  of  three  years  there- 
after, the  rent  in  the  aggre^te 
w^  not  to  be  less  than  flO,DOO, 
whether  ore  to  that  extent  or 
amount  was  mined  or  not.  The 
agreement  was  under  seal,  and 
duly  acknowledged  and  recorded. 
At  the  end  of  four  years,  plaintiffs 
brought  an  action  to  recover  the 
$10,(^0,  for  the  last  three  years 
under  the  covenant  in  the  agree- 
ment. It  was  held  that  the  agree- 
ment was  not  an  executorj^,  but 
an  executed  contract ;  that  it  was 
not  an  agreement  for  a  lease  or  a 
license,  but  a  present  lease,  and 
that  this  was  not  such  a  case  as 
would  justify  the  court  in  grant- 
ing rebef  on  eqmtable  grounds. 
The  covenant  in  the  lease  was  ex- 
press that,  for  any  period  of  three 
years  after  the  first  year,  the  rent 


in  the  aggregate  was  not  to  be  less 
than  $10,000,  and  it  was  held  that 
there  was  not  a  word  therein  to 
support  the  idea  that  this  was  a 
mere  stipulation,  which  might  be 
avoided  by  abandonment  or  sur- 
render of  the  contract  by  the 
lessees,  or  that  the  amount  was 
not  payable  imtil  the  expiration  of 
the  entire  term ;  and  uiat  if  de- 
fendant ceased  operations  in  1873, 
and  no  royalty  was  demanded  or 
paid  before  1876,  it  was  not,  there- 
fore, to  be  presumed  that  the  con- 
tract was  ended  by  the  mutual 
consent  of  the  parties.  In  the 
negotiation  immediately  preceding 
the  agreement,  the  vice-president 
of  defendant  company,  who  con- 
ducted the  negotiation,  had  writ- 
ten to  plaintiffs  that,  if  the  lease 
coiild  be  effected,  defendant  would 
take  the  risk  of  plaintiffs'  estab- 
lishing their  title  to  one  of  the 
tracts.  This  was  held  to  be  proper 
to  leave  to  the  jury,  and  for  them 
to  find  **that  ttie  defendant  took 
the  tract  with  knowledge  of  the 
title  and  at  their  own  risk." 

1  See  Holland  v.  Falser,  2  Stark. 
161. 

«  Co.  Lit.  142  a. 

3  Co.  lit.  96  a. 


CHAP.  XX vm.]  The  Estate.  619 

grain  raised  by  the  tenant,  is  a  rent  capable  of  being  as- 
certained ^th  certainty/ 

The  rent  must  be  reserved  to  the  lessor  and  his  heirs, 
and  not  to  a  stranger.'  But  the  law  uses  all  ingenuity 
imaginable  to  conform  the  reservation  to  the  estate.' 
Hence  a  reservation  to  the  lessor,  entitled  in  fee,  his  heirs, 
executors,  and  assigns,  will  not  prevent  the  rent  from 
following  the  reversion  and  going  to  the  heir.* 

Sec.  297.  Mode  of  reservation.— The  most  clear  and  sure 
mode  of  reservation  is  to  reserve  rent  yearly  during  the 
term,  and  leave  the  law  to  make  the  distribution,  with- 
out an  express  reservation  to  any  person  .*  A  reservation 
of  rent  to  the  lessor  only,  not  mentioning  his  heirs,  &c., 
will  enure  only  during  the  life  of  the  lessor,*  unless  the 
reservation  be  expressly  to  the  lessor  during  the  term,  in 
which  case  rent  will  continue  payable  to  the  end  of  the 
term/ 

Sec.  298.  "Net  rent."— A  stipulation  for  a  net  rent 
means  a  rent  clear  of  all  deductions ;  hence  the  tenant 
under  a  lease  containing  this  reservation  wiU  be  liable  to 
pay  land  tax  and  water  rates,  and  all  rates  chargeable 
upon  the  premises.' 

>  Daniel  v.  Gracie,  6  Q.  B.  145 ;  13  «  Whitlock's  Case,   8  Ck>.  R.,  at 

L.  J.  Q.  B.  309.     See  judgment  in  p.  71. 

Watson  V.  Waud,  8  Ex. ,  at  p.  839.  •  Co.  lit.  47  a. 

•  lit.  8.  846 ;  2  Wms.  Saund.  870.  '  Sacheverell  v.  Froggatt,  2 
See  post  Rent.  Wms.  Saund.  867  a. 

'  Sacheverell     v.     Froggatt,     1  *  Bennett  v.  Womack,  7  B.  &  C. 

Vent.   161.  639 ;   2  C.  &  P.  96 ;  Bradbury  v. 

*  Drake  v.  Munday,    Cro.   Car.  Wright,  3  Dougl.  624. 
207.    See  Sacheverell  v.  Froggatt, 

2  Wms.  Saund.  867  a. 


620 


Ck>NS!rBUCTION  OF  LEASES. 


[§299. 


CHAPTER    XXIX. 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  LEASES. 

Sec.  299.    General  rules  for. 

Sec.  800.    Oral  evidence  admissible  when  to  explain,  &0. 

Sec.  299.  Oeneral  rules  for.— Leases,  whether  by  deed  or 
otherwise,  are  to  be  construed,  like  all  other  contracts,  so 
as  to  effectuate  the  intention  of  the  parties.  The  rules 
for  ascertaining  which,  as  well  as  the  general  rules  for 
construction,  are  so  fully  given  in  the  succeeding  chapter 
on  Covenants  as  to  render  their  repetition  here  unneces- 
sary. It  may  be  stated  as  a  general  rule,  that  if  a  lease 
or  deed  may  operate  two  ways,  the  one  of  which 
is  consistent  with,  and  the  other  repugnant  to,  the 
intention  of  the  parties,  that  construction  will  be 
adopted  which  will  give  effect  to  the  intention  of  the 
parties,  if  by  law  it  may  so  operate,  but  if  it  cannot 
operate  in  one  way  it  will  be  made  to  operate  in  another 
if  possible.'  If  a  material  word  is  omitted  and  the  other 
words  in  the  lease  cannot  have  their  proper  effect  unless 
it  is  supplied,  the  court  will,  when  the  imperfect  expres- 
sion can  be  resolved  by  reference  to  the  context  of  the 
lease  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  surrounding 
circumstances,  aid  the  imperfect  expression  in  favor  of 
the  manifest  intention  of  the  parties,  and  will  read  the 
instnmient  as  though  the  word  was  inserted  in  the  instru- 


» Goodtitle  v.  Bailey,  Camp.  600 ; 
Solly  V.  Forbes,  4  Moore,  448; 
Hotham  v.  East  India  Co.,  1  T.  R. 
638.  A  leased  to  B  a  foundry 
building,  yard,  the  joint  use  of  a 
pattern  shop  and  an  engine  room 
for  $500  per  year.  In  a  subsequent 
clause  of  the  lease  it  was  provided 
that  B  should  pay  fifteen  cents  per 
hour  for  steam  furnished  to  his  en- 


gine by  A,  A  to  have  the  use  of 
tne  power  of  the  engine  without 
charge.  A  failed  to  f lunish  steam 
to  B.  In  an  action  of  covenant  by 
B  against  A  for  this  alleged  breach, 
it  was  held  that  there  was  no  cov- 
enant by  A  to  furnish  steam  nor  by 
B  to  use  it.  Penn.  Iron  Co.,  lim- 
ited, V.  Dieler,  118  Penn.  St  685. 


!• 


CHAP.  XXIX.] 


Gekeral  Bules. 


621 


ment,  and  that,  although  the  particular  passage  where 
it  ought  to  stand  conveys  a  sufficiently  distinct  meaning 
without  it/  If  a  wrong  word,  descriptive  of  the  estate, 
is  used,  and  in  applying  the  description  to  the  estate  the 
error  is  obvious,  the  right  word  wiU  be  supphed.  And 
under  this  rule,  the  word  "east''  in  a  lease,  for  boundary 
in  a  grant  will  be  construed  to  mean  "  west"  where  such 
correction  is  obviously  required  by  the  other  calls  in  the 
instrument.*  So,  where  a  lease  in  writing  is  made,  and 
certain  words  have  been  stricken  out,  which,  if  left, 
would  have  entirely  changed  the  meaning  of  the  lease  or 
the  character  of  the  estate  granted,  yet,  if  the  omission  of 
such  words  leaves  the  matt^  in  doubt  as  to  what  the 
parties  really  mean,  or  as  to  the  character  of  the  estate 
which  was  intended  to  be  conveyed,  resort  may  be  had 
to  the  words  erased,  to  ascertain  their  intention.  Thus, 
in  one  case  *  a  lease  was  produced  in  evidence  by  which 
the  plaintiff  agreed  to  let  the  premises  for  the  term  of 
one  year  fully  to  be  completed  and  ended.  Most  of  the 
subsequent  stipulations  in  the  lease  were  inapplicable  to  a 
tenancy  determinable  by  a  notice  to  quit.  The  lease  on 
the  face  of  it  originally  contained  words  showing  a  ten- 
ancy  from  year  to  year,  which  were  struck  outj  and  the 
words  as  to  the  term  were  left  as  stated  above.  It  was 
held,  that  the  words  that  had  been  struck  out  might  be 
looked  at  to  show  what  the  intention  of  the  parties  was, 
and  that  the  parties  intended  a  tenancy  for  only  one  year, 
and  that  all  words  inconsistent  with  such  a  tenancy 
must  be  treated  as  expunged. 

When  necessary  to  do  so,  the  courts  will  draw  all  such 
plain  and  reasonable  inference,  from  the  language  and 


'  Wright  V.  Dickson,  1  Dowl. 
141 ;  JaSvis  v.  Wilkins,  7  M.  &  W. 
410;  CJoles  v.  Home,  8  B.  &  C. 
668 ;  Langdon  t.  Goole,  8  Lev.  21 ; 
Say's  Case,  10  Mod.  46.  So  the 
oourt  will  reject  inconsistent 
words.  ThraU  v.  NeweU,  19  Vt. 
202.  In  a  case  where  a  note  read, 
"I  promise  not  to  pay,  &Ci,"  the 
court  rejected  the  word  not. 
Thrall  t.  Newell,  ante.  And 
where  a  bill  of  exchange  was  made 


for  "twenty-five,  seventeen  shil- 
lings," the  court  supplied  the  word 
pounds.  Phipps  v.  Tanner,  5  C. 
&  P.  488.  And  where  a  i)er8on 
agreed  to  pay  a  tailor  a  certain 
sum  "for  a  suit  of,  ordered  for, 
&c./'  the  word  dothea  was  sup- 
plied.   Jarvis  v.  Wilkins,  ante. 

•  Mizell  V.  Simmons,  79  N.  C. 
182. 

» Strickland  v.  Maxwell,  2  C.  & 
M.  539. 


633 


Construction  of  Leases. 


[§299 


general  context  of  the  instrament  as  appear  to  be  neces. 
sary  to  give  effect  to  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  parties. 
Thus,  in  a  case  where  the  lease  recited  an  agreement 
made  by  the  lessee  with  other  part  owners  to  pull  down 
a  certain  smelting  miU  upon  the  premises  and  build 
another  of  laiger  dimensions,  and  the  lease  contained  an 
express  covenant  to  keep  such  new  miU  in  repair,  the 
court  held  that  a  covenant  to  build  the  mill  might  be 
impUed  from  the  import  of  the  whole  deed,  and  that  the 
lessor  might  maintain  an  action  of  covenant  for  the  les- 
see's failure  to  do  so,  and  recover  his  proportion  of  the 
damages  for  such  failure.'  Care  should  always  be  taken 
to  describe  the  premises  with  reasonable  certainty,  but 
too  much  particularity  of  description  may  be  worse  than 
too  little,  and  if  the  description  is  so  vague  and  indefinite 
that  it  cannot  be  applied  to  the  subject-matter,  and  there 
is  no  reference  in  the  grant  to  any  other  conveyance  or 
anything  that  will  aid  the  application  of  the  grant  by 
construction  or  otherwise,  it  will  be  void ;  but  if  by  any 
rules  of  construction  the  grant  can  be  applied  to  the  sub- 
ject-matter, it  will  be  upheld,  notwithstanding  the 
description  is  vague  and  uncertain,  and,  if  necessary,  the 
court   will   reject   or  reconcile   necessary   particulars.* 


1  Sampson  v.  Easterly,  9  B.  &  C. 
605  ;  Saltarm  v.  Houston,  1  Bing. 
433.  In  January,  1883,  the  owner 
of  a  lot  of  woodland  executed  a 
lease  of  it  for  two  years,  from 
April  1,  1883,  the  lessee  to  have 
the  privilege  of  cutting  and  remov- 
ing the  wood  and  timber  during 
that  time,  and  agreeing  to  pa^r  a 
certain  sum  on  May  1,  1888,  with 
interest  from  the  day  of  the  execu- 
tion of  the  lease.  The  lease  also 
contained  an  agreement  **  that  the 
wood  and  timber  on  the  described 
premises  shall  be  held  by  the  lessor 
as  guaranty  for  the  payment"  of 
the  sum  named  and  interest.  At 
thei^me  time  the  lessee  gave  the 
plaintiff  a  promissory  note  for  the 
amount  named,  with  interest,  pay- 
able on  May  1,1883.  When  the  note 
became  due  it  was  not  paid,  and  the 
parties  agreed  that  it  might  lie  on 
mterest.  The  lessor  afterwards 
permitted  the  lessee  to  cut  and  re- 
move some  of  the  wood  and  tim- 


ber. It  was  held  that  the  transact 
tion  was  not  a  conditional  sale,  but 
was  in  the  nature  of  a  pledge.  It 
was  held  also  that  after  the  failure 
of  the  lessee,  the  lessor  could  ac- 
quire no  condiitional  title,  as  against 
an  assignee  in  insolvency  subse- 
quently appointed,  by  talang  pos- 
session oi  the  wood  and  timber, 
with  the  consent  of  the  leasee. 
Wilkie  V.  Day,  141  Mass.  68. 

•  HaU  V.  Foster,  7  Vt.  100;  Wing 
V.  Burgis,  12  Me.  Ill ;  Wrieht  v. 
CJochran,  8  Iowa,  607 ;  Bailey  v. 
White,  41  N.  H.  337 ;  Harvey  v. 
Mitchell,  31  id.  575;  Jackson  ▼. 
Marsh,  6  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  281 ;  Arm- 
strong V,  Mudd,  10  B.  Mon.  (Ky.) 
144 ;  Kea  v,  Robeson,  5  Ired.  (N. 
C.)  Eq.  375 ;  United  States  v.  King, 
3  How  (U.  S.)  773.  If  necessary, 
a  genersil  description  will  govern  a 
puticular  one.  Sawyer  v.  Ken- 
dall, 10  Gush.  (Mass.)  241 ;  Worth- 
in^n  V.  Hyler,  4  Mass.  196. 
**  Seventy  acres  lying  and  being 


CHAP.  XXDC.] 


Oral  Evidence. 


628 


Where  the  description  includes  several  particulars,  all  of 
which  are  necessary  to  ascertain  the  estate,  no  estate  will 
pass  except  such  as  will  agree  with  every  particular ; ' 
but  if  the  description  is  sufficiently  certain  to  ascertain 
the  estate  conveyed,  the  estate  will  pass  although  it  does 
not  agree  with  some  of  the  particulars.'  The  rule  may 
be  said  to  be,  that  descriptions  in  a  grant  are  to  be  con- 
strued liberally,  so  as  to  carry  into  effect  the  intent  of 
the  parties  if  possible,  and  it  is  only  necessary  that  after 
subjecting  it  to  every  modification  which  the  actual  con- 
dition of  the  premises  may  require,  there  shall  be  left 
some  substantial  designation  of  the  thing  to  be  conveyed, 
so  that  the  court,  looking  at  the  property  in  the  condi- 
tion in  which  it  was  when  the  grant  was  made,  that  the 
description  can  be  fitted  to  it,  and  was  intended  to  relate 
to  it/ 

It  may  be  stated  as  a  general  rule  that,  where  from  the 
whole  instrument  it  appears  to  have  been  the  intention  of 
the  party  to  bind  himself  by  any  agreement,  a  covenant 
to  do  the  thing  in  question  maf  be  collected  from  the 
whole  of  the  lease  taken  together,  or  from  any  form  of 
expression  in  any  part  of  it,*  and  the  courts  have  gone  to 
great  lengths  in  extracting  covenants  from  the  various 
parts  of  a  deed,  where,  possibly,  the  parties  never  in  fact 
intended  to  covenant,  as  from  recitals  in  the  deed,  &c.* 

Sec.  300.  Oral  OTidence  admissible  when  to  explain^  &o. 
— The  general  rule  is  too  well  established  to  need  repeti- 
tion, that  parol  evidence  is  not  admissible  to  explain,  add 
to,  or  vary  the  meaning  of  express  terms  employed  in  a 
deed  or  other  written  instrument,'  but  like  most  gen- 


in  the  south-west  comer  of  a  sec- 
tion," is  a  eood  description,  and 
the  land  willlie  in  a  square.  Walsh 
V.  Ringer,  2  Ohio,  327. 

*  Jackson  v.  Clark,?  John.  (N.  Y.) 
217 ;  Worthington  v.  Hyler,4Mas8. 
196. 

*  Worthington  v.   Hyler,   ante. 
» Peck  V.  Mallams,  10  N.  Y.  509. 

*  Duke  of  St.  Albans  v.  Ellis,  16 
East,  852 ;  Deerine  v.  Farrington 
1  Mod.   118;   Seldon    v.    Senate, 
18  East,  68;   Russell  v.  Gulwel, 


Cro.  Eliz.  657;  Brice  v.  Carre,  1 
Lev.  47 ;  Pordage  v.  Ck>ok,  1  Saund. 
819. 

•Barfoot  v.  Freswell,  8  Keb. 
465 ;  Severn  v.  Clark,  2  Leon,  122; 
Graves  v.  White,  1  Eq.  Cas.  Abr. 
84 ;  Hollis  v,  Carr,  2  Mod.  87. 

•  All  previous  conversations,  con- 
tracts or  agreements  relating  to 
the  subject-matter  are  merged  in 
the  written  contract,  and  it  cannot 
be  added  to  or  subtracted  from  by 
proof  of  a  different  agreement  or 


624 


Construction  of  Leases. 


[§300. 


eral  rules,  it  is  subject  to  numerous  exceptions.  It  is  not 
competent  to  show  by  parol  that  certain  other  premises 
were  intended  to  be  included  in  the  lease ;  or  that  certain 
premises  named  therein  were  intended  to  have  been  ex- 
cluded ; '  or  to  show  that  more  or  less  rent  was  agreed 
upon ;  or  that  it  was  to  be  apportioned ;  *  or  that  it  was 

of  any  agreement  in  any  wise 
affecting  it.  Smith  v.  Higbee,  12 
Vt  113 ;  Cole  v.  Spann,  18  Ala. 
587 ;  Albert  v.  Zeigler,  29  Penn.  St. 
eO ;  Pilmer  v.  Bank,  16  Iowa,  821 ; 
Bradley  ▼,  Bentley,  8  Vt.  248; 
West  V.  KeUy,  19  Ala.  859 ;  Walker 
V.  Engler,  30  Mo.  180 ;  Vaughn  v. 
Lynn,  9  Mo.  870 ;  Norton  v.  Wood- 
ruff, 2  N.  Y.  158;  Hoffman  v. 
Hammer,  14  N.  J.  L.  269;  Hau-T. 
La  Brouse,  10  AJa.  648 ;  Lockett  v. 
Tobey,  10  La.  An.  718;  Faukboner 
V.  Faukboner,  20  Ind.  62;  Dean  v. 
Mason,  4Ck)nn.  428;  Brandon  Mfg. 
Co.  V.  Morse,  48  Vt.  822 ;  Walters 
V.  Vanderveer,  17  Kan.  425 ;  Dixon 
V.  Clayville,  44  Md.  578 ;  Slocum 
V.  Smith,  2  Low.  (U.  S.  D.  C.)  212 ; 
McMiUen  v.  Parkell,  64  Mo.  286 ; 
Church  V.  Town,  49  Vt.  29.  The 
fact  that  a  lease  is  in  the  han^  of 
a  third  person  will  not  authorize 
parol  evidence  as  to  its  contents,  im- 
less  the  person  has  first  been  sub- 
poenaed to  produce  it.  Rucker  v. 
NcNally,  5  Blackf .  (Ind.)  128.  Nor 
will  the  fact  that  he  is  out  of  the 
State,  and  has    been   notified  to 

groduce  it,  change  the  rule.  Mc- 
Gregor V.  Montgomery,  4  Penn.  St. 
237.  Where  the  lease  contains  no 
warranty,  express  or  implied,  that 
the  premises  are  fit  for  occupation, 
it  is  not  comi)etent  to  show  that 
the  landlord  represented  them  to 
be  so.  Dutton  v.  Gerrish,  9  Cush. 
(Mass.)  89.  Where  an  assignment 
of  a  lease  is  made  in  writing,  it  is 
not  competent  to  show  that  the 
assignee  agreed  to  pay  the  accrued 
rent.  Graves  v.  Porter,  11  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  192.  Where  a  lease  abro- 
gates a  previous  written  agree- 
ment, it  is  not  competent  to  show 
that  it  was  not  intended  to  have 
that  effect,  Tibbetts  v.  Percy,  24 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  39.  Under  a  lease  of 
coal  mines,  containing  no  stipula- 
tion as  to  the  quantity  of  coal  to  be 
mined,  but  fixing  a  certain  sum 
per  bushel  as  the  rent  to  be  paid, 
parol  evidence  is  not  admissible  to 
show  that   the  lessee   agreed   to 


mine  any  particular  quantity,  or 
even  all  that  he  could.     J^^ypn  v. 
Miller,  24  Penn.  St.  892.    When  a 
party  seeks  to  enforce  a  written 
contract,  although  the  defendant 
cannot  introduce  parol  evidence  to 
alter  or  vary  it,  vet,  if  the  plaint- 
iff introduces  evidence  as  to  a  con- 
tract not  embraced  in  the  writing, 
the  defendant  is  at  libertv  to  in- 
troduce  evidence   of   a  different 
contract  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
tradicting the  plamtiSTs  evidence 
although  it  has  the  effect  to  vary 
the  terms  of  the  written  contract. 
Arbeiter  v.    Day,  88   Conn.  155. 
Where  there  is  no  latent  ambigu- 
itv,  parol  evidence  is  not  admis- 
sible.     "niUB,  where  lands  leased 
were  bounded  on  the   north  line 
of  a  town,  parol  evidence  was  held 
inadmissible  to  show  that  a  dif- 
ferent line  had  been  understood  bv 
the  parties  to  be  the  true  boand- 
ary.     So  where  a  lease    was  in 
writing,  and  there  were  only  two 
exceptions  therein,  it   was    held 
that  it  could  not  be  shown  by  parol 
that  the  lessor  intended  to  make 
stUl  another,  Haney  v.  Newton,  7 
Pick.  (Mass.)  29,  and  generally  it 
may  be  saia,  that  parol  evidence 
is    not   admissible    to    prove   an 
agreement     that     directly     con- 
tradicts the  lease,  Jungermanv. 
Bovee,  19  Cal.  854 ;  Carpenter  v. 
Shanklin,  7  Blackf.  (Ind.)  808,  or 
that  it  was  intended  to  have  a 
different  effect  from  that  which  it 
purports  to  have.    As,  that  it  was 
mtended  as  a  mortgage,  Stewart 
V.  Murray,  13  Minn.  4^,  or  that  it 
was  understood    that    the  lessee 
might  occupy  the  premises  for  anp 
purpose,  wnen  the  use  was  speci- 
ally restricted  in  the  lease.    Sientes 
V.  Odier,  17  La.  An.  153. 

>  Barton  v.  Dawes,  10  C.  B.  261 ; 
Meres  v.  Ansell,  8  Wils.  275 ;  Nor- 
ton V.  Webster,  12  Ad.  &  EL  442  ; 
Hope  V.  Atkins,  1  Price,  148. 

«  Flinn  v.  Calow,  1  M.  &  O.  589 ; 
Preston  v.  Merceau,  2  W.  Bl.  1249. 
But  if  no  rent  is  named  in  the 


CHAP.  XXIX.] 


Obal  Evidence. 


625 


to  be  paid  at  a  different  time  from  that  named  in  the 
lease ;  *  or  that  the  lease  was  to  commence  at  a  later  date ' ; 
or  that  the  tenant  was  to  pay  the  taxes,  &c.  ;  *  or  that 
other  rights  and  privileges  than  those  named  in  the  lease 
were  given ;  *  or  that  the  landlord  agreed  to  repair  the 
premises ;  *  or,  indeed,  where  the  lease  is  explicit,  is  paroj 
evidence  even  admissible  to  aid  in  its  construction/  But 
as  previously  stated,  there  are  exceptions  to  the  i-ule,  and 
in  addition  to  those  exceptions  it  may  be  said  that  parol  evi- 
dence is  always  admissible  to  defeat  the  lease,  as,  to  show 
that  it  was  made  for  an  illegal  purpose,'  or  that  certain 


lease,  parol  evidence  is  admissible 
to  show  what  rent  was  agreed  up- 
on. King  V.  Woodruff,  28  Conn. 
56. 

^  Thus,  in  Carpenter  v.  Shank- 
lin,  7  Blackf.  (Ind.)  808,  by  lease  of 
real  estate  executed  b^  uie  lessor 
and  lessee,  under  then:'  seals,  for 
one  year,  the  time  fixed  for  the 
payment  of  the  last  half  year's 
rent  was  February  1, 1841.  It  was 
held,  that  parol  evidence  that  the 
said  rent  was  not  due  untU  March 
1,  1841,  was  inadmissible;  also, 
that  the  landlord,  in  such  case, 
had  a  preference  for  said  rent  over 
an  execution  levied  February  1, 
1841,  on  the  tenant's  goods. 

'  Henson  v.  CSooper,  8  Scott's  N. 
R.  48. 

»  Rich  V.  Jackson,  4  Br.  P.  C.  C. 
514,  cited  and  reported  in  full  in 
note  c,  6  Yes.  884. 

^Jungerman  v.  Bovee,  19  CaL 
854;  Sientes  v.  Odier,  17  La.  An. 
158.  But  where  the  lease  provides 
that  he  shall  hold  the  lease  subject 
to  '*  manor  regulations,"  or  **  mu- 
nicipal regulations,"  &c.,  the  les^ 
see  ma^  show  by  parol  what  sucli 
regulations  are.  Dorseyv.  Eagle, 
7  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  821.  Where  cer- 
tain specific  exceptions  are  made 
in  a  lease,  it  cannot  be  shown  by 
parol  that  other  exceptions  were 
agreed  ui)on.  Hovey  v.  Newton, 
TPick.  (Mass.) 29. 

*  Mayer  v.  MuUer,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y. 
C..P.)491 ;  Post  V.  Vetter,  2  E.  D. 
S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  248  ;  New  York  v. 
Price,  5  Sandf .  (N.  Y.  Supr.  Ct.j 
542.  In  Howard  v.  Thomas,  12 
Ohio  St.  201,  the  plaintiff  and  de- 
fendant executed  a  written  agree- 
ment for  the  lease  of  a  house  for 


the  term  of  one  ^r^ar,  at  the  ren^ 
of  flOO.  In  an  action  by  the  plaint- 
iff against  the  defendant  for  not 
repauing  the  roof  of  the  house, 
the  plaintiff  offered  to  prove,  by 
parol,  that,  at  the  time  of  the  exe- 
cution of  the  written  agreement, 
he  refused  to  sign  it,  unless  the  de- 
fendant would  promise  to  repair 
the  roof  of  the  house ;  and  there- 
upon the  defendant  promised  to 
do  BO,  and  he,  the  plaintiff,  in  con- 
sideration of  such  promise,  signed 
the  written  agreement.  It  was 
held,  that  such  evidence  was  inad- 
missible. 

*2  Best  on  Evidence  (Wood's 
Edn.)  note,  page  888. 

^  Doe  V.  Allen,  8  T.  R.  148 ;  Rex 
V.  Northwingfield,  1  B.  &  Ad. 
912 ;  lightfoot  v.  Tenant,  1  B.  & 
P.  556.  Where  fraud  or  ille^lit^ 
are  averred,  parol  evidence  is  al- 
ways admissible  to  establish  it, 
whatever  may  be  its  effect  upon 
4he  contract.  Thus,  it  may  be 
shown  that  a  material  part  of  the 
contract  has  been  inserted  or  al- 
tered by  the  fraud  of  the  other 
party.  Baltimore  Steamboat  Ck>. 
V.  Brown,  54  Penn.  St.  77 ;  Pierce 
V.  Wilson,  84  Ala.  596 ;  Townsend 
V.  Ctowler,  81  id.  428 ;  Hunter  v. 
Biglyon,  80  HI.  228 :  Hamilton  v. 
Congers,  28  Ga.  276 ;  Sanf ord  v. 
Handy,  28  Wend.  JN.  Y.)  126; 
Akin  V.  Drummond,  2  La.  An.  92  ; 
Gatting  v.  NeweU,  9  Ind.  572; 
Davis  V.  Stem,  15  La.  An.  177; 
Bartle  v.  Vosburg,  2  Grant's  Cas. 
(Penn.)  277 ;  Selden  v.  Myers,  20 
How.  rcr.  S.)  506  ;  or  that  the  other 
party  oy  fraud  has  prevented  the 
reduction  of  the  whole  contract  to 
writing.    Phyfe  v.    Wardwell,  2 

40 


626 


Construction  of  Leases. 


[§300. 


formalities  required  by  law  were  not  observed;'  or, 
indeed,  fraud  or  anything  that  tends  to  show  that  the 
deed  is  void  in  law  may  be  shown.*  So,  too,  it  is  com- 
petent to  show  by  parol  evidence  to  what  premises  the 
lease  appUes,  when,  although  the  lease  upon  its  face  is 
clearly  enough  expressed,  yet  an  ambiguity  arises  from 
extrinsic  circumstances.  Where  there  is  any  ambiguity 
in  a  lease,  and  it  cannot,  from  the  language  used,  be  as- 
certained what  was  intended  by  the  use  of  a  certain  word 
or  phrase,  the  sense  which  it  has  acquired  by  usage,  if 
any,  in  the  locaUty  where  the  premises  are  situated,  may 
be  shown,  and  it  will  be  presumed  that  it  was  used  in 
such  sense.*  In  the  case  last  cited  the  lessee  of  farming 
land  covenanted  that  the  '^stubble"  should  belong  to  the 
landlord.  In  an  action  by  the  landlord's  assignee  to  re- 
cover damages  for  having  been  prevented  from  grazing 
his  sheep  on  the  land,  held,  that  evidence  was  admissible 
to  prove  that  by  the  custom  of  the  locaUty  of  the  leased 
premises  the  word  *^  stubble  "  included  whatever  was  left 
upon  the  ground  after  harvest.  The  court  said:  "It 
was  the  duty  of  the  court  to  construe  the  contract  in  such 
a  way  as  to  render  it  operative  and  effectual  to  carry  out 
the  purpose  of  the  parties  as  expressed  in  the  language 
and  terms  which  they  used.  As  a  general  rule,  the 
words  of  a  contract  are  to  be  understood  in  their  ordinary 
and  popular  sense  rather  than  according  to  their  strict 
legal  meaning ;  but  if  they  are  used  in  a  technical  sense 
they  should  be  interpreted  as  usually  understood  by  per- 
sons in  the  profession  or  business  to  which  they  relate ; 


Edw.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  47 ;  EUiott  v. 
Conwell,  18  Miss.  91 ;  Wesley  v. 
Thomas,  6  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  54 ;  Ken- 
nedy V.  Kennedy,  2  Ala.  571 ;  Chet- 
wood  V.  Britain,  2  N.  J.  Eq.  438 ; 
SuU  y.  Cass,  43  N.  H.  62  ;  Martin- 
eau  V.  May,  18  Wis.  64.  As  to 
proof  of  illegality,  see  Lazare  y. 
Jacques,  15  La.  An.  599 ;  Corbin  y. 
Sistrunk,  19  Ala.  203. 

J  Kelfey.  Ambrosse,  7  T.  R.  551. 

'  GkxKlwin  y.  Hubbard,  15  Mass. 
219  ;  Boyer  v.  Grundy,  3  Pet.  (17. 
S.)  219 ;  Russell  v.  Rogers,  15  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  851 ;  Prentiss  y.  Russ,  16 
Me.  80 ;  Wren  y.  Woodlaw,  1  Ala. 


863.  Where  fraud  is  alleged,  any 
consideration  of  fact,  however  con- 
trary to  the  averment  of  a  deed, 
may  be  proved  to  show  the  fraud- 
ulent nature  of  the  transaction, 
Roscoe's  Ev.  (18th  ed.)  22  ;  FsxUm 
V,  Popham,  9  East,  421,  for  fraud 
is  an  extrinsic  and  collateral  mat- 
ter that  avoids  all  transactions, 
and  the  same  is  true  as  to  illegality. 
Chandler  v.  Ford,  8  Ad.  &  El.  6^ ; 
Ck)llinB  V.  Blantem,  3  Smith's  S. 
C,  notes. 

*  Callahan  v.  Stanley,  7  Flac  L 
J.  672,  Cal. 


^Jk 


CHAP.  XXTX,] 


Oral  Evidence. 


627 


or,  if  they  have  a  special  meaning  given  to  them  by  usage, 
the  meaning  should  be  followed.  In  such  a  case  evidence 
explanatory  of  the  words  is  admissible,  not  for  the  pur- 
pose of  adding  to  or  qualifying  or  contradicting  the  con- 
tract, but  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  it  by  expound- 
ing the  language,  and  so  enabling  the  court  to  interpret 
it  according  to  the  actual  intention  of  the  parties,  and 
the  law  and  usage  of  the  place  where  it  is  to  be  per- 
formed. K  there  was  an  existing  usage  among  farmers 
as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  *  stubble'  when  this  con- 
tract was  made,  it  must  be  inferred  that  the  contracting 
parties,  being  farmers,  contracted  with  reference  to  it, 
and  that  they  used  the  word  in  the  broader  meaning 
which  was  given  to  it  by  that  usage,  and  not  in  the  or- 
dinary or  popular  sense.  Evidence  of  such  usage  and 
meaning  was  therefore  admissible  to  define  and  explain 
the  peculiar  or  local  meaning  of  the  word  as  it  was  used 
in  the  contract.  "  *  Thus  where  the  lease  is  of  "  The  Lanier 
House ; "  or  it  is  competent  to  show  what  premises  are 
connected  and  used  with  it,  and  what  extent  of  building 
and  grounds  are  included  under  the  expression,  and 
testimony  as  to  what  was  ordinarily  meant  in  that  locality 
by  the  words  is  admissible ;  *  or  what  premises  are  under- 
stood to  be  embraced  in  the  words  "  my  home  farm, ''  or 
any  other  general  description  of   premises.'    Thus,    a 


1  See  Randall  y.  Smith,  68  Me. 
105  ;  18  Am.  Rep.  200,  Jones  v. 
Hoey,  22  Alb.  L.  J.  297. 

» Harris  v.  Dub.  67  Ga.  77  ;  Sar- 
gent y.  Adams,  3  Gray  (Mass.)  72. 

« Hutchins  v.  Scott,  2  M.  &  W. 
816 ;  Hutchins  y.  Groom,  5  C.  B. 
515.  Where  there  was  an  agree- 
ment in  writinfi^  to  lease  for  a  term 
of  years  **  The  Adams  House, 
situate  on  Washington  Street,  Bos- 
ton,'* it  was  held  that  it  might  be 
Sroyed  by  parol  to  have  been  in- 
Bnded  by  the  parties  to  include 
only  so  much  of  the  building  as 
was  fitted  up  as  a  hotel,  by  the 
name  of  the  Adams  House,  and 
not  the  separate  shops  which  occu- 
pied the  whole  of  the  ground  floor, 
except  the  entrance  to  the  hotel. 
Sargent  y.  Adams,  8  Gray  (Mass.) 
72.  Whether  certain  premises  are 
or  are  not  embraced  m  the  lease. 


when  the  lease  does  not  explicitly 
describe  them,  is  always  open  to 

rtrol  proof.  Crawford  y.  Morris, 
Gratt.  (Va.)  90;  Guy  y.  Barnes, 
29  Ind.  103 ;  Ck)rbett  y.  Costello,  8 
La.  An.  427  ;  D'Aquin  y  Barbour, 
4  id.  441.  In  Chamberlain  y.  Let- 
son,  5  N.  J.  L.  152,  the  lease  de- 
mised a  "  house  and  lot  containing 
three  acres,  more  or  less."  The 
lessee  claimed  8€r}en  acres,  the 
whole  being  in  one  lot  not  sepa- 
rated by  a  fence.  Parol  evidence 
was  admitted  to  show  that  the 
original  lot  connected  with  the 
house  was  about  three  acres  ;  that 
the  lessor  added  about  four  acres 
by  purchase,  and  occupied  the 
whole  at  the  time  of  the  demise, 
and  that  the  lease  was  intended  b^ 
the  parties  to  coyer  only  the  origi- 
nal three  acres,  yisible  remains  of 
the  old  original  line  being  still  yisi- 


■ 

i 


628 


CONSTBUCTION  OF  LEASES. 


[§  300. 


building  misdescribed  as  number  38^  may  be  shown  in 
fact  to  mean  number  35  ; '  especially  would  this  be  so, 
if  it  was  shown,  that  the  lessor  owned  number  35,  and 
did  not  own  number  38,  and  the  tenant  had  gone  into 
possession  of  35  under  the  lease.  But  if  the  landlord 
owned  both,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  lease  to  indi- 
cate that  85  instead  of  38  was  intended,  and  the  tenant 
had  not  gone  into  possession  under  the  lease,  it  would 
not  be  competent  in  a  court  of  law  to  show  that  35  was 
intended.  Where  a  grant  is  in  general  terms,  the  ad- 
dition of  particular  terms  operate  as  a  restriction  and 
limitation  upon  the  grant.  Thus,  if  a  lease  is  of  'Hhe 
premises  on  the  comer  of  College  and  Centre  Street,"  the 
whole  of  the  premises  there  situated,  owned  by  the  lessor, 
will  pass ;  but  if,  in  addition  thereto,  the  words  "recently 
occupied  by  E.  Laporte,  as  a  French  Hotel "  are  added, 
the  latter  clause  limits  the  grant  to  such  part  of  the  prem- 
ises as  were  occupied  by  E.  Laporte  for  a  French  Hotel, 
and  no  more,  aud  no  less  will  pass.  Therefore,  the  extent 
of  the  grant  being  rendered  tmcertain  by  such  restrictive 
clause,  parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  show  jwrhat  part  of 
the  premises  was  occupied  by  E.  Laporte  for  a'  French 
Hotel,  and  thus,  to  define  the  extent  of  the  demise.* 


ble.  A  call  in  a  grant  for  a  line 
beginning  at  the  *'  north  comer  of 
R's  store,  where  the  store  stands 
squarely  east  and  west  and  has 
ttoo  north  comers,  is  a  latent  am- 
biguity, and  may  be  explained  by 
pan>l  proof.  Lawrence  v.  Hy- 
man,  79  N.  C.  209. 

I  Hutchins  v.  Scott,  ante.  And 
even  though  such  a  lease  was  void 
to  create  any  interest,  if  the  tenant 
went  into  possession  of  the  premi- 
ses kitend^,  it  would  be  admissi- 
ble to  prove  the  terms  of  the 
tenancy.  Bealand  v.  Hurst,  3 
Starkie,  60. 

«  Alger  V.  Kennedy,  49  Vt.  109 ; 
24  Am.  Rep.  117.  See  also.  Nut- 
ting V.  Herbert,  85  N.  H.  125.  In 
ConoUy  v.  Vernon,  5  East,  51,  the 
rule  was  thus  stated:  "Where 
there  is  a  grant  of  a  particular 
thing  once  sufficiently  ascertained 
by  some  circumstance  belonging 
to  it,  the  addition  of  an  alle^tion, 
mistaken  or   false,  respectmg  it, 


will  not  frustrate  the  grant ;  but 
where  a  grant  is  in  general 
terms,  there  the  addition  of  a 
particular  circumstance  will  op- 
erate by  way  of  restriction  and 
modification  of  such  grant.  There- 
fore, where  one  having  customary 
tenements,  compounded  and  un- 
compounded,  surrendered  to  the 
use  of  his  will  *  aU  and  singular 
the  lands,  tenements,  <fte.,  uihatso- 
ever,  in  the  manor,  which  he  hdd 
of  the  lord  by  copy  of  court-roll,  in 
whose  tenure  or  occupation  soever 
the  same  were,  being  of  the  yearly 
rent  to  thelordin  the  whole  of^.  10s. 
8id.,  and  compounded  for  :*  held, 
that  the  words  *  and  compounded 
for,^  restrained  the  operation  of  the 
surrender  to  that  description  of 
copyholds  then  belonging  to  the 
surrenderor.  And  that  the  words 
'being  of  the  yearly  rent,  <fcc.,  of 
4L  lOs.  8i  d.,'  which  were  not 
referable  to  any  actual  amount  of 
his  rents,  either  compounded  or  un. 


Jl 


CHAP.   XXIX.] 


Obal  Evidence. 


629 


But^  if  the  description  of  the  premises  of  itself  affords 
ample  means  of  ascertaining  or  defining  the  premises  in- 
tended to  pass,  it  is  not  competent  to  show  by  parol  that 
the  lease  was  intended  to  apply  to  other  premises,  even 
though  there  are  errors  or  inconsistencies/  and  the  actual 
intention  of  the  parties  is  in  opposition  to  the  strict  letter 
of  the  lease.' 

Where  the  language  of  a  lease  is  illegible  from  age  or 
other  causes,  and  the  construction  is  doubtful  from  antiq- 
uity, parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  show  what  its  pro- 
visions are,  as  well  as  to  aid  in  its  construction  in  any 
doubtful  matter.*    So  parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  ex- 


compounded,  though  much  nearer 
to  tne  whole  than  to  the  com- 
pounded only,  could  not  qualify  or 
impugn  that  restriction."  See 
also,  to  the  same  effect;  Bell  v. 
Sawyer,  32  N.  H.  72 ;  Tenny  v. 
Beard,  5  id.  58 ;  Hibbard  v.  Hurl- 
burt,  10  Vt.  178;  Sargent  t. 
Adams,  8  Gray  (Mass.)  72  ;  Mitch- 
ell V.  Stevens,  1  Aik.  (Vt.)  161 ; 
Putnam  v.  Smith,  4  Vt.  622.  In 
Freeland  v.  Burt,  1  T:  R.  701,  the 
demise  was  of  certain  premises  in 
Westminster  **  late  in  the  occu^- 
tion  of  A,"  particularly  describ- 
iuK  them,  was  held  to  extend 
only  to  such  part  of  the  prem- 
ises as  A  occupied,  and  a  cel- 
lar under  yard  belonging  to  the 
premises,  which  was  in  the  pos- 
session of  another  tenant,  was  held 
not  embraced  in  the  grant ;  and  in 
ejectment  for  the  premises,  it  was 
held  that  the  landlord  might  show 
what  part  of  the  premises  A  occu- 
pied, and  that  the  cellar  did  not 
pass  under  the  grant.  In  Jackson 
V.  Perrine,  35  «.  J.  L.  137,  the 
court  laid  down  the  rule  that 
where  the  language  of  the  grant 
admite  of  but  one  construction, 
and  the  location  of  the  premises 
intended  to  be  conveyed  is  already 
ascertained  by  a  description  in  the 
deed,  either  by  courses  and  dis- 
tances or  monuments,  no  other  ex- 
position derived  either  from  the 
language  or  acts  of  the  parties  is 
admissible ;  but,  where  the  larv- 
guage  ia  equivocal,  and  the  loca- 
tion of  tne  premises  is  made 
dovbtfulj  either  by  the  insujflciency 
of  the  description  or  the  tnconsis- 
tency  of  two  or  more  parts  of  the 


description^  the  construction  put 
upon  the  grant  by  the  parties  in 
locating  the  premises  may  be  re- 
sorted to.  See  also,  Mclaughlin 
V.  Bishop,  85  id.  512  ;  Thomson  v. 
Wilcox,^  Lans.  (N.  Y.)  876. 

1  Vose  V.  Bradstreet,  27  Me.  156 ; 
Norwood  V.  Byrd,  1  Rich.  (S.C.) 
185 ;  Phillips  v.  Castley,  40  Ala. 
486 ;  Todd  v.  Philhamer,  24  N.  J. 
L.  7961 ;  McLaughlin  v.  Bishop, 
85  N.  J.  L.  512 ;  Eggleston  v.  Brad-  ' 
ford,  10  Ohio,  812 ;  Campbell  v. 
Johnson,  44  Mo.  247 ;  Bratton  v. 
Clamson,  8  Strobh.  (S.  C.)  185. 

'  Tracy  v.  Albany  Ex.  CJo.,  7  N. 
Y.  474. 

'Best  on  Evidence,  198,  n.  a, 
A  and  B  made  and  executed  the 
following  agreement:  A  doth 
le€»e  unto  B,  her  heirs  and  assigns, 
(here  follows  the  description  of  the 
land)  for  the  term  of  five  years 
from  the  first  day  of  December 
next,  for  the  yearly  rent  of  three 
dollars,  which  yearly  rent  the  said 
B  doth  for  herself,  her  heirs  and 
assips,  covenant  and  agree  to  pay 
to  the  said  A,  his  heirs  and  assigns, 
the  said  rent.'*  It  was  held  (a)  that 
the  agreement  is  not  ambiguous, 
nor  its  meaning  doubtf  uL  (b)  That 
the  grant  being  to  B  and  heirs  for 
a  term  of  years,  reserving  rent, 
it  is  a  lease  for  the  term.  Where 
an  instrument  in  writing  is  ambig- 
uous, the  intention  of  we  parties 
to  it  is  to  be  ascertained  from  the 
entire  instrument,  not  from  par- 
ticular words  or  phrases  without 
reference  to  the  context.  The  in- 
strument must  operate  according 
to  the  intention  of  the  parties  im- 
less  it  be  contrary  to  law.    Where 


630  CONSTEUCnON  OF  LEASES.  [§300. 

plain  a  latent  ambiguity  in  a  deed  or  lease.  It  is  a  role 
of  construction  that  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  real  intention 
of  the  parties,  and  to  make  a  correct  application  of  the 
words  and  language  of  the  contract  to  the  subject  matter 
thereof,  and  the  objects  professed  to  be  described,  all  the 
surrounding  facts  and  circumstances  may  be  taken  into 
consideration.  *  *  The  law  does  not  deny  to  the  reader  the 
same  light  and  information  that  the  writer  enjoyed ;  he 
may  acquaint  himself  with  the  persons  and  circumstances 
that  are  the  subjects  of  the  allusions  and  statements  in  the 
written  agreement,  and  is  entitled  to  place  himself  in  the 
same  situation  as  the  party  who  made  the  contract,  to 
view  the  circumstances  as  he  viewed  them,  and  so  judge 
of  the  meaning  of  the  words  and  of  the  correct  application 
of  the  language  to  the  things  described."  *  A  lease  had 
been  made  by  the  plaintiff  to  the  defendant,  of  part  of  a 
messuage,  together  with  a  piece  of  ground  thereunto 
adjoining.  This  space  of  ground  was  used  as  a  yard, 
and  beneath  the  surface  thereof  was  a  cellar,  occu- 
pied by  a  third  party  imder  a  lease  previously  granted  to 
him  by  the  plaintiff.  The  occupant  of  the  cellar  continued 
to  reside  in  it,  and  to  pay  the  rent  to  the  plaintiff  for  three 
or  four  years  after  the  latter  had  demised  the  yard  to  the 
defendant,  but  his  lease  having  expired,  and  he  having 
quitted  the  cellar,  the  defendant  took  possession  of  it,  con- 
tending that  the  cellar  had  passed  to  him  by  the  demise 
of  the  yard,  upon  the  maxim  of  the  common  law,  ^fcujtis 
est  solum  ejus  est  usque  ad  coelum  et  ad  mferos^^  and  that 
the  plaintiff  was  estopped  from  introducing  parol  evidence 
to  control  or  qualify  the  operation  of  the  lease  ;  but  the 
court  held  that  parol  evidence  of  the  surrounding  circum- 
stances might  properly  be  brought  in  aid  of  the  construc- 
tion and  interpretation  of  the  lease.  *  *  The  only  question, " 
observes  Ashurst,  J. ,  "  is  whether  the  court  are  absolutely 
bound  by  the  terms  of  this  lease  to  put  the  construction 
upon  it  for  which  the  defendant  contends.    Prima  faci^ 

the  meaning  is  doubtful,  the  cir-  the  words.     Benidge  v.  Glaasey, 

cumstances  at  the  making  of  the  113  Penn.  St.  443. 

instrument',    and   the  subsequent  ^  Shore  v.  Wilson,  9  CL  &  FuL 

acts  of  the  parties  are  to  be  con-  555,  569. 

sidered  in  determining  the  sense  of 


GHAP.  xxTX.]       Oral  Evidencb.  631 

indeed,  the  property  in  the  cellar  would  pass  by  the  de- 
mise, but  that  might  be  regulated  and  explained  by  cir- 
cumstances, and  it  seems  to  me  that  the  construction  of 
all  deeds  must  be  made  with  reference  to  their  subject- 
matter,  and  it  may  be  necessary  to  put  a  different  con- 
struction upon  leases  made  in  populous  cities  from  that 
on  those  made  in  the  country ;  we  know  that  in  London 
different  persons  have  several  freeholds  over  the  same  spot 
and  that  different  parts  of  the  same  house  are  let  out  to 
different  people."' 

From  the  admission  of  such  evidence,  and  from  bringing 
the  words  of  the  written  instrument  into  contact  with 
surrounding  circumstances,  a  doubt  sometimes  arises  as  to 
the  correct  application  of  the  language  and  words  used  to 
the  subject-matter  of  the  contract  and  the  objects  pro- 
fessed to  be  described ;  this  is  called  a  latent  ambiguity^ 
because  it  is  not  apparent  upon  the  face  of  the  contract, 
but  arises  from  the  application  of  the  words  to  the  object 
to  which  they  refer.  "  As  this  difficulty  or  ambiguity 
is  introduced  solely  by  the  admission  of  extrinsic  evidence 
of  surrounding  circumstances,  it  may  be  rebutted  and  re- 
moved by  the  production  of  further  evidence  of  the  iden- 
tity of  the  objects  described,  in  accordance  with  the  ancient 
maxim,  aminguitas  verborum  latens,  verificatione  sup- 
pletur;  nam  quod  ex  facto  oritvs  ambiguum  verificatione 
facti  tolUtur.^"*  This  may  be  illustrated  and  exem- 
plified by  a  case  analogous  to  the  one  mentioned  by 
Pothier.  ''  You  rent  of  me  an  apartment  in  a  house,  the 
remainder  of  which  is  occupied  by  myself.  I  make!you  a 
new  lease  in  these  terms  :  '  I  agree  to  let,  and  A  B  agrees  to 
occupy  my  house  in  Frederick  Street,  for  the  term  <jf  two 
years  from  the  date  hereof,  at  the  annual  rent  of  201. ' "  Any 
one  on  reading  this  agreement  would  imagine  that  the 
whole  house  was  intended  to  be  demised,  but  when  evi- 
dence of  extrinsic  circumstances  is  admitted,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  applying  the  language  of  the  contract  to  the  sub- 

»  Freeland  v.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  703 ;        »  Tindal,  C.  J.,  Miller  v.  Travens, 
Press  v.  Parker,  10  Moore,  158 ;     1  M.  d;  Sc.  846 ;  Bac.  Max.  28. 
Wiffram,  89,  58  (2d  ed.) ;  20  Law 
J.  Q.  B.  67. 


632 


CONBTBUCnON  OF  LEASES. 


[§300. 


ject-matter  thereof,  a  doubt  at  once  arises,  whether  it  was 
intended  that  you  should  have  the  whole  house  or  the  mere 
apartment  which  you  had  previously  occupied ;  and  this 
doubt,  which  is  suggested  purely  by  extrinsic  evidence  of 
the  relative  situations  and  circumstances  of  the  parties  at 
the  time  of  the  making  of  the  contract,  may  be  removed  by 
parol  evidence  of  other  circumstances  calculated  to  ex- 
plain the  sense  in  which  the  words  were  used,  and  to  give 
them  a  correct  appUcation.  The  written  instrument  may 
also,  on  the  face  of  it,  be  perfectly  intelligible,  and  free 
from  all  doubt  and  obscurity,  but  from  some  of  the  cir- 
cumstances admitted  in  proof,  an  ambiguity  arises,  as  to 
which  of  two  or  more  things,  or  which  of  two  or  more  per- 
sons, each  answering  the  words  of  the  writings  the  par- 
ties intended  to  designate.  There  may,  for  example,  be  two 
estates,  or  two  persons  of  the  same  name  and  description, 
and  the  words  may  equally  apply  to  either.  This  doubt 
or  difficulty,  which  has  been  created  by  parol  evidence, 
may  be  removed  by  further  evidence  of  a  like  character, 
calculated  to  explain  which  of  the  estates  or  persons  is  em- 
braced by  the  description  in  the  written  instrument. '   But 


»  Gordv.  Needs,  2  M.  &  W.  140; 
Hisoocks  Y.  Hiscocks,  5  M.  &  W. 
868;  Wigram,  p.  86,  88.  See 
Hammond  y.  Riogely,  5  H.  &  J. 
md.)  256 ;  Lowell  v.  Parkhurst,  4 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  369.  In  Crawford 
V.  Morris,  5  Gratt  (Va.)  90,  where 
there  was  a  written  agreement  to 
renew  a  lease,  it  was  held  that 
parol  evidence  was  admissible  to 
show  tJiat  the  cellar  of  an  a^oin- 
ing  tencTnent  had  been  occupied 
vnth  the  premises  to  which  the 
lease  appUedy  and  was  necessary 
for  th^prosecution  of  the  tenant* s 
(msiness,  for  the  piiuxpose  of  show- 
ing that  it  was  included  in  the 
lease  to  be  renewed.  In  Midloth- 
ian &  Co.  V,  Finney,  19  Gratt.  (Va.) 
S^,  the  lessor,  about  six  months 
after  giving  a  lease  of  certain  coal 
mines  for  a  term,  endorsed  upon 
the  lease  a  lease  of  adjoining  coal 
lands  for  the  residue  of  the  term, 
declaring  it  to  be  a  part  of  the 
original  lease,  and  after  such  an 
endorsement,  and  before  the  term 
expired,  he  agreed  to  renew  the 
lee^.     Parol  evidence  was  held 


admissible  to  show  whether  or  nd 
the  lands  of  the  endorsed  lease 
were  intended  to  be  embraced  in 
the  renewal.  In  Wing  v.  Gray, 
86  Yt.  261,  there  was  a  clause  m 
the  lease  as  follows:  The  lessee 
'*is  to  have  all  the  personal  prop- 
erty on  the  farm,"  and  it  was  held 
that  parol  evidence  was  admisBihle 
to  show  whether  it  was  meant 
that  he  should  have  the  use  of  the 
property,  or  that  it  should  be  his 
absolutely.  In  a  New  York  case 
the  defendant  C,  having  a  lease  of 
a  store,  imderlet  to  A  the  whole  of 
the  first  floor  excepting  a  portion 
thereof  which  was  uien  parti- 
tioned off,  and  which  consisted  of 
the  stairway,  with  a  hatchway  in 
front,  leading  to  the  upper  stories 
of  the  building.  There  were  two 
doors  in  the  front,  the  one  opening 
opposite  the  stairway  and  the 
other  into  the  lower  room,  into 
which  there  was  also  aooesB 
through  a  door  in  the  partition. 
The  undertenant  A,  with  the  con* 
sent  of  his  lessor,  removed  ^q 
partition,   agreeing  to   restore  f( 


.1 
1% 


CHAP.  XXIX.] 


ObaL  EVIDENOE. 


683 


the  evidence,  when  introduced,  must  have  the  effect  o£ 


when  requested  so  to  do.  After- 
wards, A  sold  out  to  the  plaintifF 
S,  with  whom  the  defendant 
agreed  in  writing  that  *'  the  pres- 
ent lessee  and  occupant  of  the  first 
floor  of  the  house  maj  continue  to 
use  and  occupy  the  said  premises 
as  long  as  I  nold  the  lease  there- 
of." In  an  action  brought  by 
S  to  recover  damages  against 
O  for  putting  up  the  partition,  it 
was  held  that  the  parol  evidence, 
showing  that  the  plaintiff  took  the 
a^preement  from  the  defendant 
with  the  knowledge  what  were  the 
rights  and  obligations  of  A  the 
firat  undertenant  in  the  premises, 
was  competent.  Steffens  v.  Ck>l- 
lins,  6  Boew.  (N.  Y.)  238.  Where 
a  party  granted  a  manor  by  par- 
ticular name,  and  had  two  manors 
of  that  name,  parol  evidence  v^as 
admitted  to  show  which  of  them 
he  meant ;  and  where  there  was  a 
demise  of  premises  in  Westmin- 
ster, late  in  the  occupation  of  A, 
particularly  describing  them,  pait 
of  which  was  a  yard,  parol  evi- 
dence was  received  to  show  that  a 
cellar  situated  under  that  yard,  but 
which  was  then  in  the  occupation 
of  B,  another  tenant  of  the  lessor, 
was  not  intended  to  pass.  Free- 
land  V.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  701  ;  Pad- 
dock V.  Fraley,  1  C.  &  J.  90.  Evi- 
dence of  usage  was  received  to 
show  that  a  room  which  had  not 
been  occupied  with  a  certain  mes- 
suage did  not  pass  under  a  demise 
of  that  messuage,  together  with 
all  the  rooms,  cnambers  and  ap- 
purtenances thereto  belonging. 
Kerslake  v.  White,  2  Stark.  5m. 
Where  a  lease  grants  a  right  of 
way,  evidence  may  be  received  of 
the  state  of  the  premises  at  the 
time  of  granting  the  lease,  and 
then  the  judge  will  put  a  construc- 
tion on  the  lease  as  to  the  line 
along  which  the  way  granted  runs ; 
but  if  it  is  uncertain  on  the  words 
which  of  two  ways  is  intended, 
parol  evidence  may  be  given  to 
show  which  the  grantor  meant. 
Osborne  v.  Wise,  7  C.  &  P.  781. 
Where  an  expression  used  in  a 
written  instrument  has  a  technical 
meaning,  parol  evidence  is  ad- 
missible to  show  that  it  has  been 
in  that  sense,  and  not  in  it  ordina- 
ry meaning  in  common  parlance. 


although  that  ma^r  be  perfectly 
clear  and  unambiguous  in  it- 
self ;  therefore,  where  a  lessee  of 
a  coal  mine  covenanted  to  get  the 
whole  of  the  mines,  "not  deeper 
than  or  below  the  level  of  the 
bottom  of  the  mine''  at  a  par- 
ticular point,  it  was  held,  that 
parol  evidence  of  the  understand- 
mg  amongst  miners  was  admissi- 
ble to  show  that  the  word  "  level " 
had  a  particular  technical  mean- 
ing different  from  its  ordinary- 
signification  of  a  **  horizontal  line. ' 
It  might  be  questionable  whether 
a  previous  agreement  between  the 
parties  for  a  lease  of  the  same 
mine,  and  for  which  the  tease  in 
question  was  substituted,  was  also 
admissible  in  evidence  *  for  the 
same  purpose.  Clayton  v.  Ghreg- 
son,  5  Ad.  &  EL  802 ;  Shore  v.  Wil- 
son, 9  CL  &.  F.  866.  Again,'wh6re 
in  a  lease  of  a  rabbit  warren,  &c., 
the  lessee  covenanted  that  on  the 
expiration  of  the  term  he  would 
leave  on  the  warren  10,000  rabbits, 
the  lessor  paying  for  them  60J.  per 
thousand,  it  was  held,  that  parol 
evidence  was  admissible  to  show 
that,  by  the  custom  of  the  country 
where  the  lease  was  made,  the 
word  '*  thousand,'*  as  it  applied  to 
rabbits,  denoted  twelve  nundred, 
Smith  V.  Wilson,  3  B.  &  Ad.  728. 
Where  the  lessee  of  a  coal  mine 
covenanted  to  pay  a  certain  share 
of  all  such  sums  of  money  as  the 
coals  should  sell  for  at  the  pit's 
mouth,  evidence  of  the  lessee's 
having  accoimted  with  the  lessor, 
and  paid  him  the  share  of  money 
produced  by  the  sale  of  coals  else- 
where, was  not  considered  admis- 
sible to  explain  the  intention  of 
the  parties.  Clifton  v.  Walmsley, 
5  T.  R.  564 ;  Gerrard  v.  Clifton,  7 
T.  R.  676.  Where  a  lessee  made 
an  agreement  for  a  lease,  and  the 
under-lessee  contracted  to  erect  a 
shop-front  to  the  house ;  in  eject- 
ment for  a  forfeiture  for  not  erect- 
ing the  shop-front,  it  was  held, 
that  the  original  lease  by  which  a 
penalty  was  imposed,  if  the  lessee 
allowed  a  trade  to  be  carried  on 
upon  the  premises,  was  not  admis- 
siole  in  evidence  for  the  defend- 
ant to  explain  the  meaning  of  the 
words  "  shop-front "  in  the  agree* 
ment.    Nash  v.  Birch,  1  M.  d;  W. 


•A 


634 


Construction  of  Leases. 


[§300. 


rendering  the  words  and  language  of  the  document  certain 
and  manifest,  and  must  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  correct 
application  of  them,  and  the  precise  object  to  which  they 
were  intended  to  refer  ;  for  parol  evidence  is  inadmissible 
to  ascertain  and  establish  the  intention  as  an  independent 
fact.    The  judgment  of  the  court  in  expounding  a  deed 


402.  Where  A  being  tenant  to  B, 
under  a  lease  containing  cove- 
nants, by  which  the  former  was 
bound  to  fetch  seventy-five  bush- 
els of  coal  yearly,  and  deliver 
them  at  the  mansion-house  of  the 
latter,  and  also  to  supply  him  with 
as  much  good  wheat  as  he  should 
want  in  his  family  at  6«.  per  bush- 
el, it  #a8  agreed  between  them 
that  the  lease  should  be  surren- 
dered up,  and  a  new  one  granted, 
omitting  the  above  covenants; 
and  a  new  lease  was  accordingly 
executed,  and  at  the  same  time  an 
agreement  entered  into,  whereby 
A  agreed  with  B  that  he  would 
fetch  and  bring  to  the  dwelling- 
house  of  B,  his  heirs  and  assigns, 
seventy-five  bushels  of  coals  year- 
ly, for  twelve  years  (the  term  of 
tne  new  lease),  and  yearly  supply 
B,  his  heirs  and  assigns,  with  as 
much  good  wheat  as  he  should 
want  in  his  family  at  68.  per  bush- 
el; it  was  held,  upon  B^  having 
parted  with  his  reversion  in  the 
farm,  and  also  quitted  the  man- 
sion house  in  which  he  resided  at 
the  time  when  the  agreement  was 
made,  that  the  agreement,  being 
entire,  must  receive  one  uniform 
construction;  as  it  was  clearly 
local  in  respect  of  the  delivery  of 
coals,  it  could  not  be  deemed  per- 
sonal with  respect  to  the  wheat ; 
and  that  no  parol  evidence  could 
be  admitted  to  explain  the  agree- 
ment, there  being  no  latent  am- 
biguity. Coker  v.  Guy,  2  B.  &  P. 
565.  If  there  be  any  ambiguity  or 
contradiction  in  expressing  the 
time  of  the  commencement  of  a 
lease,  the  lease  shall  be  construed 
beneficially  for  the  lessee,  on  the 
principle  that  every  man*s  grant 
shall  be  taken  most  strongly 
against  himself.  Anon.,  Dyer,  261 
b,  pi.  28  ;  Lilley  v.  Whitney,  Dyer, 
272  a ;  Seamen's  Case.  Oodb.  166  ; 
Davies  v.  Williams,  1  H.  Blac.  25 ; 
Shep.  Touch.  88,  s.  6.  Where  a 
man  granted  an  estate  for  life, 


without  saying  whether  it  was  for 
his  own  Me  or  for  that  of  the 
grantee,  parol  evidence  was  re- 
ceived to  show  what  interest  he 
had  in  the  estate;  for  if  he  was 
tenant  in  fee,  it  was  oonaidered 
that  the  grantee  should  take  an 
estate  for  his  own  life ;  but  that  if 
the  grantor  himself  was  a  tenant 
for  fife  only,  the  grantee  would 
take  an  estate  for  the  grantor's  life 
only.  Smith  v.  Earl  of  Jersey,  2 
Brod.  &  B.  551 ;  8  Moo.  889;  7 
Price,  281 ;  8  Bligh,  290.  The  ex- 
press terms  of  a  lease  cannot  be 
controlled  by  the  custom  of  the 
country ;  yet  if  the  lease  be  en- 
tirely silent  as  to  the  time  of  quit- 
ting, evidence  of  the  custom  of 
the  country  may  be  given  to  fix 
the  time.  Webb  v.  Summer,  2 
B.  &.  Aid.  746.  Although  no  right 
to  an  away-going  crop  is  reserved 
in  a  lease,  if  there  are  no  covenants 
which,  either  in  express  terms  or 
by  implication  of  law,  exdude 
such  right,  the  lessee  may  produce 
parol  evidence  to  show  that  he  is 
entitled  to  such  away-going  crop 
by  the  custom  of  the  countiT. 
Caldecott  v.  Smythiee,  7  C.  &  P. 
708  ;  Wigglesworth  v.  Dallison,  1 
Doug.  2M ;  1  Smith's  L.  C.  458, 
460  (4th  ed.) ;  Wilkins  v.  Wood, 
17  L.  J.  Q.  B.  819;  Hutton  v. 
Warren,  1  M.  &  W.  466 ;  Paviell 
V.  Gaskoin,  7  Exch.  278 ;  Munoey 
V.  Dennis,  1  H.  &  M.  216 ;  Holding 
V.  Pigott,  7  Bing.  465.  So  evi- 
dence of  custom  for  an  away- 
going  tenant  to  provide  work  and 
hkbor,  tillage  and  sowine,  and  all 
materials  for  the  same  in  nis  away- 
going  year,  the  landlord  making 
him  a  reasonable  compensation, 
has  been  received,  although  there 
was  an  express  written  agreement 
between  the  parties,  but  which 
was  not  incotisistent  with  sach 
custom.  Senior  v.  Armytage, 
Bart.  Holt.  197 ;  Hutton  v.  War- 
ren, 1  M.  &  W.  466,  476. 


Jt 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  Oral  Eyidenge.  635 

must  be  simply  dedaratory  of  what  is  in  the  deed ;  it  has 
to  ascertain,  not  what  the  party  intended^  as  contra-dis- 
tinguished from  what  the  words  express,  but  what  is  the 
meaning  of  the  words  he  has  used .'  And  when  the  words 
of  any  written  instrument  are  free  from  ambiguity  in 
themselves,  and  where  external  circumstances  do  not 
create  any  doubt  or  difficulty,  as  to  the  proper  applica- 
tion of  those  words  to  claimants  under  the  instrument 
or  the  subject-matter  to  which  the  instrument  relates,  the 
instrument  is  always  to  be  construed  according  to  the 
strict,  plain  and  common  meaning  of  the  words  them- 
selves ;  and  evidence  dehors  for  the  purpose  of  explaining 
the  instrument  according  to  the  surmised  intention  of  the 
parties  is  inadmissible. 

To  explain  a  patent  ambiguity,  parol  evidence  is  never 
admissible,  whatever  doubt  may  exist  as  to  the  intention 
of  the  parties.  Thus,  if  a  blank  is  left  in  a  lease  or  deed, 
unless  it  can  be  filled  from  inferences  drawn  from  the 
instrument  itself,  it  must  remain  blank,  and  cannot  be 
cured  by  extrinsic  evidence.' 

It  may  be  shown  that  the  lease  was  made  for  the  ben- 
efit of  a  person  other  than  the  lessor,  as,  where  a  lease 
was  made  by  an  administrator  in  his  own  name,  that  it 
was,  in  fact,  made  for  the  benefit  of  the  estate.'  So, 
where  no  time  when  the  lease  shall  commence  is  named 
therein,  it  is  competent  to  show  what  time  was  fixed 
upon  by  parol ;  *  or  that  the  lease  was  in  fact  executed 
upon  a  different  day  from  that  named  in  the  lease  ;  *  or 
that  it  has  been  surrendered ;  *  or  when  the  lessee  actu- 
ally took  possession.^  So  it  is  competent  to  show,  by 
parol,  that  the  landlord  knew  the  purpose  for  which  the 
lessee  intended  to  occupy  the  premises,  unless  the  char- 
acter of  the  occupancy  is  expressly  restricted  in  the  lease, 
or  that  the  lessee  knew  their  condition,  or,  in  the  case  of 
a  sub-tenant,  that  he  knew  the  conditions  of  the  lease 

» 18  Law  J.  N.  S.  (Exch.)  365.  »  Hall  v.  Huffman,  32  Mo.  519  ; 

«  Baylis  v.  Church,  2  Atk.  28tf ;  Trustees     v.    Robinson,     Wright 

Strode  v.  Russell,  2  Vem.  624.  (Ohio)  436. 

»  Russell  y.  Erwin  41  Ala.  292.  *  Mairs  v.  Sparks,  5  N.  J.  L.  513. 

^  Leggett  y.    Harding,    10  Ind.  ^  Den  y.  Hamilton,  12  N.  J.  L. 

414.  109. 


636 


CONSTBITCnOK  OF  LEASES. 


[§300. 


under  which  the  original  tenant  holds.  *  Where  in  a  lease 
it  is  stipulated  that  the  lessee  ''shall  have  all  the  i)erson- 
al  property,"  it  is  proper  to  show,  by  parol,  whether  he 
was  to  have  it  absolutely,  or  only  the  use  of  it.' 

Customary  rights  and  incidents  universally  attaching 
to  the  subject-matter  of  the  contract  in  the  place  and 
neighborhood  where  the  contract  was  made,  are  implied- 
ly annexed  to  the  written  language  and  terms  of  the  con- 
tract, unless  the  custom  is  particularly  and  expressly 
excluded.  Parol  evidence  of  custom  and  usage,**  conse- 
quently, is  always  admissible  to  enable  us  to  arrive  at 
the  real  meaning  of  the  parties  who  are  natiu^y  pre- 
sumed to  have  contracted  in  conformity  with  the  known 
and  established  usage.  Thus,  the  custom  of  the  country 
in  regard  to  the  claims  of  an  outgoing  tenant  of  a  farm 
will  prevail,  although  there  be  a  lease  under  seal  r^ulat- 
ing  the  terms  of  the  holding,  but  not'  containing  stipula- 
tions as  to  the  terms  of  quitting,  which  can  exclude  the 
custom.*  The  customary  right  of  a  tenant  to  the  away- 
going  crop,  to  compensation  for  work  and  labor,  seed, 
and  materials  employed  in  manuring,  tilling,  and  sowing 
the  land,  also  the  customary  right  of  a  landlord  or  re- 
versioner to  a  heriot  on  the  death  of  a  tenant  for  life, 
and  all  customs  and  usages  respecting  the  cultivation  of 
the  soil  and  the  mode  of  husbandry,  will  impliedly  pre- 
vail, if  the  lease  is  silent  respecting  them,  and  parol  or 
oral  evidence  is,  consequently,  admissible  to  superadd 


>  In  Steffinsr.  OollinB,  6  Bos.  (N. 
Y.  Supr.  Ct.)  228,  the  defendant, 
C,  havinfl^  a  lease  of  a  store,  under- 
let to  A  tne  whole  of  the  first  floor 
excepting  a  portion  thereof  which 
was  then  partitioned  off,  and  which 
consisted  of  the  stairway,  with  a 
hatchway  in  front,  leading  to  the 
upper  stories  of  the  building.  There 
were  two  doors  in  the  front,  the 
one  opening  opi)osite  the  stairway 
and  tne  other  mto  the  lower  room, 
into  which  there  was  also  access 
through  a  door  in  the  partition. 
The  underrtenant.  A,  with  the  con- 
sent of  his  lessor,  removed  the  par- 
tition, agreeing  to  restore  it  when 
requested  so  to  do.  Afterwards  A 
sold  out  to  the  plaintiff,  S,  with 


whom  the  defendant  agreed  in 
writing  that  "the  present  lessee 
and  occupant  of  the  first  floor  of 
the  house  may  continue  to  use  and 
occupy  the  said  premises  as  long 
as  I  hold  the  lease  thereof.**  In  an 
action  brought  by  S  to  recover 
damages  against  C  for  putting  up 
the  partition,  it  was  neld,  that 
parol  evidence,  showing  that  the 
plaintiff  took  the  agreement  from 
the  defendant  with  the  knowledge 
of  what  were  the  rights  and  obti- 
^tions  of  A,  the  flrst  under-tenant 
m  the  premises,  was  competent. 

«  Knapp  V.  Marlboro,  29  Vt.  282. 

»  Button  V.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W. 
475,  476 ;  Domat,  liv.  1,  tit.  1. 


^ 


CHAP.  XXIXQ 


Oral  Evidenoe. 


637 


the  usage  and  customary  right  to  the  contract  between 
the  parties,  such  right  and  usage  being  recognized  by 
law  as  incident  to  the  subject-matter  of  the  contract, 
and  consequential  upon  the  taking  of  the  lands/  But 
parol  evidence  of  custom  avM  usage  is  not  admitted  to  con- 
tradict  or  vary  express  stipulations  and  provisions  re- 
stricting or  enlarging  the  exercise  and  enjoyment  of  the 
customary  right.  Omissions  may  be  supplied  by  the  in- 
troduction 9f  the  custom,  but  the  custom  cannot  prevail 
over  and  nullify  the  express  provisions  and  stipulations 
of  the  contract.'  If  a  lease,  for  example,  contains  an 
express  provision  as  to  the  disposal  of  the  away-going 
crop,  or  specifies  and  regulates  the  particular  allojvances 
that  are  to  be  made  by  an  incoming  to  an  outgoing  ten- 
ant, the  custom  in  respect  thereof  is  excluded.' 

The  known  and  received  usage  of  a  particular  trade  or 
profession,  and  the  established  course  of  every  mercantile 
or  professional  de^ng,  are  considered  to  be  tacitly  annexed 
to  the  terms  of  every  mercantile  or  professional  contract, 
if  there  be  no  words  therein  expressly  controlling  or 
excluding  the  ordinary  operation  of  the  usage,  and  parol 
evidence  thereof  may  consequently  be  brought  in  aid  of 
the  written  instrument.^  Thus,  although  a  bill  of 
exchange  is  on  the  face  of  it  payable  on  a  day  certain, 
yet  the  three  additional  days  of  grace,  accorded  by  the 
known  custom  of  merchants,  are  permitted  to  be  annexed 
to  the  terms  of  the  written  instrument,  and  make  a  part 
of  the  contract.  The  general  warranty  in  a  poUcy  of 
insurance  to  sail  with  convoy,  is  construed,  according  to 
the  usage  of  merchants,  to  depart  with  convoy  from  the 
nearest  customary  place  of  rendezvous  where  convoys 
are  to  be  had.'    When  a  workman  is  hired  for  a  year,  to 


*  Wigglesworth  v.  Dallison,  1 
Doug.  »D1;  Wilkina  v.  Wood,  17 
Law  J.  Q.  B.  819. 

'  Clarke  v.  Rojstone,  13  M.  & 
W.  752;  14  Law  J.  Exch.  148; 
Taylor  on  Ev.  p.  771 ;  Blackett  v. 
R  Ex.  Ass.  Co.,  2  C.  &  J.  249. 

*  Roxburghe  v,  Robertson,  2 
Bligh.  156 ;  Webb  v.  •Plummer.  2 
B.  &  Aid.  746;  Roberts  v.  Barker, 
1  C.  &  M.  808. 


*  Sjers  V.  Jonas,  2  Exch.  Ill ; 
Grant  v.  Maddox,  15  M.  &  W.  737 ; 
Hutton  V.  Warren,  1  M.  &  W. 
475 ;  Bourne  v.  Gatcliffe,  8  So.  N. 
R  40 ;  Sewall  v. .  Gibbe,  1  HaJl 
(N.  Y.)  602 ;  Astor  v.  Union  Ins. 
Co.,  7  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  202 ;  Piesch  v. 
Dixon,  IMas.  (U.S.)11. 

» Lethulier's  Case,  2  Salk.  448, 


638  CONSTOCTOTION  OF  LEASES.  [§  300. 

work  at  a  particular  trade,  under  a  written  agreement 
which  says  nothing  as  to  any  period  of  absence  to  be 
allowed  to  the  workman,  oral  evidence  may  be  given  to 
show  that  it  is  the  custom  of  particular  trade  for  the  work- 
men employed  in  it  to  take  ceftain  holidays,  and  to  absent 
themselves  on  such  occasions  from  their  work,  without 
the  permission  of  their  masters.* 

"In  all  contracts,"  observes  Parke,  B.,  "as  to  the 
subject-matter  of  which  known  usages  prevail,  parties 
are  found  to  proceed  with  the  tacit  assumption  of  these 
usages ;  they  commonly  reduce  into  writing  the  special 
particulars  of  their  agreement,  but  omit  to  specify  these 
known  usages  which  are  included,  however,  as  of  course, 
by  mutual  understanding ;  evidence,  therefore,  of  such 
incidents  is  receivable.  The  contract,  in  truth,  is  partly 
express  and  in  writing,  partly  implied  or  understood  and 
unwritten.  But  the  evidence  received  must  not  be  of  a 
particular  which  is  repugnant  to,  or  inconsistent  with, 
the  written  contract."*  "The  usage,"  observes  Wilde, 
C.  J.,  "is  admissible  for  the  purpose  of  annexing  inci- 
dents to  the  contract  in  matters  upon  which  the  contract 
is  silent,  but  not  to  vary  or  contradict,  either  expressly 
or  by  impUcation,  the  express  terms  of  the  written  instru- 
ment." Therefore,  where  a  written  memorandum  of  a 
contract  for  the  sale  of  certain  specified  bales  of  wool  at 
an  ascertained  price,  stated  that  they  were  "to  be  paid 
for  by  cash  in  one  month,"  it  was  held  that  the  contract 
imported  a  sale  upon  a  month's  credit ;  that  the  vendor 
was  entitled  to  delivery  of  the  goods  without  payment  of 
the  price,  and  that  evidence  of  a  usage  in  the  wool  trade, 
that  under  contracts  framed  in  'similar  terms,  the  ven- 
dors were  not  bound  to  deliver  without  receiving  payment 
of  the  price,  was  inadmissible  to  alter  the  plain  import 
of  the  written  instrument.  "We  think,"  observes 
Wilde,  C.  J.,  "that  the  admission  of  the  evidence  would 
be  to  allow  a  right  to  be  set  up  inconsistent  with  and 
contradictory  to  the  terms  of  the  contract,  and  to  annex 

>  Reg.    V.  Stoke-upon-Trent,   13         «  Brown  v.*  Byrne,  8  Ell.  &  BL 
LawjTQ.  B.  117.  715. 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  Oral  Evidence.  639 

an  incident  to  the  subject-matter,  which  if  not  expressly 
is  clearly  impliedly  excluded  by  the  contract."  * 

Custom  and  usage  also  influence  the  interpretation  of 
contracts,  and  determine  to  a  great  extent  the  meaning 
of  the  words  used  therein.  If,  by  the  known  usage  of 
trade,  or  by  custom,  a  word  has  acquired,  in  respect  of 
the  subject-matter  of  the  contract,  a  peculiar  sense  and 
meaning  different  from  the  ordinary  popular  sense  and 
meaning,  parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  show  that  the 
parties  used  the  word  in  its  customary  trade  acceptation, 
and  not  in  the  ordinary  popular  sense.  Thus,  the  word 
thcmaand  in  certain  trades  comprehends  a  larger  number 
of  units  than  it  does  in  its  ordinary  acceptation.  In  the 
herring  trade,  for  example,  six  score  herrings  go  to  the 
hundred,  and  siocty  to  the  thousand ;  and  parol  evidence  is 
consequently  admissible  to  show  that  the  word  thousand, 
when  applied  to  herrings,  in  the  contracts  of  herring  deal- 
ers means  twelve  hundred.  In  a  lease  of  a  rabbit  warren, 
parol  evidence  was  admitted  to  show  that  by  the  custom 
of  the  country  where  the  lease  was  made,  in  taking  an 
account  of  the  rabbits  on  a  rabbit  warren,  the  numbers 
were  computed  at  one  hundred  dozen  to  a  thousand,  and 
the  word  ^'  thousand  "  in  a  lease  as  applied  to  rabbits  was 
consequently  construed  to  mean  one  hundred  dozen  or 
twelve  hundred."  So,  where  an  insurance  vras  effected 
**to  any  port  in  the  Baltic,"  evidence  was  admitted  to 
show  that  the  Gulf  or  Finland  was  considered,  by  univer- 
sal custom  and  consent  amongst  merchants  and  in  mer- 
cantile contracts,  to  be  within  the  Baltic,  though  the  two 
seas  were  treated  as  distinct  by  geographers.*  And  in  a 
lease  of  a  coal  mine  evidence  was  admitted  to  show  that 
the  word  ^^  leveV^  in  mining  districts  had  a  meaning  dif- 
ferent from  the  ordinary  popular  meaning,  and  that  the 
word  was  used  by  the  parties  to  the  contract  in  the  sense 
in  which  it  is  ordinarily  employed  by  miners.*    But  the 

*  Spartali  v.  Benecke,  10  C.  B,  R.  210  ;  Anderson  t.  Pitcher,  2  B. 

221.  &  P.  168. 

« Smith  V.  WilBon,  8  B.  &.  Ad.  *  Clayton  v.  Gregaon,  6  Ad.  &  El. 

728.  802;    Hunt  v.  Otis   Company,  4 

'  Uhde  V.  Walters,  8  Camp.  16.  Met.    (Mass.)  464 ;   Batterman  v. 

See  also  Brough  v.  Whitmore,  4  T.  Pierce,  8  Hill  (N.  Y.)  174 ;  Parrot 


640  Construction  of  Leases.  [§  300. 

custom  and  usage  must  be  general  and  universa!,  and 
not  the  practice  or  course  of  dealing  of  a  particular  firm 
or  house  of  trade.' 

The  meaning  of  aU  words  and  terms  of  art,  and  speci- 
fications of  quantity,  quality,  weight,  and  measure,  are 
regulated  and  controlled  by  local  custom,  unless  the  terms 
have  been  selected,  and  a  definite  meaning  given  to 
them  by  the  legislature.*  Evidence  of  general  usage,  in 
the  trade  to  which  the  contract  refers,  is  admissible  to 
give  a  particular  and  peculiar  sense  to  the  words  employed, 
as  the  parties  may  be  persumed  to  have  contracted  in 
conformity  with  the  custom,  and  to  have  used  the 
words  in  their  customary  trade  acceptation.  A  memor- 
andum of  a  contract  of  sale  was  in  the  terms  following : 
—"Sold  Mr.  W.  S.  18  pockets  of  Kent  hops,  at  100s.;" 
and  it  was  held  that  oral  evidence  was  admissible  to  show 
that,  by  the  usage  of  trade,  a  contract  so  worded  was 
imderstood  to  mean  51.  per  cwt.,  and  that  the  hops  con- 
•  sequently  were  to  be  weighed,  and  the  price  ascertained, 
according  to  the  weight  of  the  article,  and  that  the  100s. 
was  not  to  be  paid  per  pocket,  without  reference  to  the 
weight  of  the  contents  of  such  pocket.*  But  to  vary  the 
meaning  of  plain  words,  the  existence  of  the  custom 
must  be  "  clear,  cogent,  and  irresistible."  Two  witnesses 
stated  that  the  usual  practice  of  the  trade  to  Sydney  was 
to  consider  steerage  passengers  as  "cargo,"  and  their 
passage  money  as  "  freight ; "  but  could  give  no  instances 
of  such  construction  within  their  own  knowledge,  and  it 
was  held  that  the  evidence  was  insufficient  to  establish  a 
usage  of  trade,  so  as  to  vary  the  prima  facte  meaning  of 
the  words  cargo  and  freight  in  a  written  contract.*  A 
usage  of  trade  can  never  be  set  up  in  contravention  of  a 
rule  of  law,  or  in  opposition  to  a  plain  and  clearly 

V.  Thatcher,  9  Pick.  (Maa8.)426;  *See  Eyre  v.  Marine  Ins.  Co.,  5 

Ck)llins  V.  Hope,  8  Wash.  (U.  S.)  C.  W.  &  S.  (Penn.)  116 ;  AUegre  v. 

C.  149  ;  Trott  v.  Wood,  1  Gall.  (U.  Maryland  Ins.    Co.,    2  G.    &  J. 

S.)  443 ;  Dawson  v.  Kettle,  4  HilL  (Mass.)   136  ;    Macy   v.   Whaling 

(N.  Y.)107.  Ins.  Co..  9  Mete.  854;  Spicer  v. 

»  Gabay  v.  Lloyd,  8  B.  &  C.  797.  Cooper,  1  Q.  B.  424. 

« Taylor  v.  Briggs,   2  C.  &  P.  *  Louis  v.  Marshall,  18  Law  J.  a 

525  ;   Hutchison  v.  Bowker,  5  M.  P.  198. 
&  W.  585. 


CHAP.  XXIX.] 


Oral  Evidence. 


641 


expressed  intention.  If  there  are  peculiar  expressions 
used  in  a  contract  or  lease,  which  have  in  a  particular 
place  or  trade  a  known  meaning  attached  to  them,  it  is 
for  the  jury  to  say  what  the  meaning  of  those  expres- 
sions was,  but  for  the  court  to  decide  what  the  meaning 
of  the  contract  is.' 

The  import  and  meaning  of  words  at  length  cannot  be 
contradicted  or  altered  by  figures.  Where  the  figures 
and  words  of  a  bill  of  exchange  or  a  promissory  note,  for 
example,  disagree,  the  courts  will  give  force  to  the  words 
at  length,  in  preference  to  the  figures,  for  the  reason 
assigned  by  Marius,  *'  because  a  man  is  more  apt  to  com- 
mit an  error  with  his  pen  in  writing  a  figure  than  he  is 
in  writing  a  word."  It  may  be  shown  that  a  parol 
agreement  was  entered  into  svbsequent  to  the  lease, 
which  although  in  writing  is  not  under  seal,  by  which  its 
term  never  changes,  as  that  the  landlord  agreed  to  accept 
a  reduced  rent '  or  that  the  lessor  agreed  to  pay  the  taxes 
which  by  the  terms  of  the  lease  the  lessee  was  to  pay.' 


*  Hxitchison  v.  Bowker,  5  M.  & 
W.  542 ;  8  ib.  838  ;  Trueman  v. 
Loder,  11  Ad.  &E1.  599  ;  Sotilichos 
y.  Kemp,  8  Exch.  105. 

'  In  an  action  for  the  rent  re- 
served in  a  written  lease,  the  lessee 
may  prove  in  defence,  that,  after 
the  delivery  of  the  lease,  the  lessor 
for  a  good  consideration  entered 
into  an  oral  agreement  that  for  the 
future  the  rent  should  be  reduced. 
Hastings  v.  Lovejoy,  140  Mass. 
261. 

'  In  1874  a  lease  of  a  building  in 
a  city  was  made  for  the  term  of 
ten  years,  the  lessee  agreeing  to 
pay  rent  and  taxes.  The  tax  bills 
were  made  out  to  the  lessor,  and 
he,  in  1875  and  1876,  sent  them  to 


the  lessee,  who  paid  them  to  the 
city.  In  1877  the  lessor  a^eed 
orally  that,  if  the  lessee  would  pay 
rent  then  due,  and  thereafter  pay 
rent  promptly,  he  would  assume 
the  taxes.  The  lessor  paid  the 
taxes  for  several  years,  ending  in 
1882.  Two  months  after  paying 
the  taxes  for  that  year,  the  lessor 
notified  the  lessee  that  unless  he 
would  renew  the  lease  he  would 
be  called  upon  for  the  taxes  of  that 
year.  The  lessee  refused  to  renew 
the  lease.  It  was  held  that  these 
facts  constituted  no  defence  to  an 
action  by  the  lessor  against  the 
lessee  for  the  amount  of  the  taxes 
of  1882.  Bowditch  v,  Chickering, 
189  Mafis.  283. 


41 


J 


wt 


COVENASTB, 


rjaoL 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


COVENANTS. 


Sbc.  801.  ExpreBs  covenants. 

Sec.  802.  Covenants  for  payment  of  rent. 

Sec.  808.  Ck)nsti'uction  of  covenants. 

Sec.  804.  liability  of  the  parties  and  their  assigns. 

Sec.  805.  When  covenants  are  void  or  nugatory. 

Sec.  806.  General  rule  as  to  covenants  being  real  or  {^ersonaL 

Sec.  807.  What  covenants  run  with  the  land. 

Sec.  808.  Divisibility  of  liability  on  covenants. 

Sec.  809.  Dependent  or  independent. — (general  rule  with  respect  to 

such  covenants. 

Sec.  810.  Particular  cases  decided  respecting  repairs. 

Sec.  811.  Cases  decided  respecting  other  matters. 

Sec.  812.  How  covenants  are  discharged  generally. 

Sec.  818.  When  discharged  by  the  operation  of  statutes. 

Sec.  301.  Express  covenants.— A  covenant  is  either 
express  or  implied,  and  subsists  either  in  fact  or  in  law.' 
An  express  covenant  is  a  stipulation  in  a  deed,  either 
that  a  certain  thing  has  or  has  not  been,  or  shall  or  shall 
not  be  done.  It  may,  perhaps,  more  properly  be  said  to 
be  an  agreement  of  the  parties  under  seal,^  and  no  formal 
or  technical  words  are  necessary  to  create  it ;  any  words 
in  a  deed  or  other  contract  under  seal,  that  show  an 
agreement  on  the  part  of  either  of  the  parties  thereto  to 
do  or  not  to  do  a  thing,  amount  to  a  covenant.*    The 


» Woodf all's  L.  &;  T.  97. 

<LoRD  Ellenbobouqh,  in  Ran- 
daU  V.  Lynch,  12  East,  182.  Itmay 
be  created  by  deed  poll,  Randel  v. 
Canal  Co.,  1  Harr.  (Del,)  151,  or 
by  indenture.    1  Rolle's  Abr.  517. 

'Sampson  v.  Easterby,  6  Bing. 
644.  The  law  requires  no  set  form 
of  words  to  create  a  covenant.    It 


is  enough  if  the  language  of  a 
sealed  instrument  is  sucm  as  to 
show  that  the  parties  thereto  have 
assented  to  the  performance  or  for- 
bearance of  a  future  act.  Marshall 
V.  Craig,  1  Bibb  (Ky.)  879 ;  Yocum 
V.  Barnes,  8  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  496; 
Hallett  V.  WyUe,  3  John.  (N.  Y.) 
44 ;  Stevenson's  Case,  1  Leon,  834; 


.•  .* 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


Express. 


643 


words  "covenant  and  agree/'  are  usually  employed,  but 
of  themselves  they  do  not  raise  a  covenant,  nor  does  their 
absence  prevent  the  agreement  from  being  a  covenant. 
The  only  indispei^sable  requisites  are,  that  there  shall  be 
an  agreement  between  the  parties,  and  that  it  shall  be 
under  seal.  Thus,  the  words  "I  hereby  agree  to  pay  A 
four  dollars  a  day  for  his  services,  &c.,  and  to  pay  him 
the  amount  of  wages  due  him  each  week,"  signed  and 
sealed  by  a  party,  is  a  sufficient  covenant  ;*  or,  "I  here- 
by agree  not  to  carry  on  the  trade  of  a  blacksmith  in  A 
for  the  period  of  ten  years  from  the  date,"  predicated 
upon  a  good  consideration,  and  signed  and  sealed,  is  a 
covenant,  though  the  word  "covenant"  is  not  used.*  A 
mere  recital  in  a  lease,  or  an  exception,  may  amount  to  a 
covenant,  if,  from  the  whole  instrument,  such  appears 
to  have  been  the  intention  of  the  parties.'  Thus,  in  a 
lease  of  land  the  lessee  covenanted  to  plough  and  sow 


Cannock  v.  Jones,  3  Exchq.  283; 
Wright  V.  Tattle,  4  Day  (Conn.) 
821 ;  Jackson  v.  Stewart,  20  John. 
(N.  Y.)  85 ;  Midgett  v.  Brooks,  12 
Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  145  ;  MitcheU  v. 
Hazen,  4  Conn.  508 ;  Randel  v. 
Canal  Co.,  1  Harr.  (Del.)  233;  St. 
Albans  V.  Ellis,  16  East,  352 ;  Hollis 
V.  Carr,  2  Mod.  87 ;  Comyn's  Di^st, 
tit.  (Covenant;  Lunt  v.  Noms,  1 
Burr.  290 ;  Hill  v.  Carr,  1  Ch.  Cas. 
294;  Bret  v.  Cumberland,  Cro. 
Jac.  899.  These  words  in  a  lease, 
'*  and  the  lessee  shall  repair  the 
mill  (being  the  thing  leased)  as 
often  as  need  shall  re<}uire,  and 
shall  leave  them  sufficiently  re- 
paired at  the  end  of  the  term, " 
amounts  to  a  covenant  to  repair, 
and  leave  in  repair,  because  it  is  a 
clear  agreement  of  the  parties. 
Bret  V.  Cumberland,  Cro.  Jac.  899. 
See  also,  Anonymous,  1  Rollers 
Rep.  859,  pL  391.  So  where  a  lease 
contained  a  stipulation  that  the 
lessee  should  repair,  ''provided 
always,  and  it  is  agreed,  that  the 
lessor  shall  find  great  timber,  &c. ,  *' 
it  was  held  that  this  amounted  to  a 
covenant  on  the  lessor's  part  to  find 
great  timber,  because  it  amounted 
to  an  agreement  on  his  part  to  do 
so,  and  that  it  was  not  a  mere 
qualification  of  the  lessee's  cov- 
enant.   Holder  v.  Taylor,  Brownl. 


23.  But  in  the  same  case  it  was 
held,  that  except  for  the  use  of  the 
words,  "and  it  is  agreed,"  the 
words  "  the  lessor  shall  find  great 
timber, "  would  not  have  amounted 
to  a  covenant  on  his  part  to  do  so 
absolutely,  but  would  have  been  a 
mere  qualification  of  the  lessee's 
covenant.  A  lease  from  A  to  B, 
"upon  condition  that  he  shall 
acquit  A  of  ordinary  and  ex- 
traordinarv  charges,  and  shall 
keep  and  leave  the  houses  at  the 
end  of  the  term  in  as  good  condi- 
tion as  he  found  them,"  is  a  cov-  * 
enant.  6  Viner's  Abr.  tit.  CJov- 
enant,  379.  Whatever  shows  an 
intention  on  the  part  of  parties 
thereto  to  bind  themselves  to  the 
performance  of  a  stipulation,  is  a 
covenant.  Taylor  v,  Preston,  79 
Penn.  St.  461. 

>  Randel  v.  Canal  C^k). ,  ante. 
•Grundy  v.  Edwardis,   7  J.  J. 

Marsh.  (Ky.)  868. 

>  Sampson  v.  Easterby,  9  B.  &  C. 
505 ;  Say  v.  Mattram,  19  C.  B.  N. 
S.  479 ;  FarraU  v.  Hilditch,  5  id. 
840 ;  St.  Albans  v.  TEllis,  16  East, 
852 ;  Horry  v.  Frost,  10  Rich.  (S. 
C.)  Eq.  109 ;  Penn  v.  Preston,  2 
Rawle  (Penn.)  14  ;  Lowell  v.  Hil- 
ton, 11  Gray  (Maas.)  407  ;  Huflf  v. 
Nickerson,  27  Me.  106. 


644 


Covenants. 


[§301. 


certain  land,  "except  the  rabbit  warren  and  sheep  walk," 
and  he  having  ploughed  and  sowed  a  part  of  the  rabbit 
warren  and  sheep  walk,  it  was  held  a  breach  of  the  cove- 
nant, the  court  holding  that  the  exception  was  as  much 
a  covenant  or  agreement  as  the  rest  of  the  stipulation, 
and  that  the  word  ** except,"  in  the  covenant,  was  to  be 
read  the  same  as  though  the  words  *^but  not''  had  been 
used.'    So,  where  a  lease  of  the  lessor's  interest  in  certain 


>  St.  Albans  v.  Ellis,  ante.  In 
Gravenor  v.  Parker,  And.  19,  pi. 
88,  a  lease  for  life  from  A  to  B, 
provided  that  if  the  lessee  dies  his 
executor  shall  hold  it  for  the  bal- 
ance of  the  term,  was  held  a  cov- 
enant, because  the  words  of  the 
proviso  purported  an  agreement. 
When  the  lessor  recites  that  he  is 
possessed  of  a  certain  interest  in 
an  estate,  he  thereby  covenants 
that  he  is  possessed  of  such  an 
interest.  Severn's  Case,  1  Leon, 
122;  Aspdin  v.  Austin,  5  Q.  B. 
688.  Thus,  if  A  makes  a  lease  to 
B,  and  recites  therein  that  he  is 
termor  for  99  years  if  three  lives 
so  long  continue,  and  tliat  one  life 
is  in  being,  it  is  held  to  amount  to 
a  covenant  that  the  life  continued. 
Holies  V.  Carr,  8  Swanst.  648.  So 
the  recital  in  a  deed  of  a  previous 
agreement  to  do  a  certain  act, 
amounts  to  a  covenant  in  a  deed 
for  the  performance  of  it,  for  the 
recital  operates  as  a  solemn  con- 
firmation of  the  "agreement  and 
intent  precedent. "  Barf  oot  v.  Fres- 
well,  8  Keb.  465.  But  a  recital 
does  not  necessarily  imply  a  cov- 
enant, and  whether  it  does  so  or 
not  in  each  case  depends  on  what 
is  to  be  collected  as  the  intention 
of  the  parties  from  the  whole  in- 
strument. Ivens  V.  Elwes,  24  Law 
J.  Ch.  249.  Words  of  proviso  and 
condition  will  also  be  construed  as 
an  express  covenant,  when  such  a 
construction  is  necessary  to  give 
effect  to  the  apparent  intention  of 
the  parties.  Thus,  where  a  con- 
veyance was  made  by  the  plaintiff 
of  an  incorporeal  right  to  the  de- 
fendant, provided  that  out  of  the 
first  profits  the  defendant  should 

Eay  the  plaintiff  500Z.,  it  was 
olden  that  an  action  of  covenant 
might  be  maintained  on  these 
words  of  proviso  for  the  non-pay- 
ment of  the  money.    Clapham  v. 


Moyle,  1  Keb.  842,  897.  Where  a 
lease  executed  by  the  leesor  and 
lessee  contained  a  covenant  on  the 
I^art  of  the  lessee  to  maintain  and 
repair  &  farm-house  and  premises, 
*Hhe  said  farm-house  and  build- 
ing being  previously  put  into  re- 
pair" by  the  lessor,  it  was  held 
that  these  words  amounted  to  an 
absolute  covenant  on  the  part  of 
the  lessor  to  put  the  house  into  re- 
pair, and  not  merely  to  a  qualificur 
tion  of  the  covenant  of  the  lessee. 
Gonnock  v.  Jones,  8  Exch.  233. 
So,  where  a  lease  was  granted  on 
condition  that  the  lessee  should 
keep  and  leave  the  demised  prem- 
ises at  the  end  of  the  term  in  as 
good  plight  as  he  found  them,  it 
was  holden  that  an  action  of 
covenant  would  lie  for  a  breach 
of  this  condition.  Where,  how- 
ever, the  proviso  or  condition  is  by 
way  of  qualification  of  the  cov- 
enant, or  defeazance  of  the  deed 
or  of  the  estate  and  interest  there- 
bv  created,  and  not  in  the  nature 
o{  an  agreement ;  as,  if  a  lease  be 
granted,  provided  and  on  condition 
that  the  lessee  coUect  and  pay  the 
rents  of  the  other  houses  of  the 
lessor,  an  action  of  covenant  is  not 
maintainable.  If  lessee  for  years 
covenants  .  to  repair,  **  provided 
always  and  it  is  agreed  that  the 
lessor  shall  find  great  timber, 
&c.,'*  a  covenant  is  created  on 
the  part  of  the  lessor  to  find  the 
timber  by  reason  of  the  word 
**  agreed ; "  but  if  the  lessee  had 
covenanted  to  repair  provided  the 
lessor  found  the  timoer,  without 
the  word  **  agreed,"  the  proviso 
would  not  have  amountea  to  a 
covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessor, 
but  to  a  qualification  only  of  the 
covenant  of  the  lessee.  1  Rolle 
Abr.  518 ;  Bac.  Abr.  Gov. ;  Geery 
V.  Reason,  Cro.  Car.  l!^ ;  Simpson 
V.  TittereU,  Cro.  Eliz.  242 ;  Wolve- 


i 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


Express. 


645 


mines  contained  a  recital  of  an  agreement  made  by  the 
lessee  with  the  lessor  and  the  owners  of  the  other  two- 
thirds  interest  in  the  mines,  for  pulling  down  an  old 
smelting  mill  and  building  another  of  larger  dimensions 
upon  a  waste  near  the  mines,  and  the  lease  contained  a 
covenant  to  keep  such  new  mill  in  repair,  and  so  leave  it 
at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  but  did  not  contain  any 
covenant  to  build  the  mill ;  it  was  held,  that  a  covenant 
to  build  the  mill  was  to  be  impUed  from  the  recital  and 
other  covenants  in  the  lease,  and  that  the  lessor  might 
sue  thereon  for  damages  for  its  breach  in  respect  of  his 
third  interest.  And  so,  generally,  the  question  as  to 
whether  or  not  a  recital,  exception,  proviso,  &c.,  con. 
tained  in  a  deed  is  a  covenant  or  a  mere  qualification  of  a 
covenant,  is  to  be  ascertained  from  the  facts  whether  it 
amounts  to  an  absolute  agreement  on  the  part  of  the 


ridge  v.  Stewart,  3  M.  &  S.  C.  566. 
A  lessee  covenanted  that  he  would 
at  all  times  during  the  continuance 
of  his  lease  fold  his  flock  of  sheep 
which  he  should  keep  upon  the  de- 
mised premises  upon  such  parts 
where  the  same  had  been  usually 
folded.  It  was  held  that  this 
amounted  to  a  covenant  to  keep  a 
flock  of  sheep  upon  the  premises, 
and  that  it  would  consequently  be 
no  answer  to  an  action  upon  the 
covenant  for  the  defendant  to  say 
that  he  kept  no  sheep,  and  there- 
fore had  none  to  fold.  Webb  v, 
Plummer,  3  B.  &  Aid.  749.  A 
landlord  demised  certain  limestone 
quarries  and  lime  kilns  to  a  tenant, 
who  covenanted,  amongst  other 
things,  that  he  would,  at  all  times 
and  seasons  of  burning  lime,  sup- 
ply the  lessor  and  his  tenants  with 
lime  at  a  stipulated  i)rice,  for  the 
improvement  of  their  IsLuds  and 
the  repair  of  their  houses  ;  and  it 
was  held  that  this  amounted  to  a 
covenant  to  bum  lime  at  euch  sea- 
sons, and  that  it  was  not  a  good 
defence  to  plead  that  there  was  no 
lime  burned  on  the  premises  out 
of  which  the  lessor  could  be  sup- 
plied. Earl  Shrewsbury  v.  Qould, 
2  id.  487.  K  two  persons  covenant 
together  that  it  shall  be  lawful  for 
the  one  to  hold  possession  of  the 
other's  property  for  a  certain  time, 


the  law  infers  therefrom  an  a^ee- 
ment  that  he  shall  not  detain  it  for 
a  longer  time,  but  shall  then  give 
it  up  to  the  owner ;  if,  then,  he  de- 
tains it  beyond  that  time,  it  is  a 
breach  of  covenant.  Therefore, 
where  it  was  covenanted  and 
agreed  in  a  charter-party  of  af- 
freightment, that  **  forty  days 
should  be  allowed  for  unloading 
a  vessel  and  loading  her  again,"  it 
was  held  that  this  amounted  to  a 
covenant  not  to  detain  the  ship  for 
loading  and  unloading  beyona  the 
forty  &ys.  Randall  v.  L3mch,  12 
East,  lo2.  Where  recitals  are 
made  by  a  party  under  misappre- 
hension ana  mistake,  or  in  conse- 
quence of  the  fraud  of  the  other 
party,  it  will  not  be  regarded  as 
conclusive  upon  the  party  in 
equity,  and  he  will  be  permitted 
to  show  by  parol  that  the  recital  is 
not  true,  and  that  it  was  inserted 
in  the  covenant  under  a  misappre- 
hension and  mistake.  Rich  v.  At- 
water,  16  Conn.  409.  But  at  law 
the  recital  is  conclusive  and  cannot 
be  contradicted  or  attacked  by 
parol  evidence.  Jackson  v.  Mun- 
roe,  9  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  209  ;  Shelton 
V.  Allcox,  11  Conn.  240;  Stow  v. 
Wyse,  7  Ck)nn.  214 ;  Carver  v.  Jack- 
son, 4  Pet.  (U.  S.)  82 ;  Shelley  v. 
Wright,  WiUes,  9. 


J 


646 


Covenants. 


[§302. 


person  Bought  to  be  charged  with  the  cjovenant  to  do  or 
not  to  do  the  thing  named,  or  whether  it  merely  amounts 
to  a  qualification  of  a  covenant  on  the  part  of  the  other 
party,  excusing  him  from  performance  because  of  the 
non-performance  of  the  person  seeking  to  charge  him  as 
covenantor.* 

Sec.  302.  Covenants  for  payment  of  rent.— The  words 
"yielding  and  paying"  in  a  lease  make  an  implied  cove- 
nant at  least,  and  the  lessee  is  liable  theron  for  the  non- 
payment of  the  rent.'  So  if  the  lease  provides  that  the 
lessee  shall  yield  and  pay  such  a  rent  and  all  manner  of 
taxes,  charges  and  impositions  whatever,  it  is  held  a 
covenant  to  pay  the  whole  rent  discharged  of  all  taxes 
before  or  afterwards  imposed .'  An  express  covenant  to 
pay  rent  should  be  inserted  in  all  leases,  as  if  there  is 
only  an  implied  covenant  it  is  inoperative  if  the  lessee 
assigns  his  term,  as  such  covenants  rest  merely  upon  a 
privity  of  estate;*  but  where  there  is  an  express  cove- 
nant it  rests  upon  privity  of  contract,  and  the  lessee 
remains  liable  as  Well  after  as  before  he  assigns  his  estate.* 
If,  in  case  the  premises  are  destroyed  by  fire  or  other 
casualty,  it  is  intended  that  the  rent  shall  cease,  an  express 
provision  to  that  effect  must  be  inserted  in  the  lease,  or 
liability  for  rent  will  continue  on  the  lessee's  part  as  well 
after  the  destruction  of  the  premises  as  before,  and  the 
fact  that  the  lessee  covenants  to  repair,  &c.,  "except 
damages  by  fiire,"  does  not  limit  the  operation  of  the 
covenant  to  pay  rent,*  or  excuse  the  tenant  therefrom.' 

In  New  York,  however,  by  statute,  the  tenant  is  excused 
from  his  covenant  to  pay  rent,  if  the  building,  vrith- 
out  his  fault,  is    so   destroyed   or    injured   as   to  be 


'  Esteby  v.  Sampson,  6  Bing.  644. 
See  also,  Hayes  v.  Kershaw,  1 
Sandf.  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  258. 

*  Porter  v.  Swetnam,  Styles,  496 ; 
Kimpton  v.  Walker,  9  Vt.  191,  but 
in  the  case  last  cited,  it  was  held 
that  such  words,  creating  an  im- 
plied covenant  only,  the  lessee  was 
not  liable  thereon  after  he  had  as- 
signed his  term.  See  also,  Bret 
y.    Cumberland,    Cro.    Jac.    523 ; 


Adams  v.   Gibney,  6  Bing.   656  ; 
Staines  v.  Morris,  1  V.  A;  B.  8. 

*  Giles  V.  Hooper,  Garth.  185. 
^Bret    V.    Cumberland,    ante  ; 

Kimpton  v.  Walker,  ante. 

«  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  168  ;  AuiUA 
V.  Mills,  4  T.  R.  98. 

•  Hore  V.  Groves,  8  Anst.  887. 
See  Chapter  on  Bent,  post 

^  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  166.  Seepos^, 
pp. 


S!lJra^ 


CHAP.   XXX.] 


Payment  of  Rent. 


647 


untenantable  or  unfit  for  occupancy,  so  long  as 
such  premises  from  such  causes  remain  untenant- 
able or  unfit  for  occupancy,  unless  there  is  an  express 
covenant  to  the  contrary. '  But,  under  this  statute  it  is  not 
only  held,  that,  in  order  to  suspend  the  tenant's  liability 
for  rent  the  premises  must,  from  such  causes,  have  become 
unfit  for  occupancy,  but  tJie  tenant  must  not  have  remained 
in  the  occupancy  thereof j*  and  he  is  not  excused  from 
liabflity  because  the  landlord  refused  to  accept  a  surrender 
upon  the  groimd  that  the  alleged  causes  do  not  exist.' 
But  it  seems  that  the  tenant  may  remain  temporarily  in 
possession  of  premises  injured  by  fire  for  the  purposeof 
selling  off  goods  damaged  by  the  casualty  without 
incurring  liability  upon  the  covenants  in  his  lease,  fm 
the  rent  of  the  premises  during  such  temporary  occ5 
pancy,  but  he  is  liable  for  use  and  occupation.^ 

The  advantages  incident  to  an  express  over  an  implied 
covenant  are  that  the  tenant's  liability  to  pay  rent  under 
the  implied  covenant  being  founded  on  privity  of  estate 
only,  determmes  on  his  assigning  the  property  to  another ; ' 
but  under  the  privity  of  contract  arising  from  the  express 
covenant,  he  remains  chargeable  during  the  whole  period 
of  tenancy,*  and  as  it  is  in  his  power,  unless  expressly 
restrained  by  agreement,  to  assign  the  premises  to  another, 
without  regard  to  the  assignee's  character  or  resi)on- 
sibility,"  the  express  covenant  possesses  an  obvious 
advantage  over  the  implied  one.     So   again,  as   the 


>  Laws  of  1800,  Chap.  845,  Sec.  1. 
»  Willard  v.  Tillman,  19  Wend. 

2!^.  Y.)  858.  In  Johnson  v.  Oppen- 
ftimer,  55  N.  Y.  280,  an  aajoin- 
ing  proprietor  made  an  excavation 
upon  his  premises  that  caused  the 
walls  of  the  demised  premises  to 
settle,  and  thus  rendered  them  un* 
tenantable,  but  the  tenant  refused 
to  give  the  landlord  permission  to 
enter  for  the  purpose  of  putting  in 
proper  supports  to  the  walls,  and 
it  was  heta,  that  imder  these  cir- 
cumstances he  was  not  absolved 
from  his  liabilitv  to  pay  rent. 

*  Johnson  v.  Oppenheimer,  ante. 

*  Aufitm  V.  Field,  7  Abb.  Pr.  N. 
S.  (N.  Y.)  29. 


'  Bret  T.  Cumberland,  ante ; 
Barhelouse  v.  Gage,  W.  Jones, 
228;  Anonymous,  1  Sid.  447; 
Staines  v.  Morris,  1  Y.  ft  B.  8. 

*  Edwards  v.  Morgan,  8  Lev. 
288 ;  Buckland  v.  Hull,  8  Yes.  95 ; 
Staines  v.  Morris,  ante ;  Auriol  v. 
Mills,  4  T.  R.  98. 

'  Pitcher  v.  Tavey,  1  Salk.  81 ; 
LeKeux  v.  Nash,  2  Stra.  1221; 
Onslow  V.  Corrie,  2  Madd.  880; 
Taylor  v.  Shum,  1  B.  &  P.  21 ; 
Treackle  v.  Coke,  1  Yem.  165; 
Rawley  v.  Adams,  4  My.  ft  Cr. 
584. 


648 


Covenants. 


[§303. 


lessee  invariably  convenants  for  his  heirs,  as  weU  as  for 
himself,  his  executors,  &c. ,  the  lessor  has  the  security  of 
the  lessee's  real  estate  in  the  heirs'  hands  for  the  pay- 
ment of  rent,  an  advantage  not  conferred  by  the  implied 
covenant."*  An  express  covenant  for  payment  of  rent 
runs  with  the  land  and  binds  an  assignee,  even  though 
the  lessee  does  not  covenant  for  his  assigns.* 

Sec.  303.  Construotion  of  covenants.— It  is  a  uniform 
rule,  that  all  covenants  must  be  construed  as  nearly  aa 
possible  according  to  the  intention  of  the  parties,  to  be 
gathered  from  the  whole  context  of  the  lease,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  reasonable  sense  of  the  words  used ;  *  and 
where  it  is  evidently  the  intention  of  the  parties  that 


'  Newton  v.  Osborne,  Sty.  367. 

'  Vyvyan  v.  Arthur,  1  B.  &  C. 
410 ;  Stevenson  v.  Lambard,  d 
East,  575 ;  Parker  v.  Webb,  2  Salk. 
5;  Halford  v.  Hatch,  1  Dougl. 
183 ;  Isteel  v.  Stoneley,  1  And.  89. 
See  Chapter  on  Bent. 

»  Foley  V.  CJowgill,  5  Blackf .  and.) 
18 ;  WadUngton  v.  HUl,  18  Miss. 
660 ;  Knowlden  v.  Leavitt,  121 
Mass.  307  ;  Shoneberger  v.  Hay,  40 
Penn.  St.  132  ;  Barey  v.  Burch,  8 
Mo.  447 ;  Killlanr  v.  Harshan,  7 
Ired.  (N.  C.)  L.  497  ;  Watchman  v. 
Crook,  5  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  239 ;  Ross  v. 
Adams,  28  N.  Y.  L.  160 ;  Iggulden 
V.  May,  7  East,  241.  "  It  is  not  the 
toords  of  the  law,'*  says  Plowden 
in  Egton  v.  Studd,  Plowd.  465, 
"  but  the  internal  sense  of  the  law, 
that  makes  the  law  ;  and  our  law, 
like  all  others,  consists  of  two 
parts,  viz :  of  body  and  soul.  The 
letter  of  the  law  is  the  body  of  the 
law,  quia  ratio  legis  est  anima 
legis.  And  the  law  may  be  resem- 
bled to  a  nut  which  has  a  shell  and 
a  kernel  within, — the  letter  of  the 
law  represents  the  shell,  and  the 
sense  of  it  the  kernel,  and  as  you 
will  be  no  better  for  the  nut  if  you 
make  use  only  of  the  shell,  so  you 
will  receive  no  benefit  by  the  law 
if  you  rely  only  uxx>n  the  letter ; 
and  as  the  fruit  and  profit  of  the 
nut  lie  in  the  kernel,  and  not  in 
the  shell,  so  the  fruit  and  profit  of 
the  law  consist  in  the  sense  more 
than  in  the  letter.  And  it  often 
happens  that  when  you  know  the 
letter  jou  know  not  "the  sense,  for 
sometimes  the  sense  is  n^ore  con- 


fined and  contracted  than  the  let- 
ter, and  sometimes  it  is  more  large 
and  extensive."  Words  are  sus^ 
ceptible  of  various  meanings,  and 
may  be  read  in  an  enlarged  and 
general  sense  or  may  receive  a  con- 
fined and  restricted  interpretation, 
according  to  the  subject-matter  to 
which  they  refer,  the  local  pecu- 
liarities to  which  they  are  applied, 
and  the  circumstances  and  situa- 
tion of  the  parties  to  be  controlled 
and  influenced  by  them.  Clayton 
V.  Qregson,  4  N.  &  M.  606.  The 
general  intention,  to  be  collected 
from  the  whole  context,  and  eveij 
part  of  a  written  instrument,  is 
always  to  be  preferred  to  the  par- 
ticular expression.  Gray  v.  Clark, 
11  Vt.  583 ;  KeUy  v.  Mills,  8  Ohio, 
825  ;  Patrick  v.  Grant,  14  Me.  288 ; 
Washburn  v.  Gould,  3  Sto^(U.  S.) 
C.  C.  133 ;  Nettleton  v.  Billings, 
13  N.  H.  446 ;  Warren  v.  Merry- 
field,  8  Met.  (Mass.)  96.  '*  Every 
deed,**  observes  Hoba^bt,  C.  J., 
"  ought  to  be  construed  according 
to  the  intention  of  the  parties,  and 
the  intent  ought  to  be  adjudged  of 
the  several  parts  of  a  deed  as  a 
general  issue  out  of  the  evidence, 
and  ought  to  be  picked  out  of  every 
part,  and  not  out  of  one  word 
onlv;**  and  such  a  construction 
should  be  put  upon  particular 
words  as  wilt  best  answer  and  ef- 
fectuate the  apparent  general  in- 
tention ,^*  ex  ante  cedentums et  con- 
sequentilnis  optima  fit  interpreta" 
tio,  namturpis  estjtarsauoe  cum 
sua  toto  non  contyenit,'^  It  ought 
also  to  be  so  construed  that   no 


CHAP.   XXX.] 


Construction. 


649 


they  should  be  taken  distributively  they  will  be  so  taken, 
although  there  are  no  words  of  severalty  employed.*  If 
the  interest  of  the  covenantors  or  covenantees  is  joint,  the 
covenant  will  be  treated  as  joint,*  but  if  their  interests 
are  several^  and  the  language  used  is  susceptible  of  such 
a  construction,  it  will  be  construed  as  joint  or  several^ 
according  to  the  interests  of  the  parties  to  it ; '  but  if  the 
words  of  the  covenant  are  expressly  and  clearly  joint, 
it  will  be  so  construed,  although  the  interests  are  several, 
and  vice  versa j*^  and  in  such  cases  an  action  upon  the  cov- 
enants must  be  joint ;  and  all  the  parties  represented  in 
the  action,  either  by  themselves  or  their  executors,  &c., 
if  any  of  them  are  dead ;  *  and  the  fact  that  some  of  the 
covenants  are  joint  and  some  several  does  not  change  the 
rule,  as  each  covenant,  to  that  extent  at  least,  must  be 


clause,  sentence  or  word  shall  be 
superiious,  void  or  insignificant. 
Every  word  ought  to  operate  in 
some  shape  or  other ;  nam  verba 
debent  intdligi  cum  effectu  ut  res 
•magis  valeat  quam  pereat.  One 
part  must  be  so  construed  with 
another  that  the  whole  may,  if 
possible,  stand  ;  but  a  clause  or 
particular  sentence  totally  repug- 
nant to  the  general  intent  or  the 
contract  is  void,  and  must  be  re- 
jected. Winch,  93 ;  Domat^s  Civil 
Law,  1.  1,  Tit.  1,  §  2,  xi.  ;  Shep. 
Touch.  88.  The  terms  of  the  con- 
tract *'are  to  be  imderstood  in 
their  plain,  ordinary  and  popular 
sense,  unless  they  have  generally, 
in  respect  to  the  subject-matter, 
as  by  the  known  usage  of  trade  or 
the  like,  acquired  a  peculiar  sense 
distinct  from  the  popular  sense  of 
the  same  words.  Lord  Ellen- 
borough,  Robertson  v.  French,  4 
East,  137 ;  Mallan  v.  May,  13  M.  & 
W.  137  ;  Scott  V.  Bourdillon,  5  B. 
&  P.  213.  Technical  words,  how- 
ever, are  to  have  their  legal  effect, 
unless  from  subsequent  inconsist- 
ent words  it  is  very  clear  that  the 
parties  used  them  in  a  sense  dif- 
ferent from  their  legal  meaning, 
and  the  ordinary  grammatical  con- 
struction is  to  be  followed,  unless 
it  is  repugnant  to  the  general  con- 
text of  the  written  instrument. 
Lees  V.  Mosley,  1  You.  &  C.  607 ; 
Sanderson  v.  Dobson,  1  Exch.  145. 


When  the  words  in  the  opemtive 
party  of  a  deed  of  grant  are  clear 
and  imambiguous  they  cannot  be 
controlled  by  the  recitals,  but  the 
recitals  and  all  other  parts  of  the 
deed  must  be  regarded  in  order  to 
fix  the  true  meaning  of  the  opera- 
tive part.  Walsh  v.  Trevanion,  15 
Q.  B.  751.  The  general  words  of 
a  deed  of  release  may  be  qualified 
and  restrained  by  the  recitals. 
*'  Ck)mmon  sense  requires  that  it 
should  be  so,  and  in  order  to  con- 
strue any  instrument  truly,  you 
must  have  regard  to  all  its  parte." 
Payler  v.  Homersham,  4  M.  &  S. 
426;  Simons  v.  Johnson,  8  B.  & 
Ad.  181. 

» Walker  v.  Webber,  15  Me.  65 ; 
Ludlow  V.  McCrea,  1  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  228 ;  Ernst  v.  Bartle,  1  John. 
Cas.  (N.  Y.)  319. 

« Bradbum  v.  Botfield,  14  M.  & 
W.  559 ;  Hopkinson  v.  Lee,  6  Q. 
B.  964;  Foley  v.  Addenbrooke,  4 
id.  197 ;  Pugh  v.  Stringfield,  8  0. 
B.  N.  S.  2. 

'  James  v.  Emery,  2  Moore,  195 ; 
Sorsbie  v.  Park,  12  M.  &  W.  146 ; 
Wilkinson  v.  Hull,  1  Bing.  N.  C. 
713 ;  Harcourt  v.  Wyman,  3  Exchq. 
817;  Foley  v.  Addenbrooke,  4  Q. 
B.  197 ;  Pugh  v.  Stringfield.  ante. 

*  Lee  V.  Nixon,  1  Ad.  &  El.  201 ; 
Sorsbie  v.  Park,  12  M.  &  W.  146. 

*  Thompson  v.  Hokewell,  19  C, 
B.  N.  S.  713. 


J 


650 


COVBNAOTS. 


[§  303. 


construed  by  itself.*  If  two  or  more  tenants  in  common 
of  land  make  a  joint  lease  at  an  entire  rent,  they  may 
join  in  an  action  for  its  recovery ;  but  if  there  be  a  sepa- 
rate reservation  to  each  of  his  proportion  of  the  rent,  the 
action  for  rent  must  be  separate.  So  far  as  their  cove- 
nants are  expressly  joint,  and  so  far  as  they  are  several, 
they  may  bring  several  actions.*  It  seems  to  be  the  rule 
that,  where  the  parties  to  a  covenant  may  join  in  an 
action  thereon,  they  must  do  so.'  The  whole  of  a  cove- 
nant is  to  be  taken  together,  and  that  construction  to  be 
given  to  it  which  renders  the  whole  operative ;  *  and  if 
there  is  any  doubt  or  ambiguity  upon  the  sense  of  the 
words,  or  if  they  are  susceptible  of  two  constructions, 
that  construction  is  to  be  placed  upon  them  that  is  most 
strong  against  the  person  employing  them,  to  vdt,  the 
covenantor ;  *  but  if  the  covenant  involves  a  forfeiture  it 


>  James  v.  Emery,  8  Taunt.  346, 
seems  to  be  an  authority  for  the 
rule  that  covenants  in  one  part  of 
a  deed  cannot  be  used  to  make 
those  in  another  part  either  joint 
or  several,  and  such  was  practi- 
cally the  doctrine  of  Bradbum  v. 
Bomeld,  ante. 

*  Foley  V.  Addenbrooke,  4  Q.  B. 
197 ;  Powis  v.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid. 
851. 

•In  Foley  V.  Addenbrooke,  Lord 
Denman  concludes  by  sa3ring: 
"  The  case  of  Petrie  v.  Bury,  3  B. 
&  C.  858,  shows  that,  if  the  cov- 
enantees cotUd  sue  jointly,  they  are  , 
bound  to  do  so. "  It  is  a  genend 
rule,  that  when  the  covenant  is 
joint  all  the  obliges  and  cov- 
enantees must  use.  If  these  parties 
had  all  been  tenants  in  common, 
and  the  covenants  joint,  they  must 
have  joined  in  the  action.  But 
here  is  a  case  where  four  have  no 
interest  at  all.    It  is  a  covenant  in 

fross,  and  all  mav  sue  upon  it. 
o  say  that  several  of  them  may 
sue,  or  that  four  might  sue  in 
respect  of  their  several  interests, 
would  be  to  overrule  Hopkinson  v. 
Lee,  14  L.  J.  N.  S.  Q.  B.  101,  and 
Anderson  v.  Martindale,  1  East, 
407.  In  Hopkinson  v.  Lee,  by 
articles  of  agreement  under  seal 
between  the  defendant,  of  the  one 
part,  and  the  plaintiff  and  A.  C. 
Hogg,    of  the    other   part,   after 


reciting  that  the  defendant,  as 
solicitor  of  one  D.  E.  had  applied 
to  the  plaintiff  to  lend  to  D.  K  the 
sum  of  £2900  out  of  certain  moneys 
of  the  said  A.  G.  Hogg,  then  in  the 
plaintiffs  hands  in  trust  for  A.  G. 
Hogg,  on  the  security  of  certain 
stock  in  the  funds,  and  the  oov- 
ensjQt  thereinafter  contained  the 
defendant,  in  pursuance  of  the 
agreement,  and  in  consideration  of 
the  premises,  and  of  the  plaintiff 
]iaving  advanced  the  sum  of  £2900 
to  the  said  D.  E.  at  the  request  of 
the  said  defendant,  did  covenant 
with  and  to  the  plaintiff,  his  ex- 
ecutors, &c.,  and  also,  as  a  separate 
and  distinct  covenant,  with  and  to 
the  said  A.  G.  Ho^,  her  executors, 
&c.f  that  he,  the  defendant,  would 
pay  the  plaintiff,  his  executors  Sec , 
the  regular  interest  on  the  £2900. 
It  was  held,  that  the  plaintiff  could 
not  maintcun  an  action  on  this  cov- 
enant without  ioining  A.  G.  Hogg. 
There  cannot  oe  a  stronger  case 
than  that,  for  there  the  defendant 
covenanted  as  a  separate  and  dis- 
tinct covenant  with  Hogg,  and  if  a 
separate  action  could  dayb  been 
maintained,  it  would  have  been  in 
such  a  case. 

*  Randel  v.  Ganal  Go.,  1  Harr. 
(Del.)  154. 

^  Bacon's  Abridgement,  tit.  Gove- 
nant  (F) ;  Doe  v.  Stevens,  8  B.  A; 
Ad.  803 ;  Bushnell  v.  ProprietoiSy 


CHAP,  XXX.] 


Construction. 


651 


will  be  construed  strictly  against  the  party  claiming  the 

to  the  plaintiff's  right  to  recover. 
Lord  Denman,  C.  J.,  in  passing 
upon  this  question,  said: — **The 
question  is  whether  the  finding  of 
coal  is  a  condition  precedent  to  the 
plaintiff's  recovering  the  annusd 
sum, of  £40.  It  appears  to  us  that 
it  is  not.  The  parties  seem  to  have 
assumed,  that  there  were  coals 
within  and  under  the  premises, 
and  the  indenture  operates  as  an 
absolute  sale  and  convevance  of 
that  coal  to  the  defencfant,  but 
without  any  covenant  on  his  part 
to  work  or  get  that  coaL  The 
words  of  the  conveying  part  are, 
'all  the  coals  lyin^  and  being 
within  and  under  tne  premises. 
Whether  the  defendant  at  any 
time  think  fit  to  find  and  get  them, 
was  left  entirely  to  his  will  and 
pleasure.  The  consideration  mon- 
ey is  £40  per  acre  for  coals /ound, 
not  for  coals  gotten.  By  the  word 
'found'  we  apprehend  the  parties 
to  mean,  'ascertained  to  lis  and 
be.*  It  is  necessary  that  the  quan- 
tity should  be  ascertained  at  some 
time,  in  order  to  fix  the  ultimate 
amount  of  the  consideration  mon- 
ey. That  quantity  might  be  found 
and  ascertained  without  working 
or  eetjbing  the  coal.  Who,  then, 
is  the  proper  person  to  find  and 
ascertam  the  quantity?  Not  the 
plaintiff,  for  he  had  parted  with 
all  his  interest  in  and  possession  of 
the  coal,  but  the  defendant,  who 
has  taken  them.  In  order  to  se- 
cure his  BO  finding  and  ascertain- 
ing the  quantity,  the  covenant  of 
the  defendant  to  pay  £40  per  an- 
num till  the  consideration  money 
should  be  fully  paid  is  inserted, 
otherwise,  as  tnere  is  no  covenant 
to  work  or  get  the  coal,  the  (quan- 
tity miffht  never  be  ascertamed. 
The  rignt  of  the  plaintiff  to  sue 
for  the  annual  sum  is  absolute  and 
without  condition,  and  if,  by  find- 
ing and  ascertaining  the  quantity 


&c.,  81  Conn.  150;  Mills  v.  Catlin, 
23  Vt  ©8;  Dunn  v.  English,  28  N. 
J.  L.  126 ;  Hogg's  App^,  11  Penn. 
St.  479;  Watson  v.  Boylston,  5 
Mass.  411 ;  Alton  v.  Trans.  Co.,  11 
HI.  18.  And  where  the  instru- 
ment will  inure  several  ways,  the 
grantee  may  elect  which  way  to 
take  it.  Jackson  v.  Hudson,  8 
John.  (N.  Y.)  875.  The  particular 
intent  will  govern  the  general  in- 
tent, Dawes  V.  Prentice,  16  Pick. 
(Mass.)  485,  and  the  grammatical 
sense  will  not  be  adhered  to  when 
such  a  construction  would  be  con- 
trary to  the  apparent  intent  of  the 
l^urties.  'Hancock  v.  Watson,  18 
Cal.  187.  A  very  good  illustration 
of  the  extent  to  which  the  courts 
will  go  in  constxuing  the  words  of 
a  covenant  so  as  to  carry  out  the 
real  intent  of  the  parties,  is  to  be 
found  in  Jowett  v.  Spencer,  1 
Ezchq.  648.  Iii  that  case,  an 
action  of  covenant  was  brought 
upon  an  indenture,  by  which  the 
plaintiff  granted  to  the  defendant 
all  the  coals  and  mines  of  coal  un- 
der certain  land.  The  defendant 
covenanted  to  pay  the  plaintiff 
£40  for  every  statute  acre  of  the 
coal  which  should  he  found  under 
the  lands  referred  to  in  the  lease 
until  the  said  price  should  be  fully 
paid,  and  to  pay  the  plaintiff  £40, 
part  of  .the  price,  each  year,  by 
two  equal  half-yearly  payments, 
whether  the  whole  of  an  acre  of 
the   coal  should  be   gotten  each 

?'ear  or,  not.  The  plaintiff  averred 
hat  at  the  time  of  the  making  of 
the  indenture  there  were  under  the 
said  lands  fourteen  acres  of  coal, 
and  that  thirteen  acres  of  coal 
stiU  remained  under  the  said  land, 
and  the  plaintiff  claimed  to  recover 
£40  for  two  half-yearly  payments; 
The  defence  insisted  that  the  find- 
ing of  coal  upon  the  land  was  a 
condition  precedent  to  ^  right  of 
recovery,  and  that,  as  the  plaintiff 
had  not  averred  that  any  t^oal  was 
found  no  recovery  could  be  had, 
and  the  couit  of  Exchequer  sus- 
tained this  view  and  gave  judg- 
ment for  the  defenoant.  See 
Jowett  v.  Spencer,  15  M.  &  W. 
662.  But  this  judgment  was  re- 
yersed  at  Exchequer  Chamber, 
which  held  that  the  finding  of 
coal'  was  not  a  condition  precedent 


of  the  coal,  and  paymg  the  annual 
sum  stipulated,  the  defendant  has 
fully  paid  the  consideration  mon- 
ey for  the  purchase  of  the  coal,  it 
is  for  him  to  plead  those  facts. 
We  think,  then,  that  the  plaintiff 
is  entitled  to  keep  his  vermct,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  court  bek>w 
should  be  reversed." 


653 


Covenants. 


[§303. 


forfeifcure/  Express  covenants  are  construed  more 
strictly  than  implied,*  and  if  the  covenant  is  between 
several  persons,  the  language  is  to  be  applied  to  the  one 
to  whom  it  evidently  belongs.'  Dr.  Paley,  in  his  work 
on  Moral  Philosophy,  very  succinctly  states  the  rule  in 
ethics  for  the  construction  of  agreements  as  follows  :— 
"Where,"  says  he,  **the  terms  of  a  promise  admit  of 
more  senses  than  one,  the  promise  is  to  be  performed  in 
that  s6nse  in  which  the  promisor  apprehended  at  the 
time  that  the  promisee  received  it."*  He  adds:  "It  is 
not  the  sense  in  which  the  promisor  actually  intended  it 
that  always  governs  the  interpretation  of  an  equivocal 
promise,  because,  at  that  rate,  you  might  excite  expecta- 
tions which  you  never  meant  nor  would  be  obUged  to 
satisfy.  Much  less  is  it  the  sense  in  which  the  promisee 
actually  received  the  promise;  for,  according  to  that 
rule,  you  might  be  drawn  into  engagements  that  you 
never  designed  to  undertake.  It  must,  therefore,  be  the 
sense  in  which  the  promisor  believed  that  the  promisee 
accepted  the  promise."  This  rule,  subject  to  the  excep- 
tion that  the  contract  when  reduced  to  writing  can- 
not be  altered  or  varied  by  parol  evidence,  so  far  as  the 
intention  of  the  parties  can  be  gathered  from  the  lan- 
guage used,  is,  says  Mr.  Chttty,*  also  the  rule  of  law." 
Lord  Ellenborough  says : "  The  same  sense  is  to  be  put 


*  Presbyterian  Church  v.  Pickett^ 
Wright  (Ohio)  57. 

*  Shubrick  V.  Sabnond,  3  Burr. 
1639. 

'Randal  v.  Canal  Co.,  1  Harr. 
(Del.)  154.  And  the  intention  of 
the  parties  is  to  be  ascertained  ex 
antecedibus  et  consequenttbus  rath- 
er than  from  particular  expres- 
sions, or  the  general  structure  of 
the  instrument,  or  the  order  of 
arrangement  in  which  the  cove- 
nants appear.  Hopkins  v.  Young, 
11  Mass.  804  ;  Goodwin  v.  Lynn,  4 
Wash.  (U.  S.)  714;  Speake  v. 
She^pard,  6  H.  &  J.  (Md.)  86; 
Davis  V.  Lyman,  6  Conn.  249; 
Westcott  V.  Thompson,  18  N.  Y. 
366. 

*  To  this  extent  the  rule  is  al- 
most literally  adopted  in  Qunnison, 
V.  Bancroft,  11  Vt.  498. 

*  Chitty  on  Contracts,  75. 


*  Most  systems  of  jurisprudence 
have  manifested  a  decided  prefer- 
ence for  written  over  verbal  con- 
tracts. The  French  civil  law  re- 
quires nearly  all  species  of  con- 
^cts  to  be  in  writing,  and  ex- 
pressly proliibits  the  admission  of 
oral  evidence  against  the  contents 
of  a  written  contract.  Pothier's 
Obligations,  No.  785.  And  it  is 
a  fundamental  rule  of  the  common 
law,  that  oral  evidence  shall  not 
be  permitted  to  alter  or  vary  the 
terms  of  a  written  instrument 
of  any  description  ;  upon  the  prin- 
cipal that  a  writing,  whether  a 
specialty  or  a  simple  contract, 
stands  higher  in  the  scale  of  evi- 
dence th&a  oral  testimony,  and 
that  the  stronger  evidence  ought 
not  to  be  contrcmed  by  the  weaker. 
In  obedience  to  this  rule,  it  is  held 
that  an  oral  agreement  entered 


f    A- 


CHAP.   XXX.] 


OONSTKUOTION. 


693 


upon  the  words  of  a  contract  in  an  instrument  not  under 
seal  as  would  be  put  upon  the  same  words  in  an  instru- 
ment under  seal,  for  the  same  intention  must  be  collected 
from  the  same  words  of  a  contract  in  writing,  w;hether 
with  or  without  a  seal.  "  *  The  object,  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  contracts,  is  to  arrive  at  the  real  intention  of 
the  parties,  whatever  may  be  the  nature  of  the  instru- 
ment;' and,  if  necessary,  after  all  other  rules  fail, 
punctuation  will  be  resorted  to,'  the  grammatical  sense 
win  be  repudiated,*  words  and  sentences  will  be  trans- 
posed,' and  when  unavoidably  necessary  to  give  effect  to 
the  instrument  a  repugnant  or  meaningless  clause  will 


into  before  or  at  the  time  of  the 
signing  of  a  written  a^eement  for 
a  lease,  cannot  be  given  in  evi- 
dence, to  change,  qualify,  or  vary 
BJijr  of  the  provisions  of  the 
writing ;  as,  to  show  that  the  rent 
was  to  be  less,  or  was  agreed  to  be 
paid  at  a  different  time.  Henson 
V.  CkKjpe,  8  Scott,  N.  R.  48.  Nor 
is  parol  evidence  admissible  to  add 
to  or  detract  from  the  terms  of  a 
written  lease ;  as,  to  show  that  the 
tenant  agreed  to  pay  the  ground 
rent,  Preston  v.  Merceau,  2  w.  Bl. 
1249,  or  taxes,  Rich  v.  Jackson,  4 
B.  &.  C.  C.  615 ;  or  that  more  land 
was  agreed  to  be  included  than 
that  described.  Meres  v.  Ansell,  1 
WUs.  175 ;  Henson  v.  Ckx>pe,  ante ; 
Dickson  v.  Zizina,  10  L.  J.  C.  P. 
71,  or,  indeed,  any  contempo- 
raneous parol  a^eement  that  goes 
against  the  written  contract,  be- 
cause the  writing  is  treated  as 
merging  all  prior  agreements  re- 
lating to  the  matter,  and  if  any- 
thing was  left  to  rest  in  parol  it  is 
the  folly  of  the  parties,  Kain  v. 
Aid.,  4  D.  &.  R.  61,  and,  unless 
eq^uity  will  reform  the  contract,  it 
will  be  enforced  according  to  the 
intention  of  the  parties  as  evi- 
denced by  the  usual  sense  in  which 
the  words  used  are  employed. 
But  a  contract  may  be  evidenced 
by  several  writings,  as  well  as  by 
one,  provided  it  is  shown  that  they 
relate  to  tiie  same  transaction  and 
it  does  not  appear  that  one  was 
intended  to  entirely  supersede  the 
other.  Brown  v.  I^gtey,  5  Scott, 
N.  R.  48.  As  to  how  for  parol 
evidence  is  admissible  to  expliiin 
a  deed,  see  post  p. 


1  Seddon  v.  Senate,  12  East,  73. 

«Wadlin^n  v.  Hill,  18  Miss. 
560 ;  Winmpiseogee  Co.  v.  Perley, 
47  N.  H.  85;  Peyton  v.  AyreSi  1 
Md.  Ch.  64 ;  Chouteau  v.  Suydam, 

21  N.  Y.  179 ;  Benedict  v.  Gaylord, 
11  Conn.  882;  Mulford  v.  Le 
France,  26  Cal.  88 ;  Mills  v.  Catlin, 

22  Vt.  98 ;  Pike  v.  Monroe,  86  Me. 
809  ;  Deering  v.  Long  Wharf,  25 
id.  51 ;  Wains  v.  Walhs,  4  Mass. 
185;  Bryan  v,  Bradly,  16  Conn. 
474. 

» Ewing  V.  Burnett,  11  Pet.  (U. 
S.)  41. 

^Jackson  v.  Topping,  1  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  888 ;  Hancock  v.  Watson, 
ante. 

*  But  not  unless  there  is  that  in 
the  deed  or  instrument  which 
shows  that  to  read  the  instrument 
as  it  would  defeat  the  intention  of 
the  parties,  and  that  by  doing  so 
the  instrument  will  be  rendered 
effectual  in  the  manner  intended 
by  the  parties.  Kew  v.  Robinson, 
6  Ired.  (N.  C.)  Eq.  878.  "Too 
much  regard,"  says  Willks,  C.  J., 
in  Parkhurst  v.  Smith,  Willes,  882, 
**  is  not  to  be  had  to  the  natural 
and  proper  signification  of  words 
and  sentences  to  prevent  the  sim- 
ple intention  of  the  parties  from 
taking  effect ;  for  the  law  is  not 
nice  in  grants,  and  therefore  it 
doth  often  transpose  words  con- 
trarv  to  their  order  to  bring  them 
to  the  intent  of  the  parties ;  for 
neither  false  Latin  nor  false  Eng- 
lish will  make  a  deed  void  if  the 
intent  of  the  parties  doth  plainly 
appear."  Lord  Coke,  in  Co.  Litt. 
217  6,  says:  **If  a  lease  for  two 
years  be  made  in  February,  ren- 


054 


Covenants. 


[§303. 


be  rejected  /  If  covenants  refer  to,  or  are  dependent  upon 
each  other  they  will  be  construed  together,  and  every 
part  will  be  given  effect  if  possible,  and  every  word  will 
be  made  to  operate  so  as,  if  it  can  be  done,  to  effectuate 
the  intention  of  the  parties.*  If,  however,  the  covenants 
are  independent,  they  must  be  construed  by  themselves ; « 
but,  even  in  construing  such  covenants,  the  other  cov- 
enants will  be  examined  to  ascertain  the  true  intention 
of  the  parties/  If  two  or  more  instruments  are  executed 
at  the  same  time,  between  the  same  parties,  relating  to 
the  same  subject-matter,  they  will  be  read  and  construed 
together  as  forming  but  one  instrument ;  *  and  the  gen- 
eral purpose  of  both  instruments  will  be  carried  into  ef- 
fect.* So  another  instrument,  executed  at  a  prior  date 
and  between  different  parties,  may  be  incorporated  as  a 
part  of  an  instrument,  either  by  a  general  or  special 
reference  thereto,  either  for  a  general  or  special  purpose, 
and  to  the  extent  warranted  by  the  reference,  and  the 
intent  of  the  parties  evinced  thereby  will  become  operative 
in  construing  such  instrument.  ^  So,  too,  when  it  becomes 
necessary  to  do  so,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  intention  of 
the  parties  the  court  will  take  into  consideration  the  cir- 


dering  certain  rent  payable  at 
MichaislinaB-day  and  LadyVdav 
during  the  term,  the  law  will 
make  a  transposition  of  the  feasts, 
viz.,  at  Lady's-day  and  Michael- 
mas-day, that  the  rent  may  be 
paid  yearly  during  the  term,  and 
so  it  is  in  the  case  of  an  annuity." 
*  Alton  V.  Transportation  Co.,  12 
m.  88.  The  rule  may  be  said  to  be 
that,  when  two  clauses  in  an  in- 
strument are  so  repugnant  that 
they  cannot  stand  together,  one 
will  be  retained  and  the  other  re- 
iected,  according  as  the  evident  in- 
tent of  the  parties  require  ;  but  if 
Sjssible,  they  should  be  recomciled. 
aniel  v.  Veal,  82  Ga.  589  ;  Petty 
V.  Boothe,  19  Ala.  638 ;  Eldridge 
V.  Se.  Yup.  Co.,  17  Cal.  44 ;  Cor- 
bin  V.  Healey,  20  Pick.  (Mass.)  514. 
The  general  rule  in  the  construc- 
tion of  deeds  is,  to  retain  the  first 
and  reject  the  last  clause,  but  this 
is  not  inconsistent  with  the  one 
stated,  because  it  is  not  the  order 
in  which  the  clause  appears  in  the 


deed  that  determines  its  prece- 
dence, but  the  order  in  which  it 
ought  to  appear  in  whatever  part 
of  the  instrument  it  may  be  found. 
Doe  V.  Porter,  8  Ark.  18.  Thus,  if 
by  an  inartificial  writing  of  the 
deed  the  premises  were  made  to 
follow  the  habendum,  if  the  two 
are  inconsistent,  the  habendum 
must  yield  to  the  premises.  Eld- 
ridge V,  Se.  Yup.  Co.,  ante. 

*  Richardson  v.  Palmer,  88  N.  H. 
212 ;  Moore  v.  Griffin,  22  Me.  850. 

'  James  v.  Emery,  8  Taunt.  245. 

*  Goodyear  v.  Gary,  4  Blatchf. 
(U.  S.  C.  C.)  271. 

»  Cornell  v.  Todd,  2  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
130 ;  King  v.  King,  7  Mass.  486 ; 
Cloges  V.  Sweetzer,  4  Gush.  (Mass.) 
403. 

'  Ford  V.  Belmont,  7  Robt.  (N. 
Y.)  97. 

'  Gammon  v.  Freeman,  81  Me. 
243;  Field  v.  Huston,  20  Me.  69; 
Ritter  v.  Barrett,  4  Dev.  &  B.  (N. 
C.)  L.  138;  Doe  v.  Bernard,  15 
Miss.  319. 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


CONSTEUCTION. 


6S5 


cumsiances  attending  the  transaction  and  the  particular 
situation  of  the  parties  and  the  state  of  the  thing  granted 
at  the  time  when  the  lease  was  made.*  The  construction 
of  a  covenant  must  be  reasonable,'  liberal,'  and  favorable 
to  the  support  of  the  covenant ;  *  and  the  whole  instru- 
ment is  to  be  considered  in  endeavoring  to  collect  the 
intention  of  the  parties,  although  the  immediate  object  of 
inquiry  be  the  meaning  of  an  isolated  clause,  agreeably 
to  the  maxim  ex  antecedihus  et  conseqaentihus  fit  optima 
interpretatio.*    Where  the  lessee  reserves  an  option  to 


*  WinnipiBeogee  Co.  v.  Perlev, 
ante ;  French  v.  Carhart,  1  N.  Y 
98  ;  Doe  v.  Burt,  1  T.  R.  703  ;  Doe 
T.  Hubbard,  20  L.  J.  Q.  B.  67 
Press  V.  Parker,  10  Moore,  158 
Mulford  V.  LeFrance,  26  Cal.  88 
Hodden  v.  Shoutv,  15  m.  681 
Shore  v.  Wilson,  9  a.  &  F.  555 
Dunn  V.  English,  28  N.  J.  L.  126 
Adams  v.  Frothingham,  8  Mass 
852;  Canal  Co.  v.  Matthieson,  14 
N.  J.  L.  885  ;  Abbott  v.  Abbott,  58 
Me.  856 ;  Bradford  v.  Cressey,  45 
id.  9.  But  if  the  intent  is  clearly 
expressed  by  the  terms  of  the  cov- 
enant, extraneous  circumstances 
or  facts  are  not  admissible  to  alter 
or  change  it.  Means  v.  Church,  8 
W.  &  S.  OPenn.)  808 ;  Hutchings 
▼.  Dixon,  11  Md.  29 ;  Dunn  v.  Bank 
of  Mobile,  2  Ala.  152.  In  Williams 
T.  Glover,  66  Ala.  189,  imder  a 
writtm  lease  of  a  tract  of  land 
situated  on  an  island  in  the  Ten- 
nessee river,  they  were  described  as 
**  all  the  lands  on  the  island  owned 
by  the  said,"  lessor  with  a  specified 
exception,  **  said  lands  to  be  here- 
after measured,  to  ascertain  the 
amount  of  the  same ; "  the  rent 
reserved  being  ".  eight  per  cent,  per 
annum  on  the  value  of  said  lands, 
estimated  at  $85  per  acre  ; "  hdd 
that  the  rent  was  to  be  estimated 
on  the  number  of  acres  in  the  en- 
tire tract,  and  was  not  limited  to 
the  cultivable  portion,  but  that  the 
road-bed  and  right  of  way  of  a 
railroad  company,  acquired  by  it 

§rior  to  the  lease,  should  be  de- 
upted.  In  the  construction  of  a 
written  lease,  with  the  view  of  de- 
termining whether  the  rent  per 
acre  reserved  was  to  be  estimated 
on  the  entire  tract,  or  on  the  culti- 
vable portion  only,  it  is  not  per- 
znissible  that  another  person  had 


offered  the  stipulated  price  esti- 
mated on  the  entire  tract. 

'  Hartshome  v.  Watson,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  717.  In  Jones  v.  Shears,  7  C. 
&P.  846. 

'  The  terms  used  should  prevail 
according  to  their  most  compre- 
hensive and  popular  sense,  unless 
there  is  something  to  restrain  or 
limit  their  signification,  Hawes  v. 
Smith,  18  Me.  429;  Robertson  v. 
French,  4  East,  135,  according  to 
their  reasonable  sense  in  view  of 
the  circumstances  and  the  sul^ect- 
matter  to  which  they  relate.  East- 
erly V.  Heilbron,  1  McMull.  (S.  C.) 
462  ;  Ernst  v.  Bartle,  1  John.  (N. 
Y.)  Cas.  819,  and  that  which  is 
obviously  moflt  just.  Holloway  v. 
Lacy,  4  Humph.  (Tenn.)  468. 

«Hallowell  v.  Morell,  1  Scott, 
N.  R.  109;  Goodtitle  v.  Bailey. 
Camp.  600.  By  the  French  Civil 
Code,  Book  8,  tit.  165,  art.  1,157,  it 
is  provided  that  **  Wlien  a  clause 
is  susceptible  of  two  meanings,  it 
must  rather  be  understood  in  that 
according  to  which  it  may  have 
some  effect  than  in  that  whereby 
it  cannot  produce  any." 

'  Knower  v.  Emerson,  9  Pick. 
(Mass.)  422  ;  Gray  v.  Clark,  11  Vt. 
548  ;  Morey  v.  Homan,  10  Vt.  567. 
In  French  Civil  Code.  Book  3,  Tit. 
8,  §  5,  art.  1161,  it  is  said  '*  aU  the 
dausea  of  agreement  are  inter- 
preted by  each  otJiery  giving  to  each 
the  sense  derived  from  the  entire 
act  J''*  See  also.  Barton  v.  Fitzger- 
ald, 15  East,  514 ;  Trenchard  v. 
Hoskins,  Winch.  98.  It  is  upon 
this  principle  that  the  recital  m  a 
deed  or  lease  may  be  considered 
in  order  that  the  meaning  of  the 
parties  may  be  ascertained,  and 
that  the  matter  of  a  subsequent 
distinct  clause  may  often  be  ex-> 


656 


Covenants. 


[§  303, 


himself,  in  the  absence  of  any  restriction  thereon,  he  may 


plained  or  qualified  by  the  matter 
recited,  Payler  v.  Homersham,  4 
M.  &  S.  423 ;  Simons  v.  Johnson, 
3  B.  &  Ad.  175 ;  Lamper  v.  Cooke, 

5  B.  &  Aid.  606 ;  Hassel  v.  Long,  2 
M.  &  S.  369 ;  and  in  such  cases, 
parol  evidence  is  admissible  to  ex- 
plain the  recitaL  Simons  v.  John- 
son, ante.  Even  where  there  is  no 
recital,  a  general  covenant  may 
sometimes  be  qualified  or  restricted 
as  to  the  subject-matter  by  a  sub- 
sequent specfid  provision.  Thus, 
in  Sicklemore  v.  Thistleton,  6  M. 

6  S.  9,  a  lease  vv^as  granted  by  the 
plaintiff  to  J  S,  ana  the  defendant 
was  a  party  thereto.  J  S  cove- 
nanted generally  to  pav  the  rent, 
and  there  was  a  general  covenant 
by  the  defendant  that  J  S  should 
pay  the  rent  on  the  respective  day 8^ 
and  that  he  should  perform  the 
other  covenante ;  and  that  in  case 
J  S  should  not  pay  the  rent  for 
forty  daySj  defendant  would  pay 
it  on  demand.  The  court  held 
that  the  defendant  was  not  liable, 
until  after  a  default  by  J  S  for 
forty  days  ;  for  that  the  preceding 
general  covenant  by  defendant 
was  quaJified  by  the  latter  stipula- 
lation,  which  they  thought  was 
introduced  for  his  ease  and  protec- 
tion :  the  covenants  of  the  aefiend- 
ant,  though  several  in  point  of 
fact,  not  being  so  in  point  of  obliga- 
tion. So,  in  Edwards  v.  Bees,  7 
C.  &  P.  240,  where  A  demised  a 
colliery  to  B,  and  B  covenanted  to 
pay  as  rent  "  one-third  part  of  the 
money  that  should  arise,  be  made, 
received,  or  produced  from  the 
sale  of  the  coals,"  and  also  cove- 
nanted to  keep  **  true  accoimts  of 
all  coal  daily  raised,  and  to  make 
and  deliver  true  copies  thereof  to 
A,"  it  was  held,  that  taking  the 
two  covenants  together,  the  rent 
was  to  be  calculated  on  the  amount 
of  coals  8o2d,  and  not  on  the  amount 
of  money  actually  received.  It 
follows  that  even  matter  put  only 
by  way  of  recital  in  an  instrument 
may  amount  to  an  agreement, 
where  such  recital  is  to  be  called 
into  action  to  discover  and  give 
effect  to  the  obvious  meaning  of 
the  parties ;  provided  it  is  plain, 
from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  instru- 
ment, that  the  parties  mutually 
contemplated  and   intended   that 


the  matter  or  act  should  be  per- 
formed. Thus,  in  Sampson  v. 
Easterby,  9  B.  &  C.  505,  where  a 
lease  of  an  undivided  third  part  of 
certain  mines  contained  a  recital 
of  an  agreement  made  by  the  les- 
see with  the  lessor,  and  the  owner 
of  the  other  two-thirds,  for  pull- 
ing down  an  old  smelting  mill,  and 
butZdin^  another  of  larger  dimen- 
sions, and  the  lease  contained  a 
covenant  to  keep  such  new  mill 
in  repair,  and  so  leave  it  at  the 
expiration  of  the  term,  but  did 
not  contain  a  covenant  to  haUd  it : 
it  was  held  that  such  covenant 
was  to  be  implied,  but  that  the 
lessor  of  the  one-third  might  main- 
tain an  action  of  covenant  upon 
it,  in  respect  of  liis  interest.  So 
words  by  way  of  exc^tUm  may, 
for  the  same  reason,  constitute  a 
covenant  or  agreement.  Lobd  6if- 
FOBD,  in  Saitoun  v.  Houston,  1 
Bing.  438.  Thus,  a  covenant  in  a 
lease  to  plough,  cultivate,  &c.,  tiie 
premises  demised,  "except  the 
rabbit-warren  and  sheep-walk," 
amounts  to  a  stipulation  not  to 
plough  the  rabbit-warren  and 
sheefv-walk,  and  covenant  lies  for 
so  doing.  Duke  of  St.  Albans  v. 
Ellis,  16  East,  352.  And  a  cove- 
nant or  agreement  may  arise  even 
from  words  put  in  a  clause,  intro- 
duced as  a  proviso  or  condition ; 
if  there  be  sufficient  to  show  that 
the  parties  contemplated  an  agree- 
ment that  the  particular  act  men- 
tioned in  the  clause  should  be 
done.  Beswich  v.  Swindell,  3  Ad. 
&  El.  868.  Thus,  if  a  lessee  cove- 
nant to  repair,  "provided  always, 
and  it  is  agreed  that  the  lessor 
shall  find  timber,  &c."  the  lessor  is 
liable  to  an  action  of  covenant  if 
he  refuse  to  find  it ;  and  the  clause 
is  not  a  mere  qualification  of  the 
lessee's  covenant.  Haider  v.  Tay- 
lor, Brownl.  23 ;  Pordage  v.  Cole, 
T.  Raym.,  183.  So,  where  a  lease 
was  gi'auted  to  A,  on  condition 
that  he  should  keep  and  leave  the 
premises  in  as  good  plight  as  he 
found  them ;  it  was  decided  he 
was  liable  in  covenant  for  omit^ 
ting  to  leave  the  premises  in  good 
plight ;  for  such  an  agreement  was 
to  be  implied.  40  Ed.  3,  6  6 ;  Bac. 
Ab.  Covenant  (A) ;  Rol.  Ad.  518 ; 
Geery  v.  Reason,  Cro.  Car.  128.  But 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


CONBTEUCnON. 


657 


exercise  it  capriciously^  wilfully,  and  with  the  single 

if  the  lessee  of  a  term  assign  it 
bj  indenture,  sealed  by  the  as- 
signee, and  thereby  assign  avb- 
jeet  to  the  rent  reserved  by  the  lease, 
and  the  covenants  therein,*'  the 
latter  cannot  merely  by  force  of 
these  words  be  sued  by  the  lessee 
in  covenant  for  not  paying  the 
rent  to  the  lessor.  Wolveridge  v. 
Steward,  1  C.  &  M.  644,  in  error ; 
9  Bing.  60.  When  case  lies,  see 
Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  &  C.  689. 
Assumpsit  does  not  lie  if  the  as- 
signment contains  *■  the  word 
"  prant,"  on  which  covenant 
nught  be  brought.  Baber  v.  Har- 
ris, 1  P.  &  D.  860.  The  general 
mode  of  construing  deeds  to  which 
there  are  exceptions,  is  to  let  the 
exceptions  control  the  instrument, 
so  far  aa  the  words  of  it  extend, 
and  no  farther ;  and  then  upon  the 
case  being  taken  out  of  the  letter 
of  the  exception,  the  deed  operates 
in  full  force.  Lord  Kenton,  in 
Bowring  v.  Emslie,  cited  in  7  T. 
R.  216,  n.  Although,  in  the  con- 
struction of  all  instruments,  it  is 
the  duty  of  the  court  not  to  con- 
fine itself  to  the  force  of  a  particu- 
lar expression,  but  to  collect  the 
intention  from  the  whole  instru- 
ment taken  together,  yet  the 
judges  are  not  authorized  to  devi- 
ate from  the  force  of  a  particular 
expression,  unless  they  find  in 
other  parts  of  the  instrument  ex- 
pressions which  manifest  that  the 
author  of  the  instrument  could 
not  have  the  intention  which  the 
literal  force  of  a  particular  ex- 
pression may  impute  to  him. 
However  capricious  may  be  the 
intention  which  is  clearly  and  un- 
equivocally expressed,  every  court 
is  bound  by  it,  unless  it  be  plainly 
controlled  by  other  parts  of  the 
instrument.  Hume  v.  Rundell,  1 
S.  &  S.  177.  An  express  particular 
covenant  will  qualify  the  gen- 
erality of  a  covenant  in  law,  or 
implied  covenant ;  as  in  the  case 
of  the  words  demise  and  grant 
in  a  lease,  followed  by  a  covenant 
by  the  lessor  for  quiet  enjoyment, 
against  his  own  act,  or  the  acts  of 
others  claiming  imder  him.  Mer- 
rill V.  Frame,  4  Taunt.  829 ;  Line 
V.  Stephenson,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  183. 
A  covenant  was  entered  into  by 
the  assignor  of  certain  shares  in  a 


patent  right,  that  he  had  good 
right,  full  power,  and  lawful  au- 
thority to  assign  and  convey  the 
said  shares,  and  that  hehs^  not 
by  any  means  directly  or  indirectly 
forfeited  any  ri^ht  or  authority  he 
ever  had  or  might  have  had  over 
the  same.  It  was  held,  that  the 
generality  of  the  former  words  of 
the  covenant  was  not  restrained 
by  the  latter.  Hesse  v.  Stevenson, 
8  B.  &  P.  566.  Lord  Alvanley, 
C.  J.,  in  delivering  the  judgment 
of  the  court,  said  :  **  From  tul  the 
cases  upon  this  subject  it  appears 
to  be  oetermined,  that,  however 
general  the  words  of  a  covenant 
may  be  if  standing  alone,  yet  if 
free  from  other  covenants,  on  the 
same  deed  it  is  plainly  and  irre- 
sistibly to  be  inferrea  that  the 
party  could  not  have  intended  to 
have  used  the  words  in  the  general 
sense  which  they  import,  the  court 
will  limit  the  operation  of  the 
general  words.  The  question, 
therefore,  always  has  been, 
whether  such  irresistible  inference 
does  arise ;  for  if  such  an  infer- 
ence does  arise  rom  concomitant 
covenants,  they  will  control  the 
general  words  of  an  independent 
covenant  in  the  same  deed."  The 
case  of  Barton  v.  Fitzgerald,  15 
East,  580,  is  a  strong  authority 
that  where  neither  the  recital,  nor 
the  other  covenants  in  a  deed, 
evince  a  clear  intention  to  restrict 
the  plain  general  words  of  an 
independent  clause,  that  clause 
shall  receive  its  exclusive,  unre- 
stricted, and  absolute  meaning. 
In  that  case,  the  assignor  in  a  de^ 
of  assignment  of  a  lease  (after  re- 
citing the  original  lease  granted  to 
another  for  the  term  of  ten  years, 
which  by  mesne  assignments  had 
vested  in  him,  and  that  the  pUunt- 
iff  had  contracted  for  the  absolute 
purchase  of  the  premises),  bar- 
gained, sold,  assigned,  tran^erred, 
and  set  over  the  same  to  the  plaint- 
iff, for  and  during  all  the  rest,  &c., 
of  the  said  term  of  ten  years,  in  as 
ample  a  manner  as  the  assignor 
might  have  held  the  same,  subject 
to  the  payment  of  rent  and  per- 
formance of  covenants ;  and  men 
covenanted  that  it  was  a  good  and 
subsisting  lease,  valid  in  law,  of 
and  for  the  said  premises  thereby 

42 


658 


COVEKANTS. 


[§  303. 


purpose  of  incommoding  or  injuring  the  tenant,  without 
incurring  any  liability  to  the  lessee  therefor.  Thus,  if 
A,  in  a  lease  to  B,  covenants  that  B  shall  have  the  '^use 
of  a"  certain  **pump  in  the  yard,  jointly  with  himself, 
whilst  the  same  shall  remain  there^  paying  half  the  ex- 
penses of  repairs,"  the  covenant  does  not  bind  A  to  main- 
tain the  pump,  or  permit  it  to  remain  in  the  yard  for  any 
particular  time,  and  the  covenant  is  not  broken  even 
though  he  removes  it  without  cause,  and  for  the  purpose 
of  incommoding  or  injuring  the  lessee.'  But  a  distinc- 
tion exists,  and  was  made  in  the  case  cited  in  reference 
to  the  pump  between  a  case  where  the  covenant  relates 
to  a  thing  demised,  and  one  where  there  is  no  demise  of  the 
thing  to  which  the  covenant  applies.  In  the  former  case, 
the  demise  of  the  use  of  a  thing  is  treated  as  equivalent 
to  a  demise  of  the  thing  itself.'  But  except  for  the  qual- 
ification of  the  covenant  by  the  use  of  the  words  "whilst 
it  shall  remain  there,"  which  left  it  optional  with  the 
lessor  to  permit  it  to  remain  or  not,  it  would,  in  the  lat- 
ter case,  have  been  treated  as  a  covenant  that  the  pump 

this  was  f  oUowed  by  another  cove' 
nant  •  for  further  assurance  by 
the  **  lessor,  his  executors,  &c., 
and  all  persons  claiming  any  estate 
therein  under  him  or  them,  and  it 
was  held  that,  looking  at  the 
whole  deed,  the  covenant  tor 
quiet  enjoyment  extended  only  to 
tne  acts  of  the  covenantor  and  of 
those  claiming  under  him,  and  not 
against  the  acts  of  aU  the  world. 
The  court  said  that  looking  at  the 
restrictive  nature  of  the  covenants 
preceding  and  following,  the  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjoyment  most 
have  been  intended  to  be  subject 
to  the  same  restrictions. 

1  Rhodes  v.  BuUard,  7  East,  118. 
So  in  Butt  V.  Imperial  Gas  Ck).,  L 
R.  2  Ch.  158,  the  lessor  reserved 
the  right  to  divert  a  certain  road, 
by  making  certain  other  altera- 
tions, and  it  was  held  that  he 
might  divert  the  road  without  any 
reference  to  the  question  whether 
he  was  to  be  benented  by  it  or  not, 
and  although  he  made  the  altera- 
tions stipulated  to  be  made  for 
the  sole  purpose  of  diverting  the 
road. 

« Pomf  ret  v.  Ricrof  t,  1  Saund.  321. 


assigned,  and  not  forfeited,  &c., 
or  otherwise  determined,  or  be- 
come void  or  voidable.  It  was 
held  that  the  generality  of  the 
covenant  for  title,  which  was  sup- 
ported by  the  recital  of  the  bargam 
for  an  absolute  term  of  ten  years, 
was  not  restrained  by  other  cove- 
nants, which  went  only  to  pro- 
vide for  or  against  the  acts  of  the 
assignor  himself,  or  those  w^ho 
claimed  under  him  ;  such  as,  1st, 
a  covenant  against  encumbrances, 
except  an  underlease  of  part  by 
the  assignor  for  three  years ;  2dly, 
for  quiet  enjoyment;  3dly,  for 
further  assurance.  And  there- 
fore/as  it  appeared  that  the  orig- 
inal lease  was  for  ten  ^ears,  de- 
terminable on  a  life  m  being, 
which  dropped  before  the  ten 
years  expirea,  though  not  until 
after  the  covenant  of  the  assizor ; 
tlie  court  held  that  the  assignee 
might  assign  a  breach  upon  the 
absolute  covenant  for  title.  See 
also,  Nind  v.  Marshall,  3  Moore, 
703,  where  a  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  was  against  *'  the  les- 
sor, his  executors,  &c.,  or  any 
other  persons  whatsoever, ^^     But 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


Construction. 


659 


should  remain  during  the  term,  and  that  the  lessee 
should  have  the  use  of  the  same  by  paying  half  the  ex- 
penses of  repair.*  As  illustrative  of  the  rule  that  a  cove- 
nant is  to  be  construed  according  to  the  intention  of  the 
parties  as  ascertained  from  the  language  used  and  the 
subject-matter  to  which  it  appUes,  in  a  case  where  a 
lease  granted  a  certain  lot  "with  the  fire-proof  ware- 
house for  the  purpose  of  storing  cotton  therein,"  it  ap- 
pearing from  the  circumstances  attending  the  execution 
of  the  lease  that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  parties  to 
procure  a  fire-proof  warehouse  for  that  purpose,  it  was 
held  that  the  recital  as  to  the  warehouse  must  be  treated 
as  a  covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessor  that  it  was  fire- 
proof.' But  a  covenant  of  that  description  is  not  treated 
as  continuing,  and  if  the  warehouse  was  fire-proof  at  the 
time  when  the  lease  was  made^  the  fact  that  it  subse- 
quently  became  otherwise  from  any  cause  would  not  op- 
erate as  a  breach  of  the  covenant.  This  was  well  illus- 
trated in  a  California  case.  In  that  case  a  lease  was 
made  of  premises,  describing  them  as  "a  certain  lot  of 
land,  together  with  the  improvements  thereon,  consisting 


'  See  opinion  of  Le  Blanc,  J., 
in  Rhodes  v.  Bullaxd,  ante.  In 
Pomfret  v.  Ricroft,  ante,  a  lease 
was  made  of  a  certain  piece  of 
land  "  except  the  land  on  which 
the  pump  stands,  &c.,"  but  giving 
to  the  lessee  in  common  with  the 
other  tenants  the  right  to  us^  the 
pump  during  his  term  of  thirty- 
one  years.  The  plaintiff  claimed 
that  by  this  exception  and  demise 
to  hiTTi  of  the  right  in  common  to 
use  the  pump,  the  defendant  im- 
pliedly covenanted  to  repair  it, 
and  for  permitting  it  to  go  to  de- 
cay he  Drought  covenant.  But 
the  Court  of  Exchequer  held  that 
no  such    covenant  could  be  im- 

SUed,  but  that  the  plaintiff — the 
ef  endant  having  demised  the  U8e 
of  the  pump  to  hun — might  repair 
it  himself,  *^  because  where  the  use 
of  a  fhirtg  is  granted,  everything 
is  grantm  by  which  the  arantee 
may  have  and 'enjoy  such  M»e." 
See  also  Uford's  Case,  11  Coke,  52 
a,  where  this  doct  nne  of  implied 
grants  is  very  fully  and  clearly  set 


forth;   also  Lord  Darcy  v.  Ask- 
vjrith.  Hob.  234. 

'  Vaughn  v.  Mattock,  23  Ark.  9. 
A  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  is 
not  to  be  construed  as  intended  to 
protect  the  lessee  against  any  or 
all  disturbances,  but  only  such  as 
in  law  amoimts  to  a  disturbance. 
Ryckman  v.  Gillis,  57  N.  Y.  68. 
In  a  covenant  in  a  lease  of  certain 
factories,  the  lessee  covenanted  to 
keep  the  "factories"  insured.  It 
was  held  that  the  word  "  factories" 
was  to  be  treated  as  embracing  the 
fixed  machinery  used  to  operate 
them,  and  that  the  covenant  should 
be  construed  as  re<^uiring  the  lessee 
to  keep  such  machmery,  as  well  afl* 
the  buildings,  insured.  Mahew  v. 
Hardesty,  8  Md.  479.  As  to  cove- 
nants implied  in  leases,  see  Lynch  v. 
Ononda^  Salt  Co.,  64  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)558.  As  to  when  a  covenant 
for  quiet  enjoyment  is  treated  as 
broken  by  the  existence  of  a  right 
of  way,  see  Bridgo  v,  Pierson,  66 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  514. 


GGO 


Covenants. 


[§  308. 


of  a  building  known  and  designated  by  the  name  of  Hotel 
de  France/'  and  it  was  held  that  this  could  only  be  con- 
strued as  a  covenant  that  such  a  building  was  upon  the 
premises  at  the  time  when  the  lease  was  made,  and  not 
that  it  should  remain  there  during  the  entire  existence  of 
the  term.'  In  an  Indiana  case'  the  lease  contained  a 
covenant  that  the  lessee  should  ^'seed"  certain  land  '*to 
clover  each  year,"  and  it  was  held  that  this  could  not  be 
construed  as  a  covenant  on  the  lessee's  part  that  the  seed 
should  grow,  but  only  that  he  should  sow  proper  seed 
upon  the  land  properly  prepared  to  receive  it,  at  the 
usual  season.  A  covenant  must  be  reasonably  construed. 
Thus,  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  as  ^^  against  the 
lessor,  his  heirs,  executors,  &c.,  or  any  person  or  persons 
whatever,"  is  treated  as  a  covenant  merely  against  a  dis- 
turbance in  possession,  either  by  the  lessor  or  some  per- 
son claiming  by,  under,  or  through  him,  and  not  as  a 
covenant  against  an  entry  by  a  mere  trespasser,  and  it 
is  unreasonable  to  suppose  from  the  language  used  that 
the  parties  intended  to  enter  into  any  such  covenant.' 
So,  where  a  lease  was  made  of  a  lot  of  ground  '^  with  all 
the  appurtenances "  for  four  years,  at  a  rental  of  $22  a 
year,  and  the  lessee  agreed  to  return  the  premises  at  the 
end  of  the  four  years  "  with  all  the  appurtenances ; "  it  was 
held,  that  this  could  not  be  construed  as  a  covenant  on 
the  lessee's  part  to  rebuild  any  of  the  buildings  thereon 
accidentally  destroyed  by  fire,  or  other  casualty  not  re- 
sulting from  his  negligent  acts,  as,  in  view  of  the  lan- 
guage used,  the  rent  paid,  &c.,  it  would  be  unreasonable 
to  suppose  that  the  parties  intended  that  he  should  do  so/ 


>  Branger  t.  Manciet,  80  Cal.  624. 

«  Walters  v.   Hutchms,  29  Ind. 
136. 

<  Branger  v.  Manciet,  80  Cal.  624. 

^  MaggortT.  fiansberger,  8  Leigh. 
fVa.)  532.  Where  a  tenant  entered 
into  a  covenant  to  re-deliver  a  steam 
saw  mill,  at  the  expiration  of  his 
term,  in  as  good  order  as  when  it 
was  leased  to  him,  **mia voidable 
accidents  and  the  usual  wear  and 
tear  excepted,*'  it  was  held  that 
this  could  not  be  construed  as  a 
^ovenant  to  rebuild  the  mill  in  case 


it  was  cuxidentaUy  destroyed  hy 
fire,  as  that  must  be  treated  as 
among  the  accidents  excepted 
against  in  the  covenant.  Howeth 
v.  Aderson,  25  Texas,  657.  Where, 
in  a  lease,  several  buildings  were 
embraced  and  named,  and  the  les- 
sor covenanted  *'to  repair  said 
building,'*  it  was  held  that  the 
covenant  should  be  treated  as  ap- 
plying to  all  the  buildings,  and  not 
as  merely  relating  to  the  one  last 
named.  Leavitt  v.  Fletcher,  10 
Allen  (Mass.)  119. 


OHAP.  XXX.]  OoNsratTcnoN,  661 

■ 

A  covenant  on  fhe  part  of  a  lessor  to  build  upon  the 
leased  premises,  is  held  not  to  involve  a  covenant  to  re- 
build in  case  the  building  erected  by  him  is  destroyed  by 
jftre  or  other  casualty.  Having  performed  his  covenant 
once,  by  erecting  such  a  building  as  he  covenanted  to 
erect,  his  covenant  is  discharged ;  and  even  though  the 
building  is  destroyed  by  fire  the  lessee  remains  liable  for 
the  rent.' 

If  a  party  acts  contrary  to  the  intention  of  a  covenant, 
he  is  guilty  of  a  breach  thereof ;  as,  if  he  covenants  to 
leave  all  the  trees  upon  the  land,  he  is  treated  as  covenant- 
ing to  leave  them  standing,  and  if  he  cuts  them  down 
and  leaves  them  lying  upon  the  land  he  is  Uable  for  a 
breach  of  the  covenant ;  *  or,  if  he  covenants  to  leave  a 
certain  pump  upon  the  premises,  that  is  already  put  up 
and  in  use,  his  covenant  is  not  kept  by  pulling  out  the 
pump  and  leaving  it  upon  the  land,  &c.  The  court  will 
look  first  to  the  covenant  itself,  and  if  there  is  any  ambi- 
guity, or  if  the  intention  of  the  parties  is  not  entirely 
plain  therefrom,  they  wiU  look  at  the  circumstances  ex- 
isting at  the  time  when  the  lease  was  made,  and  the 
subject-matter  to  which  it  relates,  to  ascertain  the  real 
meaning  and  intention  of  the  parties.'  If  a  covenant  is 
merely  negative  or  passive,  some  positive  act  must  be 
done  in  order  to  constitute  a  breach  ;  as,  where  a  person 
covenants  with  another  to  permit  him  to  do  ^  certain  act, 
and  permission  to  do  the  act  was  never  asked,  there  can 
be  no  breach,  even  though  the  covenantor  has  put  him- 

9 

iInCk)wellv.Lmnle7,80CaL151;  building   was   destroyed  by    fire 

the  plaintiff  leased  certain  prem-  insisting  that  impliedly  the  plaint- 

ises  to  the  defendant  for  the  term  iff  must  be  treated  as  having  cov- 

of  five  years  at  a  certain  rental,  enanted  to  re-build  in  case  of  the 

and  also  covenanted  to  erect  a  destruction  of  the  building  erected 

building  upon  the  premises,   ac-  by   him   imder   his   covenant  to 

cording  to  certain  plans  and  spec-  build,  and  that  having  failed  to  do 

ifications  referred  to,  and  the  les-  so,  he  was  not  entitled  to  reooVbr 

see  covenanted  to  keep  the  build-  for  the  rent  of  the  premises.    But 

ing  in  repair.    The  building  was  the  court  held  that  the  plaintiff's 

erected    according    to  the    con-  covenant  was  discharged  bv  the 

tract,  and  the  defendant  paid  the  erection  of  the  building,  and  that 

rent  for  three  years,  but  during  the  covenant  to  re-build  could  not 


the  early  part  of  the  fourth  year      be  implied. 

Idhig  ■      " 

and  the  defendant  refused  to  pay      (E),  2. 


the  building  was  destroyed  by  fire,         *  Comyn's  Digest,  Tit.  (Covenant 

and  the  defendant  refused  to  pay      (E),  2. 

any  rent  for  the  period  after  the         '  Vaughn  v.  Mattock,  28  Ark.  9l 


662 


Covenants. 


[§  303. 


self  in  a  position  that  he  could  not  perform ;  as»  when  A 
covenanted  with  B  to  permit  B  to  sow  clover  amongst 
barley  sown  by  A,  and  he  sowed  in  the  last  year  of  his 
term  without  giving  B  notice,  it  was  held  a  breach  of  the 
covenant.*  Nor  is  a  lessee  liable  for  a  breach  occurring 
'before  the  covenant  was  in  fact  executed,  although  the 
lease  refers  back  to  a  time  anterior  to  the  alleged  breach, 
as  the  commencement  of  the  term,  and  although  the 
covenantor  was  in  possession  as  tenant  when  the  alleged 
breach  was  committed.  Thus,  the  defendant  went  into 
possession  under  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  June  22d,  1842, 
but  the  lease  was  not  executed  until  November  following, 
but  it  recited  the  fact  that  the  term  commenced  June 
22d.  Shortly  after  the  defendant  entered,  and  before  the 
lease  was  executed,  he  commenced  to  pull  down  and 
make  alterations  in  the  buildings  upon  the  premises. 
The  lease  contained  certain  covenants  on  the  tenant's 
part  to  repair,  of  which  his  acts  in  pulling  down  and 
altering  the  premises  were  alle^d  as  a  breach,  but  the 
court  held,  that  even  though  such  acts  constituted  a 
breach,  no  recovery  could  be  had  upon  the  covenant, 
because  the  alleged  breach  was  committed  before  the  lease 
was  executed.^  But  if  a  tenant  goes  into  possession  of 
premises  under  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  and  subse- 
quently a  lease  is  executed,  by  which  he  covenants  to  do 
certain  things  unless  prevented  by  "inevitable  accident," 
in  an  action  for  a  breach  of  the  covenant  he  cannot  set 
up  an  inevitable  accident  occurring  before  the  lease  was 
made,  although  after  his  tenancy  commenced,  in  defence 
thereto.*    Where  the  performance  of  a  covenant  is  ren- 


»  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  110. 

« Shaw  V.  Kay,  1  Exchq.  412 ; 
Steele  v.  Mart,  4  B.  &  C.  272 ;  Bird 
V.  Baker,  1  E.  &£.  12. 

*^  In  Jervis  v.  Tompkinson,  1  H. 
&  N.  195,  by  an  agreement  in  writ- 
InK,  dated  Aug.  29th,  1851,  made 
between  the  plaintiff  and  defend- 
ants, the  plamtiff  (amongst  other 
things)  covenanted  with  the  de- 
fendants that  he  would,  on  or 
before  the  25th  day  of  March 
then  next  ensuing,  grant  and  de- 
mise to  the  defendants  the  lower 


mine  of  rock  salt  or  salt  rock 
within  and  under  certain  land  of 
the  plaintiff,  at  Witton-cum- 
Twamorookes,  &c.,  with  free  lib- 
erty, power,  and  authority  for  the 
defendants,  during  the  time  there- 
inafter mentioned,  and  pursuant 
to  the  covenants  to  be  contained  in 
the  said  lease,  to  get  and  take  all 
such  lower  rock  salt  or  salt  rock 
as  should  be  found  within  or  un- 
der the  said  land,  and  to  carry- 
away  and  dispose  of  the  same: 
To  hold  the  same  unto  the  def  end* 


m^ 


GHAP.  XXX] 


Construction. 


66S 


dered  impossible,  either  by  the  act  of  Qod  or  of  the  law, 


ants,  their  executors,  &c.,  from 
the  15th  day  of  June  then  last  past 
for  the  term  of  twenty-one  years, 
at  and  under  the  several  rents,  and 
subject  to  the  several  covenants 
and  provisos  therein  mentioned, 
which  were  in  terms  the  same, 
rents,  covenants,  and  provisos  as 
were  contained  in  the  tease  after- 
wards granted  in  pursuance  there- 
of. At  the  time  of  the  execution 
of  this  agreement  the  defendants 
began  to  sink  a  shaft  on  a  piece  of 
land  belonging  to  them,  adjoining 
the  lands  mentioned  in  the  agree- 
ment, for  the  purpose  of  getting 
the  rock  salt  referred  to  m  the 
agreement.  The  sinking  of  this 
shaft  was,  in  September,  1851,  dis- 
continued in  conseauence  of  an 
influx  of  brine,  whicn  interrupted 
the  progress  of  the  work.  The  de- 
f  enoants  thereupon  began  to  sink 
a  second  shaft  in  another  part  of 
the  same  piece  of  land,  which 
shortly  afterwards,  in  the  same 
montn  of  September,  was  discon- 
tinued, from  the  like  cause.  From 
these  shafts  the  defendants  had 
intended  to  drive  levels  under 
their  land  to  the  plaintiff's  mine  of 
rock  salt,  and  so  to  get  the  same. 
On  the  16th  day  of  November, 
1851 ,  a  lease,  pursuant  to  the  agree- 
ment, and  a  counterpart,  were 
executed  and  delivered  by  the 
plaintiff  and  defendants  respect- 
ively.— ^The  case  set  out  the  lease, 
which  was  for  twenty-one  years, 
from  the  15th  of  June,  1851.  The 
reddendum  commenced  with  a 
reservation  of  a  rent  of  6d.  per 
ton,  and  also  in  proportion, 
for  a  less  quantity  thim  a  ton  of 
rock  salt,  a£  any  time  during  the 
continuance  of  the  term,  gotten 
from  the  mine  ;  '*  to  be  paid  half- 
yearly,  on  the  19th  September  and 
15th  March  in  each  year,  in  re- 
spect of  the  rock  salt  which  shall 
have  been  raised  or  gotten  during 
the  preceding  half-year ;  the  first 
of  such  pavments  to  be  made  on 
such  one  of  the  said  days  as  shall 
first  and  next  happen  after  any 
rock  salt  shall  have  oeen  raised  or 
gotten  from  and  out  of  the  said 
mine."  Then  followed  the  reser- 
vation (stated  in  the  declaration) 
of  6d.  per  ton  for  any  quantity 
gotten  m.  a  year,  less  than  1000 


tons.  The  lease  also  contained  the 
following  covenant  on  the  part  of 
the  defendants : — ''  And  also  shall 
and  will,  in  case  the  said  rock  salt 
mine  and  premises  hereby  devised 
shall,  durmg  the  continuance  of 
the  said  term  hereby  granted,  be 
in  danger  of  failing,  by  any  inevi- 
table accident  whatever,  at  their 
own  proper  costs  and  charges,  use 
their  utmost  endeavors  to  protect 
the  said  rock  salt  mine  and  premi- 
ses from  injury  or  prejudice."  The 
proviso  for  cesser  was  as  follows : 
•*  Provided  also,  and  it  is  hereby 
further  declared  and  agreed  by 
and  between  the  said  parties  to 
these  presents,  that  in  case  the  rock 
salt  or  salt  rock  within  and  imder 
the  said  land,  &c.,  shall,  during 
the  continuance  of  the  said  term 
hereby  granted,  fail  by  any  inevi- 
table accident,  or  if  the  mine  of 
rock  salt  or  salt  rock  hereby  de- 
mised shall  be  worked  out  and  ex- 
hausted at  any  time  during  the 
said  term,  then  and  in  either  of 
the  said  cases,  upon  payment  of 
all  rent  due  and  arrears  of  rent  in 
respect  of  the  said  mine  and  prem- 
ises hereby  demised,  and  on  per- 
formance m  all  respects  of  all  and 
every  the  covenants,  conditions, 
and  agreements  herein  contained, 
and  on  the  part  and  behalf  of  the 
said  R.  Tompkinson,  &c.  (the  de- 
fendants), to  be  observed,  fulfilled, 
and  performed,  the  said  term  of 
twenty-one  years  hereby  granted, 
or  the  residue  thereof  then  unex- 
pired, shall  cease  and  determine 
to  all  intents  and  purposes  whatso- 
ever, anything  herem  contained 
to  the  contrary  in  anywise  not- 
withstanding." In  consequence  of 
the  influx  of  brine  before  men- 
tioned the  defendants  have  never 
in  any  manner  worked  the  plaint- 
iff's mine  of  rock  salt  demised  by 
the  said  lease,  nor  raised  or  got  any 
rock  salt  therefrom,  nor  driven 
through  the  rock  salt  under  their 
own  piece  of  land  mentioned  in 
the  said  lease,  in  order  to  work  or 

get  the  demised  mine.  Neither 
ave  they  paid  any  or  anv  part  of 
the  several  rents  reserved  by  the 
said  lease.  In  answer  to  questions 
left  to  the  jury,  thev  found  that 
the  defendants  could  not  have 
worked  the  plaintiff's  mine  '*by 


664 


Covenants. 


[§  303. 


performance  is  excused.  Thus,  in  a  Michigan  case'  the 
landlord  covenanted  to  rebuild  in  case  of  the  destruction 
of  the  building  by  fire.  The  City  after  the  loss,  but 
before  preparation  had  been  made  to  rebuild,  passed  an 
ordinance  prohibiting  the  erection  of  wooden  bmldings. 
After  the  buildings  were  burned,  the  defendant,  with 
reasonable  dispatch  went  on  and  erected  a  brick  build- 
ing, and  the  tenant  moved  into  a  part  of  it,  but,  complain- 
ing that  the  new  building  was  not  put  up  within  a 
suitable  time.  He  brought  an  action  against  the  landlord 
on  the  covenant.  The  court  held  that  the  action  would 
not  lie,  as  the  covenant  only  required  the  landlord  [to 
rebuild  such  a  structure  as  was  originally  leased,  and  that 
this  being  rendered  impossible  by  the  passage  of  the  ordi- 
nance,  the  landlord  was  released  from  performance. 
CooLEY,  J.,  said  *^Some  stress  is  also  laid  upon  the  fact 
that  the  lease  did  not  mention  the  material  of  which  the 
old  building  was  constructed.  The  court  below  sustained 
the  action. 

If  this  judgment  is  correct,  then  Cordes  had  placed 
himself  under  legal  obligation  not  only  to  put  up  a  new 
building  of  some  more  substantial  material  than  wood, 
no  matter  how  much  greater  might  be  the  cost,  and  to 
turn  it  over  to  Miller  for  the  term  at  the  same  rent,  no 


any  reasonable  application  of  la- 
bor, diligence,  bkiII,  money,  or 
other  means  ;"  and  that  'Hhe^ 
"were  prevented  from  working  it 
by  the  influx  of  brine."  The  ques- 
tion for  the  opinion  of  the  Court 
was,  whether,  under  thecirciun- 
BtaHces  stated,  the  defendants 
have  a  defence  to  their  action  un- 
der the  proviso  for  cesser  of  the 
said  lease,  or  under  any  other  of 
the   pleas.    The  verdict   for   the 

Slaintiff  was  sustained.  Pollock, 
!.  B. ,  saying  :  "  The  term  unques- 
tionably commenced,  in  paint  of 
interest i  on  the  16th  Nov.,  1852, 
though  the  duration  of  the  term 
SB  to  computation  of  time,  was  to 
be  reckoned  from  the  25th  of  June, 
1851.  See  Wyburb  v.  Tuck,  3  Keb. 
207.  To  x»iuse  the  proviso  to  oper- 
ate, there  must  have  been  a  rail- 
nre  by  inevitable  accident  after  the 
IQth  of  Nov,,  1852,  for  the  proviso 


clearly  refers  to  some  future  in- 
evitable accident,  and  that,  during 
the  contimvance  of  the  term, 
which  did  not  begm  until  that 
day  whereas  the  accident  which 
caused  the  failure  of  the  salt,  is 
found  bv  the  special  case  to  have 
occurred  before  the  date  of  the 
lease,  but  after  the  date  ctf  the 
agreement  for  a  lease  and  the  com- 
mencement of  operations  under 
that  agreement,  by  the  disooveiy 
of  brine  in  such  quantities  as  to 
prevent  the  getting  the  rock  salt 
at  all.  If  the  lease  had  been  exe- 
cuted when  the  agreement  was, 
viz.,  on  the  25th  Aug.,  1851,  the 
influx  of  brine,  which  appears  to 
have  taken  place  after  sinking 
the  shaft  in  Sept.,  1851,  might 
have  been,  on  the  evidence, 
such  an  inevitable  accident 
as  to  be  within  the  proviso." 
1  Cordes  v.  Miller,  89  Mich.  581. 


I 


■    ■  ■. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CONSTBUCmON.  666 

matter  how  much  more  the  occupation  might  be  worth. 
Moreover  he  would  be  obliged  to  reproduce  the  old  build- 
ingy  as  near  as  the  change  in  the  material  would  permit, 
and  could  not  compel  his  lessee  to  accept  a  building  dif- 
ferently planned,  subdivided  and  arranged,  even  though 
it  might  be  better  and  at  least  equally  convenient.  In 
other  words,  in  the  enforced  change  of  material  Cordes 
could  not  consult  his  own  interest  in  making  such  modi- 
fications as  the  change  would  be  likely  to  render  impor- 
tant and  desirable,  but  would  be  tied  down  to  the  plan 
and  arrangement  of  a  building  which  it  might  be  well 
enough  to  reproduce  in  the  old  material,  but  which  would 
never  be  chosen  if  the  material  were  to  be  brick,  stone  or 
iron. 

We  cannot  think  this  the  fair  construction  of  the  lease. 
Cordes  covenanted  to  rebuild,  if  destroyed  by  fire,  the 
building  he  leased;  but  did  not  covenant  that  if  not 
allowed  to  rebuild,  he  would  put  up  another  on  the 
same  plan,  of  more  substantial  and  presumably  more 
costly  material.  Had  the  exact  contingency  which  has 
since  happened  been  in  the  minds  of  the  parties  at  the 
time,  it  is  scarcely  conceivable  that  the  lessor  would  have 
consented  to  put  up  a  brick  building  in  place  of  the  one 
leased,  and  to  receive  for  it  thesame  rent  the  wooden 
building  brought  him,  when  its  probable  rental  value  would 
be  considerably  greater,  and  its  cost  presumably  more. 

Had  this  been  an  agreement  by  a  builder  to  rebuild  the 
old  building,  it  would  scarcely  be  urged  that  the  covenant 
would  bind  him  to  erect  a  new  one  differing  from  it  so 
radically  as  would  a  brick  or  a  stone  structure  from  one 
of  wood.  Had  Cordes  been  selling  this  land  to  Miller 
with  a  similar  agreement  respecting  the  building,  it 
would  be  equally  plain  that  the  change  in  the  law  could 
not  work  a  change  in  his  contract  so  seriously  increasing 
his  responsibility.  But  in  principle  the  cases  suggested 
would  not  differ  from  this  in  the  least.  Cordes  under- 
took for  something  which  by  a  change  in  the  law  has 
become  illegal ;  and  his  covenant  has  thereby  been  dis- 
charged. 


666 


CoVBirAOTS. 


[§304. 


Sec.  304.  inability  ofthepartieB  and  their  assignB.— As  to 
the  extent  to  which  a  lessee  or  his  assignee  is  liable  in 
covenant  there  is  a  considerable  difference.'  The  lessee 
has  both  a  privity  of  contract  and  a  privity  of  estate ;  and 
though  he  assigns,  and  thereby  destroys  the  privity  of 
estate,  yet  the  privity  of  contract  continues,  and  he  is 
liable  in  covenant  notwithstanding  the  assignment ; '  but 

the  right  to  an  action  of  covenant, 
however,  survives  the  assignment ; 
Fisher  v.  Ameers,  1  B.  &  Gold.  20 ; 
Ventrice  v.  Goodcheape,  1  Rol.  Ab. 
522  (N),  pL  1 ;  cited,  Cro.  Jac.  809: 
Ck>mitess  of  Devon  v.  Collyer,  1 
Rol.  Ab.  623  (N);  1  Saund.  240; 


>  WoodfaU's  L.  &  T.  111-122. 

*  A  lessee  cannot  discharge  his 
liability  upon  either  the  express  or 
implied  covenants  in  the  lease,  by 
assignment,  Flinn  v.  Callow,  1  M. 
&  G.  589 ;  Worthington  v.  McCann, 
19  Ohio  St.  66 ;  Van  Rensselaer  v. 
Chadwick,  24  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  838 ; 
Broom  v.  Hore,  Cro.  El.  638 ;  Wad- 
ham  V.  Marlow,  8  East,  814  n. ; 
Marsh  v.  Brace,  Cro.  Jac.  834; 
Staines  v.  Morris,  IV.  &  B.  11 ; 
Fifty  Associates  v.  Howland,  5 
Cush.  (Mass.)  214,  and  the  lessee 
is  not  absolved  from  his  liability 
upon  an  express  covenant,  even 
though  the  lessor  assented  to  the 
assignment  and  has  accepted  rent 
from  the  assignee.  Lodge  v.  White, 
80  Ohio  St.  569  ;  27  Am.  Rep.  492 ; 
Taylor  v.  De  Bue,  81  Ohio  St.  468  ; 
Sutliff  V.  Atwood,  15  id.  194;  2 
Piatt  on  Leases,  855.  While  the 
lessee  remains  tenant,  the  lessor 
has  his  option  to  sue  him  for  ar- 
rears of  rent  in  debt,  Rushden's 
Case,  1  Dy.  4  6;  Anon.,  2  Dy.  247 
h,  pi.  (77) ;  Sicklemore  v.  Simonds, 
Cro.  Eliz.  797,  or  covenant ;  Fisher 
V.  Ameers,  1  B.  &  Gold.  20 ;  Sickle- 
more  V.  Simonds,  ante  ;  but  when 
the  privitv  of  estate  is  transferred, 
and  the  lessor  has  once  accepted 
rent  of  the  assignee,  or  otherwise 
assented  to  his  tenancy,  Fisher  v. 
Ameers,  ante  ;  Anon. ,  2  Dy.  247  h, 
pi.  (77) ;  Walker's  Case,  8  Coke,  24 
o;  Iremonger  v.  Newsam,  Latch, 
260 ;  Marsh  v.  Brace,  Cro.  Jac.  884 ; 
March  v.  Brace,  2  Bulstr.  151 ;  Ar- 
thur V.  Vanderplank,  7  Mod.  198 ; 
MiDs  V.  Auriol,  1  H.  Bl.  453  ;  Au- 
riol  V.  Mills,  4  T.  R.  08  ;  Thomas  v. 
Cooke,  2  Stark.  408 ;  Wadham  v. 
Marlow,  8  East,  314  n.,  and  not  be- 
fore, HasseFs  Executrix,  Lit.  53; 
Auriol  V.  Mills,  4  T.  R.  94 ;  Whit- 
way  V.  Pinsent,  Sty.  800.  See 
Anon.,  Dy.  247  b.  pi.  (77);  Mar- 
row V.  Tiirpin,  Cro.  Eliz.  715,  the 
right  to  maintain  an  action  of  debt 
against  the  lessee  is  determined; 


Ashurst  V.  Mingay,  2  Show.  132; 
Parker  v.  Webb,  8  Salk.  5;  Ed- 
wards V.  Morgan,  8  Lev.  233; 
Overton  v.  Sydal,  Cro.  EUiz.  555 ; 
Arthur  v.  Vanderplank,  7  Mod. 
198 ;  Jodderell  v.  Towell,  Ca.  tem^ 
Hardw.  348;  Jenkins  v.  Hermi- 
tage, Freem.  877 ;  Hornby  v.  Houl- 
diteh,  1  T.  R.  98  n. ;  Mifis  v.  Au- 
riol, 1  H.  Bl.  448 ;  Auriol  v.  Mills, 
4  T.  R.  94  ;  Stevenson  v.  Lombard, 
2  East,  575 :  Staines  v.  Morris,  1  V. 
&B,  11 ;  Burnett  V.  L^ch,  5  B.  ft 
C.  589 ;  Manning  v.  Flight,  8  B.  ft 
Ad.  211  ;  Thomas  v.  Cooke,  2 
Stark.  40i3;  and  the  lessor  may 
sue,  at  his  election,  either  the  les- 
see, or  the  assignee;  Barnard  v. 
Godscall,  Cro.  Jac.  809 ;  Vamis  v. 
Goodcheape,  cited  Cro.  Jac.  309; 
Bacheloure  v.  Gage,  W.  Jo.  223 ; 
Hornby  v.  Houlditch,  Andr.  40; 
Walker'sCase,  8Coke,  24  6;  Nor- 
ton V.  Acklane,  Cro.  Car.  580; 
Devereux  v.  Barlow,  2  Saund. 
181 ;  Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  ft  C. 
589 ;  the  former,  in  covenant,  on 
the  personal  privity  of  contract; 
the  latter,  eitlier  in  debt  on  the 
privity  of  estate,  Walker's  Case,  3 
Coke,  22  b,  argo ;  Mills  v.  Auriol, 
1  H.  Bl.  445 ;  Stevenson  v.  Lom- 
bard, 2  East,  575-9;  Curtis  v. 
Spitty,  1  Bing.  N.  C.  756,  or  in 
covenant,  on  the  privity  of  con- 
tract in  respect  of  estate.  Steven- 
son V.  Lombard  2  East,  575 ; 
Staines  v.  Morris,  IV.  ft  B.  8  ; 
Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  ft  C.  589. 
And  it  is  observable  that  the  as- 
signee cannot  plead  that  the  land- 
lord on  a  previous  occasion  refused 
to  accept  nim  as  tenant.  Devereux 
V.  Barlow,  2  Saund.  181 ;  Iremonger 
V.  Newsam,  Latch,  260.    The  tee* 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


Liability. 


667 


the  assignee  comes  in  only  in  privity  of  estate,  and  is  there- 
fore liable  to  the  lessor  and  his  assigns  for  those  breaches 
only  which  occur  during  the  continuance  of  such  privity 
of  estate  and  before  he  assigns  over.*  But  he  continues 
liable  to  his  immediate  assignor,  his  executors  or  admin- 
istrators, upon  any  express  covenant  by  him  in  the  deed 
of  assignment,  for  payment  of  the  rent  and  performance 


see  is  also  liable  to  an  action  of 
covenant  at  the  suit  of  the  grantee 
of  the  lessor^B  reversion,  although 
he,  the  lessee,  may  have  assigned 
over,  and  the  grantee  of  the  rever- 
sion may  have  accepted  rent  of  the 
assignee  of  the  term.  Thursby  v. 
Plant,  1  Saund.  286;  Nurstie  v. 
Hall,  1  Vent.  10 ;  Ashurst  v.  Min- 

f^,  3  Show.  183 ;  Parker  v.  Webb, 
SaOk.  5;  Twynam  v.  Pickard,  2 
B.  &  Aid.  105.  These  remarks, 
however,  are  applicable  only  to  an 
express  covenant  for  payment  of 
rent ;  for,  on  an  implied  covenant 
arising  on  the  reddendmn,  after  an 
assignment  bv  the  lessee,  and  ac- 
ceptance by  the  lessor  of  rent  from 
the  assignee,  Fisher  v.  Ameers,  1 
B.  &  Gold.  20 ;  Bachelonre  v.  Gage, 
Oro.  Car.  188,  or  other  assent  to  his 
being  tenant,  Wadham  v.  Marlow, 
8  East,  814  n.,  or,  according  to  one 
authority.  Anon.,  1  Sid.  4^,  pi.  9. 
And  see  Staines  v.  Morris,  1  V.  & 
B.  8;  Bret  v.  Chimberland,  Cro. 
Jac.  528,  after  an  assignment 
merely,  neither  debt  nor  covenant 
will  lie  against  the  lessee.  Fisher 
T.  Ameers,  ante  ;  Bacheloure  v. 
Gage,  ante;  Bret  v.  Cumberland, 
gup. ;  Anon.,  1  Sid.  447,  pi.  9.  On 
M  the  other  covenants  contained 
in  the  lease,  whether  inherent  or 
collateral,  the  lessee's  liabili^  con- 
tinues during  the  term.  Bache- 
loure V.  Gage,  ante ;  Whitway  v. 
Pinsent,  Sty.  800 ;  Barnard  v. 
GodscaU,  Cro.  Jac.  809;  1  RoL 
Ab.  522  (N),  1 ;  Ventrice  v.  Good- 
cheape,  1  Rol.  Ab.  622  (N),  1.  The 
assignee  becomes  charged  with 
those  that  run  with  the  land ; 
but  this  does  not  relieve  the  leasee ; 
either  may  he  sued  at  the  option  of 
the  lessor,  Bacheloure  v.  Gage, 
W.  Jo.  228 ;  Bret  v.  Cumberland, 
Cro.  Jac.  621 ;  Barnard  v.  GodscaU, 
ante ;  Norton  v.  Acklane,  Cro. 
Car.  580 ;  Hornby  v.  Houlditch, 
Andr.  40,  44 ;  Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5 


B.  &  C.  589;  Walker's  Case,  8 
Coke,  24  6;  Devereux  v.  Barlow, 
2  Saund.  181 ;  Boulton  v.  Canon, 
Freem.  K.  B.  836.  A  right  of 
action  once  accrued  to  the  lessor 
against  the  lessee  is  not  defeated 
by  the  expiration  of  the  lease ; 
Kinlyside  v.  Thornton,  2  W.  BL 
1,111 ;  Walker's  Case,  8  Coke,  28  5. 
And  see  James  v.  Landon,  Cro. 
EUz.  86 ;  nor  by  the  surrender  by 
the  lessor  of  his  reversion  (as  if  he 
be  tenant  for  life)  to  a  paiwiount 
reversioner ;  Ognel's  Case,  4  Coke, 
49  h ;  nor  by  the  lessee's  surrender 
of  his  term  to  the  lessor,  Walker's 
Case,  8  Coke,  23  h.  And  if  the 
lessor  in  his  declaration  in  cove- 
nant makes  profert  of  the  *'  said  in- 
denture," it  IS  no  variance  if  at  the 
trial  he  produces  the  counterpart. 
Pearse  v.  Morrice,  8  B.  &  Ad.  396. 
The  lessee  in  pleading  to  an  action 
of  debt  for  rent,  an  assigimient 
by  him,  and  acceptance  by  tne  les- 
sor of  rent  from  the  assignee,  need 
not  aver  that  the  lessor  nad  notice 
of  the  assignment,  the  acceptance 
being  considered  of  itself  prima 
fade  evidence  that  the  assignee 
paid  the  rent  in  that  capacity,  and 
not  as  the  lessee's  agent.  To  avail 
himself  of  want  of  notice,  the  lech 
sor  must  allege  it.  March  v.  Brace, 
2  Bulstr.  151 ;  Marsh  v.  Brace,  Cro. 
Jac.  884 ;  Hassel's  Executrix,  Lit. 
58.  Hie  lessee's  representatives, 
as  executors,  &c. ,  are  equally  liable 
thereon,  although  the  lessee  as- 
signed before  ms  decease.  Bret 
V.  Cumberland,  Cro.  Jac.  552 ; 
Eaton  V.  Jacques,  2  Doug.  455  ; 
Chancellor  v.  Poole,  2  Doug.  764  ; 
Orgill  V.  Kemshead,  4  Taimt.  642  ; 
1  &nith  L.  C.  47  (4th  ed.). 

» Harley  v.  King,  6  Tryw.  692  ; 
Taylor  v.  Shum,  IB.  &  P.  21 ;  Le 
Keux  V.  Nash,  2  Stra.  1222  ;  Odell 
V.  Wake,  1  Camp.  894 ;  Onslow  v. 
Corrie,  2  Madd.  880;  Paul  v. 
Nurse,  8  B.  &  C.  486 ;  1  Smith  L« 


J 


668 


COVBNAIITS. 


[§305. 


of  the  covenants  contained  in  the  original  lease.'  A  cov- 
enant may  be  divisible  and  follow  the  land ;  wherefore 
an  action  of  covenant  will  lie  against  an  assignee  of  part 
of  the  thing  demised.'  If  a  covenant  by  two  lessees  is 
joint  and  several,  it  will  bind  the  executors  of  the  de- 
ceased lessee,  although  the  whole  term,  interest  and  ben- 
efit survived  to  the  other  lessee.'  The  assignee  of  a  lease 
is  subject  to  a  covenant  therein  to  pay  taxes,  and  a  sab- 
sequent  assignment  by  him  will  not  relieve  him  from  a 
breach  occuring  during  his  occupancy/ 

Sec.  305.  When  oovenants  are  void  or  ntLgator7.^A  cove- 
nant to  do  a  thing  which  upon  the  face  of  it  appears  to  be 
prejudicial  to  the  pubhc  interest,  or  otherwise  contary  to 
law,  is  absolutely  void  ; '  so  is  a  covenant  to  do  a  thing 
which  is  impossible,  if  the  impossibUty  exist  at  the  time 
of  making  the  covenant ;  but  not  otherwise.*  Where  a 
covenant  is  founded  on  a  conveyance  of  an  estate  which 
proves  to  be  void,  and  no  estate  passes,  the  covenant  is 
void  also  :  thus,  where  the  conveyance  was  "a  grant  of 
so  much  of  a  term  as  should  be  unexpired  at  the  death  of 
A,"  and  there  was  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  and 
a  boi^d  for  performance,  the  conveyance  being  void  on 
account  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  when  the  term 
was  to  commence  and  end,  the  covenants  were  adjudged 
to  be  void,  as  they  depended  on  the  estate  :  ^  but  although 
this  is  the  case  with  respect  to  all  dependent  covenants,  it 


O.  47;  Cole  E^'ec.  540.  An  as- 
signee is  bound  in  favor  of  the  les- 
sor b^  all  of  the  lessee^s  covenants, 
and  is  presumed  to  know  what 
they  are,  Barroilhet  v.  Battelle,  7 
CaJ.  450;  McMurphy  v.  Minat,  4 
N.  H.  351 ;  Willison  v.  Watkins, 
8  Pet.  (U.  S.)  50  ;  Hintze  v.  Thom- 
as, 7  Md.  346,  and  this  is  the  rule 
whether  he  comes  in  by  contract 
of  by  operation  of  law,  provided 
he  stands  in  the  relation  of  as- 
signee. Prettyman  v.  Wallston, 
84  111.  175 ;  Sutliffe  v.  Atwood,  15 
Ohio  St  186 ;  D'Aquin  v.  Armont, 
14  La.  An.  217. 

*  Harris   v.    Qoodwin,  9  Dowl. 
409 ;  Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  &  C. 


589  ;  Wolveridge  v.  Stewart,  1  Gr. 
&  Mee.  644, 

<  1  RoU,  522,  L  5 ;  Jones,  245; 
Congham  v.  King,  Cro.  Car.  221. 

'  Enys  V.  Donnithome,  2  Burr. 
1190,  1197. 

*  State  V.  Martin,  14  Lea  (Tenn.) 
92.  See  on  genmJ  proposition 
that  the  assignee  is  liable  upon 
covenants  that  run  with  the  land, 
Bedford  v.  Terhune,  80  N.  Y.  458 ; 
Post  V.  Kearney,  2  N.  Y.  894. 

•  1  Smith  L.  G.  278-286  (4th  ed.). 
«  Shep.  Touch.  168. 

"^  Capienhurst  v.  Capenhurst,  Sir 
T.  Raym.  27 ;  Hayne  v.  Maltby, 
8  T.  R.  438 ;  Co.  Lit.  456. 


CHAP.  ZXX.]  BbAL  OB  PEBSONAL. 


669 


is  otherwise  of  covenants  which  are  independent.  *  A  cov* 
enant  in*a  lease  to  repair,  Scc.j  during  the  tetmy  does  not 
take  effect  where  the  lessor  does  not  execute  the  lease." 
If  a  lease  is  made  for  the  express  purpose  of  the  premises 
being  used  to  boil  oil  and  tar,  contrary  to  the  provisions  of 
the  statute,  the  lessor  cannot  sue  on  it  for  rent.'  A 
covenant  not  to  replevy  goods  distrained  imtil  the  rent  is 
paid  is  void.^  A  covenant  with  the  lessor  to  indemnify 
the  town  or  cotmty  against  any  paupers  which  the  lessee 
may  cause  to  be  settled  in  it  is  vsJid.*  But  it  does  not 
run  with  the  land  nor  bind  an  assignee  of  the  lessee.* 

Sbc.  306.  GteneralruleaBtooovonaatBbeingrealorpenonal. 
— Covenants  are  either  real  or  personal ;  the  former  are 
such  as  are  annexed  to  an  estate,  or  are  to  be  performed 
on  it,  and  are  said  to  '^run  with  the  land, "  so  that  he 
who  has  the  one  is  subject  to  the  other.  In  order  to  run 
with  the  land  and  bind  the  assignee  it  must  respect  the 
thing  granted  or  demised,  and  the  covenant  must  concern 
the  land  or  estate  demised.^  A  grant  of  a  mere  privilege, 
as,  of  the  right  to  draw  water  from  a  certain  pond,  is  not 
a  conveyance  of  land,  consequently,  a  covenant  respect- 
ing it  does  not  run  with  the  land  and  cannot  be  enforced 
by  an  assignee  of  the  grantee.*  And,  in  order  to  run 
with  the  land,  it  must  not  only  relate  to  the  estate,  bui 
there  mast  also  be  a  privity  of  estate  between  the  contract- 
ing parties.*  Therefore,  where  an  estate  was  conveyed 
to  a  trustee  in  fee  to  the  use  of  such  person  as  W  should 
appoint,  and  in  default  of  appointment  to  the  use  of  W, 

>  Northcote  v.  U&derhil,  1  Salk. 
190 ;  1  Ld.  Raym.  880. 

>  Pitman  v.  Woodbury,  8  Exchq. 
4;  Linwood  v.  Squire,  6  Exchq. 
284 ;  Wheatley  v.  Boyd,  7  Exchq. 
20 ;  Swatman  v.  Ambler,  8  Exchq. 
72 ;  22  L.  J.  Exchq.  81.  Ck>mpare 
these  cases  with  Hughes  v.  Clarke, 
10  G.  B.  906 ;  Morgan  v.  Pike,  14 
C.  B.  478 ;  Wood  v.  The  Copper 
Miners'  Co.,  14  C.  B.  428 ;  17  C.  B. 
594 ;  Northampton  Oas  Co.  v.  Par- 
nell,  15  C.  B.  680;  Bowers  v. 
CroU,  6  E.  &  B.  255;  Hew  v. 
Greek,  8  H.  &  C.  891. 

*G^  Light  Co.  V.  Turner,  5 
Bing.  N.  C.  666 ;  6  id.  824. 


« 1  Inst.  145  h. 

■  Walsh  V.  Fussel,  6  Bine.  168. 

*  Mayor,  &c.,  of  Congleton  ▼• 
Pattison,  10  East,  180. 

'  Nesbit  V.  Nesbit,  1  C.  &  M,  (N. 
C.)  824  ;  Wheeler  v.  Schad,  7  Nev. 
204. 

« Wheelock  v.  Thayer,  16  Pick. 

ass.)  68 ;  Mitchell  v.  Warner,  5 

nn.  497. 

•  Webb  v.  Russell,  8  T.  R.  402 ; 
Tallman  v.  Coflln,  4  N.  Y.  184 ; 
Columbia  College  v.  Lynch,  47 
How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  278,  but  the  cov- 
enantee may  sue,  although  his  as- 
signee cannot.  Stokes  v.  Russell, 
8  T.  R.  898 ;  Co.  Litt.  884  h. 


(Ml 
Ck) 


670 


Covenants. 


[§306. 


in  fee,  and  W  covenanted  in  the  same  conveyance,  for 
himself,  his  heirs  and  assigns,  to  pay  a  certain  fee  farm 
rent  reserved  out  of  the  estate  to  the  vendors,  their  heirs 
and  assigns,  it  was  held  that  the  land  was  not  bound  in 
the  hands  of  Ws  appointee  by  W's  covenant,  for  tfie  ap- 
pointee did  not  take  the  estate  of  W,  to  which  his  cov- 
enant was  annexed,  but  took  as  if  the  original  conveyance 
had  been  made  to  himself ."^  The  lessor's  covenant  to  pay 
the  tenant  for  improvements  runs  with  the  land,  and  the 
tenant  may  retain  possession  even  against  the  lessors  as- 
signs, until  he  is  paid  therefor.*  A  covenant  by  the  les- 
sor of  a  mine,  quarry,  or  pit,  that  neither  he  or  his  as- 
signs shall  sell  any  such  articles  as  are  produced  from  the 
mine,  quacry^  or.  pit^  ia  personal  and  does  not  run  with 
the  land.'  But  it  has  been  held  that  a  covenant^  in.  a 
lease  of  a  mill  site,  by  the  lessor,  for  himself  and  his  as- 
signs, with  the  lessee  and  his  assigns,  not  to  erect  and 
put  in  operation  a  rival  mill  during  the  term,  runs  with 
the  land,  and  passes  by  an  assignment  of  the  lease ;  and 
the  assignee  may,  in  his  own  name,  sue  the  assignee  of 
the  i-eversion  for  a  breach  of  it.*  A  covenant  in  a  lease 
of  a  ferry  that  the  lessor  shall,  during  the  existence  of 
the  term,  have  the  right  to  pass  toll  free,  is  a  mere  per- 
sonal covenant.  *  A  covenant  between  the  several  owners 
of  mills,  drawing  water  from  the  same  dam,  as  to  the 
use  of  the  water,  does  not  run  with  the  land,  because  of 
a  lack  of  privity  of  estate  between  such  owners,  and  is 
not  binding  upon  a  grantee  or  lessee  of  either  of  the 
owners."  Nor  does  a  covenant  not  to  permit  a  mill  to  be 
erected  on  other  premises  than  those  demised,'  or  to 


1  Roach  T.  Wadham,  6  East,  289. 
»  Ecke  V.  Fetzer,  65  Wis.  55. 

*  Bower  v.  Marshall,  19  N.  J. 
Eq.  537. 

*  Norman  v.  Wells,  17  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  136. 

*  Morse  v.  Gamer,  1  Stroh.  (S. 
C.)  514. 

«  Hurd  V.  Curtis,  19  Pick.  (Mass.) 
459. 

'  Hareha  v.  Reid,  45  N.  Y.  415. 
In  Norcross  v.  James,  140  Mass. 
188,  a  covenant  not  to  allow  a 
quarry,  upon  lands  belonging  to 


the  grantor  adjoining  those  con- 
veyed to  the  grantee,  to  be  worked, 
was  held  not  to  run  with  the  land. 
But  the  reason  for  the  distinction 
between  that  class  of  covenants, 
and  a  covenant  not  to  permit  erec- 
tions of  a  certain  class  to  be  made 
upon  the  land,  is  not  well  taken, 
and  shows  the  absurdity  of  at- 
tempting to  make  nice  technical 
distmctions,  when  the  real  basis  of 
the  doctrine  is,  that  that  class  of 
covenants  are  void,  because  op- 
I>06ed  to  public  policy,  in  that  they 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


Beal  or  Personal.  . 


671 


name  an  arbitrator  to  settle  disputes,'  or  to  pay  a  part  of 
the  expenses  of  a  party  wall."  A  covenant  is  said  to  run 
with  the  land  when  either  the  hability  to  perform  it,  or 
the  right  to  take  advantage  of  it,  passes  to  the  assignee 
of  the  land.  A  covenant  is  said  to  run  with  the  rever- 
sion when  either  the  liability  to  perform  it,  or  the  right 
to  take  advantage  of  it,  passes  to  the  assignee  of  that 
reversion."  A  joint  covenant  with  tenants  in  common 
does  not  run  vnth  the  land  or  with  the  reversion.*  Cove- 
nants personal  are  such  whereof  some  person  in  particular 
shall  have  the  benefit,  or  whereby  he  shall  be  charged, 
as,  when  a  man  covenants  to  do  any  personal  thing." 
If  the  lessor  covenants  to  pay  rent  or  repair ;  or  if  he 
grants  to  the  lessee  so  many  estovers  as  will  repair,  or 
as  he  shall  bum  within  his  house  during  the  term,  these 
covenants,  as  belonging  to  things  appurtenant,  go  with 
the  land,  into  whosesoever  hand  it  comes."  A  covenant 
which  relates  to  something  not  in  being  at  the  time  of 
the  demise,^  or  which  is  merely  personal  or  collateral  to 


stifle  bnsineBS,  and  prevent  health- 
ful competition.  See,  holding  that 
a  covenant  against  making  a  cer- 
tain class  of  erections  upon  other 
adjacent  lands,  run  with  the  land. 
Trustees,  &c.,  v.  Thacher,  87  N.  Y. 
440 ;  41  Am.  Rep.  365 ;  Tntetees 
V.  Lynch,  70  N.  Y.  449 ;  26  Am. 
Rep.  615  ;  Phenix  Ins.  Co.  v.  Ck)n- 
tinental  Ins.  Ck).,  90  N.  Y.  122; 
Bobbins  v.  Webb,  68  Ala.  898; 
Trustees  v.  Cowen,  4  Paige,  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  510.  So  that  aU  buildings 
erected  on  a  lot  shall  be  set  back  a 
certain  distance  from  the  street. 
Winlield  v.  Henning,  21  N.  J.  Eq. 
198 ;  or  not  to  let  or  establish  any 
more  mill  sites' on  the  same  stream, 
for  a  saw  mill,  Norman  v.  WeUs,  7 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  136 ;  or  to  keep  a 
a  drain  in  repair,  Northfleet  v. 
Cromwell,  64  N.  C.  1 :  run  with  the 
land.  So  a  covenant  to  keep  a 
mill  dam  in  repair,  Fitch  v.  John- 
son, 104  HI.  Ill,  See,  also,  Rsr 
tavia  MTg.  Co.  v.  Newton  Wagon 
Co.,  91  ni.  280 ;  Sterling  Hydraulic 
Co.  V.  Williams.  66  id.  393. 
»  Gray  v.  Cuthbertson,  4  Doug. 

851. 

»  Brown  v.  McKie,  57  N.  Y.  684 ; 
Curtis  v.  White,  Clarke's  Ch.  (N. 


Y.)  889  ;  Bluck  v.  Isham,  (Ind.)  7 
Am.  L.  R:  U.  S.  8.  But  contra, 
and  holding  that  such  a  covenant 
does  run  with  the  land,  see  Bur- 
lock  V.  Peck,  2  Duer  (N.  Y.  Su- 
perior Ct.)  90 ;  Black  v.  Idiam,  28 
Ind.  87 ;  Cole  v.  Hughes,  54  N.  Y. 
444 ;  18  Am.  Rep.  611 ;  Hart  v. 
Lyon,  90  N.  Y.  668;  Gibson  v. 
BLolden,  115  111.  199 ;  66  Am.  Rep. 
148 ;  see  also,  involving  the  same 

grinciple.  Bell  v.  Bronson,  17  Penn. 
t.  863 ;  Todd  v.  Stokes,  10  id. 
155 ;  GUbert  v.  Drew,  10  id.  219 ; 
Davids  v.  Harris,  9  id.  608 ;  Jay 
V.  Boston  Penny  Savings  Bank, 
115  Mass.  60 ;  Weld  v.  Nichols, 
17  Pick.  (Mass.)  588 ;  Scott  v.  Mil- 
Ian,  76  N.  Y.  448. 
»  1  Smith  L.  C.  42  (4th  ed.). 

*  Roach  V.  Wadham,  6  East, 
289  ;  Thompson  v.  Hakewill,  19  C. 
B.  N.  S.  718. 

»  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Covenant  (E),  2, 
5 ;  Shep.  Touch.  161. 

•  Martyn  v.  Clue,  18  Q.  B.  661. 
'  Doughty  V.  Bowman,  11  Q.  B. 

444 ;  1  Smith  L.  C.  47  (4th  ed.). 
Where  the  covenant  relates  to  a 
thing  not  in  esse,  but  to  be  done 
upon  the  land  demised,  the  as- 
signee is  bound,  if  named ;  but  if 


672 


COVBNAOTS. 


[§  306. 


the  thing  demised, — ^as  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  in  gross, 
to  build  de  novoy  or  the  like, — does  not  run  with  the  land, 
and  therefore  assignees  are  not  bound,  even  though  they 
be  expressly  named.'  Although  a  covenant  to  put 
fixtures  into  a.  building  runs  with  the  land,  yet,  as  it 
relates  to  a  thing  not  in  esscy  but  to  be  done,  an  action 
will  not  lie  in  favor  of  the  lessee  against  the  lessor's  as- 
signs, the  word  ^^ assigns"  not  being  used,  although  it  is 
expressly  provided  that  the  "heirs,  executors,  &c.,"  of 
the  parties,  shall  be  bound  thereby.'  A  covenant  by  the 
lessor  to  purchase  at  the  end  of  the  term  at  a  valuation, 
all  improvements,  &c.,  made  by  the  lessee,  will  bind  his 
executors  or  administrators  in  their  representative  ca- 
pacity, but  not  as  assignees  of  the  reversion."    If  a  man 


not  named,  he  is  not  bound.  Tall- 
man  V.  Coffin,  4  N.  Y.  184.  The 
rule  laid  down  in  Spencer's  Case, 
5  Coke,  16,  is  that  generally 
adopted,  and  furnishes  an  accu- 
rate test  by  which  to  determine 
what  covenants  do,  and  what  do 
not  run  with  the  land.  It  is  there 
resolved — Ist.  When  the  covenant 
extends  to  a  thing  in  ess^  {larcel  of 
the  demise,  the  covenant  runs  with 
the  land  and  binds  the  assignee, 
though  not  named  therein.  Oth- 
erwise, when  it  relates  to  a  thing 
not  in  being  at  the  time  of  the 
demise.  2d.  Although  the  cove- 
nant extends  to  a  thing  not  in  esse 
at  the  time  of  the  demise,  yet  the 
assignee  shall  be  bound  if  named^ 
unless  the  thing  to  be  done  is  7nere- 
ly  collateral  to  the  land  and  does 
not  concern  the  thing  demised, 
8d.  In  a  lease  of  personal  goods, 
as,  sheep  or  other  cattle,  a  covenant 
by  the  lessee  for  himself  and  his 
assigns  does  not  bind  the  assignee. 
Where  a  lease  embraces  both  real 
and  personal  estate,  the  covenants, 
as  a  covenant  to  surrender,  does 
not,  as  to  the  personal  property, 
run  with  the  Ituid.  Allen  v.  Cul- 
ver. 8  Den.  (N.  Y.)  284. 

*  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke,  16 ;  1 
Smith  L.  C.  86  (2d  Res.).  A  cove- 
nant to  pav  off  a  certain  mortgage 
is  personal,  even  though  it  is  ex- 
pressly stated  in  the  lease  or  grant 
that  the  covenant  shall  run  with 
the  land^  Campbell  v.  Johnson,  4 
Dana  (Ky.)  177,  and  the  parties 


cannot  by  contract  make  a  person- 
al, a  reeu  covenant.    Id. 

'  In  Hansel)  v.  Meyer,  81  Dl. 
821 ;  25  Am.  Rep.  282,  a  lease  hke 
that  stated  above  was  executed, 
the  lessor  covenanting  to  put 
'*  counters  and  shelves^  into  the 
building,  but  the  word  "asEogns^ 
not  bein£  used,  it  was  held  that 
the  lessors  assignee  was  not  liable 
on  the  covenant,  upon  the  princi- 
ple stated  in  Spencer's  Case,  8 
Coke,  16  a.  8^  also,  Gray  v. 
Cuthbertson,  2  Chitt.  482,  where 
the  lessor  covenanted  for  himself, 
but  not  for  his  assigns^  to  take 
and  pay  for  all  trees  and  bushes 
planted  by  the  lessee,  growing  at 
the  end  of  the  term,  and  the  les- 
sor's assignee  was  held  not  charge- 
able upon  the  covenant,  although 
it  was  admitted  that,  if  the  word 
"assies"  had  been  used,  liability 
would  have  existed. 

•  Grorton  v.  Gregory,  8  B.  &  S. 
00 ;  but  see  Coffin  v.  Tallman,  8 
N.  Y.  465.  A  lease  of  a  house  and 
lot  with  a  provision  that  the  lessor, 
&Cm  should  pay  at  the  end  of  the 
term  for  buudmgs  erected  by  the 
lessee,  &c.,  and  with  leave  to  pull 
down  the  house,  and  erect  build- 
ing,— Held,  not  a  building  or  re- 
pairing lease,  but  that  it  was  at 
the  option  of  the  lessee  to  pull 
down  the  old  house,  or  to  make 
improvements,  if  any,  without  do- 
inj^  so ;  and  that  the  covenant  ran 
with  the  land,  so  that  the  execu- 
tors of  one  who  became  assignee 


ik  J 


CHAP.  XXX.]        What  Run  with  Laio). 


673 


leases  animals,  or  anything  personal,  and  the  lessee  cove- 
nants for  himself  and  "  his  assigns  "  at  the  end  of  the  term 
to  deliver  up  the  animals  or  things  so  let,  or  to  pay  such 
a  price  for  them,  if  the  lessee  assigns,  this  covenant  will 
not  bind  the  assignee,  for  it  is  but  a  personal  contract.' 
Covenants  which  nm  with  the  land  bind  those  who  come 
in  by  act  of  law,  such  as  the  personal  representatives  of 
the  assignee  of  a  lessee,  as  well  as  those  who  come  in  by 
act  of  the  parties ;'  for  the  personal  representatives  of  a 
lessee  for  years  are  his  assignees.*  If  a  man  covenants  to 
pay  money,  build  a  house,  for  quiet  enjoyment  or  the  Uke, 
and  he  does  not  in  the  covenant  mention  his  executors  or 
administrators,  yet  hereby  his  executors  and  administra- 
tors are  bound  and  shall  be  charged.^  In  preparing  cove- 
nants which  are  intended  to  run  with  the  land,  the  ^^  as- 
signs" should  always  be  mentioned,  for  though  some 
covenants  will  bind  them  although  not  mentioned,*  and 
others  wiU  not  bind  them  although  mentioned,*  yet  there 
is  a  middle  class,  in  which  assignees  are  bound  if  men- 
tioned, but  not  otherwise,^  and  it  is  prudent  to  provide 
for  the  possibility  of  a  covenant  being  held  to  belong  to 
this  class. 


Sec.  307.  What  oovenants  run  with  the  land.— Where  a 
covenant  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  estate  demised  it  runs 
with  the  land,  and  will  extend  to  the  assignee,  though 


of  the  term  could  sue  for  the 
hreach.  Lametti  v.  Anderson,  6 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  802.  A  covenant 
with  tne  lessee,  not  naming  his 
assigns,  to  purchase  at  the  end  of 
the  term  improvements  made  by 
him  during  the  term,  as  it  does 
not  relate  to  anythmg  upon  the 
demised  premises  as  parcel  there- 
of, and  in  being  at  the  time  of  the 
lease,  and  the  assignee  of  the 
lessee  not  being  named,  does  not 
run  with  the  Ismd  so  as  to  uphold 
an  action  by  the  assignee,  Coffin 
V.  Tallman,  8  N.  Y.  465. 

*  Spencer's  Case,  attpra. 

«  Esp.  N.  P.  290 ;  Frettyman  v. 
Wallston,  34  HI.  175 ;  D'Aquin  v, 
Armand,  14  La.  An.  217 ;  Sutliffe 
V.  Atwood,  19  Ohio  St.  186. 

*  Homidge  v.  Wilson,  11  Ad.  & 
EL  645;   WoUiaton  v.  HakewiU, 


8  M.  &  G.  297 ;  Hopwood  v.  Whal- 
^,  6  C.  B.  744 ;  6  D.  &  L.  842; 
Collins  V.  Crouch,  13  Q.  B.  542. 

*  Shep.  Touch  178  ;  Williams  v. 
Burrell,  1  C.  B.  402.  y 

» Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Covenant  (E), 
3 ;  Cockson  v.  Cock,  Cro.  Jac. 
125 ;  Tatem  v.  Chaphn,  2  H.  Bl, 
133 ;  Wilkinson  v.  Kogers,  12  W. 
R.  119 ;  Martin  v.  Clue,  18  Q.  B. 
661. 

*  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke,  16,  or 
even  though  it  is  specially  provided 
that  thev  shall  run  with  the  land. 
Campbell  v.  Johnson,  4  Dana  (Ky.) 
177. 

^  Spencer's  Case,  ante  ;  Paul  v. 
Nurse,  8  B.  &.  C.  486 ;  Doughty  v. 
Bowman,  11  Q.  B.  444;  Green- 
away  V.  Hart,  14  C.  B.  340; 
Smith  L.  &  T.  392  (2d  ed.). 

43 


A 


674 


OOVBNAOTB. 


[§807. 


he  is  not  named :'  thus,  a  covenant  to  pay  rent'  or  taxes, 
or  to  repair/  or  to  leave  in  repair,*  runs  with  the  land, 
for  it  effects  the  estate  in  the  hands  of  any  person  that 
has  it ;  *  a  covenant  to  pay  for  improvements  put  upon 
the  land  by  the  tenant  runs  with  the  land*  but  it  is 
otherwise  as  to  a  covenant  to  build  and  maintain  a  new 
fence  on  the  land/  But  a  covenant  to  maintain  an 
existing  fence,  runs  with  the  land ;  *  yet  if  a  lessee  for 


>  Lejris  v.  Cook,  18  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
198;  White  v.  Whitney,  8  Met. 
(Mass.)  81 ;  Dickerson  t.  Hohnes, 
S  Gratt.  (Va.)  858  ;  Slater  v.  Raw- 
son,  6  Met.  (Mass.)  79 ;  Shelton  v. 
Ckxlman,  8  Gush.  (Mass.)  818; 
Markland  v.  Crump,  1  D.  &  B.  (N. 
C.)  94 ;  Martin  v.  Baker,  5  Blackf. 
(Ind.)  282 ;  AUen  v.  Culver,  8  Den, 
(N.  Y.)  884 ;  Suydam  v.  Jones,  10 
Wend.  ^N.  Y.)  180,  and  a  covenant 
so  running  with  the  land  attaches 
to  the  land,  although  neither  par- 
tv  had  any  interest  therein  wnen 
the  covenant  was  made.  Fuller  v. 
Eastman,  8  Met.  (Mass.)  121.  And 
generally  it  may  be  said  that  an 
assignee  of  a  lease  is  liable  for  the 
periormance  of  every  duty  issu- 
mgoutof  the  land  or  directly  relat- 
ing to  it.  Post V.  Kearney,  2  N.  Y. 
894;  Torrey  v.  Wallis,  8Cu8h.  (Mass.) 
442 ;  Graves  v.  Porter,  11  Barb. 
(N.  Y,)  592 ;  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Cove- 
nant (E),  8  ;   Spencer's  Case,  ante. 

»  Van  Rensselaer  v.  Havs,  19  N. 
Y.  68  ;  Van  Rensselaer  V.  Bonesteel, 
24  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  865;  Main  v. 
Feathers,  21  id.  646 ;  Sandwith  v. 
De  Silver,  1  Browne,  n?enn.)  221 ; 
Hurst  V.  Rodney,  1  Wash.  (Va.) 
875.  But  a  covenant  embodied  in 
a  lease  that  the  lessee  ehall  pav  to 
a  third  person  a  pre-existing  debt, 
due  from  both  lessor  and  lessee 
jointl^r  to  a  third  person,  does  not 
run  with  the  land.  The  covenant 
is  merely  collateral,  and  does  not 
bind  the  assignee  of  the  lease. 
Moreover  the  creditor  being  in  no 
way  connected  with  the  reversion 
or  rent,  could  not  take  advantage 
of  such  a  covenant  if  it  did 
run  with  the  land.  Dolph  v. 
White,  12  N.  Y.  296 ;  Parker  v. 
Webb,  8  Salk.  5. 

» Post  V.  Kearney,  2  N.  Y.  394 ; 
Astor  V.  Miller,  2  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 


66;  Dean  and  C.  of  Windsor's 
Case,  5  Coke,  24  ;  Conan  v.  Kem- 
ise,  W.  Jon.  245  ;  Smith  v.  Arnold, 
8  Salk.  4 ;  Minshull  v.  Oakes,  2 
H.  &  N.  798  ;  Martyn  v.  Clue,  18  Q. 
B.661. 

*  Vin.  Abr.  Covenant  (K),  19 ; 
Strode  v.  Beaton,  2  C.  M.  &.  R. 
780 ;  1  Smith  L.  C.  46  ;  Martvn  v. 
Clue,  ante ;  Demorest  v.  Willard, 
8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  206;  Myers  v. 
Bums,  88  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  401 ;  Shel- 
by V.  Heame,  6  Yerg.  ^enn.)  512 ; 
Harris  v.  Qoslin,  8  Harr.  (Del) 
840 ;  Payne  v.  Haine,  16  M.  &  W. 
541. 

•Buckley  v.  Pirk,  1  SaJk.  817; 
Wakefield  v.  Brown,  9  Q.  B.  209 ; 
Magnay  ▼.  Edwards,  18  C.  B. 
479;  ISmithL.  C.  49(4thed.). 

•Eckev.  Fitze,66  Wis.  65 ;  Gorton 
V.  Gregory,  8  B.  &  S.  90 ;  Mansel  v. 
Norton,  L.  R.  22  Ch.  Div.  769 ;  Hop- 
kins V.  Gilman,  22  Wis.  476 ;  47  id. 
581. 

^  Kennedy  v.  Owen,  186  Mass.  199. 

"Hartung  V.  Witte,  59  Wis.  285; 
Kelloggv.  Robinson,  6  Vt.  276 ; Pst- 
ton  V.  Deshon,  1  Gray  (Mass.)  825 ; 
Howland  v.  Coffin,  12  Pick.  (Mass.) 
125 ;  Plumleigh  v.  Cook,  18  IlL  669 ; 
Bronson  v.  Coffin,  108  Mass.  165 : 
Norman  v.  Wills,  17  Wend.  (N.  Y.) 
176 ;  Beddoe  v.  Wadsworth,  21  id. 
120 ;  Duffy  v.  R.  R.  Co.  2  Hilt  (N.  Y.) 
C.  P.)  476 ;  Brewer  v.  Marshall,  18 
N.  Y.  Eq.  888 ;  VanRensselaer  v. 
Hays,  19  N.  Y.  81 ;  Cook  v.  Bright- 
ly, 46  Penn.  St.  845 ;  Baldwin  ▼. 
Walker,  21  Conn.  168 ;  Hazlett  v. 
Sinclare,  76  Ind.  488 ;  Crawford  v. 
Chapman,  17  Ohio,  445;  see  also 
holaing  that  a  covenant  to  fence 
''and  keep  fenced"  runs  with  the 
land.  Blaine  v.  Taylor,  19  Abb. 
(N.  Y.)  Tr.  228 ;  Kello^  v.  Robin- 
son, ante ;  Bronson  v.  Coffin,  ante. 


CEUkP.  XXX.]       What  Run  with  JjAitd. 


C75 


years  covenants  for  himself  (omitting  other  words)  to 
repair  the  house  demised,  it  seems  in  ttiis  case  he  is 
bound  to  repair  only  during  his  life,  and  his  executors  or 
administrators  are  not  bound.*  A  covenant  for  further 
assurance/  for  a  right  of  ingress  and  egress  to  and  from 
a  building,'  not  to  assign  or  underlet,  runs  with  the 
land/  In  this  country  it  has  been  held  that  a  covenant 
not  to  erect  a  building  in  front  of  the  demised  prem- 
ises runs  with  the  land  ;  *  but  in  England  it  is  held  that 
it  does  not.*  Where  a  lessee  agreed  to  pay,  in  Addition 
to  the  rent  that  had  been  reserved,  ten  per  cent,  on  the 
outlay  which  the  lessor  should  make  in  improving  the 
buildings,  it  was  held  that  this  was  not  a  contract  run- 
ning with  the  land.^  In  England,  it  is  held  that  a  cov- 
enant to  pay  the  rent  will  not  run  with  the  rent  alone ; ' 
but  a  contrary  rule  has  been  adopted  in  some  of  the 
States  of  this  country,  and  such  a  covenant  in  a  lease  for 
life  or  years  is  held  to  run  with  the  rent  alone.*  A  cove- 
nant not  to  plow  or  to  cultivate  the  land  in  a  certain 
manner  runs  with  the  land,  and  therefore  binds  an 
assignee,  although  ^'assigns"  are  not  named  in  the 
deed :  '*  so  a  covenant  to  use  the  land  in  a  husband-like 
manner,  and  leave  it  in  like  condition : "  so  a  covenant 


1  Shep.  Touch.  178. 

•  Bennett  v.  Waller,  28  EL  97 ; 
Roe  V.  Haley,  12  East,  464.  A 
leased  his  farm  to  B,  to  explore 
for  and  produce  oil  at  a  ro jaltvof 
one-eighth  the  production.  The 
lease  contained  the  following  cove- 
nant :  "To  continue  with  due  dil- 
igence and  without  delay,  to  pros- 
ecute the  business  to  success  or 
adandonment ;  and  if  successful, 
to  prosecute  the  same  without  in- 
terruption, for  the  common  bene- 
fit of  the  parties."  B  assigned  an 
interest  in  said  lease  to  0  and  D, 
and  they  with  B  assi^ed  it  to  E. 
Two  wells  were  bored  in  the  farm, 
both  of  which  were  producing 
wells.  E  refused  to  bore  any  other 
wells.  In  an  action  of  covenant 
brought  by  A  against  E  for  breach 
of  the  covenant  above  quoted,  it 
was  held  that  said  covenant  was 
not  the  personal  covenant  of  B, 
but  a  covenant  that  run  with  the 
land,    and    therefore    bound    E. 


Bradford    Oil   Ck).  v.    Blair,    118 
Penn.  St.  88. 

« Bush  V.  Calis,  1  Shower,  889 ; 
Gole*8  Case,  1  Salk.  196. 

*  Williams  v.  Earle,  9  B.  &  S.  740. 
■  Trustee  v.  Cowen,  4  Paige  Ch. 

(N.  Y.)  616. 

*  Thomas  v.  Hay  ward,  L.  R.,  4 
Exchq.  811. 

'  Lambert  v.  Norris,  2  M.  &  W. 
333 ;  Hoby  v.  Roebuck,  7  Taunt. 
157 ;  Donellan  v.  Read,  8  B.  &  Ad. 
899 ;  Martyn  v.  Clue,  ante. 

« Randall  v.  Rigby,  4  M.  &  W. 
186. 

•Patten  v.  Deshon,  1  Gray 
(Mass.)  826 ;  Willard  v.  Tallman, 
2  Hill  (N.  Y.)  274;  Demorest  v. 
Willard,  8  Cow.  (N.  Y.)  206 ;  Wol- 
lan  V.  Harmstead,  44  Pen.  St.  492. 
But  contra,  Allen  v.  Wooley,  1 
Blackf .  (Ind.)  148. 

*•  Cockson  V.  Cock,  Cro.  Jac. 
125. 

"Walsh  V.  Watson,  Eq>.  N.  P. 
295. 


676 


COVISNANTB. 


[§307. 


to  lay  dung  on  the  demised  land  in  each  and  every  year 
during  the  continuance  of  the  term ;  *  or  a  covenant  to 
leave  the  land  in  a  certain  condition  or  with  certain  crops 
sown  or  planted;'  but  a  covenant  to  pay  rent  and 
repair^  made  with  a  mortgagor  and  his  assigns,  in  a  lease 
granted  by  himself  together  with  the  mortgagee,  does 
not  run  with  the  land,  as  it  is  only  collateral  to  the  grant- 
or's interest  in  the  land.*  A  lease  recited  that  the  les- 
sors were  owners  subject  to  a  mortgage,  the  interest  on 
which  was  payable  at  a  certain  place;  it  then 
demised  the  land  for  a  term,  the  lessee  yield- 
ing and  paying  a  certain  sum  at  that  pUice  in 
part  of  the  interest  due  on  the  mortgage,  and  the  lessee 
covenanted  to  pay  that  sum  at  the  place  and  in  the 
manner  mentioned :  held  that  this  was  a  covenant  in 
gross  to  pay  an  annual  sum/  A  covenant  that  a  lessee 
should  reside  on  the  demised  premises  during  the  term 
was  held  to  extend  to  his  assignees,  though  not  men- 
tioned in  the  covenant.*  So  with  respect  to  a  covenant 
not  to  carry  on  particular  trades,'  or  erect  other  than 
buildings  of  a  certain  kind,  or  to  use  theui  for  other  than 
certain  specified  purposes,'  or  a  covenant  to  erect  a  build- 
ing upon  demised  premises,*  or  to  erect  and  maintain  a 
fence  between  adjoining  lots,*  a  covenant  to  insure  when 
the  covenant  provides  that  the  money  received  upon  the 
poUcy  shall,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  he  expended  in  re- 
storing the  buildings. "  A  covenant  to  pull  down  old  build- 
ings, or  parts  thereof,  and  build  new,"  or  not  to  carry  on 
an  offensive  trade  upon  the  premises. "  A  covenant  by  a 
lessee  of  tithes  for  himself  and  his  ^'assigns"  not  to  let 


1 V.  Davis,  MS.  M.  T.  42 

Geo.  8. 

«  Hooper  v.  Clark,  8  B.  &  S.  150, 
sustains  the  proposition  in  princi- 
ple. 

» Webb  V.  Russell,  8  T.  R.  393 ; 
Stokes  V.  Russell,  Id.  678;  Rus- 
seU  T.  Stokes,  1  H.  Bl.  562. 

*  Pargeter  v.  Harris,  7  Q.  B. 
708. 

»  Tatem  v.  Chaplin,  2  H.  Bl.  183. 

•  Hunt  V.  Bishop,  8  Exch.  675  ; 
Barron  v.  Richaros,  8  Edw.  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  96. 


^  St.  Andrew's  Church's  Appeal, 
67  Penn.  St.  512. 

^  Fisher  v.  Lewis,  1  Penn.  L.  J. 
422. 

*Bronson  t.  Coffin,  108  Mass. 
174 ;  Duffy  v.  N.  Y.  &  Erie  R,  R. 
Co.,  2  HQt.  (N.  Y.  O.  P.) 496;  Kel- 
logg v.  Robinson,  6  Vt.  276. 

^0  Thomas  v.  Van  Kapff ,  6  G.  A; 
J.  (Md.)  872. 

!■  Harris  t.  Caulbom,  8  Hair. 
(Del.)  888. 

"  Barron  V.  Richards,  8£dw.  Ch. 
(N.  Y.)  96. 


CJHAP.  XXX.]      What  Eun  with  Land. 


677 


any  of  the  farmers  in  the  parish  have  any  part  of  the 
tithes,  runs  with  the  tithes,  and  binds  the  assignee.'  A 
covenant  to  carry  all  the  com  produced  on  the  demised 
land  to  the  lessor's  mill  to  be  ground,  is  a  covenant 
which  runs  with  the  land,  of  which  the  ass^ee  of  the 
reversioner  of  the  land  demised  and  of  the  mill  may  take 
advantage ;  the  suit  to  the  mill  being  likened  to  rent,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  court  proceeding  on  the  unity  of  the 
title  to  the  mill  and  the  land  demised.'  A  covenant  for 
quite  enjoyment  runs  with  the  land ;  •  so  does  a  covenant 
to  produce  title-deeds^  or  to  make  further  assurance,^  or 
or  renew  the  lease.*  So  a  covenant  by  a  lessee  for  lives, 
made  in  an  imderlease,  that  he  wiU,  on  either  of  the 
cestui  qm  vies  dying,  apply  for  and  do  his  utmost  en- 
deavors to  procure  a  renewal  of  the  lease  for  another  life, 
is  a  covenant  which  runs  with  the  land,  and  therefore 
the  assignee  of  the  underlessee  may  sue  on  it."  A  cove- 
nant in  an  underlease,  whereby  the  lessor  covenanted  (not 
naming  his  assigns)  to  observe  and  perform  and  effect- 
ually to  indemnify  the  lessee  against  the  covenants  in 
the  superior  lease,  one  of  which  was  to  build  several 
houses  on  the  land,  does  not  run  with  the  land  so  as  to 
make  the  assignee  of  the  covenantor  liable.*  A  cove- 
nant to  build  a  new  smelting  mill  in  heu  of  an  old  one  in 
a  lease  of  mines,  has  been  considered  as  a  covenant  which 
runs  with  the  land,  as  it  tended  to  the  support  and  main- 
tenance of  the  thing  demised.*  A  covenant  to  repair  and 
leave  in  repair  {inter  alia)  all  buildings  which  should  or 


»  BaUy  V.  Wells,  8  Wils.  25 ; 
Brewer  v.  Hill,  2  Anst.  418. 

•  Vyvyan  v.  Arthur,  1  B.  &  C. 
410,  or  that  the  grantor  and  his 
heirs  may  grind  toll  free.  Dunbar 
V.  Gumper,  2  Yeates  (Penn.)  74. 

*  Lewis  v.  CampbiBll,  8  Taunt. 
715 ;  3  Moo.  85,  51  ;  Campbell  v. 
Lewis,  2  B.  &  Aid.  892 ;  Noke  v. 
Awder,  Cro.  Eliz.  375, 436 ;  1  Smith 
L.  C.  46  (4th  ed.) ;  Suydam  v. 
Jones,  10  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  186  ;  Hunt 
T.  Amidon,  4  mil  (N.  Y.)  845 ; 
Hartin  v.  Baker,  5  Blackf.  (Ind.) 
Heath  v.  Whidden,  24  Me.  888 ; 
MarklandY.  Crump,  1  D.  &B.  (N. 
C.)  L.  94. 


^  Barclay  v.  Raine,  1  Sim.  &  S. 
449. 

*  Middlemore  v.  Ooodhall,  Cro. 
Car.  508  ;  Kingdon  v.  Nottle,  4  M. 
&  S.  58 ;  King  v.  Jones,  5  Taunt. 
418. 

*  Isteed  T.  Stanley,  1  And.  82 ; 
Brooke  v.  Buckley,  2  Ves.  Jr.  498 ; 
Roe  V.  Hayley,  12  East,  464. 

^  Simpson  v.  Clayton,  4  Bing.  N. 
C.  758. 

^  Doughty  V.  Bowman,  11  Q.  B. 
444. 

*  Sampson  y.  Easterby,  9  B.  & 
C.  505;  Easterby  v.  Sampson,  6 
Bing.  644. 


678  Covenants.  [§  307. 

might  be  thereafter  erected  during  the  term  on  the 
demised  premises,  is  not  considered  as  a  covenant  abso- 
lutely to  do  a  new  thing,  but  to  do  something  condi- 
tionally, viz.,  that  if  new  buildings  were  erected  on  the 
demised  premises  during  the  term  to  repair  them ;  and, 
as  when  built  they  would  be  part  of  the  thing  demised, 
the  assignee  of  the  lessee  would  be  bound  by  the  cove- 
nant although  not  named  therein.'  A  covenant  by  a 
lessor  to  supply  houses  with  good  water,  at  a  rate  therein 
mentioned  for  each  house,  runs  with  the  land ;  and  for  a 
breach  of  it  the  assignee  of  the  lessee  may  maintain  an 
action  against  the  reversioner ;  ■  but  a  covenant  by  a 
lessor  (not  mentioning  his  assigns)  to  pay  on  a  valuation 
for  all  trees  planted  by  the  lessee  during  the  term,  does 
not  run  with  the  land  so  as  to  bind  an  assignee  of  the 
reversion."  A  covenant  by  a  lessor,  for  himself  and  his 
assigns,  to  purchase  by  appraisement  at  the  end  of  the 
term  all  improvements,  &c.,  made  by  the  lessee,  will 
not  bind  the  assignees  of  the  reversion/  But  a  covenant 
to  pay  for  all  improvements  made  upon  the  premises 
demised  nms  with  the  land : "  so  does  a  covenant  to  renew 
the  lease,*  or  that  the  lessee  may  purchase  the  land  at 
his  option  during  the  term,^  as  such  a  covenant  for 
many  purposes  may  be  regarded  as  a  continuation  of 
the  former  term.*  The  executors  of  the  lessor  should 
be  charged  upon  such  a  covenant  in  their  representative 
capacity  and  not  as  assignees  of  the  reversion.*  Where 
there  was  an  exception  in  a  lease  of  an  entry,  and  liberty 
to  wash  in  the  kitchen,  and  a  passage  for  that  purpose ; 
it  was  held  that  an  action  would  lie  against  an  assignee 
for  hindering  the  lessor,  because  a  covenant  relating 

1  Minshull  v,  Oakes,  2  H.  &  N.  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  412 ;  Barclay  v. 

793.  Steamboat    Co.,  6  Phila.  (Penn.) 

•  Jourdain  v.  Wilson,  4  B.  &  558 ;  Vemon  v.  Smith,  5  B.  & 
Aid.  266.  Aid.   11 ;  Hyde  v.  Skimier,  2  P. 

« Grey  v.  Cuthbeitaon,  4  Doug.  Wms.   196 ;  Winslow  v.  Tighe,  » 

851 ;  2  Chit.  482;  1  Selw.  N.  P.  B.  &  B.  195;    Roe  v.  Hajtey,  13 

534  (12th  ed.).  East,  469. 

*  Gorton  v.  Gregory,  3  B.  &  S.  '  Hagar  t.  Buck,  44  Vt.  285 ; 
90 ;  but  see  Comn  t.  Tallman,  Napier  v.  Darlington,  70  Penn.  St* 
ante.  64 ;  Willard  v.  Taylor,  8  WalL  (U. 

*  Lockett  V.  Howard,  34  Md.  121.  S.)  557. 

•  Wilkinson  v.  Pettitt,  47  Barb.         « Id. 

(N.  C.)  280 ;  Piggot  v.  Mason,  1         •  Gorton  v.  Gregory,  mjpro. 


JA    J 


CHAP.  XXX.]      What  Run  with  JjAnd. 


679 


to  a  way  or  other  profit  appurtenant  goes  with  the 
tenement,  and  binds  the  assignee : '  but  where  in  a  lease 
of  ground,  with  a  liberty  to  make  a  watercourse  and  erect 
a  mill,  the  lessee  covenanted  for  himself^  his  executors 
and  assigns,  not  to  have  persons  to  work  in  the  mill  who 
were  settled  in  other  parishes  without  a  parish  certificate, 
it  was  held  that  this  covenant  did  not  run  with  the  land, 
nor  bind  the  assignee  of  the  lessee.'  Where  the  lessee  of 
a  theatre  by  deed  agreed  to  repay  money  lent  to  him  by 
the  plaintiff  on  a  day  certain,  and  that  until  payment  the 
plaintiff  and  such  persons  as  he  might  appoint  should 
have  the  fi-ee  use  of  two  boxes  in  the  theatre,  no  specific 
boxes  being  mentioned,  and  afterwards  assigned  his  in- 
terest in  the  theatre,  it  was  held  that  it  was  a  mere  per- 
sonal contract,  and  that  no  action  could  be  maintained 
aga|nst  the  assignee  for  refusing  to  permit  the  plaint- 
iff, to  use  the  boxes.'  A  mere  personal  covenant  in  a 
lease  is  not  affected  by  a  surrender  of  the  lease.  ^  When 
^  covenant  is  broken,  it  becomes  mere  personalty,  and 
ceases  to  run  with  the  land ; '  and,  even  though  a  cove- 
nant may  run  with  ^he  land,  yet  it  does  not  so  run  against 
the  clear  intention  of  the  grantor,  or  unless  there  is  such 
language  used  as  shows  that  it  was  intended  to  pass  the 
benefit  or  burden.  This  was  illustrated  in  a  recent  Eng- 
lish case,*  in  which  the  owners  in  fee  of  a  residential  es- 
tate to  the  plaintiff  and  adjoining  lands  sold  part  of  the 
adjoining  lands  to  the  defendants'  predecessor  in  title,  who 
entered  into  covenant  with  the  vendors  and  their  assigns, 
restricting  their  right  to  build  on  and  use  the  purchased 
land.  The  same  vendors  gfterward  sold  the  residen- 
tial estate  to  the  plaintiff's  predecessor  in  title.      The 


J  Cole's  Case,  1  Show,  388  ;  1 
Salk.  196. 

» Mayor,  Ac.,  of  Congleton  v. 
Pattison,  10  East.  180  ;  and  see 
Walsh  V.  FuflseU,  6  Bing.  163. 

»  Flight  V.  Gloesop,  3  Bing.  N. 
C  125 

'*  Wilder  v.  Maine  Centl.  R.  R. 
Co.,  65  Me.  832;  Atty.  Gen.  v. 
Cox,  3  H.  L.  Caa.  240. 

*  Shelby  v.  Heame,  6  Yerg. 
(Tenn.)  612.    But  in  Maine  by  stat- 


ute, and  in  Missouri,  Dickson  v. 
DeEore,  23  Mo.  151 ;  Indiana,  Mar- 
tin V.  Baker,  5  Blackf .  (Ind.)  282, 
and  Ohio,  Devone  v.  Sunderland, 
17  Ohio,  52,  as  well  as  in  England, 
Kingdon  v.  Nottle,  4  M.  &  S.  68, 
such  covenants  are  treated  as  con- 
tinuous, and  pass  with  the  land, 
though  broken  before  assignment. 
*  Kenols  V.  Cowlinshaw.  41  L. 
T.  N.  S.  116. 


680 


Covenants. 


[§308. 


conveyance  contained  no  reference  to  the  restrictive  cov- 
enants, nor  was  there  any  contract  or  representation  that 
the  purchasers  of  the  residential  estate  were  to  have  the 
benefit  of  them.  There  was,  moreover,  in  the  plaintiflPs 
conveyance  a  covenant  limiting  their  use  of  the  purchas- 
ed property,  but  such  covenant  was  not  co-extensive  with 
the  covenants  above  mentioned.  In  an  action  by  the 
plaintiffs  to  restrain  the  defendants,  w;ho  had  purchased 
the  land  first  sold,  as  above  mentioned,  with  notice  of  the 
first  mentioned  restrictive  covenant,  from  building  in 
contravention  of  those  covenants,  it  was  held,  that 
although  the  plaintiffs  were  '^assigns  of  the  original 
covenanters,  they  were  not  entitled  to  sue  upon  the 
original  covenants." '  As  there  can  be  no  covenant  ex- 
cept the  contract  is  iinder  seal,  it  follows  that  no  burden 
can  be  imposed  upon  the  land  except  by  contract  ui^er 
seal,"  nor  by  a  covenant  entered  into  after  the  original 
lease  or  grant  has  been  delivered ; '  but,  while  such  a  cov- 
enant neither  creates  an  easement  nor  runs  with  the  land, 
yet  it  will  be  enforced  in  equity  against  a  subsequent 
grantee  with  notice.  So  held,  in  a  case  where  an  agree- 
ment under  seal  was  made,  subsequent  to  a  conveyance 
of  a  lot,  that  the  purchaser  would,  within  one  year,  build 
a  residence  upon  such  lot,  to  cost  not  less  than  a  certain 
sum,  and  in  a  certain  specified  manner.^ 

Sec.  308.  Divisibility  of  liability  on  oovenants.— A  cove- 
nant which  runs  with  the  land  may  be  divisible  and  follow 
the  land ;  therefore  an  action  of  covenant  will  lie  against 
an  assignee  of  part  of  the  premises  leased ; '  thus,  where 
two  houses  were  leased,  with  a  covenant  on  the  part  of 


1  See  Keates  v.  Lynch,  20  L.  T. 
N.  S.  265  ;  Child  v.  Douglass,  28 
L.  T.  O.  S.  140,  282. 

« Elliott  V.  Johnson,  8  B.  &  S. 

88 
*  Kirkpatrick  v.  Peshine,  24  N. 

J.  Ea.  206. 

»  When  a  covenant  running  with 
the  land  is  divisible  in  its  nature, 
and  the  entire  interest  in  different 
parts  of  the  land  passes  by  assign- 


ment, the  assl^ee  of  each  part 
will  be  exclusively  liable  for  a 
breach  which  relates  to  that  part 
alone.  Astor  v.  Miller,  2  Paige 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  68.  Where,  from  the 
subject-matter  of  the  covenant,  it 
is  the  evident  intent  of  the  parties, 
that  they  should  be  taken  distrib- 
utively,  they  may  be  so  taken,  al- 
though there  be  no  words  of  sev- 
eralty. Ludlow  V.  M*Crea,  1 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  228 ;  Ernst  v.  Bar- 


CHAP.  XXX.]    DBPENDBNT  OR  INDEPENDENT. 


681 


the  lessee  for  himself  and  his  assigns  to  repair,  and  the 
lessee  assigned  one  of  them,  in  an  action  against  such  as- 
signee for  not  repairing  it  was  held  to  be  maintainable ; 
so  in  case  of  eviction  the  rent  may  be  apportioned  as  in  debt 
or  replevin ; '  so,  it  seems,  an  action  lies  by  an  assignee  of 
part  of  the  estate  demised,  or  the  assignees  of  several  parts 
may  join.'  An  assignee  of  five-sixths  of  an  underlease, 
who  is  tenant  in  common  with  the  assignee  of  the  other 
sixth,  may  sue  on  a  covenant  by  the  original  lessee  to  pro- 
cure a  renewal  of  the  original  lease.'  The  assignee  of 
part  of  an  estate  is  not  liable  for  rent  for  the  whole  ;*  but 
if  a  lessee  grants  or  assigns  part  of  his  estate,  yet  the  en- 
tire privity  of  the  contract  is  not  at  an  end,  and  the  lessee 
would,  it  seems,  remain  liable  on  his  covenant  to  pay  the 
entire  rent,  for  he  cannot  apportion  it.' 

Sec.  309.  Dependent  or  independent.— Gtoneral  rule  with 
respect  to  such  covenants.— As  to  what  covenants  shall  be 
construed  to  be  conditions  precedent  or  not,'  it  is  held  that 
the  dependence  or  independence  of  covenants  must  be 
collected  from  the  sense  and  meaning  of  the  parties ; 
and  that  in  whatever  order  covenants  may  stand  in  a 
deed,  their  precedency  must  depend  on  the  order  of  time 
in  which  the  intent  of  the  transaction  requires  the  per- 


tle,  1  Johns.  Cas.  (N.  Y.)  819; 
Walker  v.  Webber,  12  Me.  66;  1 
Boll.  523, 1.  5 ;  Ck>iia]i  v.  Kemise, 
W.  Jon.  245;  Congham  v.  King, 
Cro.  Car.  221. 

^  Stevenson  v.  Lambard,  2  East, 
575. 

•  Ck>m.  Dig.  tit.  CJovenant  (B),  8. 

•  Simpson  v.  Clayton,  4  Bing.  N. 
0.758. 

•  Holford  V.  Hatch,  1  Doug.  183 ; 
Hare  v.  Cator,  Cowp.  766.  In 
Curtis  V.  Spitly,  1  Bing.  N.  C.  756, 
TiNDAL,  C.  J.,  said:  "The  propo- 
sition contended  for  by  the  plaint- 
iff, is  this : — ^that  the  lessor  may 
char^  the  assignee  of  part  of  the 
land  in  an  action  of  debt  "with  the 
rent  of  the  whole  of  the  land  com- 
prised in  the  original  demise.  He 
may  undoubtedly,  after  an  assign- 
ment of  part,  distrain  upon  the 
whole;  because  the  rent  for  the 
whole  becomes  due  out  of  every 
jmrt  of  the  land ;  but  in  that  case 


it  must  be  remembered  that  the 
avowry  would  be  for  the  pent  due 
from  the  original  tenant  and  noth- 
ing would  appear  upon  the  record 
as  to  the  assignment."  Covenants 
are  joint  or  several,  according  to 
the  mterest  of  the  parties,  unless 
expressly  made  either  joint  or  sev- 
eral, in  which  case  they  cannot  be 
construed  otherwise  th£Ui  as  the 

Si,rties  intended.  Withers  v. 
irchem,  8  B.  &  C.  254 ;  Sorsbie 
V.  Park,  12  M.  &  W.  158 ;  James 
V.  Emery,  8  Taunt.  245 ;  Bradbum 
V.  Batfield,  14  M.  &  W.  559;  An- 
derson V.  Martindale,  1  Easty  407 ; 
Keighley  v.  Watson,  8  Ebcchq. 
716;  Eccleston  v.  Clipsham,  1 
Wm.  Saund.  158 ;  Slingsby's  Case, 
5  Coke.  18  a ;  Wollaston  v.  Hake- 
wiU,  8  M.  &.G.  297. 

*  Broom  v.  Hore,  Cro.  EHz.  688 ; 
Ards  V.  Watkin,  Cro.  Eliz.  687; 
Stevenson  v,  Lambard,  2  East,  675, 
579. 


^ 


; 


682 


Covenants. 


[§309. 


formance/  No  precise  technical  words  therefore  are 
required  in  a  deed  to  make  a  stipulation  a  condition  pre- 
cedent or  subsequent ;  neither  does  it  depend  on  the  cir- 
cumstance whether  the  clause  is  placed  prior  or  posterior  in 
the  deed  :  the  merits^  therefore,  of  a  question  of  this  kiiid 
must  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  contract  and  the  order 
of  time  in  which  the  acts  are  to  be  performed  by  the 
contracting  parties,  and  any  subsequent  facts  disclosed 
which  have  happened  in  consequence  of  the  contract.  ' 
When  one  act  is  to  be  done  by  one  party,  before  another 
act  which  is  the  consideration  of  it  is  to  be  done  by  the 
other,  the  covenants  are  dependent,  and  the  other  is  not 
bound  to  perform  until  the  first  act  has  been  done,  because 
the  first  act  is  a  condition  precedent  to  performance  of  the 
other,  and  in  all  cases,  where  covenants  are  dependent, 
they  are  in  the  nature  of  conditions  precedent,  and  must 
be  performed  in  the  order  of  time  in  which  performance 
is  provided  f oi:  in  the  covenant ;  and  in  determining 
whether  covenants  are  dependent  or  independent  the  inten- 
tion of  the  parties  and  the  good  sense  of  the  case  will  be 
regarded,  rather  than  the  technical  sense  of  the  words 
used.*    Where  a  covenant  is  part  only  of  the  consider- 


'  Grant  v,  Johnson,  6  N.  Y.  247 ; 
Babcock  v.  Williams,  17  Me.  873. 
Ck>yenant6  are  to  be  regarded  as 
dependent  or  independent,  accord- 
ing to  the  intention  of  the  parties 
and  the  good  sense  of  the  case ; 
and  technical  words  shall  give  way 
to  such  intention.  1  Boot,  170;  4 
Eand.  (Va.)  352;  M'Crelish  v. 
Churchman,  4  Rawle,  26 ;  Tileston 
T.  Newell,  13  Mass.  410 ;  Tompkins 
V.  Elliott,  5  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  496 ; 
Barruso  v.  Madan,  2  Johns.  (N.  Y.) 
145.  And  the  intention  of  the  par- 
ties is  to  be  discovered  rather  from 
the  order  of  time  in  which  the 
acts  are  to  be  done  than  from  the 
structure  of  the  instruments  or 
the  arrangement  of  the  covenants. 
Goodwin  v.  Lynn,  4  Wash.  (U.  S. 
C.  C.)  714  ;  Speake  v.  Sheppard,  6 
H.  &  J.  (Md.)  85  ;  Gardiner  v.  Cor- 
son, 15  Mass.  504;  Hopkins  v. 
Young,  11  Mass.  304.  Where  one 
act  is  to  be  done  by  one  party  be- 
fore another  act,  which  is  the  con- 
sideration of  it,  is  to  be  done  by 


the  other,  the  covenants  to  do  those 
acts  are  independent.  Tileston  v. 
Newell,  18  Mass.  410;  Couch  v. 
Ingersoll,  2  Pick.  (Mass.)  300; 
Goodwin  v.  Holbrook,  4  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  377;  Cunningham  v.  Morrell, 
10  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  208 ;  Bairuso  v, 
Madan,  2  Johns.  <N.  Y.)  145; 
Craddock  v.  Aldridge,  2  Bibb. 
(Ky.)  15 ;  Mullins  v.  Cabiness,  Min- 
or (Ala.)  21.  Thus,  A  covenanted 
with  B  to  dig  a  canal  and  keep  it 
open,  and  B  covenanted  that  all 
suits  against  A  should  cease  and 
determine.  Held,  that  the  cove- 
nant to  keep  open,  bein^  without 
limitation  of  time,  was  mdepend- 
ent,  and  that  when  the  canal  was 
du^,  A  might  compel  B  to  enter 
satisfaction  on  a  juogment  remain- 
ing open  against  him  at  the  suit  of 
B.  ^Barksdale  v.  Toomer,  2  Bailey 
(S.  C.)  180;  Jones  v.  Barkley,  2 
Doug.  684. 

*  Hotham  v.  East  India  Co.,  1  T. 
R.  645  ;  Newson  v.  Smythies,  8  H. 
&  N.  840;  Todd  v.  Summers* 


CHAP.  XXX.]  Dependent  or  Independent. 


683^ 


tion  on  one  side,  and  the  breach  of  it  may  be  paid  for 
in  damages,  it  is  an  independent  covenant,  and  not  a 
condition  precedent.'  If  one  party  covenants  to  do  one 
thing,  the  other  party  doing  another,  it  is  not  a  condi- 
tion precedent,  but  a  mutual  covenant."  A  contract  to 
grant  a  lease  upon  payment  of  a  certain  sum  by  certain 
instalments  at  stated  times,  the  granting  of  such  lease  is 
not  a  condition  precedent  to  a  right  to  recover  the  sum 
agreed  upon/  So  where  A  agrees  to  sell  and  B  to  pur- 
chase an  estate,  and  B  covenants  to  pay  A  on  or  before 
a  specified  day  a  certain  sum  as  the  consideration  of 
such  sale,  vrith  interest  to  the  time  of  the  completion 
of  the  purchase,  but  no  time  is  fixed  for  executing  the 
conveyance,  A  may  maintain  an  action  for  the  pur- 
chase-money and  interest,  without  first  tendering  a  con- 


Gratt.  (Va.)  167  ;  M'Crelish  v. 
Ghiirchman,  4  Rawle  (Peim.)26; 
Bean  v.  Atwater,  4  Conn.  8  ;  Til- 
eeton  y.  Newell,  18  Mass.  410 ;  Gar- 
diner Y.  Ck)r8on,  15  Mass.  600 ; 
Tompkins  v.  Elliott,  6  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  496  ;  Howland  v.  Leach,  11 
Pick.  (Mass.)  154;  Church  v.  In- 
^eiBoll,  2  id.  800 ;  Mullins  v.  Cab- 
mess,  Minor  (Ala.)  21 ;  Parmalee  v. 
Oswego  R.  R.  Co.,  6  N.  Y.  74; 
Dwiffgins  v.  Shaw,  6  Ired.  (N.  C.) 
L.  4o  :  Barruso  v.  Maddan,  2  John. 
(N.  Y.)  145.  Unless  a  contrary  in- 
tention clearly  appears,  our  courts 
are  inclined  to  construe  covenants 
as  dependent,  Clapton  v.  Bolton, 
23  Miss.  78  ;  Mecumv.  Peoria,  &c., 
R.  R.  Co.,  21  m.  538  ;  liddell  v. 
Suns,  17  Miss.  569 ;  Bangs  v.  Low- 
ber,  2  Cliff.  (U.  S.  C.  C.)  157,  es- 
pecially where  one  party  may  en- 
force performance  by  the  other 
EEuty  and  yet  refuse  to  perform 
imself.  Mecum  v.  R.  R.  Co.,  ante. 
Where  covenants  are  once  estab- 
lished as  independent,  they  remain 
so  throughout.  Evans  v.  Harris, 
19  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  416.  Where  acts 
are  to  be  done  rnnvltaneously^  and 
each  forms  the  consideration  for 
the  other,  they  are  dependent. 
Darkin  v.  Williams,  11  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  67  ;  Hounsford  v.  Fisher, 
Wright  (Ohio)  150  ;  Parker  v.  Par- 
malee, 20  John.  (N.  Y.)  180 ;  Day  v. 
Essex  Bank,  13  Vt.  97.  It  does  not 
nece»8arUy  follow  that  a  covenant 
is  independent  because   it    goes 


only  to  a  part  of  the  consideration  ; 
nor  that  the  consideration  is  divis* 
ible  in  its  nature  ;  nor  that  part  of 
it  has  been  received ;  nor  that  one 
or  more  of  the  covenants  in  an 
instrument  are  independent.  The 
order  of  time  in  which  they  are  to 
he  performed  is  the  test  for  deter- 
mming  the  question.  Grant '  v. 
Johnson,  6  N.  Y.  247.  In  Butler 
V.  Many,  52  Mo.  497,  it  was  held 
that  in  order  to  be  dependent  the 
covenants  must  be  mutual  and  to 
the  entire  consideration. 

'  Nelson  v.  Owen,  41  EL  18 ;  Ober- 
myer  v.  Nicholls,  6  Binn.  (Penn.) 
166  ;  Bennett  v.  Pixley,  7  John  (N. 
Y.)  249 ;  Payne  v.  Bettisworth,  2 
A.  K.  Mar.  (Ky.)  166 ;  Boone  v. 
Eyre,  1  H.  Bl.  278,  n,  a ;  St.  Al- 
bans V.  Shore,  1  id.  270 ;  Pordage 
V.  Cole,  1  Wm.  Saund.  820  h ;  Bag- 
allay  V.  Pettit,  5  C.  B.  N.  S.  687 ; 
Carpenter  v.  Creswell,  4  Bing. 
409. 

2  Boone  v.  Eyre,  2  W.  Blac. 
1812 ;  Pordage  v.  Cole,  1  Wms. 
Saund.  819  &,  820  c;  Kewson  v. 
Smythies,  ante ;  Macintosh  v.  Mid- 
land Counties  Railway  Co.,  14  M. 
&  W.  548;  London  Gas  Light  Co. 
V.  Chelsea  Vestry,  8  C.  B.  S.  215, 

»  Freeland  v.  Mitchell,  8  Mo.  487; 
Champion  v.  White,  6  Cow.  (N. 
Y.)  509 ;  Manning  v.  Brown,  10 
Me.  49 ;  Wilcox  v.  Ten  Eyck,  5 
John.  (N.  Y.)  78 ;  Benson  v.  Hobbs, 
4H.  &  J.  (Md.)  285;  Baggallay  v. 
Pettit,  6  C.  B.  N.  S.  687. 


684 


Covenants. 


[§  310. 


veyance/  It  is  a  general  rule  that  covenants  are  to  be 
treated  as  independent  rather  than  as  conditions  pre- 
cedent, especially  where  some  benefit  has  been  derived 
by  the  covenantor ; '  and  where  a  penalty  is  attached  for 
a  breach,  the  covenant  is  always  independent.' 

Sec.  810.  Fartioular  oases  decided  respeotdng  repaira— A 
covenant  to  keep  a  house  in  repair,  from  and  after  the 
lessor  has  repaired  it,  is  conditional;  and  it  cannot  be 
assigned  as  a  breach  that  it  was  in  good  repair  at  the 
time  the  lease  was  made,  and  that  the  lessee  suffered  it 
to  decay ;  for  the  lessor  must  repair  before  the  lessee  is 
liable.*  Where  the  plaintiff  let  to  the  defendant  a  mes- 
suage, bam,  stable  and  buildings,  and  the  defendant 
agreed  to  repair  the  said  messuage,  buildings  and  premi- 
ses, the  same  being  first  put  into  repair  by  the  plaintiff; 
it  was  held  that  the  repair  by  the  plaintiff  was  a  condi- 
tion precedent  to  the  obligation  on  the  defendant  to  keep 
in  repair;  that  that  condition  precedent  could  not  be 
divided,  and  that  the  plaintiff  was  not  entitled  to  recover 
for  the  non-repair  of  any  part  of  the  premises  without 
having  first  repaired  the  whole.'  So  if  a  lessee  covenants 
to  repair,  ^'provided  always  and  it  is  agreed  that  the  les- 
sor shall  find  great  timber,"  &c.,  this  makes  a  covenant 
on  the  part  of  the  lessor  to  find  great  timber  by  the  word 
^'agreed,"  and  it  shall  not  be  a  quaUfication  of  the  cove- 
nant of  the  lessee  ;•  but  where  the  words  were,  "he,  the 
said  lessor,  finding,  aUowing  and  assigning  timber  suffi- 
cient for  such  reparations  during  the  said  term,  to  be  cut 
and  carried  by  the  lessee ; "  it  was  held  not  to  be  a  covenant 
to  provide  timber,  but  a  mere  qualification  of  the  cove- 
nant to  repair/    Where  a  lease  for  lives  contained  a 


^  Mattock  v.  Kinglake,  10  Ad.  & 
EL  50 ;  Wilks  v.  Smith,  10  M.  & 
W.  855  ;  2  Dowl.  N.  S.  215  ;  Dun- 
lop  V.  Grote,  2  C.  «fe  K.  153 ;  Dicker 
V.  Jackson,  6  C.  B.  103 ;  Sibthorp 
V.  Brunei,  8  Exch.  826 ;  Thames 
Haven  Dock  Co.  v.  Brymer,  5 
Exch.  696,  710. 

»  Newson  v.  Smythies,  8  H.  &  N. 
848,  Pollock,  C.  B. 

»  Freeland  v.  MitcheU,  8  Mo.  487 ; 


Dawson  v.  Fltsgerald,  1  L.  R.  Ex. 
Div.  257. 

^  Slater  v.  Stone,  Cro.  Jac.  645  ; 
but  see  4  Jarm.  Bvth.  407  (8d  ed.X 

»  Neale  v.  Ratchflf,  15  Q.  B.  916 ; 
Hunt  V.  Bishop,  8  Exch.  675; 
Hutchinson  v.  Kead,  4  Exch.  761. 

*  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Covenant  (A). 

^  Thomas  v.  Cadwallader,  WilleB, 
496. 


ii 


■k 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CONDmOKAL.  685 

covenant  by  the  lessee  at  his  own  expense  to  keep  the 
demised  premises  in  proper  repair,  "having  or  taking  in 
and  upon  the  said  demised  premises  competent  and  suf- 
ficient house-bote,  hedge-bote,  flre-bote,  plough-bote  and 
gate-bote  for  the  doing  thereof,  without  committing  any 
waste  or  spoil : "  held  in  an  action  for  not  repairing,  that 
the  covenant  to  repair  was  absolute,  with  a  license  to  the 
lessee  to  take  competent  and  sufficient  house-bote,  &c. ; 
and  that  the  finding  such  house-bote,  &c.,  was  not  a 
condition  precedent  to  the  liability  of  the  lessee  to  repair. ' 
Where  the  lessee  covenants  to  put  and  keep  the  demised 
premises  in  repair,  "being  allowed  rough  timber  but  not 
on  the  stem  upon  the  demised  premises,  the  timber  to  be 
fetched  and  carried  at  the  expense  of  the  lessee : ''  in  an 
action  of  covenant  for  not  repairing,  it  is  sufficient  to 
all^e  that  the  lessor  was  ready  and  willing  to  allow  and 
provide  sufficient  rough  timber  not  on  the  stem,  without 
stating  that  he  did  actually  furnish  it.*  Where  a  lessee 
covenanted  to  rejmr  a  house  before  the  first  of  June, 
6,000  slates  being  found  by  the  lessor  towards  the  repair, 
and  afterwards  to  keep  in  repair  during  the  term ;  it  was 
held,  that  finding  the  slat^  was  not  a  condition  precedent 
to  the  covenant  to  keep  in  repair,  but  only  to  the  cove- 
nant for  putting  the  premises  in  repair  before  the  first  of 
June.'  In  a  farming  lease  the  lessee  covenanted  with  the 
lessor  that  the  lessee  should  at  all  times  during  the  term 
repair  and  glaze  the  windows  and  also  the  hedges,  &c., 
when  necessary,  "  the  said  farmhouse  and  buildings  being 
previously  put  in  repair  and  kept  in  repair  by  the  lessor ; '' 
the  latter  clause  was  held  to  amount  to  an  absolute  and 
independent  covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessor  to  put  the 
premises  in  repair.*  A  covenant  by  the  lessor  to  do 
certain  work,  containing  at  the  end  of  the  words  "and 
the  whole  of  which  is  agreed  to  be  left  to  the  superin- 
tendence of  the  lessee  and  the  lessor's  son,"  is  neither  a 
condition  precedent  to,  nor  concurrent  with,  the  cove- 
nant.*   The  covenant  to  repair  generaUy,  and  to  repair 

1  Dean  and  C.  of  Bristol  v.  Jones,         '  Mucclestone  v.  Thomas,  Willes, 
1  £.  &  E.  484.  146. 

>  Martyn  v.  Clae,  18  Q.  B.  661.  ^  Cannock  v.  Jones,  3  Ezch.  238. 

^  Jones  V.  Cannock,  5  Exch.  718. 


686  CoVBNAinS.  [§  310. 

within  three  months  after  notice  in  writing,  are  inde- 
pendent covenants ; '  and  where  a  lessee  covenanted  to 
leave  premises  in  repair  at  the  expiration  of  the  term, 
and  also  that  the  lessors  might  direct  the  lessee  to  com- 
plete the  repairs  by  giving  six  months'  notice  in  writing, 
it  was  held,  that  these  were  two  distinct  and  separate 
covenants,  the  former  of  which  was  not  qualified  by  the 
latter;'  but  where  a  lease  contained  a  covenant  by  the 
lessee  to  repair  the  premises  at  all  times  (as  often  as  need 
or  occasion  should  require)  and  '^at  farthest  within  three 
months  after  notice,"  it  was  held  to  be  one  entire  cove- 
nant, the  former  part  of  which  was  qualified  by  the  lat- 
ter/ Where  there  was  an  agreement  that  the  lessee 
should  spend  a  certain  sum  in  repairs,  to  be  inspected 
and  approved  of  by  the  lessor,  and  to  be  done  in  a  sub- 
stantial manner,  and  the  lessee  was  to  be  allowed  to 
retain  the  money  out  of  the  first  year's  rent  of  the  prem- 
ises, it  was  held,  that  the  lessor's  approval  was  not  a 
condition  precedent  to  the  lessee  retaining  the  rent/ 
Where  a  lessee  covenanted  to  expend  a  certain  sum  in 
substantial  and  beneficial  improvements,  under  the  direc- 
tion or  with  the  approbation  of  some  competent  survey- 
ors to  be  named  by  the  lessor,  the  appointment  of  the 
sm^veyors  was  held  to  be  a  condition  precedent  to  the 
lessee's  liability  to  expend  the  money.*  Where  the  lessor 
covenanted  to  pay  the  lessee  for  the  manure,  &c.,  at  the 
end  of  the  term,  upon  the  lessee  delivering  up  the  farm, 
if  in  the  meantime  he  cultivated  it  on  the  four-course 
system,  and  perf  oiined  and  kept  all  and  singular  other 
his  covenants  in  the  lease :  held,  that  the  deliveiy  up  of 
a  certain  agreement  pursuant  to  a  covenant  in  the  lease 
was  not  a  condition  precedent  to  the  tenant's  right  to 
recover  for  the  manure,  &c.*    Where,  by  deed  reciting 

'  Morecraft  v.  Meux,  4  B.  &  C.  *  Coombe  v.  Greene,  11  M.  &  W. 

e06  ;  Wood  V.  Day,  7  Taunt.  646  ;  480  ;    Cannock  v.  Jones,  8  Exch. 

Baylis  v.  Le  Gros,4C.  B.  N.  S.  587.  233 ;  5  Id.  718 ;  Hunt  v.  Bishop,  8 

«  Wood  V.  Day,  ante.  Exch.  675. 

*  Horsefall  v.  Testar,  7  Taunt.  *  Newson  v.  Smythies,  8  H.  &  K. 
885  ;  cited  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  551.  840  ;  28  L.  J.,  Exch.  97 ;  1  F.  &  F. 

*  Dallman  v.  King,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  477. 
105,  recognized  in  Stadhart  v.  Lee, 

8  B.  &  S.  864. 


CHAP,  xxx.]  Miscellaneous.  687 

an  agreement  to  let  copyhold  premises,  A  covenanted 
that  as  soon  as  he  had  procured  a  license  from  the  lord 
of  the  manor  he  would  lease  them  to  B  for  the  then 
residue  of  a  term  of  years  from  a  certain  day,  and  B  cov- 
enanted that  he  would  repair  during  the  term  so  to 
be  granted,  it  was  held  that  B  was  liable  on  this  cove- 
nant after  having  occupied  the  premises  for  the  whole 
term,  though  no  license  had  been  procured  from  the 
lord  nor  any  lease  ever  made/ 

Sec.  311.  Casdd  deoided  respeoting^othermatterfl.^ Where 
a  lessee  covenanted  to  leave  suflficient  compost  on  the 
soil  of  the  landlord  at  the  end  of  the  term,  he,  the  lessee, 
having  the  yard,  bam  and  a  room  to  lodge  in  and  dress 
diet ;  it  was  held  to  be  a  mutual  and  not  a  conditional 
covenant,  as  it  differed  from  a  case  where  the  tenant 
covenants  to  repair  if  the  lessor  finds  sufficient  timber, 
for  there  the  proviso  restrains  the  covenant ;  but  in  this 
case,  said  Lord  Mansfield,  there  is  not  the  least  foun- 
dation for  such  construction.*  Where  in  a  lease  for  seven 
years,  containing  the  usual  covenants  that  the  lessee 
should  pay  the  rent,  keep  the  premises  in  repair,  &c., 
there  was  a  proviso  that  the  lessee  might  determine  the 
term  at  the  end  of  the  first  three  or  five  years,  giving 
six  months'  previous  notice,  and  that  then,  from  and  after 
the  expiration  of  such  notice,  and  payment  of  all  rents 
and  duties  to  be  paid  by  the  lessee,  and  performance  of 
all  his  covenants  until  the  end  of  the  three  or  five  years, 
the  indenture  should  cease  and  be  utterly  void,  it  was 
held,  that  the  payment  of  rent  and  performance  of  the 
other  covenants  were  conditions  precedent  to  the  lessee's 
determination  of  the  term  at  the  end  of  the  first  three 
years,  and  that  his  merely  giving  six  months'  notice,  ex- 
piring withm  the  first  thr^y  A  was  not  sufficient  for 
that  purpose.'  A  mining  lease  contained  numerous  cov- 
enants by  the  lessees,  and  also  a  proviso  that  if  they 
shpuld  desire  to  quit  the  premises  at  the  end  of  the  first 
eight  years,  and  should  give  eighteen  months'  notice 

>  Pistor  V.  Citer,  9  M.  &  W.  815.  « Porter  v.  Shephard,  6  T.  R.  655. 

« Dodd  V.  Linis,  Loflft.  66. 


688  COVBNAOTS.  [§  311. 

thereof  to  the  lessor,  then,  all  arrears  of  rent  being  paid, 
and  all  and  singular  the  covenants  and  agreements  on 
the  part  of  the  lessees  having  been  observed  and  per- 
formed, the  lease  should  at  the  expiration  of  the  eighth 
year  be  utterly  void ;  but,  nevertheless,  without  preju- 
dice to  any  claim  or  remedy  which  any  of  the  pKEuties 
might  then  be  entitled  to  for  breach  of  any  of  the  cove- 
nants ;  it  was  held,  in  error,  that  the  performance  of  aU 
the  covenants  by  the  lessees  was  a  condition  precedent 
to  their  right  to  determine  the  lease. '  Another  court  of 
error,  however,  appears  to  have  entertained  a  different 
opinion.'  A  lease  contained  a  proviso,  that  if  the  lessor 
should  give  notice  for  the  deUvery  up  of  the  land  to  him, 
the  lessee  covenanted  to  surrender  it  up,  and  that  the 
lessor  might  take  possession  of  it,  paying  the  lessee  com- 
pensation for  money  expended  thereon:  it  was  held, 
that  the  proviso  did  not  operate  as  a  mere  covenant  by 
the  lessee  to  give  up  on  notice,  but  expressly  gave  the 
lessor  power  to  take  possession ;  and  that  he  might  do  so 
without  having  first  paid  compensation.'  Where  A  cov- 
enanted  to  pay  an  annuity  to  B,  who  covenanted  for  the 
assignment  and  quiet  enjoyment  of  premises,  the  en- 
tering into  which  covenants  was  the  consideration,  it 
was  held,  that  they  were  not  dependent.*  So  where  it 
was  agreed  that  the  lessor  should,  within  eighteen  months 
from  the  date  of  the  lease,  build  a  cattle-shed,  the  whole 
to  bo  left  to  the  superintendence  of  the  lessee  and  her 
son,  it  was  held,  that  this  latter  provision  was  not  a  con- 
dition precedent  to  or  concurrent  with  the  lessor's  cove- 
nant to  build.'  On  a  lease  of  some  coal  mines,  the  les- 
sees covenanted  that  the  lessor  should,  when  he  thought 
fit,  employ  a  fit  and  proper  person  to  weigh  the  coals  and 
keep  the  accounts,  the  person  so  weighing  and  keeping 
the  accounts  to  be  paid  by  the  lessees ;  but  in  case  such 
person  did  not  duly  attend  to  his  duties,  the  lessees  were 
authorized  to  discharge  him :  held,  that  the  appointment  1 
of  a  fit  and  proper  person  was  a  condition  precedent  to 

1  Friar  v.  Grey,  5  Exch.  584.  *  Rose  v.  Poulton,  2  B,  &  Ad.  822. 

«  Grey  v.  Friar,  15  Q.  B.  901.  •  Cannock  v,  Jones,  8  £xch.  233- 

»  Gardner  v.  Kennard,  12  Q.  B.  5  id.  718. 
244. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  How  DiSCHABGED.  689 

the  liability  of  the  lessees  to  pay  the  wages,  and  that 
therefore  they  were  not  bound  to  pay  the  wages  though 
they  .had  not  dismissed  him/  An  assignee  of  a  term  in 
coal  mines  covehanted  with  the  lessee  that  he  would,  so 
long  as  he  should  be  in  receipt  of  the  rents  of  the  prem- 
ises, pay  to  the  lessors  the  rent  payable  by  the  original 
lease,  and  would  keep  the  lessee  harmless  and  indem- 
nified  against  the  rents  and  covenants  of  the  lease :  it 
was  held,  that  the  words  **so  long  as  he  should  be  in 
receipt  of  the  rents "  did  not  extend  to  the  covenant  to 
indemnify."  A  covenant  in  a  farming  lease  provided 
that  the  tenant  should  consume  and  convert  into  man- 
ure, and  spread  on  the  premises,  all  the  turnips,  &c., 
grown  thereon ;  but  that  in  case  he  should  sell  off  any 
part  thereof,  which  he  was  at  liberty  to  do,  then  that  he 
should  for  every  ton  of  turnips,  &c.,  so  sold  off,  bring 
back  and  spread  thereon  one  ton  of  manure  within  three 
months  after.  In  an  action  on  this  covenant  the  plaint- 
iff set  out  the  first  part  only,  and  assigned  for  breach 
that  the  defendant  carried  away  fourteen  acres  of  turnips, 
without  converting  the  same  into  manure  and  spreading 
the  same :  it  was  held,  that  the  covenant  was  an  alter- 
native one,  and  that  the  plaintiff  should  have  negatived 
the  bringing  back,  within  the  time  limited,  an  equiva- 
lent in  manure.' 

Sec.  812.  How  covenants  are  discharged,  generaUy.— Cov- 
enants cannot  be  discharged  before  breach  otherwise  than 
by  deed  ;  therefore  a  parol  hcense  or  agreement,  dispens- 
ing with  or  charging  the  terms  of  such  an  obligation, 
cannot  be  pleaded  in  bar  to  an  action  of  covenant ; 
except  perhaps  by  way  of  equitable  defense  in  some 
cases.* 

Sec.  813.  When  discharged  by  the  operation  of  statutes.— 
With  respect  to  the  operation  of  statute  in  discharging 

J  Lawtan  v.  Sutton,  9  M.  &  W.  795.      Thompson  v.  Brown,  7  Taunt.  656 

*  Crosafield  v.  Morrison,  7  C.  B.      Sellers  v.  Bickford,  1  Moo.  460 
286.  Ck)rdwell  v.  Hunt,  8  Taunt  596 

»  Richards  v.  Bluck,  6  C.  B.  487.      Harris  v.  Goodwin,  2  M.  «fe  G.  405 

*  littler  Y.  Holland  8  T.  R.  590 ;      West  v.  Blakeway,  2  M.  &  G.  729 

44 


690  Covenants.  [§  313. 

the  obligation  of  a  covenant  there  is  this  difference^  viz., 
that  where  a  man  covenants  not  to  do  an  act  or  thing 
which  it  was  lawful  to  do,  and  a  statute  is  made  after- 
wards and  compels  him  to  do  it,  the  statute  repeals  the 
covenant ;  so,  if  one  covenants  to  do  a  thing  which  is 
lawful,  and  a  statute  comes  in  and  hinders  him  from 
doing  it,  the  covenant  is  repealed ;  *  but  if  a  man  cove- 
nants not  to  do  a  thing  which  at  the  time  was  unlawful, 
and  an  act  comes  and  makes  it  lawful  to  do  it,  such  stat- 
ute  does  not  repeal  the  covenant ; '  and  if  the  covenant 
is  to  do  that  which  is  afterwards  made  unlawful  in  part 
only,  it  must  be  performed  so  far  as  it  continues  lawfuL* 
If  there  is  a  covenant  to  do  a  thing  which  is  unlawful 
by  statute,  the  covenant  will  not  be  made  lawful  by  the 
repeal  of  the  statute,  because  the  covenant  was  bad  ab 
initio ;  although  it  would  be  otherwise  if  the  covenant 
had  been  originally  lawful,  but  had  been  made  unlawful 
by  a  statute  which  was  itself  afterwards  repealed.* 
Though  aU  the  rent  of  the  lessee  is  assigned  by  statute 
if  there  are  no  words  of  discharge,  the  lessee  is  still  liable 
to  an  action  of  covenant  for  the  rent/ 

^Brewstor  v.  Kitchell,  1  Salk.  '  Brewster  v.  Kitchen,  lSalk.198. 

196 ;  Marquis  of  Anglesea  v.  Ruge-  *  2  Eq.  Ca.  Abr.  26, 

ley,  6  B.  B.  107  ;  Brown  v.  Mayor,  *  Jacques  v.  Withy,  1  H.  BL  65. 

Soc.,  of  London,  9  C.  B.  N.  S.  726  ;  ,  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Covenanc  (E), 

18  id.  828 ;  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Ctondi-  4,  n. 
tion  (<^,  2 ;   Com.  Dig.  Tit.  Con- 
dition (L),  1. 


JL'. 


CHAP.  2XXI.] 


DCPUED  COVENAHTS. 


691 


CHAPTER   XXXL 

Impu]q>  Covenants. 

Sec.  814.  Implied  covenants. 
Sec.  815.  Implied  covenants  by  lessee. 

Sec.  816.  Covenants  -when  implied  from  express  words  in  other  cove 
nants. 


Sec.  814.  Implied  Ctovenants.— What  are.— An  implied 
covenant  is  a  covenant  which  the  law  raises  or  implies 
from  the  nature  of  a  transaction  and  the  language 
employed  and  therefore  is  called  a  covenant  in  law. 
**  It  is,"  says  the  court  in  one  case/  "an  agreement  which 
the  law  infers  or  implies  from  the  use  of  certain  words 


'Williams  v.  Bnrrell,  1  C.  B. 
429.  A  covenant  in  law  is  such  a 
covenant  as  the  law  implies  from 
the  nature  of  the  transaction,  and 
from  the  use  of  certain  words 
which  have  a  known  legal  opera- 
tion and  effect  in  the  creation  of 
an  estate ;  in  other  words,  which 
have  both  a  primary  and  secondary 
significance  in  a  lease  or  deed,  and 
which,  after  being  given  their  pri- 
mary eflfeet,  have  a  secondary  force 
by  raising  an  agreement  on  the 
part  of  the  grantor  to  protect  and 
preserve  the  estate  granted.  The 
word  "demise"  imports  a  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjojment,  and,  un- 
less expressly  qualified  or  restrain- 
ed, the  law,  from  its  use,  implies 
such  a  covenant,  Barney  v.  Keith, 
4  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  502 ;  Holder  v. 
Carondelet,  26  Mo.  112;  Burnett 
V.  Lynch,  6  B.  &  C.  689 ;  Holder 
V.  Taylor,  Hob.  12 ;  Adams  v.  Gil> 
ney,  6  Bing.'  656 ;  Fraser  v.  Skey, 
2  Chit.  646;  Iggulden  v.  May,  9 
Ves.  825,  and  such  a  promise  is  im- 
plied even  when  premises  are  de- 
mised by  paroL  Messent  v.  Rey- 
nolds, 8  C.  B.  194 ;  Hancock  v. 
^ffln,  8  C.  B.  194.    But  from  the 


mere  fact  of  letting,  no  covenant 
Ib  implied  that  the  lessor  had  good 
title.  Mack  v.  Patchin,  42  N.  Y. 
167 ;  Maule  v.  Ashmead,  20  Penn. 
St  482  ;  Granger  v.  Collins,  6  M. 
&  W.  458  ;  Bandy  v.  Cartwright, 
8  Ezcha.  918 ;  Baugher  v.  WiUdns, 
16  Md.  85,  or  that  he  had  power  to 
let  without  restriction  as  to  the 
uses  to  which  the  premises  might 
be  put.  Jackson  v.  Cobbin,  8  M. 
&  W.  790.  While  an  executed  con- 
sideration from  which  the  law  will 
imply  a  promise  or  covenant,  will 
not  support  any  other  promise  than 
that  wnich  the  law  implies,  Kos- 
corler  v.  Thomas,  8  Q.  B.  234; 
Kaye  v.  Dutton,  2  P.  &  L.  296 ; 
Lattimore  v.  Garrand,  1  Exchq. 
809,  yet  parol  evidence  is  admis- 
sible to  explain  the  circumstances 
under  which  the  lease  was  granted, 
in  order  to  raise  an  impliS  prom- 
ise. Thus,  a  renewed  lease  of  a 
mill  was  granted  to  a  bleacher  for 
the  purpose  of  carrying  on  his 
business,  and  it  was  held  that 
parol  evidence  was  admissible  to 
explain  the  special  circumstances 
under  which  the  lease  was  granted 
and  from  which  an  implied  grant 


692 


Ihploed  Covbnastb. 


[§  3m; 


having  a  known  legal  operation  in  the  creation  of  an 
estate  :  so  that  after  they  have  had  their  primary  operation 
in  creating  the  estate,  the  law  gives  them  a  secondary 
force,  by  implying  an  agreement  on  the  part  of  the  grantor 
to  protect  and  preserve  the  estate  so  by  these  words 
already  created ;  as,  if  a  man  by  deed  demise  lands  for 
years,  covenant  hes  upon  the  word  'demise,*  which 
imports  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment. "  * 


to  use  the  stream  for  the  purpose 
of  such  busmess  may  be  inferred. 
"I  think,"  said  Pollock,  C.  B., 
«that  we  are  at  liberty  to  ascer- 
tain the  mode  in  which  the  prem- 
ises had  been  enjoyed  by  the  for- 
mer lessee;  their  enjoyment  as 
bleaching  works  being  the  object 
intended  by  the  lessor  in  granting 
the  lease.  *  *  *  The  lessor  with 
full  knowledge  of  the  mode  in 
which  premises  had  been  used  by 
the  former  lessee,  grants  to  the  de- 
fendant a  new  lease  of  the  prem- 
ises for  the  same  purpose  ;  and  the 
pkdntiff  who  purchased  the  rever- 
sion stands  in  the  same  position  as 
the  lessor,  and  cannot  derogate 
from  his  own  grant."  See  also 
opinion  of  Wilde,  B.,  in  same 
case,  where  he  says :  '*  Each  case 
must  depend  on  its  own  circum- 
stances and  the  intention  of  the 
parties,  to  be  ascertained  from  the 
character,  state,  and  use  of  the 
premises  at  the  time  of  the  grant,** 
Hull  V.  Lund,  1  H.  &  C.  676.  Not 
only  will  a  contract  or  covenant 
for  quiet  enjoyment  be  implied, 
but  also  a  covenant  that  the  lessor 
will  not  by  his  own  acts  destroy 
the  beneficial  enjoyment  of  the 
premises.  Wade  v.  Halligan,  16 
lU.  507,  and  that  the  lessee  may 
do  any  acts  necessary  to  insure  the 
beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  prem- 
ises for  the  purposes  for  which 
they  were  rented.  Davis  v.  Brig- 
ham,  29  Me.  391 ;  Wyman  v.  Far- 
rar,  35  id.  64.  Anything  neces- 
sary to  the  use  and  enjoyment  of 
the  demised  premises  for  the  pur- 
poses intended  by  the  parties,  must 
he  implied  when  not  expressed  in 
the  lease.  Kelsey  v.  Durkee,  38 
Barb.  (N.  Y.')  410.  There  is  no  im- 
plied covenant  that  the  premises 
are  fit  for  the  purpose  for  which 
the^  are  let,  or  that  they  shall  re- 
mam  so.    libbey  v.  Talford,   48 


Me.  816;  Bobbins  v.  Mount,  4 
Robt.  (N.  Y.)  553 ;  Foster  v.  Pey- 
ser, 9  Gush.  (Mass.)  242  ;  Dutton  v. 
Qerrish,  6  Gush.  (Mass.)  89 ;  Mc- 
Glosham  v.  Talmadge,  87  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  813 ;  Mayer  v.  MuUer.  1 
Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  491.  But  where 
a  building  being  erected  is  leased, 
and  from  the  terms  of  the  lease 
and  the  subsequent  acts  of  the 
parties  it  appears  that  they  both 
understood  that  the  building  was 
to  be  finished  as  a  store,  a  cove- 
nant is  implied  that  the  building 
shall  be  fit  for  use  as  a  store  at  the 
time  when  the  term  conmienoes. 
La  Forge  v.  Mansfield,  81  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  845.  But  from  a  recital  in 
a  lease  that  the  premises  are  to  be 
used  as  a  boarding  house,  there  is 
no  covenant  implied  that  they 
shall  be  fit  for  that  purpose,  and 
even  if  there  was,  there  would  be 
no  covenant  that  it  should  be  fit 
for  any  particular  descriptioii  of 
boarding  house  not  expressed  in 
the  lease.  Roosevelt  v.  Abbott,  2 
Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  156.  It 
has  been  held,  however,  that  when, 
from  the  circumstances  attending 
the  making  of  the  lease,  that  the 
lessee  intended  to  procujne  a  fire- 
proof warehouse,  and  the  lease  is 
of  premises  '*  together  with  the 
fire-proof  cotton  warehouse  built 
thereon,"  a  covenant  is  implied 
that  the  warehouse  is  fire-proof, 
Vaughan  v.  Mattock,  23  Ajk.  9, 
but  the  covenant  cannot  be  ex- 
tended by  implication  so  as  to 
make  the  lessor  a  covenantor  that 
it  shall  remain  fire-proof  during 
the  whole  term.  Branger  v.  Mun- 
ciet,  80  CaL  624. 

^  The  words  "  grant  and  demise" 
in  a  lease  for  years  import  a  cove- 
nant on  the  lessor's  part  that  he 
has  power  to  lease,  and  also  of 
quiet  enjoyment  during  the  term. 
Barney  v.  Keith,  4  Wend.  (N.  Y 


CHAP.  XXXI.]        Implied  Covenants. 


693 


Although  a  deed  or  lease  contains  express  covenants, 
yet  other  covenants  may  be  implied,  but  the  latter  will 
be  raised  or  given  effect  to  only  when  they  are  consistent 


402;  Crouch  v.  Fowle,  9  N.  H. 
219 ;  Style  v.  Hearing,  Cro.  Jac. 
73 ;  Adams  v.  Qibney,  6  Bing.  656  ; 
Noke's  Case,  4  Coke,  81  a;  Bur- 
nett V.  Lynch,  5  B.  &  C.  586 ;  Ig- 
gulden  V.  May,  9  Ves.  825.  The 
common  law  covenants  have 
been  so  generally  superseded  by 
personal  covenants  as  to  be  of  lit- 
tle practical  value.  Jones  v. 
Franklin,  80  Ark.  681.     The  im- 

Shed  covenant  for  title,  Line  v. 
tephenson,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  678 ;  5 
Bing.  N.  C.  188 ;  Burnett  v.  Lynch, 

5  B.  &  C.  589,  and  ouiet  enjoy- 
ment, Noke*s  Case,  4  Coke,  80  o; 
Cro.  Eliz.  674 ;  Holder  v.  Taylor. 
Hob.  12 ;  Gainsf  ord  v.  Griffith,  1 
Saund.  68 ;  2  Keb. ;  Andrew's 
Case,  Cro.  Eliz.  214 ;  Pomfret  v. 
Ricrof t,  1  Saund.  821 ;  1  Vent.  26, 
44  ;  Coleman  v.  Sherwyn,  1  Show. 
79 ;  1  Salk.  187 ;  Bragg  v.  Wise- 
man, 1  B.  &  Gold.  22 ;  Deering  v. 
Farrington,  1  Mod.  118 ;  Style  v. 
Hearing,  Cro.  Jac.  78 ;  Hayes  v. 
Bickerstaffe,  Vaugh.  118;  Fraser 
V.  Skey,  2  Chit  646;  Smith  v. 
Chambers,  4  Esp.  164 ;  Merrill  v. 
Frame,  4  Taunt.  829 ;  Burnett  v. 
Lynch,  ante;  Adams  v.  Gibney, 

6  Bing.  656 ;  Iggulden  v.  May,  9 
Ves.  &5 ;  SmitiTv.  Pocklmgton,  1 
Cr.  &  J.  445 ;  Williams  v.  Burrell, 
1  M.  G.  &  So.  402;  Hart  v.  Wind- 
sor, 12  M.  &  W.  68,  arising  on  the 
word  demise  has  yielded  m  prac- 
tice to  the  express  covenant  for 
quiet  enjojrment,  which  by  its 
power  of  limiting  the  liability  in- 
tended to  be  assumed  bv  the  les- 
sor, and  guaranteeing  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  estate  during  the 
whole  term  granted  to  the  lessee, 
presents  readier  means  than  the 
former  of  effecting  the  intention 
of  the  parties ;  for  it  is  well  estab- 
tabhshed,  in  accordance  with  the 
maxim,  esspressum  facit  taciturn 
cesaare,  Merrill  v.  Frame,  ante, 
that  the  eeneral  implication  of 
title  in  a  lease  for  vears,  Noke's 
Case,  ante;  Merrill  v.  Frame, 
ante ;  Line  v.  Stephenson,  ante ; 
Stannard  v.  Forbes,  6  Ad.  &  £1. 
572,  687,  though  not  in  a  lease  for 
life,  Shep.  Touch.  165 ;  Co.  lit.  884 
a»  is  restrained  by  the  particular 


express  covenant  Hence,  if  a 
lessor  covenants  against  disturb- 
ance by  himself  or  any  person 
claiming  under  him,  and  the  lessee 
is  evicted  bv  one  having  a  para- 
mount title,  he  cannot  recover  un- 
der the  covenant  for  general  title 
implied  in  the  word  demise.  Merrill 
V.  Frame,  ante.  But  here  a  distinc- 
tion is  observable;  for  where  a 
party,  reciting  a  lease  for  years  of 
a  mill  to  himself  and  A,  and  that 
A  died,  whereby  he  had,  as  he  sup- 
posed, the  whole  by  survivorship, 
granted  the  mill  and  all  his  estate 
uierein  to  another;  and  cove- 
nanted for  quiet  enjoyment  with- 
out any  act  done  by  him,  the 
grantor ;  and  the  grantee  was 
evicted  of  a  moiety  by  the  grantee 
of  the  deceased  joint-tenant ;  the 
court  held  that  tne  general  cove- 
nant implied  bj  the  word  grant 
was  not  restramed  by  the  subse- 
quent qualified  covenant.  And 
tney  said  it  did  not  resemble 
Noke's  Case,  4  Coke,  80  h;  Cro. 
Ehz.  674,  where  the  grant  being 
once  good  for  the  whole,  and  be- 
coming bad  by  eviction  after,  the 
covenant  subsequent  qualified  the 
general  covenant ;  but  that,  in 
me  principal  case,  the  grant 
according  to  the  purport  of  it  was 
never  good;  for  over  the  one 
moiety  which  had  been  previously 
granted  by  his  companion  the 
grantor  had  no  power.  Johnson 
V.  i^octor  V.  Johnson,  Yelv.  175 ; 
Oo.  Jac.  288.  The  word  demise^ 
however,  in  a  lease  of  real  property 
only,  does  not  imply  a  contract  for 
any  particular  state  of  the  prop- 
er^ at  the  time  of  the  lease ;  nor 
that  it  is  fit  for  the  purpose  for 
which  it  is  let.  Hart  v.  Windsor, 
12  M.  &  W.  68.  Though  the  ex 
press  covenant  may  in  some  'de- 
gree abrid^  the  security  of  the 
lessee,  yet  in  one  important  par- 
ticular it  is  more  advantageous  to 
him  than  the  implied  covenant : 
as  the  latter  determines  with  the 
interest  of  the  party  out  of  whose 
estate  it  arises,  it  follows  that  if  a 
party  take  a  lease  for  a  certain 
term  under  an  impression  that  the 
lessor  is  tenant  in  fee,  when  in  fact 


694 


Implied  Covenants. 


[§  31*. 


with  the  former.'  But,  where  there  is  an  express  cove- 
nant relating  to  the  same  matter  as  that  embraced  in  the 
implied,  however  quaUfied,  the  implied  covenant  will  be 
excluded  upon  the  principle  expressam  facit  cessare  taci- 
turn,* Thus,  where  there  is  an  express  covenant  relajting 
to  quiet  enjoyment,  the  impUed  covenant  arising  from 
the  use  of  the  word  '*  demise  "  is  thereby  restrained,  and, 
even  though  two  covenants  are  impUed  from  the  woi^, 
one  that  the  lessor  has  power  to  grant,  and  the  other  for 
quiet  enjoyment,  yet,  it  seems  that  a  subsequent  express 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  appUes  to  the  whole.  *  The 
covenant  implied  from  the  word  ''demise ''  does  not  em- 


he  is  tenant  for  life  only,  the  right 
of  suing  on  that  covenant  will  be 
defeated  by  the  lessor's  death,  and 
the  lessee  left  without  remedy  on 
eviction  by  the  remainder-man. 
Swan  V.  Stranaham,  8  Dy.  257  a; 
Series  v.  Stransham,  1  And.  12; 
Bragg  V.  Wiseman,  1  Brownl.  22  ; 
Adiuns  v.  Gibney,  6  Bing.  656. 
The  words  ''  yieldmg  and  paying'* 
amount  to  an  im^uied  covenant 
only,  and  the  lessee  is  not  liable  for 
rent  theron  after  he  has  assigned 
his  term.  Kempton  v.  Walker,  9 
Vt.  191. 

»  Crouch  V.  Fowle,  9  N.  H.  219 
Boebuck  v.  Dupoy,  2  Ala.  585 
Morris  v.  Harris,  9  QiU.  (Hd.)  19 
Gates  V.  Caldwell,  7  Mass.  68 ;  Van- 
derkarr  v.  Vanderkarr,  11  John. 
(N.  Y.)  122 ;  Blair  v.  Hardin,  1  A, 
K.  Marsh.  (Kv.)  282.  The  <M>ve- 
nants  arising  from  the  use  of  the 
words  "grant,  bargain  and  sell," 
are  held  not  to  be  inconsistent  wititi 
or  restrained  by  an  express  cove- 
nant of  warranty.  Funk  v.  Vo- 
neida,  11  S.  &  R.  (Penn.)  109; 
Seitzinger  v.  Weaver,  1  Kawle 
(Penn.)  877.  But  in  New  York  it 
has  been  held  that  an  express 
covenant  will  do  away  the  effect 
of  all  implied  covenants.  But 
whether  this  is  so  or  not  will  de- 
pend upon  the  language  used,  and 
the  intention  of  the  pcu-ties  to  be 
gathered  therefrom.  Vanderkarr 
V.  Vanderkarr,  11  John.  (N.  Y.) 
122;  Frost  v.  Raymond,  1  Cai.  (N. 
Y.)  192.  See  also,  similar  in  doc- 
trine, Sumner  v.  Williams,  8  Mass. 
201.  In  any  event,  a  general  im- 
plied covenant  may  be  restrained 
by  an  express  covenant,  as  an  im- 


plied covenant  arising  from  the 
use  of  the  word  **  demise,"  in  a 
lease,  is  restrained  and  qualified 
by  an  express  covenant  for  quiet 
enioyment.  Noke's  Case,  4  Coke, 
80  b;  Kent  v.  Welch,  7  John.  (N. 
Y.)  468 ;  Deering  v.  Farrington,  1 
Mod.  118.  See  also,  Pinoombe  v. 
Rudge,  Yelv.  139. 

*  ftay  V.  Great  Falls  Co.,  88  N. 
H.  442 ;  Messent  v.  Reynolds,  8  C. 

B.  194 ;  Merrill  v.  Frame,  4  Taunt 
829 ;  Line  v.  Stephenson,  4  Bing.  N. 

C.  678 ;  Noke's  Case,  4  Coka  806. 
»TiNDAL,  C.  J.,  in  Line  v.  Ste- 
phenson, 4  Bing.  N.  C.  688.  The 
implied  covenant  for  title  and 
quiet  enjoyment,  arising  on  the 
word  ''demise"  has  praoticaUy 
yielded  to  the  express  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment,  EUurt  v.  Windsor, 
12  M.  &  W.  68 ;  Jones  v.  Franklin, 
80  Ark.  681 ;  Noke's  Case,  ante ; 
Williams  v.  BurreU,  1  M.  G.  ft  & 
402 ;  Holder  v.  Taylor,  Hob.  13  a; 
Iggulden  V.  May,  9  Ves.  825; 
Itaser  v.  Skey.  3  Chitt  646; 
Gainsf  ord  v.  Griffith,  1  Saund.  58 ; 
Smith  V.  Chambers,  4  Esp.  164; 
Stannard  v.  Forbes,  6  Ad.  &  EL 
572;  Pomfret  v.  Ricroft,  1  Saund. 
821 ;  Smith  v.  Pocklington,  1  Cr. 
&  J.  445,  and  an  action  for  a  dis- 
turbance in  his  enjoyment  of  the 
premises  will  only  he  upon  the  ex- 
press covenant.  MerriU  v.  Frame, 
4  Taunt.  829.  But  see  Johnson  v. 
Proctor,  Yelv.  175,  where  the 
court  held  that  th^  general  cove- 
nant implied  from  the  word 
"grant"  was  not  qualified  by  a 
subsequent  qualified  covenant, 
and  that  an  action  could  be  main- 
tained upon  the  implied  covenant. 


CHAP.  XXXI.]        Implied  Covenants. 


695 


brace  a  contract  for  any  particular  state  of  the  property 
at  the  time  when  the  lease  was  executed,  nor  that  the 
property  is  fit  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  let ;  nor 
is  there  ever  an  implied  covenant  that  the  premises  are 
even  reasonably  fit  for  habitation,  occupation  or  cultiva- 
tion/ nor  that  they  shall  remain  so,  or  even  that  the  build- 
ings shall  endure,  or  the  premises  remain  in  a  condition 
suitable  for  occupation."  But  such  a  covenant  may  be 
implied  when  it  is  warranted  from  the  language  used  in 
the  lease,  and  such  appears  to  have  been  the  intention  of 
the  parties.  A  contract  for  quiet  enjoyment  may  be  im« 
plied  from  a  parol  demise  of  premises,  but  this  does  not 
extend  to  or  include  an  undertaking  that  the  lessor  has  a 
good  title,' and  if  the  contract  is  stated  too  broadly  the 
plaintiff  will  be  defeated  in  his  action.^  That  is,  when 
the  right  of  action  depends  upon  an  implied  covenant,  it 
must  not  be  stated  more  broadly  than  the  law  implies.* 
Thus,  where  the  lessee  in  his  declaration  alleged  an  implied 
covenant  that  the  lessor  had  power  to  let  the  premises 
without  restriction  as  to  the  purposes  for  which  they 
should  be  used,'  or  that  the  lessor  had  covenanted  for 
quiet  enjoyment  "without  any  eviction  from  or  by  the 
party  or  parties  entitled  to  the  reversion  of  or  in  the  said 
demised  premises, "  it  was  held  that  no  such  covenants 
could  be  implied,  and  consequently  that  the  declaration 
was  too  broad .  ^  The  woFds  '  *  covenant  "or  "  condition, " 
when  used  in  a  lease  not  imder  s^al,  do  not  mean  the 
same  as  when  employed  in  a  lease  under  seal,  but,  in 
order  to  carry  out  the  intention  of  the  parties,  will  be  con- 


>  Keates  v.  Earl  of  Cadogan, 
10  C.  B.  591 ;  Hart  v.  Windsor,  13 
M.  &  W.  68  ;  Witty  v.  Matthews, 
52  N.  Y.  512 ;  Ck)weU  t.  Lumley, 
89  Cal.  151. 

*  Arden  t.  Pullen,  10  M.  &  W. 
821 ;  Gait  v.  Gandy,  2  E.  &  B.  845  ; 
Keats  V.  Earl  of  Cadogan,  10  C. 
B.  591. 

•  Bandy  t.  Cartwright,  8  Exchq. 
913 ;  Hancock  v.  Coffyn,  8  Bing. 
866 ;  Messent  v.  Reynolds,  8  C.  6. 
194.    The  very  fact  that  a  person 

Smts  a  lease,  or  agrees  to  do  so, 
plies  a  promise  or  agreement  on 


his  part  that  Tie  has  authority  to 
do  80.  Stranks  v.  St.  Jolm,*Ii.  B., 
2  C  P  276 

<  Wilcox  V.  Cahn,  5  Blatchf.  (U. 
S.  C.  C.)846;  Gi-anger  v.  Collins, 
M.  &  W.  458 ;  Jackson  v.  Cobbin, 
8  M.  &  W.  790. 

*  Roscorla v.  Thomas,  8Q.  B.  284 ; 
Kaye  v.  Dutton,  2  D.  &  L.  296 ; 
Lattimore  v.  Gkmrard,  1  Ezchq. 
809  •    Hall  V.  Lund,  1  H.  &  C.  676. 

*  Jackson  v.  Cobbin,  ante. 

^  Granger  v.  Collins,  6  M.  &  W. 
458. 


696  iMPLffiD  Covenants.  [§  315. 

etrued  to  mean  contract  or  stipulation,  otherwise  they 
would  be  meaningless,  and  the  real  purpose  of  the  parties 
to  the  instrument  would  fail.* 

An  impUed  covenant  cannot  arise  on  the  demise  of  a 
party  having  only  an  equitable  title,  nor  when  the  word 
demise  is  referable  to  a  subject  not  strictly  capable  of 
being  demised/  and  it  ceases  with  the  estate  of  the  lessor, 
and  does  not  necessarily  continue  during  the  entire  term 
demised.  Especially  is  this  the  case  where  a  tenant  for 
life  demises  an  estate  for  a  term  and  dies  before  the  term 
is  complete,'  but  in  case  of  an  express  covenant  it  con- 
tinues in  force  during  the  whole  term  granted,  and  does 
not  cease  with  the  lessor^s  estate.^ 

Sec.  315.  Implied  oovenants  by  le88ee.-~In  the  absence  of 
any  express  covenant  on  the  subject,  a  covenant  or 
promise  is  implied  on  the  part  of  the  lessee  that  he  will 
use  the  buildings  in  a  tenantable  and  proper  manner/ 
and  that,  he  will  manage  and  cultivate  the  lands  in  a  good 
and  husbandhke  manner,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
country  ;*  but  not  that  he  will  make  a  certain  quantity 
of  fallow,  and  spend  a  certain  quantity  of  manure  thereon, 
and  keep  the  buildings  in  repair,  or  any  other  stipulation 
not  arising  out  of  the  bare  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant.* 
In  declaring  on  such   implied  covenant,  the  plaintiff 


« 


*  Hoyne  v.  Cummings,  16  C.  B.  action  lies  against  her.    Bragg  t. 

N.  8.  461.  Wiseman,  Br.  &  G.  22. 

» Smith  V.  Pooklington,  1  Cr.  &  *  Bragg  v.  Wiseman,  Br.  &  G. 

J.  446 ;  Hind  v.  Gray,  1  M.  &  G.  22  ;  Wflhamfl  v.  BurreU,  1  C.  B. 

196.  402. 

'  Adams  t,  Gibney,  6  Bing.  656 ;  *  Horsef all  v.  Mather,  Holt,  7 ; 

Swan  V.  Stransham,  Dyer,  267  a ;  Leach  y.  Thomas,  7  0.  &  P.  937 ; 

Penford  v.  Abbott,  82  U  J.  Q.  B.  Harnett  v.  Maitland,  16  M.  &  W. 

67.    An  implied  covenant  {Misses  267  ;  Yellowly  v.  Gower,  11  £zch. 

to  an  assignee,  and  is  good  so  long  294. 

as  the  lessor's   estate  continues,  *  Powl^  v.  Walker,  6  T.  R  373 ; 

Bacon's     Abr.     Tit.     Covenant ;  Legh  v.  Hewitt,  4  East,  154  ;  An- 

Vyvyan  v.  Arthur,  1  B.  &  0.  410,  gerstein  v.  Handson,  1  C.  M.  &  R 

but  it  will  not  support  an  action  789 ;  Earl  of  Falmouth  v.  Thomas, 

against  the  lessor's  ezechitors,  &c.,  1  Cr.  &  M.  89  ;  Halifax  v.  Cham- 

wnen  the  term  ceases  with  the  bers,  4  M.  &  W.  662 ;  Martin  v. 

lessor's  death.      Swan  v.  Stran-  Gilham,  7  Ad.  &  El.  640 ;  Bickford 

sham,  ante.     Nor  where  a  lease  is  v.  Parson,  6  C.  B.  920  ;  Wilkins  v. 

made  by  husband  and  wife  is  such  Wood,  17  L.  J.  Q.  B.  819 ;  BuUen 

covenant  binding  upon  the   wife  &L.,PL  176(2ded.). 

after  the  husband's  death,  and  if  ^  Brown  y.  Crump,  6  Taont  900* 
she  enters  and  avoids  the  lease  no 


J 


CHAP,  xxxi.]     From  other  Covenants.  697 

should  avoid  stating  the  particulars  of  the  alleged  custom, 
but  may  allege  specially  any  breaches  of  it.*  A 
strict  legal  custom  need  not  be  proved,  but  only  the 
prevailing  course  of  good  husbandry  and  management 
in  the  neighborhood,  and  a  breach  or  breaches  thereof.* 
Where  a  custom  of  the  country  is  proved  to  exist,  it  will 
be  considered  apphcable  to  all  tenancies  in  whatever  way 
created,  whether  verbal  or  in  writing,  unless  expressly 
or  impliedly  excluded  by  the  terms  actually  agreed  on.* 

Sec.  316.  CoyenantB,  when  implied  from  ezpreBs  wordB  in 
other  covenants.— Where  a  lease  covenanted  to  plough,  sow, 
manure  and  cultivate  the  demised  premises,  except  a  cer- 
tain specified  part  of  the  land  in  a  due  course  of  hus- 
bandry, it  was  held  that  it  amounted  to  a  covenant  not  to 
plough  the  part  excepted.*  Where  a  lessee  covenanted  that 
he  would,  at  all  times  and  seasons  of  burning  lime,  supply 
the  lessor  and  his  tenants  with  lime  at  a  stipulated  price^ 
for  the  improvements  of  their  lands  and  repair  of  their 
houses ;  it  was  held  that  this  was  an  impUed  covenant 
also  that  he  would  bum  Ume  at  all  such  seasons;  and 
that  it  was  not  a  good  defence  to  plead  that  there  was 
no  lime  burned  on  the  premises  out  of  which  the  lessor 
could  be  supplied.*  So  a  covenant  by  a  lessee  to  pen  and 
fold  his  flock  of  sheep,  which  he  should  keep  upon  the 
premises,  upon  such  parts  where  the  same  had  been  usu- 
ally folded,  was  held  to  amount  by  implication  to  a  cov- 
enant to  keep  a  flock  of  sheep.'  A  landlord  having  ac- 
cepted the  offer  of  a  tenant,  whose  term  was  expiring, 
to  continue  tenant,  provided  he  could  not  find  any  other 
tenant,  at  the  rent  it  appeared  to  him  to  be  worth,  by  a 
certain  day,  it  was  held  to  be  an  impUed  condition  that 
the  tenant  should  allow  persons  applying  for  the  farm  to 
go  over  it,  and  that  the  condition  not  having  been  per- 

»  Angerst^v.  Handson,  1  C.  M.  W.  466  ;  Wilkins  t.  Wood,  17  L, 

&  R.  789  ;  Powlev  v.  Walker,  5  T.  J.  Q.  B.  819. 

B.  378  ;  Legh  v.  Hewitt,  4  East,  154.  «  Duke  of  St.  Albans  v.  EUis,  16 

*  Legh  V.  Hewitt,  ante.  East,  852. 

•  Wigglesworth   v.    DaUison,  1  *  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  v.  Gk>iildy 
Doug.  190  ;  1  Smith  L.  C.  453,  460,  2  B.  &  Aid.  487. 

(4th  ed.);  Senior  v.  Armytage,  Holt,         *  Webb  t.  Plummer,  2  B.  &  Aid. 
197 ;  Mutton  v.  Warren,  1  M.  &      746. 


J 


698  Ihpubd  Covenants.  [§  316. 

formed  the  contract  was  at  an  end.'  On  a  demise  of  a 
brewery,  and  the  exclusive  privilege  of  supplying  ale,  it 
would  seem  that  no  covenant  can  be  implied  with  re- 
spect to  such  a  privilege  from  the  word  "demise."'  la 
an  agreement  for  a  lease  from  the  plaintiff  to  the  defend- 
ant, the  plaintiff  agreed  to  supply  to  the  defendant  ^he 
whole  of  the  chlorine  still  waste  as  it  comes  from  the 
still,  neither  adding  to  nor  taking  anything  from  the 
same,  at  a  given  rate  per  cwt. ,  and  not  to  use  or  injure, 
or  part  with  any  of  the  still  waste,  except  to  the  defend- 
ant, so  long  as  he  should  hold  the  works.  It  was  held, 
that  the  defendant  was  bound  to  take  the  whole  of  the 
waste  which,  during  his  occupancy,  came  from  the 
plaintiff's  stiU.'  A  demise  was  made  of  a  mansion-house 
and  land,  with  the  sole  license  of  sporting  over  all  other 
lands  of  the  lessor,  and  he  covenanted  that  if  any  of 
his  tenants  should  obstruct  the  lessee  in  the  enjoyment 
of  his  license,  then  the  lessor  would,  on  the  requisition 
of  the  lessee,  give  the  tenant  notice  to  quit,  and  would 
enforce  such  notice ;  it  is  no  breach  of  this  covenant  if 
the  lessor  subsequently  demises  some  of  his  lands  for  a 
term  of  years,  without  any  clause  to  prevent  the  tenant 
from  obstructing  the  person  having  the  license  of  sport- 
ing to  enjoy  his  Ucense,  and  without  reserving  a  power 
to  give  a  notice  to  quit  if  he  did.*  A  lease  of  alum  mines 
gave  the  lessee  the  right  to  obtain  alum  from  certain 
coal  wastes.  A  subsequent  lease  of  the  coal  mines  pro- 
vided that  nothing  thereby  granted  should  injure  the 
rights  of  the  parties  who  held  the  alum  mines.  The 
alum  existed  in  the  coal  wastes.  The  coal  lessees  could 
not  thoroughly  work  the  coal  without  removing  the  pil- 
lars which  supported  the  roof ;  but  by  doing  this,  the 
alum  would  be  rendered  impossible  to  be  reached :  it 
was  held,  that  the  coal  pillars  could  not  be  removed.* 
A  covenant  will  not  be  implied  in  a  lease  of  mines  for 

»  Marquis  of  Hertford  v.  Hunt,  1  *  Newton  v.  Wilmott,  8  M.  &  W. 

M.  &  W.  690.  711. 

*  Hinde  v.  Gray,  1  M.  &  G.  195  ;  ^  Glasgow  v.  Hurlet  Alum  Ca,  3 

1  Scott.  N.  B.  123.  H.  L.  Cas.  25. 

» Bealy  V.  Stuart,  7  H.  &  N.  758'; 
81  L.  J.  JBzch.  281. 


^ 


CHAP.  XXXI.]    Fbom  Othbb  CovENAirrs. 


699 


the  lessee  to  sink  a  pit  or  shafts  although  various  pro- 
visions of  the  lease  cannot  be  carried  into  effect  without 
their  doing  so.'  The  tendency  of  modem  decisions  is  not 
to  imply  covenants  or  stipulations  which  might  or  ought 
to  have  been  expressed,  if  intended.^  Where  words  of 
recital  or  reference  manifest  a  clear  intention  that  the 
parties  shall  do  a  certain  act,  from  these^  a  covenant  to 
do  such  acts  may  be  implied.  *  But  where  parties  expressly 
covenant  to  do  certain  acts,  the  covenant  will  not  be 
extended  by  impUcation,  but  the  parties  having  expressed 
some,  will  be  treated  as  having  expressed  aJl  the  condi- 
tions by  which  they  intend  to  be  boimd,*  and  a  covenant 
will  never  be  implied  unless  it  is  consistent  with  the 
express  covenants.*  A  recital  in  a  deed  may  amount  to 
a  covenant,  if  such  was  the  intention  of  the  parties,'  and 
an  action  of  covenant  will  lie  upon  such  implied  covenant.' 
An  impUed  covenant  ceases  with  the  estate  of  the  lessor, 
and  does  not  necessarily  continue  during  the  whole  term 
granted.  Therefore,  if  a  tenant  for  life  demises  by 
indenture  for  fifteen  years,  without  any  express  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjoyment,  upon  his  death  during  the  term 
the  covenant  in  law  implied  from  the  word  "demised'* 
will  cease."  But  an  express  covenant,  or  one  to  be 
Implied  by  construction  of  words  used  in  the  deed  by  way 
of  warranty  or  contract,  would  continue  in  force  to  the 
end  of  the  term  expressed  to  be  granted,  and  not  merely 
during  the  actual  continuance  of  such  term.*  A  cove- 
nant in  law  goes  to  the  assignee  of  the  term,  and  he  has 
the  advantage  of  it  during  the  actual  continuance  of  the 


I  James  V.  Cochran,  7  Exchq.  170. 

«  Aspdin  V.  Austin,  5  Q.  B.  671 ; 
Sharp  V.  Waterhouse,  7  £.  &  B. 
816  ;  Dunn  v.  Sayles,  5  Q.  B.  685 ; 
Smith  V.  Hawich,  2  C.  B.  N.  S. 
651 ;  Marquis  of  Bute  v.  Guest,  15 
M.  &  W.  160. 

>  Sampson  t.  Easterby,  9  B.  & 
C.  505 ;  afiTd,  6  Bing.  644  ;  Saltoun 
V.  Houston,  1  Bing.  438 ;  Frey  t. 
Johnson,  23  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  816. 

^  Aspdin  V.  Austin,  ante  ;  Dunn 
V.  Sayles,  5  Q.  B.  685. 

» Gates  V.  Caldwell,  7  Mass.  68 
Crouch  ▼.  Fowle,  9  N.  H.  249 
Boebuck  v.  Dupuy,  2  Alsu   585 


Morris  v.  Harris,  9  GiU  (Md.)  19 
Vanderkarr  t.  Vanderkarr,  11 
John.  (N..Y.)  122. 

*  Say  V.  Mottram,  19  C.  B.  N.  S. 
479. 

'  Severn  v.  Clark,  2  Leon,  122 ; 
Farral  v.  Hilditch,  5  C.  B.  N.  S. 
840  ;  Hollis  v.  Carr,  2  Mod.  87 ; 
Saltoun  y.  Houston,  1  Bing.  488 ; 
Sampson  v.  Easterby,  6  Bing.  644 ; 
Barefoot  y.  FresweU,  8  Keb.  465. 

^  Swan  y.  Stransham,  Dyer,  257  ; 
a ;  cited  6  Bing.  666  ;  Adams  y. 
Gibney,  6  Bing.  656;  Penford  y. 
Abbott,  82  L.  J.  Q.  B.  67. 

•Williams  v.  Buirell,  1  C.  B. 


700  iMPLiEa>  Covenants.  [§  316. 

term.  But  the  executors  or  administrators  of  the  lessor 
are  not  liable  where  the  term  ceases  on  his  death,  and  the 
lessee  is  subsequently  evicted.*  So  where  husband  and 
wife  join  in  a  lease  of  the  wife's  freehold,  and  after  hus- 
band's death  the  wife  enters  and  avoids  the  lease." 

402  ;  Bragg  v.  Wisemaa,  Brown-  ^  Bragg  y.  Wiaeman,  Brown- 
low  &  G.  22 ;  Shep.  Touch,  178.  low  &  G.  23. 

»  Bac.  Abr.  Tit.  Covenant  (E)  5 ; 
Vyvyan  V.  Arthur,  1 B.  &  C.  410. 


CHAP,  xxznj 


Generally. 


701 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

OOYENAin*  TO  INSURE. 

Sac.  817.    Qenevally. 

Sbo.  818.    Ck>YenaiLt  to  insuie  where  no  loss  has  occurred. — Charles  ▼• 

Altin. 
Sec.  819.    Where  a  loss  has  occurred. 


Sec.  317.  CStenerally.— Where  the  lease  contains  a  cov- 
enant on  the  lessee's  part  to  insure  the  premises^  he  must 
perform  the  covenant,  or,  in  case  of  the  destruction  of 
the  premises  by  fire,  he  will  be  hable  for  the  value  of  the 
premises  destroyed.  But,  whether  the  premises  are 
destroyed  by  fire  or  not,  he  is  liable  upon  his  covenant  if 
he  permits  the  premises  to  remain  uninsured  for  a  period, 
however  short.*  If  the  lease  is  silent  as  to  whether  the 
policy  shall  be  taken  in  the  name  of  the  lessor  or  lessee, 
a  policy  in  the  name  of  either  will  fulfil  the  covenant,* 
but  if  the  lease  specifies  how  the  policy  shall  be  taken 
out,  it  must  be  strictly  followed,  and  this  is  true  both  as 
to  the  name  of  the  insured,  the  company  in  which  the 
policy  shall  be  taken,  the  amount,  &c.*  So  if  the  lease 
requires  aU  the  buildings  to  be  insured,  a  failure  to  insure 
one  of  them  operates  as  a  breach.*    But  where  a  forfeit- 


1  Darlington  v.  Ulph,  18  Q.  B. 
804 ;  Pitt  V.  Shewin,  ^  Camp.  184 ; 
Wilson  V.  Wilson,  14  C.  B.  616; 
Baker  v.  Jones,  5  Exchq.  4d8; 
Hyde  v.  Watts,  12  M.  &  W.  204 ; 
Flower  t.  Peck,  1  B.  &  Aid.  428. 

*  Pitt  v.  Laming,  4  Camp.  78. 

>  In  Maston  v.  Gladwin,  6  Q.  B. 
058,  the  lease  required  the  policy 
to  be  taken  in  tne  names  of  the 
lessor  and  lessee  jointly,  but  the 
lessee  took  out  a  policy  in  his 
name  alone,  and  it  was  held  a  con- 
tinuing breach  of  the  covenant,  al- 
though he  show  the  policy  to  the 
lessor,  who  approved  of  it  and  ac- 


cepted rent  thereafter.  In  Pen- 
niall  V.  Harbome,  11  Q.  b.  868, 
the  lessee  covenanted  to  insure  in 
the  names  of  three  persons  sp«^ 
cifically  named.  He  prociured  an 
insurance  in  the  names  of  the 
three  and  himself,  and  it  was  held 
a  breach  of  the  covenant.  See 
Ketaltas  v.  Coleman,  2  E.  D.  S. 
(N.  Y.)  where  it  was  held  that  a 
covenant  requiring  insurance  for 
the  benefit  of  the  landlord,  an  in- 
surance in  the  name  of  the  lessee  is 
not  a  compliance  with  the  cot  enant. 
*  Darlington  v.  Ulph,  ante ;  Pen- 
niall  V.  Harbome,  11  Q.  B.  868. 


702 


Covenant  to  Insube. 


t§  817. 


ure  is  proTided  for  a  failure  to  insure  in  the  mode  pre- 
scribed in  the  covenant,  and  the  insurance  is  not  procured 
as  prescribed  in  the  covenant,  the  lessor,  knowing  how 
the  insurance  is  taken,  by  acquiescing  therein,  or  so  con- 
ducting in  reference  thereto  as  to  induce  a  man  of  ordi- 
nary prudence  to  understand  that  he  is  satisfied  therewith, 
cannot  afterwards  insist  upon  the  forfeiture,  but  he  may 
proceed  upon  the  covenant  for  damages  for  its  breach;' 
and  where  the  lease  provides  that  if  the  lessee  does  not 
insure,  the  lessor  may,  if  the  lessor  induces  the  lessee  to 
believe  that  he  has  insured,  when  in  fact  he  has  not,  he 
cannot  claim  a  forfeiture  nor  maintain  ejectment  for  the 
breach.*  If  the  lease  provides  that  the  lessee  shall  insure 
the  premises,  and  employ  the  insurance  money  in  the 
re-instatement  of  the  premises,  not  only  the  lessor,  bat 
an  assignee  of  the  reversion,  may  maintain  an  action  for 
its  breach,  by  neglecting  or  refusing  so  to  apply  the 
money,  as  to  this  extent  it  is  a  covenant  running  with 
the  land,  although,  when  there  is  no  provision  for  rebuild- 
ing, and  no  statute  relating  to  the  matter,  it  is  treated 
as  merely  personal,  and  available  only  to  the  lessor  or 
his  personal  representatives/  Where  the  covenant 
requires  the  lessee  to  insure  a  certain  building,  as  ^'a 


1  Knight  v.  Bowe,  Ry.  &  Moo.  846. 

«  Pitman  v.  Sutton,  9  C.  &  P.  706. 

•In  Vernon  v.  Smith,  6  B.  & 
Aid.  1,  the  tenant  covenanted  to 
insure  to  the  amount  of  £800. 
There  was  no  covenant  to  re-instate 
the  premises  with  the  money,  but 
merely  a  covenant  to  pay  it  over 
to  the  lessor,  his  executors,  ad- 
ministrators or  assigns.  The  prem- 
ises were  within  the  weekly  bills 
of  mortality  mentioned  in  14 
George,  8,  c.  78,  and  under  this 
statute  it  was  held  to  be  a  cove- 
nant running  with  the  land ,  and  for 
that  reason  the  action,  in  the  name 
of  an  assignee,  was  held  maintain- 
able. **  If,"  said  HOLROYD,  J., 
**  the  covenant  to  insure  could  be 
considered  as  a  covenant  to  pay 
a  collateral  sum  to  the  lessor,  the 
present  action  [being  in  the  name 
of  the  assignee,  H.  G,  W.J  could 
not  be  supported ;  but,  taking  that 
covenant  together  with  the  stat. 
14  Geo.  8,  c.  78,  I  think  that  the 


sum  insured  is  not  to  be  consid- 
ered as  a  collateral  sum,  but  as  a 
sum  whidi  by  operation  of  law 
must  he  laid  o\U  on  the  premises. 
It  is,  therefore,  a  covenant  to  do  a 
matter  which  concerns  the  land, 
and  falls  within  the  rule  laid  down 
in  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke,  17,  and 
by  Lord  Chief  JnsncB  Wilmot, 
in  BaUv  v.  Wells,  8  Wils.  25.  He 
there  fays  down  the  rule  thus: 
**  Covenants  in  leases  extending  to 
a  thing  in  esse,  parcel  or  demise, 
run  with  the  Ismd,  and  bids  the 
assignee  though  he  be  not  named, 
as  to  repair,  &c.  And  if  they  re- 
late to  a  thing  not  in  esse,  but  yet 
the  thing  to  be  done  is  on  the  liuid 
demised,  as  to  build  a  new  house 
or  wall,  the  assignees,  if  named, 
are  bound  by  the  covenants ;  btd 
if  they  in  no  manner  concern  or 
touch  the  thing  demised,  as  to 
build  a  house  on  other  land,  or  to 
pay  a  collateral  sum  to  the  lessor, 
the  assignee,  though  named,  is  not 


:k. 


CHAP.  X3CXL] 


Gbkkeallt. 


703 


mill,"  ^*a  factory,"  &c.,  the  covenant  requires  the  tenant 
to  keep  the  fixed  machinery  therein  insured,  necessary 
to  the  oi)eration  of  the  mill  or  factory,  but  not  tools  or 
machinery  not  affixed  to  the  freehold.'  If  the  covenant 
is  both  to  repair  and  to  insure  the  premises,  the  tenant, 
in  case  the  premises  are  destroyed  by  fire,  is  bound  to 
re-instate  them  as  they  were  when  he  leased  them,  and 
is  not  excused  therefrom  because  the  amoimt  recovered 
from  the  insurance  is  insufficient  for  that  purpose,  nor 
does  he  answer  the  covenant  by  simply  expending  the 
insurance  money  to  that  end.'  A  tenant  or  person  in 
possession,  as  a  mortgagee,  is  not  entitled  to  charge  the 
landlord  for  premiums  paid  for  insurance,  in  the  absence 
of  any  provision  to  that  effect  in  the  lease  or  mortgage ;' 
unless  the  landlord  has  been  guilty  of  fraud,  or  has  misled 
the  tenant  in  reference  to  the  insurance,  a  court  of  equity 
will  not  reUeve  a  tenant  from  a  forfeiture  aoising  from  a 
breach  of  a  covenant  to  insure.* 


bound  h^  such  covenantB  ;  or  if 
the  lease  is  of  sheep  or  other  per- 
sonal goods,  the  assignee,  though 
named,  is  not  bound  by  any  cov- 
enant concerning  them.  The  rea- 
sons why  the  assignees,  though 
named,  are  not  bound  in  the  two 
last  cases,  are  not  the  same.  In 
the  first  case  it  is  because  the  thing 
covenanted  to  be  done  has  not  the 
least  reference  to  the  things  de- 
nused ;  it  is  a  substantial,  mde- 
pendent  agreement,  not  quodam 
modOj  but  nvUa  modo,  annexed  or 
appurtenant  to  the  tlung  leased. 
In  the  case  of  the  mere  personalty 
the  covenant  doth  concern  and 
touch  the  thing  demised  ;  but  it  is 
to  restore  it,  or  the  value  at  the  end 
of  the  term  ;  but  it  doth  not  bind 
tne  assignee,  because  there  is  no 
privity  as  there  is  in  the  case  of  re- 
alty lietween  the  lessor  and  lessee 
and  Ms  assigns  in  respect  of  the 
reversion ;  it  is  merelv  collateral 
in  one  case ;  in  the  other  it  is  not 
collateral,  but  they  are  total  stran- 
gers to  one  anotner  without  any 
fine  or  thread  to  unite  or  tie  them 
together ;  and  to  constitute  tliat 

Snvity  which  must  subsist  between 
ebtor  and  creditor  to  support  an 
action. "  After  citing  several  cases 
he  further  says :    '*  All  these  cases 


clearly  prove  that  concurrent  cove- 
nants, and  such  as  tend  to  the  sup- 
Sort  and  maintenance  of  the  thing 
emised,  where  assigns  are  ex- 
pressly mentioned,  follow  the  re- 
version and  the  lease,  let  them  go 
where  they  will."  Li  Lynch  v. 
Darrell,  cited  in  the  SadHer's  Ck>.  v. 
Badcock,  2  Atk.  577,  where  the 
Stat.  14  Geo.  8  did  not  apply,  it 
was  held  that  the  covenant  to  in- 
sure did  not  inure  to  the  benefit  of 
the  assignee.  See  Masury  v.  South- 
worth,  9  Ohio  St.  840,  where  it  was 
held  that  a  covenant  to  insure, 
where  the  mone v  is  to  be  expended 
in  reinstating  tne  building,  runs 
with  the  land;  also,  Thomas  v. 
Van  Kaflf,  6  G.  &  J.  (Md.)  872, 
where  a  similar  doctrine  was  held. 
1  Mayhur  v.  Hardesty,  8  Md. 
479. 

*  ^^^7  V. '  Atkinson,  4  Camp. 
275.  "The  covenant  to  insure," 
said  Lord  Ellenbobough,  in  the 
case  last  cited,  was  introduced  for 
the  security  of  the  landlord,  leav- 
ing the  tenant  still  absolutely  liable 
on  his  covenant  to  repair." 

'Bellamy  v.  Bnckenden,  2 
Johns.  &  H.  137 ;  Brooke  v.  Stone, 
84  L  J.  Ch.  251. 

*  White  V.  Warner,  2  Mer.  459 ; 
Gregory  v.  Wilson,  9  Hare,  683; 


704  Covenant  to  Insure.  [§  318. 

Sec.  318.  Oovenant  to  insure  where  no  loss  has  ooourrecL — 
Charles  t.  Altin.— In  an  action  for  breach  of  this  covenant, 
the  plaintiff,  who  had  himself  paid  the  insurance  premium, 
was  held  entitled  to  recover  it  back  from  the  defendant  as 
damages,  no  special  loss  having  occurred.'  In  this  case 
the  plaintiff  was  himself  a  lessee,  bound  by  covenant  to 
insure,  and  the  defendant  was  his  assignee,  who  had 
taken  subject  to  the  original  covenants,  so  that  the  pay- 
ment by  the  plaintiff  was  necessary  for  his  own  safety. 
Even  in  the  ordinary  case  of  lessor  and  lessee,  the  same 
rule  would,  it  is  conceived,  hold  good.  If  the  plaintiff 
has  paid  the  insurance  premiums,  he  ought  to  recover 
their  amount ;  because,  as  he  is  entitled  to  the  protection 
of  an  insurance  policy,  he  is  also  entitled  to  adopt  such 
means  as  may  keep  it  on  foot.  If,  however,  he  has  not 
paid  the  premiums,  then  the  question  is,  how  much  is 
the  reversion  the  worse  by  reason  of  the  lapse  or  non- 
existence of  such  a  poUcy,  no  loss  having  as  yet  occurred  t 
The  answer  to  this  would  seem  to  be,  that  the  loss  to  the 
reversion  is  measured  by  the  amount  which  it  would  cost 
the  plaintiff  to  put  himself  into  the  same  position  as  he 
would  now  be  in,  had  the  defendant  kept  his  contract. 
If  no  insurance  has  been  effected,  this  amount  would 
consist  of  the  cost  of  entering  into  one ;  that  is,  aU  the 
charges  which  a  party  has  to  incur  at  starting,  before  his 
next  premium  falls  due.  If  a  policy  has  been  effected, 
then  the  arrears  of  premiums  (if  the  oflSce  will  accept 
them),  or  the  cost  of  a  new  policy,  whichever  is  cheaper. 
It  seems  plain  that  this  is  all  to  which  the  plaintiff  is 
entitled ;  he  can  claim  nothing  in  respect  of  the  past  risk, 
for  this  is  over,  nor  in  respect  of  past  payments,  for  he 
has  made  none.  The  cost  of  commencing  an  insurance 
will,  at  any  moment,  secure  him  against  risk  till  default 
made  in  paying  the  premiums ;  and  when  this  takes  place, 
he  may  pay  them  himself,  and  recover  their  amount  as 
damages. 

These  views  are  to  a  considerable  extent  confirmed  in 

Meek  v.  Carter,  4  Jur.  N.  S.  992 ;      83  ;   Mayne  on  Damages,  Wood's 
Green  v.  Bridges,  4  Sim.  96.  ed.  874r-877. 

»  Hey  V.  Wyche,  12  L.  J.  Q.  B. 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  Where  no  Loss.  705 

a  case  -where  the  question  incidentally  arose.  It  was 
agreed  by  the  terms  of  a  charter-party,  that  the  char- 
terers should  pay  one-third  of  the  freight  in  advance — 
the  same  to  be  returned  if  the  vessel  did  not  reach  her 
destination — the  charterers  to  insure  the  amount  at  the 
owner's  expense,  and  deduct  the  cost  of  so  doing  from 
the  first  payment  of  freight.  The  charterers  paid  the 
one-third  freight,  deducting  insurance  premium.  The 
vessel  and  cargo  never  arrived.  The  charterers  sued  for 
a  return  of  the  freight.  The  owners  pleaded  that  if  the 
insurance  had  been  properly  effected,  it  would  have 
indemnified  them  against  the  loss  of  the  one-third  freight 
stipulated  to  be  returned ;  but  that  by  the  negligence  of 
tiie  charterers  in  deviating  from  the  usual  course  of  busi- 
ness in  effecting  the  insurance,  the  insurance  had 
become  worthless;  consequently,  that  the  defendants 
had  a  right  of  action  against  the  plaintiffs  to  exact  the 
same  amount  as  that  which  the  plaintiffs  had  against 
them.  This,  if  true,  would  have  made  the  plea  good,  in 
avoidance  of  circuity  of  action.  It  was  held  bad,  on  the 
ground  that  damages  for  negligence  in  insuring  were  not 
necessarily  the  same  as  the  freight  to  be  returned. 
Maule,.  J.,  said  :  ^^I  do  not  think  that  the  concluding 
allegation  sufficiently  identifies  the  sum  mentioned  in 
the  plea  with  that  sought  to  be  recovered  by  the  declara- 
tion. That  which  is  complained  of  in  the  plea  would 
give  the  defendants  a  right  of  action  against  the  plaint- 
iffs, so  soon  as  they  were  guilty  of  the  negligence 
charged,  and  the  defendant  was  thereby  damnified. 
That  which  happened  subsequently  does  not  necessarily 
determine  the  amount  of  damages  the  defendant  would 
be  entitled  to.  A  jury  might  have  given  exactly  the 
same  amount  of  damages  before  as  after  the  loss.  The 
question  is,  what  damage  has  the  party  sustained  at  the 
time  the  cause  of  action  vested  in  him  ?  If  nothing  had 
happened,  and  a  policy  might  then  have  been  effected, 
the  jury  would  consider  what  was  probable ;  if  the  loss 
had  then  happened,  they  perhaps  might  have  given  the 
full  amount ;  but  they  were  not  bound  to  do  so.    There 

were  a  variety  of  circumstances  which  they  might  prop- 

45 


706  CoymiLST  TO  Insube.  [§  319. 

eriy  take  into  their  consideration.  Theref  ore^  it  is  not  a 
necessary  and  conclusive  thing  that  the  sum  be  insured 
by  the  policy,  neither  more  nor  less,  is  the  sum  which 
the  plaintiffs  would  have  to  pay;  but  a  compensation 
for  the  injury  resulting  from  their  negligence.''  "Per- 
haps, after  the  loss,  they  would  be  bound  not  to  give 
more  than  the  amount  of  the  actual  loss,  when  no 
greater  loss  could  happen. " '  It  will  be  observed  that  it 
was  not  necessary  for  the  court  to  lay  down  positively 
what  the  measure  of  damages  would  be,  where  the  ac- 
tion was  brought  before  a  loss  had  arisen.  It  was  suf- 
ficient for  their  purpose  to  show  that  they  were  not  nec- 
essarily the  full  amount  of  the  policy.'  This  will  account 
for  the  absence  of  any  direct  and  positive  assertion  as  to 
the  rule  of  law  in  such  a  case. 

Sec.  819.  Where  a  Iobs  has  ooourrecL- There  seems,  on 
principle,  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  afier  a  loss  had  occurred 
the  measure  of  damages  would  be  the  exact  value  of 
the  thing  lost,  which  ought  to  have  been  insured.  A  later 
case  expressly  decides  the  point.  R,  the  owner  of  a  saw- 
mill, received  from  B  timber  to  be  sawed.  An  agreement 
was  made  as  to  its  being  kept  insured  by  B,  as  to  which 
varying  evidence  was  given.  According  to  one  account, 
the  agreement  was,  that  B  should  hold  all  B's  timber  in- 
sured from  fire,  and  should  pay  its  value  if  burnt.  Ac- 
cording to  another  account,  the  whole  substance  of  what 
passed  as  to  insurance  was  that  the  goods  should  be  al- 
ways insured  from  fire.  No  written  memorandum  was 
made — no  particular  office  was  mentioned — no  time  for 
insurance  was  mentioned,  nor  any  particular  amount. 
No  insurance  was  effected.  The  goods  were  burnt,  and  B 
became  bankrupt.  B  applied  to  prove  for  the  value  of  the 
timber.  His  right  depended  upon  the  question,  whether 
his  claim  was  for  an  ascertained  amount,  or  for  unUqui- 
dated  damages.  It  was  decided  on  appeal  to  the  lord  jus- 
tices that  his  claim  was  admissible.  The  court  held  that 
on  the  whole  evidence  they  were  satisfied  that  there  was 

1  Charles  v.  Altdn,  15  C.  B.  46,         '  So  in  Cahill  y.  Dawson,  3  G.  B. 
65.  (N.  S.)  106. 


ceAF«  xxxn.] 


Whebe  L0S8. 


ror 


a  contract  bn  the  part  of  the  bankrupt  to  make  good  the 
value  of  the  timber.  L,  T.  Turner,  however,  added] : 
"  In  any  event,  it  seems  to  be  clear  that  there  was  a  con- 
tract on  the  part  of  the  bankrupt  to  insure  the  petitioner's 
timber,  and  that  this  insurance  was  to  be  made  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  to  the  petitioner  the  value  of  his  tim- 
ber, in  case  it  should  be  destroyed  by  fir^ ;  and,  under 
such  circumstances,  I  apprehend  that  the  value  of  the 
timber  would  be  the  measure  of  damages  in  an  action  for 
breach  of  the  contract."  This  being  so,  and  the  value  of 
the  timber  being  an  ascertained  thing  in  the  market,  the 
amount  of  the  claim  of  course  became  a  mere  matter  of 
account.*  Where  a  lessee  of  real  and  personal  property, 
covenanted  to  keep  the  personal  property  insured  for  the 
benefit  of  the  lessor  and  he  fulfills  this  covenant,  the  lessee 
is  relieved,  by  destruction  of  all  the  leased  property  by  fire, 
from  the  subsequent  payment  of  any  rent,  although  he 
has  covenanted  to  keep  the  premises  in  repair.* 

The  fact  that  the  landlord  keeps  the  tenant  out  of 
possession,  or  that  the  premises  are  held  by  a  tenant  under 
a  prior  lease  that  has  not  expired,  although  not  an  evic- 
tion, is  equivalent  thereto,  and  affords  a  good  defence  to 
an  action  for  the  rent ; '  but  the  fact  that  the  premises  are 
in  the  possession  of  a  third  person  who  holds  without 
right,  and  refuges  to  let  the  tenant  in,  affords  no  ground 
of  defence. 


1  Ex  parte  Bateman,  20  Jur.  265. 
Approved  by  Eahle,  C.  J.,  Betteley 
V.  Steinsby,  12  C.  B.  (N.  S.)  499. 
In  Upper  Canada  it  has  been  on 
this  principle  laid  down  that  the 
measure  oi  damages  is  the  value 
of  the  premises  lost  to  the  plaint- 
iff  by  toe  n^lect  to  insure,  not  ex- 


ceeding the  sum  in  which  the  de- 
fendant was  to  have  insured  by 
his  covenant. 

^Whitaker  v.  Hawley,  15  Kan. 
674 ;  87  Am.  Rep.  277. 

'Douglas  V.  Murphy,  16  Upper 
Canada,  Q.  B.  118. 


708  Not  to  Assigot  ob  TTbdeblkf.  [§  320. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

•OOTENANT  NOT  TO  ASSIGN  OB  UNBEBLBT. 

Sec.  820.  Generally. 

Sec.  821.  How  brokeiL 

Sbc.  823.  Assignments  generallj.— Nature  of. 

Sbc.  828.  Assignments  of  the  reversion. — ^Howmade. — 82Hen.8,c.8i 

Seo.  824.  How  assignments  of  the  reversion  may  be  made. 

Sec.  825.  Effect  of  a  mortgage  of  the  reversion. 

Sec.  826.  What  amounts  to  an  assignment. 

Sec.  827.  Distinction  between  an  assignment  and  an  underlease. 

Sec.  828.  Operative  words  in  assignments. 

Sec.  829.  Usual  covenants  in  assignments. 

Sec.  880.  General  liability  of  lessee  and  assignee. 

SEa  881.  .  On  what  covenants  the  assignee  is  Table. 

SEa  882.  Rights  and  liabilities  of  assignee. 

SEa  888.  '^Where  covenants  run  with  the  land.— TVhere  ^'aasigiis'' 

are  not  mentioned. 

Sec.  884.  Where  *^  assigns  "  are  mentioned. 

Sec.  885.  Ck>venants  which  will  not  run  with  land* 

Sec.  886.  When  the  assignee's  liability  commenceSi 

Sec.  887.  Effect  of  an  assignment  over. 

Seo.  888.  Assignment  of  part  of  the  land.  , 

Sec.  889.  Rights  of  assignees  of  a  term. 

Sec.  840.  By  way  of  mortgage. — ^Mortgagee's  liability. 

Sec.  841.  Equitable  assignments  by  deposit. 

Sec.  842.  Election  by  trustees  to  accept  or  disclaim  a  lease. 

SEa  848.  What  property  passes  by  general  words  in  such  assignmentB. 

Sec.  844.  Underlease. — ^Distinction  between,  and  assignments. 

Sec.  845.  Sales  of  underleases.  ^ 

Sec.  846.  Effect  of  re-assignment. 

Ssa  847.  Ck>ntinued  liability  of  leasee. 

Sec.  848.  Rights  and  liabilities  of  assignee  as  against  lessee. 

Sec.  849.  Rights  as  to  title. 

Sbu  860.  Qrant  by  the  landlord  of  his  reversion. 


•  •'-■ 


CHAP.  XXXHL] 


Geneballt. 


709 


Sec.  861.    ConveyanceB  good  without  attornment  of  tenant. 
Sec.  893.    Effect  of  death  of  the  lessor. 
Ssa  868.    Death  of  leasee. 


Sbo.  820.  Generally.-- A  covenant  not  to  assign  or 
underlet  the  leased  premises  without  the  assent  of  the 
lessor  is  frequently  inserted  in  a  lease^  and  is  r^arded  as 
fair  and  reasonable  covenant/  even  though  a  forfeiture 
is  provided  in  case  of  its  breach.*  But  a  license  once 
given  removes  the  restriction  f orever,  as  the  condition  is 
treated  as  entire^  and  therefore  not  capable  of  being 
waived  or  released  as  to  part/  and  this  is  the  rule  whether 


>  FoUdngham  v.  Croft,  8  Anst. 
700 ;  Morgan  -r.  Slaughter,  1  "Efsp. 
8.  Where  there  is  no  restraining 
clause  in  the  lease,  the  lessee  may 
assign  or  underlet  without  the 
assent  of  the  lessor,  or  even  against 
his  protest,  and  this  to,  whether 
the  word  "  assigns  "  is  used  or  not. 
Bohinson  t.  Perry,  21  Qa.  188; 
Greenway  t.  Adams,  12  Ves.  895 ; 
Saffan  v.  Naglee,  9  Gal.  862.  And 
even  when  such  restraint  is  im- 
posed in  the  lease  it  is  not  regarded 
with  much  favor  by  the  courts, 
Coonev  v.  Hayes,  40  Vt.  478; 
Ghuich  V.  Bnown,  15  Ves.  205: 
Crusoe  v.  Bugby,  1 W.  BL  766,  and 
when  the  covenantee  has  once 
ffiven  his  assent  to  an  assignment 
the  restoiction  is  gone  forever. 
Chipman  v.  Ehneric,  5  Cal.  49. 
Ana  even  a  verbal  agreement  to 
accept  an  assignee  as  tenant,  acted 
upon,  is  good.  Levering  v.  Lang- 
ley,  8  Minn.  107.  But  in  Bngland 
hy  Stat.  22  and  28  Vict.,  c.  85,  s.  1, 
a  license  is  operative  only  in  the 
special  instance,  and  does  not  re- 
move the  restriction  so  that  there 
can  be  no  subsequent  breach.    • 

'Haberdasher's  Co.  v.  Isaac,  8 
Jur.  N.  a  811. 

*Dnmpor'8  Case,  4  Coke,  119  5; 
Chipman  v.  Emeric,  5CaL  49 ;  Co. 
Litt.  219  &;  Noy,  82.  And  the 
assi^ee  may  re-assign  without 
special  license  or  assent  from  the 
lessor.  Whitcot  v.  Fox,  Cro.  Jac. 
898;  Murray  v.  Haraway,  56  N. 
Y.  887 ;  Seifke  v.  Koch,  8  How. 
Pr.  (N.  Y.)  888.  And  the  rule  is 
generally  recognized  that  when  a 
condition  has  once  been  disp^ued 
with  or  waived  it  cannot  subse- 


quently be  enforced  as  a  condition, 
although  it  may  perhaps,  in  some 
instances,  be  maae  the  gpx>und  of 
an  action  upon  the  covenant. 
Merrifield  v.  Cudleigh,  4  Cush. 
(Mass.)  178 ;  Dakin  v.  WilliamB,  17 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  447  ;  Dickey  v.  Mc- 
Cullough,  2  W.  &  8.  (Penn.)  88. 
But  a  distinction  exists  when  the 
obli^tion  imposed  is  continuous. 
Where  the  covenant  is  continuous 
a  waiver  extends  onlv  to  particular 
or  antecedent  breacnes,  and  does 
not  relieve  him  from  the  effects  of 
a  subsequent  breach:  as,  where 
the  tenant  covenants  to  cultivate 
the  lands  in  a  certain  way,  or  to 
insure  to  a  certain  amount,  &c., 
by  accepting  rent,  or  expressly,  the 
landlora  may  waive  a  past  breach, 
but  such  waiver  does  not  relieve 
the  tenant  from  any  subsequent 
breach.  Notwithstanding  such 
waiver,  the  tenant  must  thereafter 
perform  his  covenants.  Doe  v. 
Gladwin,  6  Q.  B.  958.  But  a  cov- 
enant not  to  assign  is  not  a  con- 
tinuous covenant.  When  once 
broken  the  conseauences  are  en- 
tailed, and  if  the  jandlcnrd  waives 
the  breach  he  is  forever  after  with- 
out a  remedy,  except,  as  pre- 
viously stated,  it  is  by  action  upon 
the  covenant.  Dickey  v.  Mo- 
Culloufi^h,  ante.  The  same  rule, 
applicable  in  the  case  of  a  con- 
'dition,  applies  to  a  penalty,  and, 
if  a  person  has  put  himself  in  a 
situation  that  he  cannot  claim' the 
whole  penally,  he  can  claim  no 
part  of  it.  It  is  laid  down  in  1 
Bolle*B  Abr.  471,  and  I  am  not 
aware  that  the  principle  has  ever 
been  controverted,  that  '*  if  a  man 


no 


Not  to  Assign  ob  Undeblet. 


[§820. 


the  license  is  general)  or  is  restricted  to  a  particular 
individual ; '  but,  in  order  to  have  that  effect,  it  must  be 
such  a  license  as  is  contemplated  in  the  lease.  That  is, 
if  the  lease  provides  that  the  license  shall  be  in  writing, 
an  oral  license  is  not  good,  and  does  not  operate  to  de- 
stroy the  covenant ; '  nor  does  a  license  given  by  one  not 
vested  with  authority  to  give  it,  although  he  was  at  the 
time  owner  of  the  estate.*  The  license  should  expressly 
forbid  the  lessee  from  parting  with  the  possession  until 
a  complete  transfer  of  the  legal  interest  has  been  effected. 
The  practice  of  letting  a  purchaser  into  possession  before 
the  legal  estate  is  transferred,  is,  however,  so  common, 
that,  if  it  is  intended  to  forbid  it,  such  intention  must  be 
clearly  expressed.*  A  covenant  by  the  lessor  not  to 
withhold  his  license  to  assign  unreasonably  or  vexatiously, 
is  broken  by  his  refusing  his  hcense  to  assign  to  an 
imobjectionable  person,  in  order  that  he  may  obtain  a 
surrender  of  the  lease  for  the  purpose  of  rebuilding.^ 
Where  the  lease  contains  a  provision  against  assignment, 
ifcc,  except  in  a  particular  way,  ashy  will,  the  tenant  may 
assign,  &c.,  in  that  way.  but  in  no  other,  because  the  orig- 
inal restriction  as  to  alienation  contains  an  exception  out 
of  it,  so  that  in  the  mode  expepted  there  was  nothing  to 
license.  The  exception  in  such  a  case  not  only  extends 
to  the  lessee  himself,  but  also  to  his  assignee  or  lessee, 

is  bound  to  make  an  house  and  the 
obligee  dischargea  him  of  a  single 
posty  he  is  discharged  of  all'* 
While  a  license  to  assign  removes 
the  restriction  in  toto,  Murray  v. 
Murray,  56  N.  Y.  837 ;  Chipman  v. 
Emeric,  5  Cal.  49 ;  Jones  v.  Jones, 
12  Ves.  189 ;  Masher  v.  Foundling 
Hospital,  1  v.  &  B.  191 ;  Dakin  t. 
Wilfiams,  1  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  458 ; 
Paul  T.  Nurse,  8  B.  &  C.  486; 
Williams  v.  Earle,  9  B.  &  S.  740  ; 
West  V.  Dobb,  9  id.  755,  and  if 
there  are  several  lessees  a  license 
to  one  discharges  the  condition  as 
to  all,  Leeds  v.  Compton,  1  Boll's 
Abr.  472,  or  if  a  license  is  ^ven  to 
assign  apart  of  the  premises,  the 
lessee  may  assign  the  whole;  Leeds 
V.  Compton,  ante ;  yet  in  order  to 
have  that  effect  the  license  must 
be  in  toriting,  when  such  a  license 
is  required  oy  the  lease.    Gregson 


V.  Harrison,  2  T.R.  4ao.  Alicenae 
to  underlet  a  part  of  the  premises 
applies  onlv  to  the  particular  in- 
stuice,  and  does  not  discharge  or 
remove  the  condition  as  to  the 
remainder.  Gregson  v.  Harrison, 
ante. 

*  Brummel  v.  McPherson,  14  Ve& 
172. 

*  Richardson  ▼.  Evans,  8  Hadd. 
218  ;  Roe  v.  Harrison,  2T.  R.  4d5  ; 
Macher  v.  Foundling  Hospital,  1 
V.  &  B.  191.  But  where  the  lea- 
see has,  in  good  faith,  acted  upaa- 
such  parol  license,  a  court  of  equity 
would  restrain  the  lessor  from  en- 
forcing a  forfeiture.  BJchardaop 
V.  Evans,  ante. 

»  Read  v.  Farr,  6  M.  &  a  121. 

*  West  V.  Dobb,  L.  B.,  4  Q.  B* 
684. 

■  Lehmann  v.  M^ Arthur,  L.  B., 
8  Eq.  746. 


CHAP,  xxxm.] 


Generally. 


m 


and  they  may  alienate  in  that,  but  not  in  any  other  mode.  ^ 
An  assignment,  even  when  expressly  forbidden  by  the 
lease,  and  when,  by  the  terms  of  the  lease,  a  forfeiture  is 
provided  for  its  breach,  is  nevertheless  valid,  and  passes 
the  estate  to  the  assignee  subject  to  the  consequences  of 
the  breach,'  and  the  landlord  may  waive  the  forfeiture, 
either  expressly  or  impliedly,  by  personally  accepting  rent 
that  accrues  ^u&segt£en^  to  an  assigment,  knotmng  the  fact 
thai  an  assignment  has  been  made ; '  but  mere  proof  of 
the  acceptance  of  rent  that  accrued  subsequent  to  the 
assignment,  does  not  relieve  the  term  from  the  forfeit- 
ure ;  it  must  also  he  shotvn  that  at  the  time  when  such 
tvas  received  the  landlord  vxjs  aware  of  the  assign- 


>  Lloyd  ▼.  Crisp,  6  Taunt.  249. 

*  GkxJdright-  V.  Davies,  Cowp. 
808 ;  Brununell  v.  Macpherson, 
ante.  The  assignment,  without 
the  approbation  of  the  lessor,  of  a 
lease  which  contains  a  covenant 
that  the  lessee  will  not  lease,  un- 
derlet, nor  permit  any  other  per- 
son to  occupy  without  such  ap- 
probation, does  not  determine  the 
lease  without  re-entry  by  the  les- 
sor; nor  enable  the  lessor  to  main- 
tain an  action  for  use  and  occupa- 
tion against  one  occupying  part  of 
the  premises  under  the  assignee 
before  such  re-entry.  Shattuck  v. 
Lovejoy,8Gray(Mass.)204.  Whe* 
the  lease  is  assigned  tvith  his  con- 
sent the  assi^ee  is  not  liable  for 
any  breaches  oy  the  assignor  either 
before  or  after  assignment.  Town- 
send  v.  Scholey,  86  Cal.  18. 

•Gregson  v.  Harrison,  2  T.  R. 
425  ;  Godb.  47.  In  Cheny  y.  Bat- 
ten, Cowp.  248,  Aston,  J.,  said: 
"Where  an  ejectment  has  been 
brought  for  the  forfeiture  of  a 
lease,  *  *  acceptance  of  the  rent 
afterwards  by  the  landlord  has,  I 
belieye,  been  neld  a  waiyer  of  the 
forfeiture  of  the  lease  ;  which  may 
weU  be,  for  it  is  a  penalty ,  and  by 
accepting  the  rent,  the  party 
waiyes  the  penalty."  In  Gooa- 
right  y.  Dayies,  Cowp.  808,  where 
the  lease  contained  a  condition  for 
a  forfeiture  if  the  tenant  should 
underlet,  the  hmdlord,  with  full 
knowledge  of  the  underletting, 
accepted  subsequently  accruing 
rent.     Lord     Mansfield   said : 


<'  This  cade  is  extremely  clear.  To 
construe  this  acceptance  of  rent, 
due  since  the  condition  broken,  a 
vxLiver  of  the  forfeiture,  is  to  con- 
«true  it  accordinfi"  to  the  intention 
of  the  parties.  Upon  the  breach 
of  the  condition  we  landlord  had 
a  right  to  enter.  He  had  full  no- 
tice of  the  breach,  and  does  not 
take  advantage  of  it ;  but  accepts 
rent  subsequently  accrued.  That 
shows  he  meant  that  the  lease 
should  continue.  Cases  of  forfeit- 
ure are  not  favored  in  law ;  and 
where  the  forfeiture  is  once  waived 
the  court  will  not  assist  it.*'  Ac- 
ceptance of  rent  by  an  agent,  the 
agent  knowing  the  facts,  does  not 
operate  as  a  waiver  bv  the  landlord. 
Jackson  v.  Schutz,  18  John.  (N.  Y.) 
174.  As  stated  by  Lord  Mans- 
field, ante,  tiie  courts  do  not  fa- 
vor forfeitures,  and  therefore  ad- 
here strictly  to  the  precise  words 
of  the  condition  in  order  to  pre- 
vent a  forfeiture,  and  if  the  l^d- 
lord  has  manifestly  done  any  act 
that  is  inconsistent  with  his  reli- 
ance upon  it,  or  which  amounts  to 
a  waiver  of  it,  they  will  not  per- 
mit him  to  enforce  it,  and  accept- 
ance of  rent  with  full  knowleoge 
of  the  facts  is  such  an  act  as 
amounts  to  a  waiver  ;  but  if  he 
had  no  notice  or  knowledge  of  the 
fact  it  would  be  absurd  to  hold 
that  he  had  waived  a  breach  he 
had  never  heard  of.  Bacon^s  Abr. 
Tit.  Leases  (T)  2 ;  Jackson  v.  Brown- 
son,  7  John.  (N.  Y.)  227. 


712 


Not'  to  Assign  ob  Underlet. 


[§  820. 


ment.  ^  the  receipt  a£  rent  accuring  before  the  forfeiture 
attached,  does  not  operate  as  a  waiver  of  the  forfeiture. ' 
Not  only  does  the  acceptance  of  rent,  as  previously  stated, 
operate  as  a  waiver  of  a  forfeiture,  but  also  any  act  of  the 
landlord  that  evinces  an  intention  upon  his  part  that  the 
lease  shall  continue  notwithstanding  the  forfeiture*  and 
his  intention  is  a  question  for  the  jury/  hut  the  legal  effect 
of  his  acts  upon  the  facts  found  is  for  the  court.*  But  it 
was  formerly  held  that,  where  there  is  a  provision  that  in 
case  the  tenant  shall  assign  or  underlet,  the  lease  shaU  be 
void,  neither  an  acceptance  of  rent  or  any  other  similar 
act  upon  the  landlord's  part  could  operate  as  a  waiver, 
because  from  the  time  of  the  happening  of  the  breach  there 
is  no  lease  existing  between  the  parties,*  and  that  it  was 
only  when  the  lease  is  voidable  merely,  and  not  absolutely 
void,  that  a  waiver  could  be  set  up,^  although  it  was  held 


>  Gregson  ▼.  Harrison,  8  T.  B. 
425 ;  Camp  v.  Pulver,  5  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  91 ;  Walker  v.  Engler,  80  Mo. 
180 ;  Jones  v.  Clark,  1  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
617;  McKildoe  v.  Darracott,  18 
Gratt.  (Va.)  278;  Clark  v.  Cum- 
mings,  5  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  889 ;  News- 
man v.  Rutter,  8  Watts  (Penn.)  61. 

*  Hunter  Vv  Osterhout,  11  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  100 ;  Jackson  v.  Allen,  8 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  220. 

>  Rutson  v.  Lewis,  6  Ad.  &  £1. 
277.  In  Morecraft  v.  Meux,  1  C. 
&  P.  846,  the  jury  found  that  the 
landlord  accepted  the  rent  after 
(ejectment  brought,  and  without 
intending  to  discharge  the  tor- 
/eilxire,  out  upon  exceptions,  it 
was  held  that  by  accepting  the 
rent  he  waived  the  forfeiture.  Doe 
<sr,  Meux,  4  B.  &  C.  806. 

^  Oksskey  V.  Batten,  Cowp.  248. 
Opinion  of  Ashukst,  J. 

*  Morecraft  t.  Meux,  ante. 
*Pennanl>'s   Case,  8   Coke,  64; 

Simpson  t.  Butcher,  Doug.  61 ; 
Ooon  T.  Brackett,  2  N.  BlT  164; 
Mulcarry  v.  Eyres,  Cro.  Car.  511 ; 
Browning]8  Case,  Plowd.  184; 
Finch  v.  I^iroekBaorton,  Cro.  Eliz. 
221 ;  Parmalee  ▼.  Oswego  R.  R. 
Co.,  «  N.  Y.  74. 

">  Sjmison  T.  Buteher,  Doug.  61 ; 
Carter  t.  Strapham,  I  Cowp.  201 ; 
Yale  V.  Church,  2  id.  488. 
"Where,**  says  LoBO  Coke,  1 
Inst.  214  h,  **  the  estate  or  lease 


is  ipso  facto  void  by  the  condition 
or  limitation,  no  acceptance  of  the 
rent  after  can  make  it  to  have  a 
continuance,  otherwise  it  is  of  a 
lease  or  estate  voidable  by  entry," 
and  this  doctrine  is  also  laid  down 
in  PenniLut*B  Case,  ante,  with  equal 
force.  In  that  case  it  was  resolved 
that  "  where  the  condition  is,  that 
on  breach  thereof  the  lease  for 
years  shall  he  void,  acceptance  of 
rent  due  at  a  subsequent  day  will 
not  affirm  it**  (8d  resolution).  See 
also,  Bacon*s  Abr.  tit.  Leases  fT), 
2,  where  it  is  said,  *'  When  we  say 
that  a  forfeiture  may  be  waived, 
we  miist  be  understood  to  confine 
ourselves  to  those  cases  where,  by 
the  terms  of  the  contract,  the  es- 
tate, upon  the  tenant's  doing  or 
failing  to  do  what  he  has  stipulated 
to  do  or  abstain  from,  is  only  de- 
terminable, not  tohere  it  absolutely 
determines ;  where  the  lease  is  only 
voidable,  not  where  it  is  absolutdy 
void.  Kennensley  v.  Orpe,  Doug. 
66.  In  the  one  case  the  forfeiture 
is  optional  with  the  lessor,  and, 
unless  he  sees  fit  to  rely  upon  and 
enforce  it,  no  forfeiture  is  actually 
incurred ;  but  in  the  other  case,  by 
the  breach,  the  lease  is  at  once  put 
an  end  to  ;  without  the  exercise  of 
any  option  by  the  lessor,  it  be- 
comes a  nullity  and  cannot  be  re- 
ceived by  any  act  of  the  lessor  abort 
of  an  actual  renewal  of  the  coq* 


Jk 


CHAP,  xxxm,] 


Generally. 


713 


that  if  the  landlord  permitted  the  tenant  to  remain  after 
the  breach,  and  accepted  rent  from  him,  a  tenancy  from 
year  to  year  sprung  up  upon  the  terms  of  the  lease,  so 
far  as  they  were  applicable  to  such  a  tenancy.'  But  lat- 
terly the  courts  are  inclined  to  hold  that  the  landlord  may 
elect  whether  to  treat  the  lease  as  void  or  not,  and,  while 
the  tenant  has  no  option  in  the  matter,  and  cannot  set  up 
his  own  breach  to  defeat  the  lease,  yet  the  landlord  may, 
if  he  elects  to  do  so,  treat  it  as  valid,  even  after  breach, 
and  enforce  all  of  its  provisions  as  against  the  lessee  :  * 
but  he  is  boimd  by  his  election,  and  after  having  once 
elected  by  some  decisive  act  to  treat  the  lease  as  void,  he 
cannot  afterwards  enforce  it  against  the  tenant  as  a  valid 
instrument." 


tract,  as  the  lessee  from  the  time 
of  the  breach  ceases  to  have  any 
interest  upon  which  the  will  of  the 
lessor  can  attach.  4  Bacon's  Abr. 
tit.  Leases  (T),  2.  But  there  is  a 
distinction  in  reference  to  the  ap- 
plication of  this  rule  between  leases 
for  years  and  leases  for  life  or 
lives.  In  cases  of  the  latter  class, 
although  the  lease  provides  that 
for  a  certain  breach  it  shall  be 
void,  still,  in  law,  it  is  treated 
merely  as  voidable  by  reentry 
upon  the  principle  that  an  estate 
that  begins  by  livery  can  be  ended 
only  by  entry.  Beeton^s  Case, 
Plowd.  183 ;  Doe  v.  Pritchard,  5 
B.  &  Ad.  765;  Bowenv.  Bowen, 
18  C!onn.  685;  Marwick  v.  An- 
drews, 25  Me.  526 ;  Spear  v.  Fuller, 
8  N.  H.  174;  Fifty  Associates  v. 
Howland,  11  Met.  (Mass.)  99 ;  Gar- 
rett V.  Scanten,  8  Den.  (N.  Y.)  884 ; 
Hamilton  v.  Elliott,  5  a  ft  R. 
(Penn.)  875.  And  even  in  a  lease 
for  years,  although  there  is  l[  con- 
dition that  it  shall  be  void  upon  a 
certein  breach,  vet  the  tenant  can- 
not avail  himseft  of  such  breach  to 
avoid  the  lease,  as  in  that  case  he 
^ould  be  permitted  to  avail  him- 
self of  his  own  wrong  to  rid  him- 
self of  a  contract  of  wiuch  he  had 
become  anxious  to  relive  himself. 
It  is  void  only  at  the  option  of  the 
landlord.  Reed  v.  Farr,  6  M.  &  S. 
121 ;  Hyde  v.  Watts,  12  M.  &  W. 
264;  Doe  V.  Bancks,  4B.  &  Aid. 
401 ;  Jones  v.  Carter,  15  M.  &  W. 
718^  and  if  he  elects  to  treat  it  as  a 


valid  lease,  by  any  decisive  act, 
after  breach,  and  cognizant  of  it, 
as  by  receiving  subsequent  rent, 
he  is  estopped  from  enforcing  the 
forfeiture  except  upon  a  fresh 
breach.  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B.  & 
Aid.  401. 

^  Aldebson,  B.  ,  in  Nash  v.  Birch, 
1  M.  &  W.  407  ;  Bruns  v.  RawUns, 
10  East,  261 ;  Martin  v.  Watts,  7  T. 
R.  88. 

*  Cartwright  v.  Gfardner,  5  Gush. 
(Mass.)  278 ;  Jones  v.  Carter,  15  M. 
&  W.  718  ;  Clark  v.  Jones,  1  Den. 
(N.  Y.)  517 ;  Western  Bank  v.  Kyle, 
6  Gill.  (Md.)  718.  . 

•  Jones  V.  Carter,  15  M.  &  W. 
718.  ''Although  the  lease  is  de- 
clared to  be  void  for  breach  of  cov- 
enant," says  Pabke,  B.,  in  Jones 
V.  Carter,  ante,  "it  is  perfectly 
well  settled  that  l^e  true  con- 
struction of  the  proviso  is,  that 
it  shall  be  void  at  the  option 
of  the  lessor.  Rode  v  Farr,  6  M. 
&  S.  121 ;  Bryan  v.  Bancks,  4  B.  & 
Aid.  401.  And  consequently  on 
the  one  hand,  if  the  lessor  exer- 
cises the  option  that  it  shall  con- 
tinue, the  lease  is  rendered  valid ; 
if  he  elects  that  it  shall  end,  the 
lease  must  be  determined.  In  the 
case  above  referred  to  the  option 
was  held  to  have  been  exercised  by 
the  receipt  of  rent,  subsequently 
due,  and  the  lease  thereby  ren- 
dered valid.  In  like  mannef ,  the 
lease  would  be  rendered  invalid  by 
some  unequivocal  act  indicating 
the  intention  of  tiie  lessor  to  avau 


7U 


Not  to  Assign  ob  Undeblet. 


[§  821: 


Sec.  321.  How  broken.— As  previouslj  stated,  cove- 
nants against  assignment  or  underletting  are  not  favor- 
ably regarded  by  the  courts,  and  are  construed  liberally 
in  favor  of  the  lessee,  and  so  as  to  prevent  the  restriction 
from  extending  beyond  the  express  stipulations  in  refer- 
ence thereto,  and  in  accordance  with  this  tendency  it  is 
held,  that  a  condition  not  to  assign  is  not  broken  by  an 
underlease'  uiUess  there  are  special  words,  as,  that  the 


himself  of  the  option  given  to 
him,  and  notified  to  the  lessee,  af- 
ter which  he  could  no  lon^r  con- 
sider himself  bound  to  perform  the 
other  covenants  in  the  lease ;  and 
if  once  rendered  void,  it  could  not 
a^ain  be  set  up.  An  entry,  or 
ejectment,  in  widchan  entry  k  ad- 
mitted, would  be  necessary  in  the 
case  of  a  freehold  lease,  or  of  a 
chattel  interest,  where  the  terms  of 
the  lease  provided  that  it  should  be 
avoided  by  re-entry.  In  Bryan  v. 
Bancks,  ante,  ejectment  was 
brought  upon  a  lease  of  coal  mines 
in  which  a  royalty  rent  was  re- 
served upon  every  ton  of  coal 
raised.  The  lease  contained  a  pro- 
vision that  it  should  be  void  to  aU 
intents  and  purposes  if  the  tenant 
should  cease  working  at  any  time 
for  two  years.  After  the  working 
had  ceased  for  more  than  two 
years  the  lessor  received  rent.  It 
was  held  that  a  tenancv  from  year 
to  year  was  not  thereby  created, 
for  the  lease,  by  such  breach  did 
not  become  amolutely  void,  hut 
only  voidable  at  the  option  of  the 
lessor,  and  that  he  might  avoid  the 
lease  upon  any  cesser  to  work 
commencing  two  years  before  the 
day  of  demise  in  the  ejectment. 
"I  think,"  says  Bayley,  J.,  "that 
the  landlord  has  it  in  his  election 
to  make  this  lease  void  or  not ;  that 
he  is  not  bound  to  exercise  his  elec- 
tion in  the  first  instance  ;  and  that 
though  he  may  waive  it  from  time 
to  time,  he  is  at  liberty  afterwards 
to  insist  on  the  forfeiture  in  re- 
spect of  subsequent  misconduct." 
See  also  upon  the  latter  point, 
Boscowen  v.  Bliss,  4  Taunt.  785. 

*  Blencowe  v.  Bufl[by,  3  Wils. 
224 ;  S.  C.  Crusoe  v.  Bugby,  2  Bl. 
7d6.  But  if  the  tenant  parts  with 
the  demised  premises  for  the  whole 
of  his  term,  although  lus  deed  ^ur- 
I>orts  to  be  an  underlease,  yet  it  is 


in  legal  effect  an  assignment,  and 
operates  as  a  breach  of  his  cove- 
nant.    WoUaston  v.  Hakewell,  3 
M.  &  G.  297 ;  Hicks  v.  Downing,  1 
Ld.  Rayd.  99 ;  Langf ord  v.  Selmes, 
8  Koy.  &  J.  220 ;  Palmer  v.  Ed- 
wards, 1   Doug.    187;    Pascoe  v. 
Pascoe,  3  Bing.  N.  C.  898;  Par- 
meter   V.    Webb,   8   Taunt   593; 
Thorn  v.  Woolcombe,  3  B.  &  Ad. 
595 ;  Preeoe  v.  Corrie,  6  Btng.  24 ; 
V.  Cooper,  3  Wils.  875.     Un- 
derletting does  not  operate  as  a 
breach  of  a  covenant  **  not  to  as- 
sign "  merely,  Kinnersly  v.  Orpe, 
1  Doug.   183;    Brewer    v.  Hill,  1 
Anst.  418;    Church  v.  Brown,  15 
Yes.    295;   Jalabret   v.   Duke  of 
Chandoe,  1  Eden,  872,  but  a  cove- 
nant not  to  underlet  is  broken  by 
an  assignment.   Berry  v.  Taunton, 
Cro.    Eliz.    331 ;     Greenway    v. 
Adams,  12  Yes.  395 ;    Den  v.  Poet, 
25  N.  J.  L.  285;  Bemis  v.  Wilder, 
100  Mass.  446;   Shattuck  v.  Love- 
joy,  8  Gray  (Mass.)  204 ;  Shumway 
V.  Collins,    6   id.    227;    Blake  v. 
Sanderson,  1  id.  383,  but  in  New 
York,  Lynde  v.  Houeh,  27  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  415,  and  in  New  Jersey, 
Field  V.  Mills,  33  N.  J.  L.  254,  the 
doctrine  of  the  English  cases  is  re- 
jected, and  an  assignment  is  held 
not  to  operate  as  a  breach  of  a 
covenant  not  *'  to  let  or  underlet.** 
Of  course  the  languoQe    of  the 
covenant  must  be  looked  to,  to  de- 
termine whether   an    underlease 
operates  as  a  breach  of  a  covenant 
not  to  assign.     Thus,  when  the 
covenant  is  that  *'  the  lessee  shall 
not  assign  or  otherwise  part  witb. 
the  indenti|pe   of    lease,    or    the 
premises,  for  the  whole   or  any 
part  of  the  term,"  an  imderlease 
would  operate  as  a  breach,  and  if 
there  is  a  right  of    re-entrv  re- 
served,  would  work  a  forfeiture, 
Holland    v.    Worsley,    1   Camp, 
1;  Granger  v.   Grovenor,  3  Dy. 


•b 


CHAP,  xxxm.] 


How  Bbokkn. 


715 


lessM,  his  executors,  &c.,  shall  not  assign,  let,  &c.,'  in 
which  case  neither  the  lessee  nor  his  executors^  &c.,  can 
underlet.*  But  an  underlease  operates  as  a  breach  if  the 
lease  contains  a  proviso  that  it  shall  be  void  ^^  if  the  lessee 
assigns  or  otherwise  parts  with  the  indenture  of  lease,  or 
the  premises  thereby  demised,  or  any  part  thereof,"  for 
the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  term,*  or  if  any  words  are 
used  in  the  condition  that  operate  as  a  limitation  in  that 
respect/  But  an  assignment  by  operation  of  law  does 
not  operate  as  a  breach  of  the  condition,  as,  if  the  lessee's 
interest  under  the  lease  is  set  off  or  sold  under  a  bona  fide 
execution/    Nor  does  any  involuntary  assignment  of  the 


808  h,  n.  75.  But  even  when 
the  covenant  is  against  either  a»- 
signing  or  underletting,  and  there 
is  nothing  restraining  the  tenant 
from  parting  with  the  possession, 
merely  putting  a  person  into  po&> 
sion  does  not  operate  as  a  breach, 
Church  V.  Brown,  15  Ves.  265; 
Williams  v.  Cheney,  8  id.  61,  nor 
is  a  covenant  not  to  part  with  the 
possession  broken  by  parting  with 
the  possession  of  a  part  of  the 
premises,  Church  v.  Brown,  ante  ; 
Collins  V.  Sillye,  Sty.  266,  nor  even 
when  the  lessee  covenants  not  to 
assign  or  underlet  any  part  of  the 
the  premises,  is  the  covenant 
broken  bv  letting  out  rooms  to 
ledgers,  the  tenant  still  retaining 
control  of  the  premises.  Pitt  v. 
Laming.  4  Camp,  78.  But,  -poesi- 
bly  the  doctrine  of  the  last  case 
must  be  restricted  to  the  letting  of 
buildings  for  a  purpose  that  neces- 
sarily involves  the  letting  of  rooms 
to  lodgers  ;  Greenslade  v.  Tap- 
scott,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  85  ;  and 
it  has  been  held  that  such 
would  be  the  result  when 
the  language  of  the  covenant 
was  such  as  imphedly  to  exclude 
such  a  letting.  Ambler  v.  Wood- 
bridge,  9  B.  £  C.  876.  If  the  cove- 
nant is  mereljr  personal,  and  the 
words  **  administrators,  executors, 
&c.,"  are  not  used,  the  restraint  is 
removed  upon  the  death  of  the 
lessee.  Gregson  v.  Harrison,  2  T. 
R.  425  ;  Anonymous,  1  Dyer,  66  a, 
pi.  8.  But  if  the  covenant  extends 
to  executors,  administrators,  &c., 
they  are  boimd  by  it,  and  cannot 


assign  even  to  pay  debts.  Lloyd 
V.  Crispe,  5  Taunt.  249  ;  Williauns 
V.  Davies,  6  C.  &  P.  614 ;  North- 
cote  V.  Duke  Ambler,  511 ;  Ori- 
son V.  Harrison,  ante;  Goodbe- 
here  v.  Bevan,  ante ;  Bridgman  v. 
Davies,  1  C.  M.  &  R.  405.  But  in 
the  latter  case,  where  the  term  is 
assi^ed  for  the  payment  of  debts, 
equity  will  relieve  against  the  for- 
feiture. Cox  V.  Brown,  1  Rep.  no 
Ch.  170 ;  Leers  v.  Hind,  1  Ves.  Jr. 
294;  Northoote  v.  Duke,  ante; 
Burleton  v.  Humf rey.  Ambler,  258. 
'  Gregson  v.  Harrisom,  2T.  R.  426. 

•  Dingley  v.  Sales,  1  M.  &  S.  297. 
A  covenant  not  "  to  assign,  trans- 
fer, set  over  or  otherwise  do  or  put 
atvay  the  lease  or  premises,"  is  not 
broken  by  underletting  them. 
Jackson  v.  Harrison,  17  John.  (N. 
Y.)  66;  Jackson  v.  Silvemail,  15 
id.  278;  Copeland  v.  Palmer,  4 
Mich.  660 ;  Hargrave  v.  King,  5 
Ired.  (N.  C.)  Eq.  480.  But  an  un- 
derlease operates  as  a  breach  of  a 
covenant  not  "to  set,  let  or  as- 
sign over"  the  premises.  Gregson 
V.  Harrison,  2  T.  R.  425 ;  Dingley 
V.  Sales,  ante. 

'  Holland  v.  Worsley,  1  Camp. 
20. 

*  Holland  v.  Worsley,  ante. 

» Mitchinson  v.  Carter,  8  T.  R. 
67.  But  it  was  held,  upon  a  hear- 
ing of  this  case  at  Trinity  Term,  8 
T.  R.  800,  that,  if  a  tenant  under  a 
covenant  not  '^to  let,  set,  or  as- 
sign, transfer  or  make  over,  Ac.,** 
gives  a  warrant  of  attorney  to 
confess  judgment  to  a  creditor  for 
the  express  purpose  of  enabling 


J 


716 


Not  to  Asbigk  ob  Underlet. 


[§821. 


lease  operate  as  a  breach  of  the  covenant,  as  the  death* 
or  involuntary  bankruptcy  of  the  lessee/  or  in  any  wise 
by  the  mere  operation  of  law.'    Nor  is  the  coiMition 


the  creditor  to  take  the  lease  upon 
execution^  such  act  of  the  tenant 
is  in  fraud  of  the  covenant,  and 
that  the  landlord  may  recoTer  the 
premises  in  ejectment  from  the 
purchaser  unaer  the  execution. 
"Here,'*  says  Grose,  J.,  "the 
tenant  did  not,  in  terms,  assi^ 
the  lease,  but  he  did  that  whtch 
vxia  equivcUent ;  it  was  an  attempt 
to  evade  the  covenant,  and  was 
intended  as  a  fraud  on  the  land- 
lord." "  If,"  says  Lord  Kenton, 
C.  J.,  in  the  same  case,  "  the  lease 
had  been  taken  by  the  creditor 
under  an  adverse  judgment,  the 
tenant  not  consenting,  it  would 
not  have  been  a  forfeiture,"  Stan- 
ho^  V.  Skeggs,  E.  &  Tr.,  21  Geo.  8 

*'  Seersv.  Hind,  1  Ves.  Jr.  p.  2W; 
Boe  V.  Harripon,  1  T.  R.  426 ;  Croft 
V.  Lumley,  6  H.  L.  Gas.  672. 

*  Doe  V.  Bevan,  8  M.  &  S.  868  ; 
Hunter  v.  Galliers,  2  T.  B.  188; 
Goodbehere  v.  Bevan,  8  M.  &  9. 
868 ;  Weatherall  v.  Geering,  12  Ves. 
612 ;  Wadham  v.  Marlow,  8  East, 
814,  n.;  Dyke  v.  Taylor,  6  Jur.  N. 
S.  1829 ;  Ixxskwood  v.  Clarke,  8 
East,  186;  Goring  v.  Warner,  2 
Eq.  Cas.  Abr.  100  _pl.  8  ;  S.  C.  7 
Vm.  Abr.  86  pi.  9.  But  taking  the 
benefit  of  an  Insolvency  Act  is 
treated  as  a  voluntary  assignment, 
and  such  would  doubtless  be  the 
effect  where  a  person  becomes  a 
bankrupt  on  his  own  petition. 
Shee  V.  Hale,  18  Ves.  404 ;  Hol- 
land V.  Cole,  1  H.  &  C.  67 ;  HiU  v. 
Cawdiy,  1  H.  &  N.  860 ;  Billiter  v. 
Young,  6  E.  &  B.  1.  And  a  lease 
may  expressly  provide  that  it  shall 
be  void  if  the  lessor  becomes  bank- 
rupt. Uoyd  V.  Ingleby,  16  M.  & 
W.  465;  Church  v.  Brown,  15 
Ves.  258 ;  Griffiths  v.  Pritchard,  5 
B.  &  Ad.  765 ;  Williams  v.  Davis, 
6  C.  &  P.  614 ;  Bridgman  v.  David, 
16  M.  dt  R.  406;  Gatehouse  v. 
Bees,  4  Bing.  N.  C.  884.  Where 
the  lessee  becomes  a  bankrupt  (not 
on  1^  own  petition),  and  by  the 
operation  of  tne  bankrupt  acts. 

*  Goring  v.  Warner,  ante ;  Shp- 
per  V.  Tottenham,  ^tc.,  By.  Co.,  L. 
k,  4  Eq.  112 ;  Sir  William  Moore's 
Caise,  Cro.    Eliz.    26;    Crusoe  v. 


Bugby,  8  Wils.  284 :  MitchinsonT. 
Carter,  8  T.  B.  67;  Stanhope  v. 
Skeggs,  2  id.  428 ;  Weatherall  v. 
Geering,  12   Ves.    613;    Shee   t. 
Hale,  18  Ves.   404;    Brandon  v. 
Astor,  2  Y.  &  C.  24,  the  property 
becomes  vested  in  the  assignees, 
such  transfer  of  interest  does  not 
create  a  breach  of  the  contnct 
against   alienation.     Wadham  v. 
li&rlow,  2 Chit  600;  8East,814ii. 
Nor  even  a  subsequent  asHignment 
by  them  to  a  purchaser.     Goodbe- 
here V.  Bevan,  8  M.  &  &  858,  880, 
861 ;  Cole  Ejec  486.  But  see  Dyke 
V.  Taylor,  6  Jur.  N.  S.  1329.    The 
assignment  being  done  by  the  au- 
thority of  a  statute,   supersedeB 
any  private  agreement   between 
the  parties,  and  is,  therefore,  no 
breach  of  the  condition.    Hunter 
V.  Galliers,  2  T.  B.  188;  Weath- 
erall  V.    Geering,    12    Ves.    512; 
Lockwoodv.  Clarke,  8  East,  185; 
Goodbehere  v.  Bevan,  8  IL  &  S. 
868.     But  if  he  became  bankrupt 
upon  his  own  petition  that  may 
amount  to  a  voluntary  assignment, 
and  consequent  l^prfeiture.    Hill  v. 
Cowdery,  1  H.  ft  N.  860;   BUliter 
V.  Young,  6  E.  &  B.  1 ;  Holland  v. 
Cole,  1  H.  ft  C.  67.    A  lease  may 
be  xnade  subject  to  a  proviso  for 
re-entry  by  the  lessor,  in  the  event 
of  the  lessee  becoming  bankrupt ; 
and  such  proviso  will  be  valid  as 
against  his  assignees.     Where  A 
granted  a  lease  to  B,  which  oon- 
tained  a  covenant  that  B,  his  ex- 
ecutors or  administrators  (without 
mentioning  '*  assigns  **)>  should  not 
underlet  without  the  consent  of 
the  lessor ;  and  B  having  become 
bcmkrupt,  his  assignees   aasigzied 
the  premises  to  C,  from  whom  B, 
after  he  obtained  his  certificate, 
took  them  again  by  re-assiKument, 
and  underlet  them  to  anotber  {per- 
son ;  it  was  held,  that  B,  having 
been  discharged  fit  the  time  of  his 
bankruptcy  nom  all  covenants  in 
the  lease,  the  underletting  by  him, 
which  was  in   the   character    of 
assignee^  was  no  forfeiture  of  the 
lease,    Cheere  v.  Smith,  5  Taunt, 
795.    Takin^pthe  benefit  of  an  in- 
solvent act  IS  considoied  as  a  mi- 
untary  assignment :  and  theref  oi:e 


CHAP,  xxxm.] 


How  Bboken. 


717 


broken  by  a  bequest  of  the  term/  nor  by  simply  deposit- 
ing the  lease  with  a  creditor  as  security  for  a  debt/  or 
otherwise  parting  with  the  possession  of  the  lease^  when 
no  transfer  is  executed  so  as  to  make  the  party  receiving 
it  liable  upon  the  covenants  of  the  lease  as  assignee;' 
nor  even  an  assignment  which  is  void  in  law/  nor  by  the 
marriage  of  a  feme  sole  tenant;*  nor  does  the  tenant 
violate  this  condition  by  a  mere  offer  to  assign,  as  by 
advertising  that  he  will  underlet  or  assign.  There  can 
be  no  breach  unless  he  does  in  fact  assign  or  underlet  in 
a  manner  that  is  operative  and  effectual  in  law.*  If  a 
man  leases  a  house  and  land,  upon  condition  that  the 
lessee  shall  not  parcel  out  the  land,  nor  any  part  thereof, 
from  the  house ;  and  afterwards  the  lessee  leases  the 
house  and'  part  of  the  land  to  one,  and  the  residue  of  the 
land  to  another,  it  is  a  breach  of  the  condition ;  for  by 
the  word  *' parcelling"  is  intended  a  division  or  separa- 
tion of  the  land  from  the  house ;  and  every  division  and 
severance  of  the  house  and  land  is  within  the  meaning  of 
the  condition.^  Where  a  lease  contained  a  proviso  for 
re-entry,  in  case  the  tenant  should  demise,  lease,  grant  or 
let  the  demised  premises,  or  any  part  or  parcel  thereof,  or 
convey,  &c. ,  to  any  person  whomsoever  for  all  or  any  part 
of  the  term,  without  the  license  of  the  lessor  in  writing ; 
and  the  lessee,  without  such  license,  agreed  with  a  person 
to^enter  into  partnership  with  him,  and  gave  him  the 
use  of  a  back  chamber,  and  some  other  parts  of  the 
premises  exclusively,  and  of  the  rest  jointly  with  himself ; 
it  was  held  to  be  a  breach  of  the  contract  |tgainst  aliena- 


creates  a  forfeiture  of  a  lease 
^^^hich  contains  a  covenant  against 
alienation.  Shee  v.  Hale,  18  Yes. 
404 ;  Townshend  v.  Early*  10  Jur. 
K.  S.  860.  So  perhaps  would  be  a 
bankruptcy  where  the  petition  for 
adjudication  is  presented  by  the 
bankrupt  himself.  So  where  he 
assigns  all  his  property  to  trustees 
for  the  benefit  of  his  creditor 
under  *the  provisions  of  the  act. 
Holland  v.  Cole,  1  H.  &  C.  67. 

«  Fox  V.  Swann,  Sty.  483 ;  Doe 
T.  Bevan,  ante ;  Chrusoe  v.  Bugby, 
ante.  But  in  .Knight  v.  Mory, 
Cro.  Eliz.  60,  a  devise  of  the  term 


was  held  a  breach  of  a  condition 
not  to  alien,  and  this  is  also  held 
in  Burry  v.  Stanton,  id.  ^0. 

•  Doe  ▼.  Bevan,  ante ;  Pitt  v. 
Laming,  Ry.  &  M.  86;  Pitt  ▼. 
Hogg,  3  C.  &  P.  160 ;  £!r  Parte 
Drake,  1  H.  D.  &  DeG.  639 ;  Good- 
behere  v.  Bevan,  ante ;  Bowser  v. 
Colby,  1  Hare,  109. 

« West V.  Dobb,  L.  R.,  4  Q.  B.  634. 

•  Lloyd  V.  PoweU,  5  B.  &  C.  308. 

•  Comyn's  Dig.  tit.  Condition  (Q). 
<  Gourley  v.  Duke  of  Somerset, 

1  V.  &  B.  68;  jE^b PaHe  Cocks,  3 
Deac.  14 
-    ^  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Condition  (0> 


718  Not  to  Assign  ob  Uicdeblet.         [§  321. 

tion,  for  which  the  lessor  was  entitled  to  re-enter.'  Suf- 
fering persons  to  use  portions  of  the  land  for  the 
purpose  of  raising  crops  without  consent,  is  a  breach  of 
a  stipulation  not  to  suffer  any  part  of  the  land  to  be  oc- 
cupied by  any  other  person,  without  the  consent  of  the 
landlord,  although  it  is  proved  to  be  the  custom  of  the 
country  for  farmers  to  pursue  that  course.*  Where  the 
covenant  was,  not  to  assign  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the 
lands  demised  without  the  lessor's  consent,  and  the  lessor 
entered  into  part  himself,  and  then  the  lessee  assigned ; 
it  was  held  to  be  a  breach  of  the  covenant,  notwithstand- 
ing the  lessor's  entry.'  Where,  during  the  existence  of 
a  lease  containing  a  proviso  for  re-entry  in  case  of  assign- 
ment or  underletting  without  license  in  writing,  the  lessor, 
who  had  purchased  the  remainder  of  the  interest  in  it, 
engaged  to  grant  a  new  lease  to  the  defendant,  who  was 
not  the  lessee,  to  take  effect  on  the  expiration  of  the  old 
lease,  it  was  held,  that  the  lessor  could  not  maintain 
ejectment  against  the  defendant  on  the  fact  of  his  pos- 
session, though  no  license  in  writing  had  been  granted, 
as  there  was  a  waiver  of  the  forfeiture,  if  any  had  taken 
place,  or  else  there  was  no  forfeiture  at  all,  for  the  defend- 
ant came  in  with  the  lessor's  consent.*  It  was  at  one 
time  held,  that  where  there  is  a  right  of  re-entry  upon 
assignment  or  underletting,  if  a  person  is  found  on  the 
premises  appearing  as  tenant,  it  is  prima  facie  evidence 
of  an  underlettiqg  ;  and  the  defendant  must  show 
whether  the  person  was  a  tenant  or  merely  a  servant : ' 
but  it  has  since  been  laid  down  by  Lord  Ellenborouqh, 
that  it  is  not  sufficient  to  prove  the  defendant,  a  stranger, 
in  possession  of  the  demised  premises,  and  his  declaration 
that  they  were  demised  to  him  by  another  stranger,  even 
if  the  tenant  had  covenanted  not  to  part  with  the  pos- 
session. Unless  otherwise  specially  provided  in  the  lease, 
it  passes  to  his  executors  upon  the  decease  of  the  lessee, 
and  may  be  sold  by  them  as  personalty,  even  though  it  is 

iDingley  ▼.  Sales,    1  M.  A;  S.  'Oreenslade  v.    Tapsoott,  1  C. 

297.    But  a  mere  provision  against  M.  &  R.  55. 

assigning  or  unoiirletting    is  not  *  Collins  v.  Sillfe,  Style,  265. 

broken  by  a  mere  change  in  the  ^Weatherhead   v.    Cuxwood,    1 

business  and  letting  in  a  partner.  Har.  &  Wol.  140^ 

Roosevelt  v.  Hopkins,  88  N.  Y.  81,  •  Hindley  v.  Bickarby,  5  Esp.  4, 


CHAP,  xxxm.]         How  Broken. 


719 


upon  condition  that  he  shall  not  sell  without  leave,  unless 
the  restraint  is  specially  extended  to  them.'  So  too,  if, 
under  an  order  of  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  the 
lessee  makes  an  assignment  for  the  benefit  of  his  creditors,* 
or  tfee  lease  is  sold  upon  execution  or  other  legal  process,' 
or  Whenever  the  lease  passes  by  operation  of  law,  and 
not  by  the  voluntary  act  of  the  lessee,  such  a  condition  is 
not  broken,  because  it  is  presumed  that  the  parties  in- 
tended only  to  guard  against  a  conveyance  by  the  voluntary 
act  of  the  lessee ;  *  as,  where  the  lessee  is  forced  into  in- 
solvency and  the  lease  passes  by  operation  of  the  statute 
or  the  order  of  court,*  or  the  land  is  taken  for  a  public 
purpose  under  the  provisions  of  the  statute,"  or  if  a  feme 
sole  lessee  marries,  the  condition  is  not  broken,  even 
though  tre  lease  is  expressed  to  be  given  *'only  for  her- 
self to  occupy  for  a  residence, '' '  unless  language  is  used 
that  expressly  restrains  such  transfers.*  But  it  is  com- 
petent for  the  lessor  to  restrain  even  such  transfers ;  but 
in  order  to  have  that  effect,  there  must  be  an  express 
provision  in  the  lease  that  clearly  prohibits  the  transfer  ; 
as,  that ' '  the  lease  and  premises  shall  not  pass  by  operation 
of  law  nor  by  any  species  of  conveyance  by  the  lessee  or 
any  person  representing  him."*  So,  too,  the  restriction 
may  be  such  as  to  prohibit  any  transfers  by  necessary  in- 
ference ;  as  where  the  lease  is  to  a  person  '^  so  long  as  he 
shall  occupy  "  the  premises,  or  for  ten  years,  "  if  he  shall 
continue  to  inhabit  and  dwell  in  the  house  and  actually 
occupy  the  land,"  it  was  held  that  the  lessee  having 
become  bankrupt,  and  his  assignees  having  sold  the  lease, 
and  the  lessee  having  quit  possession,  the  lease  was  for- 
feited.'*   It  is  competent  for  the  lessor  to  limit  the  estate 


1 4  Kent's  Oom.  180. 

•Shee  V.  Hale,  13  Ves.  404 ;  Gor- 
ing V.  Warner,  2  Eq.  Cas.  Abr. 
100;  Gkx)dbehere  t.  Beyan,  8  M. 
&  S.  858 ;  Lloyd  v.  Powell,  5  B.  ft 
G.  806.  That  a  receiver  cannot 
sell  in  defiance  of  a  restrictiye 
olause,  see  Spencer  t.  Darlington, 
74  Penn.  St.  286. 

•Mitchinaon  v.  Carter,  8  T.  R. 
57;   RiggB  V.  PinseU,  fi6  N.  Y.  198. 

*  Weauierall  v.  Geering,  12  Ves. 
G18;   Smith  v.  Putnam,  8  Pick. 


(MasB.)  221;  Stevenson  v.  Sil- 
vernail,  15  John.  (N.  Y.)  291; 
Wilkinson  v.  Wilkinson,  Coop.  Eq. 
259  -  Jackson  v.  Corliss,  7  John. 
(N.  Y.)  587. 
'  Bemis  v.  Wilder,  100  Mass.  446. 

*  Bailey  v.  De  Crespigney,  10  B. 
&S.  1. 

^  Schroeder  v.  King,  88  Conn.  78. 

*  Comyn^s  Dig.  tit.  Condition  (Q). 

*  Yamold  v.  Moorehouse,  1  R.  & 
My.  864. 

"^oLockwoodv.  dark,  8  East,  184. 


Y20 


Not  to  Assign  ob  Undeblet. 


[§822. 


as  he  pleases,  and  if  he  expressly  provides  therein  that 
the  lease  shall  cease  if  taken  upon  execution  or  otherwise 
by  operation  of  law,  the  provision  is  valid  and  operative.' 
A  condition  that  the  lessee  shall  not  assign,  sublet,  or 
otherwise  part  with  the  lease,  is  not  broken  until  an  actual 
transfer  is  made ;  consequently,  a  yaUd  agreement  to  sell 
does  not  operate  as  a  breach.*  Where  a  license  is  required 
as  a  condition  precedent  to  a  sale  or  transfer  of  the  lease, 
it  is  the  duty  of  the  lessee  to  procure  such  consent '  if  the 
assignee  requires  him  to  do  so ;  but,  as  the  privil^e  is 
personal,  the  assignee  or  subtenant  may  waive  it. 

Sec.  322.  Assignments  generaUy.—Nature  ofl-*An  assign- 
ment is  the  transfer  or  conveyance  of  some  pre-existing 
term  or  reversion^  estate^  rights  title  or  interest.  The 
party  assigning  is  called  the  assignor,  and  he  to  whom 
the  assignment  is  made,  the  assignee.  The  word 
'^ assigns"  extends  not  only  to  the  hnmediate  assignee, 
but  also  to  assignees  ad  infinitum.*    Every  one  who  has 


>  Duke  of  Norfolk  v.  Hawke,  3 
East,  481. 

*  liayhew  v.  Hardesty,  8  Md. 
479. 

•Roberts  v.  Geis,  2  Daly  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  585;  llojA  V.  Crikpe,  5 
Taunt.  549;  Austin  v.  Hams,  10 
Gray  (Mass.)  296 ;  Kason  v.  Cor- 
der,  7  Taunt.  9. 

^  Milkman  t.  Ordway,  106  Mass. 
282 ;    Blake  y.  Sanderson,  1  Gray 

*  Com.  Dig.  Tit.  Assignment  (A. 
B.)  In  Dunlap  t.  Bullard,  Mass.  S. 
C.  1888,  Ostrom  held  as  lessee  from 
the  plaintiff,  a  lease  of  premises 
which  expired  in  twenty-two  years 
from  1855,  at  a  fixed  rent  payable 
quartwly.  It  contained  a  cove- 
nant to  pay  taxes.  In  1868  Ostrom 
leased  the  premises  with  buildings 
erected  since  the  date  of  the  orig- 
iginal  lease,  to  one  Johnson,  for 
a  term  eaual  to  the  whole  of  the 
unexpired  term  of  the  original 
lease,  but  at  an  increased  rent  pay- 
able monthly.  The  last  named 
lease  also  contained  covenants  on 
the  part  of  the  lessee  to  pay  rent 
and  taxes,  and  that  the  lessor 
might  enter  and  take  possession  for 
breach  of  covenant,  and  that  the 
lessee  would  quit  and  deliver  up 


the  premises  to  the  lessor  at  the 
end  of  the  term.  This  lease  was 
assigned  by  Johnson  to  the  de- 
fendant. Thereafter  taxes  were 
assessed  whicT:  were  not  paid  by 
defendant.  In  an  action  by  the 
plaintiff  against  defendant  for 
such  taxes,  hdd^  that  defendant 
was  a  sub-lessee  of  Ostarom  and 
not  an  assignee  of  the  original 
lease,  and  was  not  liable  to  pEdnt- 
iff s  on  the  covenant  therein  to  pay 
taxes.  Said  Calt  J„  "to  conscr- 
tute  an  assignment  of  a  leasehold 
interest,  the  assignee  must  take 
precisely  the  same  estate  in  the 
whole,  or  in  a  part  of  the  leased 
premises,  which  his  assignor  had 
therein.  He  must  not  only  take 
for  the  whole  of  the  unexpired 
term,  but  he  must  take  the  whole 
estate,  or  in  other  words,  the  whole 
term.  2  BL  Ck>m.  144.  The  grant 
of  an  interest  therefore  which  may 
possibly  endure  to  the  end  of  the 
term  is  not  necessarily  a  grant  of 
all  the  estate  in  the  term.  If  bj 
the  terms  of  the  conveyance,  be  it 
in  the  form  of  a  lease  or  an  asragn- 
ment,  new  conditions  with  a  right 
•  of  entry,  new  causes  of  forfeiture, 
are  created,  then  the  tenant  holds 
by  different  tenure,  and  a  new 


CHAP.  XXXm.]    ASSIGNHEITTS  GENERALLY. 


721 


a  term,  estate  or  interest  in  lands  or  tenements,  or  in 
things  which  lie  in  grant,  may  dispose  of  his  estate  there- 
in by  assignment,  unless  expressly  restrained  from  so 
doing  by  some  condition  in  his  lease,  and  except  tenants 
at  will  and  tenants  on  sufferance.'  But  a  right  of  re-en- 
try for  a  forfeiture  cannot  be  so  assigned."  Generally 
speaking,  a  mere  chose  in  action  is  not  assignable  at  law, 
so  as  to  enable  the  assignee  to  sue  thereon  in  his  own 
name."  But  covenants  which  run  with  the  land  form 
exceptions  to  this  rule.  They  may  be  assigned  together 
with  the  land,  and  the  assignee  may  sue  thereon  in  his 
own  name  for  breaches  subsequent  to  the  assignment, 
but  not  for  previous  breaches.*  If  a  lessee  enters  into  a 
covenant  which  runs  with  the  land,  for  himself  and  his 
assigns,  and  then  assigns  the  term,  and  the  assignee  is 
guilty  of  a  breach,  an  action  of  covenant  lies  either 
against  the  lessee  or  against  the  assignee,  at  the  election 
of  the  lessor,  who  may  charge  both,  but  execution  must 
be  taken  against  one  of  them  only.*  A  power,  where  it 
is  coupled  with  an  interest,  may  be  assigned,  although  a 
bare  power  is  not  assignable;  therefore,  if  a  lease  is 
made  with  an  exception  of  the  trees,  and  a  power  is 
reserved  to  the  lessor  to  enter  and  cut  them  down,  he 
may  assign  his  power  to  another  person  ;  but  if  it  is  not 
properly  pursued,  the  lessee  may  maintain  trespass  both 
against  the  lessor  and  his  assignee."    A  license  to  search 


leasehold  interest  arises  which 
cannot  be  treated  as  an  assign- 
ment, or  a  continuation  to  him  of 
the  original  term.  When  an  es- 
tate is  conveyed  to  be  held  by  the 
grantee  upon  a  condition  subse- 
quent, there  is  left  in  the  grantor 
a  contingent  reversionary  interest. 
See  Austin  v.  Cambridgeport 
Parish,  21  Pick.  (Mass.)  215 ;  Bratr 
tie  Square  Church  v.  Grant,  8 
Gk^^p-,  (Mass.)  142.  If  the  smallest  re- 
versionary interest  is  retained,  the 
tenant  ts^es  as  sub-lessee  and  not 
as  assignee.  Patten  v.  Deshon,  1 
Gray  825,  and  McNeil  v.  Kendall, 
12S  Mass.  24&." 

1  Perrin  v.  Lepper,  84  Mich.  292 ; 
Green  way  v.  Aaams,  12  Ves.  895  ; 
Cooney  v.  Hayes,  40  Vt.  478  ;  Rob- 
inson V.  Perry,  21  Ga.  188.    A  ten- 


ant at  will  has  no  assignable  in- 
terest. Whittemore  v.  Gibbs,  24 
N.  H.  484. 

*  Trask  v.  Wheeler,  7  Allen 
(Mass.)  109. 

3  Fairlie  v.  Denton,  8  B.  &  C. 
895 ;  Jones  v.  Carter,  8  Q.  B.  184 ; 
Thompson  v.  Dominy,  14  M.  &  W. 
403  ;  Howard  v.  Shephard,  9  C.  B. 
297 ;  Wetherell  v.  Langston,  1 
Exch.  684,  645  ;  Sepping  v.  Nokes, 
2  C.  B.  292  ;  Ord  v.  White,  3  Beav. 
857. 

*  Martyn  v.  Williams,  1  H.  &  N. 
817 ;  South wark  v.  Smith,  3  Burr. 
1272  ;  Grescott  v.  Green,  1  Salk. 
199  ;  Brittin  v.  Vaux,  Lutw.  109 ; 
Hawkins  v.  Sherman,  8  C.  &  P.  459. 

*  1  Chit.  Arch.  544. 

« Warren  v.  Arthur,  2  Mod.  817. 


46 


722 


Not  to  Assign  or  Undbrlet. 


[§  323 


for  and  raise  metals,  and  also  to  carry  them  away  and 
convert  them  to  the  use  of  the  licensee,  passes  an  inter- 
est which  is  capable  of  being  assigned.'  An  agreement 
for  a  lease  may  be  sold  and  assigned :  but  the  landlord 
cannot  be  compelled  to  grant  such  lease  direct  to  the 
assignee.  Upon  the  contract  for  such  sale,  it  is  not  an 
implied  condition  that  the  party  who  agreed  to  grant  the 
lease  had  power  to  do  so.'  An  agreement  for  the  assign- 
ment of  cUl  Rs  interest  in  a  lease  does  not  mean  free  from  all 
underleases  by  way  of  mortgage  and  other  incumbrances 
then  affecting  the  premises.*  The  good  will  of  a  lease, 
or  the  reasonable  expectation  of  its  renewal,  is  assign- 
able," and  may  be  transferred  by  deed  as  well  as  by 
assignment  endorsed  upon  the  lease.*  But  a  contract  to 
pay  a  certain  sum  for  rent,  and  to  make  certain  improve- 
mentSy  has  been  held  not  to  be  assignable  so  as  to  vest  in 
the  assignee  a  right  to  maintain  an  action  in  his  own 
name  for  the  breach ; '  but  a  le^or  may  assign  the  lease 
so  as  to  enable  the  assignee  to  recover  the  reserved  rent, 
without  a  sale  of  the  reversion.^  A  sale  of  the  reversion 
carries  with  it,  unless  expressly  reserved,  all  rents  and 
rights  under  a  lease  previously  granted  that  subsequently 
become  due,  and  the  grantee  may  recover  them  in  an  ac- 
tion in  his  own  name.'  Upon  such  conveyance,  the  gran- 
tee takes  the  place  and  assumes  the  rights  and  liabilities 
of  the  original  landlord.  In  other  words,  he  becomes 
landlord  as  fully  as  though  the  lease  had  been  made  by 
himself,  whether  he  knew  all  the  terms  of  the  lease  or 
not,*  and  the  same  rule  prevails  when  a  part  only  of  the 


»  Muskett  V.  HiU,  5  Bing.  N.  C. 
694 ;  Hantey  v.  Wood,  2  B.  &  Aid. 
724 ;  Ex  parte  Hankey,  1  M.  &  M. 
247. 

*  Kintrea  v.  Preston,  1  H.  &  N. 
857. 

•Phelps  V.  Prothero,  16  C.  B. 
870. 

*  Bennett  v.  Vansyckle,  4  Duer 
(N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  462.  An  op- 
tion to  take  a  lease  is  assignable. 
Buckland  v.  Papillon,  L.  K.,  2  C. 
R.  67. 

*  Esty  V.  Baker,  48  Me.  495. 

*  Hicks  V.  Doty,  4  Bush.  (Ky.)  420. 
'Watson  V.   Hunkins,  18  Iowa, 

547.    In  Ohio,  the  Stat.  82  Hen.  6, 


c.  84,  is  not  in  force,  and  the 
grantee  of  the  premises  cannot  sue 
upon  the  covenants  in  his  own 
name  unless  they  are  specially 
assigned.  Masury  v.  Southworth, 
8  Ohio  St.  840. 

^Gale  ▼.  Edwards,  52  Me.  383 
Dixon  V.  Nichols,  89  IlL  872 ;  Hat- 
field V.   Lockwood.  18  Iowa,  296 
Lewis  V.  WUkins,  PhiU.  (N.  C.)  Eq 
802;   Johnston  v.  Smith,  8  Penn. 
St.  496 ;  York  v.  Jones,  2  N.  H 
454 ;  Komegay  v.  Collier,  66  N.  C 
69;   Rogers   v.  McKenzie,  65  id. 
218 

» Page  V.  Esty,  54  Me.  819 


li^ 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  Assignments  Generally. 


723 


demised  premises  are  conveyed ;  the  grantee  in  such  a 
case  is  entitled  to  an  apportionment  of  the  rents,  and 
this,  whether  he  takes  by  deed  or  under  execution  or 
other  legal  process.*  But,  payment  of  the  rent  to  the 
grantor  will  be  good  until  the  lessee  has  notice  of  the 
conveyance,'  as  the  tenant  is  not  bound  to  examine  the 
records  or  make  any  inquiry  as  to'  a  change  of  title.  If 
the  grantee  desires  to  protect  himself  against  payments 
of  the  rent  to  the  lessor,  he  must  notify  the  tenant  of  the 
transfer  to  him."  The  grantee  is  bound  by  all  the  cov- 
enants that  run  with  the  land ;  hence,  a  grantee  is  bound 
by  a  covenant  on  the  lessor's  part  to  pay  for  improve- 
ments made  upon  the  land  by  the  tenant  ;^  but  where  a 
lessor  covenants  to  erect  a  building  i:Q)on  the  demised 
premises,  the  covenant  not  relating  to  a  thing  in  esse 
does  not  run  with  the  land,  and,  unless  assigns  are 
expressly  mentioned,  an  assignee  takes  no  benefit  from 
the  covenant.* 

Persons  become  assignees  either  by  act  of  the  party  or 
by  act  of  law ;  under  the  first  head  may  be  classed  those 
who  become  so  by  an  instrument  of  assignment,  or  by 
act  of  attornment :  under  the  latter  head  may  be  stated, 
those  who  have  thrown  upon  them  the  interest  in  the 
premises — ^in  consequence  of  the  property  having  been 
taken  under  writs  of  execution — ^by  bankruptcy — ^by 
marriage — or  by  death. 

A  receiver  pendenti  lite  appointed  in  an  equity  suit  is 
clothed  with  no  estate  in  the  property  intrusted  to  him 
and  is  a  mere  custodian  of  it  for  the  court,  and  there- 


1  Montague  v.  Gay,  17  Mass.  4d9 ; 
NewaU  v.  Wright,  3  id.  153 ;  Keay 
V.  Goodwin,  16  id.  1 ;  Crosby  v. 
Loop,  13  111.  625 ;  Farley  v.  Craig, 
11  N.  J.  L.  262.  Where  several 
persons  hold  the  entire  interest  of 
the  lessee  by  separate  deeds  of 
assignment  they  are  not  jointly 
liable  for  the  rent;  but  each  is 
liable  only  according  to  his  interest 
in  the  premises  as  compared  with 
the  whole  interest  under  the  lease. 
Babcock  t.  Scoville,  56  lU.  461 ; 
Van  Rensselaer  v.  Gallup,  5  Den. 
(N.  Y.)  454 ;  Van  Bensaelaer,  8  id. 


135.  If  there  is  no  proof  of  value, 
the  apportionment  will  be  made 
accorcbng  to  the  quantities.  Van- 
Bensselaer  v.  Jones,  2  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  648. 

'  Farley  v.  Thompson,  15  Mass. 
18 ;  Fitchburgh  Corporation  v. 
Melvin,  id.  268. 

»Id. 

^Frederick  v.  Callaghan,  40 
Iowa,  811;  Bailie  ▼.  Radway,  27 
Wis.  172. 

^  Cronin  v.  Watkins,  1  Tenn.  Oh. 
119. 


724 


Not  to  Assign  ob  Underlet. 


[§323. 


fore,  by  taking  possessipn  of  a  leasehold  estate  he  does 
not  become  an  assignee  of  the  term.' 

Sbc.  323.  AssignmentB  of  the  reversiozu— How  made.— 32 
Hen.  8,  o.  34.— A  lessor  may  by  deed  assign  his  reversion. 
At  common  law  such  an  assignment  would  only  have 
given  the  assignee  a  right  to  the  rent  reserved,  to  distrain 
for  it,  and  to  sue  for  breaches  of  covenants  in  law,  but 
not  for  breaches  of  express  covenants  entered  into  by  the 
lessee  with  the  lessor ; "  to  remedy  this,  the  statute  32 
Hen.  8,  c.  84,  enacted  that  aU  grantees  of  reversions 
should  enjoy  all  the  advantages,  benefits  and  remedies  by 
entry  for  non-payment  of  the  rent,  or  for  doing  of  waste 
or  other  forfeiture,*  or  by  action  only,  for  non-perform- 
ance of  conditions,  covenants  or  agreements,  contained 
or  expressed  in  leases,  which  the  grantors  or  lessors  them- 
selves had  or  enjoyed.  So  that  now  the  grantee  of  a  rever- 
sion may  take  advantage  of  all  express  covenants  which 
run  with  the  land,  as  well  as  of  covenants  in  law,  though 
only  the  lessor  and  his  heirs  are  named  in  the  lease.* 
Causes  of  action  which  accrued  previous  to  the  assign- 
ment of  the  reversion  will  not  pass  with  it,  so  as  to 
enable  the  assignee  to  sue  for  them  in  his  own  name.^ 
The  remedy  is  mutual,  for  the  same  statute  gives  the 
lessee  a  right  of  action  against  the  grantee  of  the  reversion.  • 


'Gaither  v.  Stackbridge,  (Md.) 
8  Centl.  Rep.  789,  Bryan  mssented, 
but  the  reasons  advanced  by  Al- 
NEY,  C.  J. ,  seem  to  fully  sustain  the 
rule  adopted  by  the  court. 

*  1  Wms.  Saund.  240  a,  note  (z) ; 
1  Smith  L.  C.  42  (4th  ed.) ;  Martyn 
V.  WUUams,  1  H.  &  N.  817,  826. 

2  Bennett  v.  Herring,  3  C.  B.  N. 
S.370. 

^Thursby  v.  Plant,  1  Saimd. 
237 ;  1  Smith  L.  C.  43.  This  stat- 
ute is  not  in  force  in  Ohio  and  a 
grantee  cannot  sue  upon  the  cove- 
nants in  his  own  name  unless  they 
are  specially  assigned.  Masury  v. 
South  worth,  ante. 

*  Hunt  V.  Bishop,  8  Exch.  675 ; 
Hunt  V.  Remnant,  9  Exch.  635; 
Martyn  v.  WiUiams,  1  H.  &  N.  817. 

*  Sect.  2 ;  Jourdain  v.  Wilson, 
4  B.  &  Aid.  266.  A  trustee  rented 
trust  property,  and  took  a  note  for 
the  rent,  which  he  sold  before  ma- 
turity ;  the  lessee  sublet,  and  took 


a  note  for  the  rent,  which  was 
paid.  One  holding  a  judgment 
against  the  income  of  a  trust  es- 
tate levied  on  cotton  rused  by  the 
sub-tenant.  It  was  held,  that  the 
rent-note  was  the  income,  and  the 
cotton  was  not  subject.  Manget 
V.  Hightower,  63  Ga.  217.  Under 
La.  Code,  art.  466,  the  rents  of 
seized  property  belong  to  the  seiz- 
ing creditor  from  the  moment  of 
seizure,  and  he  has  an  action 
against  the  tenant  to  recover  them, 
which  is  not  suspended  during  the 
delay  resulting  from  either  the 
usual  proceedings  to  effect  the 
sale,  or  a  contest  over  the  proceeds 
after  the  sale  is  made.  I^morere 
V.  Cox,  32  La.  An.  1045.  A  partv 
I>urchaBin^  leased  land  at  a  parti- 
tion sale  IS  entitled  to  the  unpaid 
rents  which  have  thereafter  ac- 
crued. Stevenson  v.  Hancock,  72 
Mo.  612. 


CHAP,  xxxm.]    Assignment,  How  Made. 


725 


The  statute  does  not  extend  to  mere  collateral 
covenants ; "  but  it  includes  devisees,  grantees  of  part 
of  the  reversion,*  and,  for  some  purposes,  assignees  of 
the  reversion  of  part  of  the  demised  premises." 

Sec.  324.  How  assignmentB  of  the  reversion  may  be  made.— 
An  assignment  of  the  reversion  must  be  by  deed,  imless 
otherwise  provided  by  statute.  Indeed,  all  conveyances 
of  real  estate,  or  an  interest  therein,  must  be  in  con- 
formity with  the  statute  in  the  State  where  the  estate 
is  located,  and  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt  to  give  any 
general  rule  relative  thereto,  as  the  statutes  in  the  several 
States  vary  as  to  the  necessary  requirements.*  A  let  a 
house  to  B,  as  tenant  from  year  to  year,  and  afterwards 
granted  a  lease  by  deed  to  C  of  the  house  for  twenty-one 
years :  this  was  held  to  transfer  the  reversion  to  C,  and 
to  disentitle  A  to  recover  from  B  the  rent  due  after  the 
lease.*    A  conveyance  in  fee,  whether  absolutely  or  by 


1  Webb  T.  Russell,  8  T.  B.  898. 
A  lease  of  certain  premises  con- 
tained the  covenant  by  the  lessee, 
that  he  or  others  havine  his  es- 
tate in  the  premises  would  not  as- 
sign the  lease  without  the  written 
consent  of  the  lessor.  During  the 
term  the  lessee  with  such  consent 
assigned  one  undivided  half  of  his 
interest  in  the  lease  to  a  third  per- 
son, who  subseauently  during  the 
term  re-assignea  the  same  to  the 
lessee  without  the  consent  of  the 
lessor.  It  was  held  that  the  re-as- 
signment was  not  a  breach  of  the 
covenant  in  the  lease.  McCk>r- 
mick  V.  Stowell,  188  Mass.  431. 

*  Machell  v.  Dunton,  2  Leon,  88. 
'Attoe  V.   Hemmings,  7  Bulst. 

281 ;  Wright  v.  Burroughs,  8  C. 
B.  685;  a>.  Lit.  215  a;  Rawlings 
V.  Morgan,  34  L.  J.  C.  P.  185. 

*  Twynam  v.  Pickard,  2  B.  &  Aid. 
105 ;  Simpson  v.  Clayton,  4  Bing. 
N.  C.  758 ;  Badeley  v.  Vigurs,  4  E. 
&B.  71;  1  SmithL.  C.  44. 

» Beely  v.  Perry,  8  Lev.  155 ; 
Brawley  v.  Wade,  M'Qel.  664.  In 
New  York  the  statute  of  1875,  ch. 
542,  reverses  the  common-law  rule, 
and  makes  the  right  to  rent  f oUow 
the  ownership  of  the  proi>erty  dur- 
ing the  perioa  within  which  it  was 


earned.  People  v.  Globe  Mut.  life 
Ins.  Co.,  65  How.  (N.  Y.)  Pr.  81. 
In  Alabama,  by  statute,  when  the 
lessor  dies  rents  afterwards  accru- 
ing may  be  recovered  by  the  per- 
sonal representative.  Palmer  v. 
Steiner,  68  Ala.  400.  In  Redmon 
V.  Bedford,  80  Ky.  13,  a  tenant  for 
life  permitted  A  to  sow  a  field 
with  wheat,  each  furnishing  half 
the  seed  and  to  take  half  the  crop. 
It  was  held  that  the  relation  of 
landlord  and  tenant  existed,  and 
that,  the  life  tenant  having  died 
during  the  year,  his  half  of  the 
crop,  after  deducting  the  value  of 
the  wheat  furnished  by  him ,  should 
be  apportioned  between  his  repre- 
sentatives and  the  remainder-man, 
as  rent  is  apportioned  in  such  cases. 
InEpley  V.  Eubanks,  11  IlL  App. 
272,  land  having  been  sold  under  a 
foreclosure  decree,  the  mortgagor 
leased  it  to  a  third  person  until 
March  1,  1880,  rent  payable  in 
com,  to  become  due  .when  the  ten- 
ant should  sell  his  com.  The  right 
of  redemption  from  the  foreclosure 
sale  expired  November,  1879,  when 
the  purchaser  received  a  deed  and 
notified  the  tenant  to  pay  him  the 
rent.  In  December,  1879,  the  pur- 
chaser conveyed  to  plaintiff,  who 


726 


Not  to  Assign  or  TJyDEBLEr. 


[§  325. 


way  of  mortgage,  will  pass  a  tenn  which  has  been  carved 
out  of  it,  and  afterwards  re-assigned  to  the  grantor, 
subject  to  .an  underlease.' 

Sec.  325.  EfRKjt  of  a  mortgage  of  the  reTer8ion.~Mort- 
gages  subsequent  to  a  lease  operate  as  grants  of  the  rever- 
sion, and  carry  with  them,  as  incidental  to  such  reversion, 
a  right  to  the  rent  and  the  benefit  of  the  landlord's  rem- 
edies for  the  recovery.*  The  mortgagee,  therefore,  may 
enforce  the  payment  of  the  rent  from  the  lessee  either  by 
distress  or  action ;  and  the  lessee  will  be  exonerated  by 
such  payment  from  any  demand  on  the  part  of  the  mort- 
gagor or  those  claiming  under  him  ;  even  though  actual 
compulsion  on  the  part  of  the  mortgagee  has  not  been 
resorted  to,  but  the  lessee  has  paid  the  rent  voluntarily.' 
Payments  agreed  to  be  made  by  an  occupier  of  the  sofl, 
under  a  parol  license  to  dig  earth  and  make  bricks,  are 
in  the  nature  of  rent ;  and  as  such,  a  subsequent  mortga- 
gee is  entitled,  after  notice  in  the  usual  manner,  to  all 
sums  in  arrear  at  the  time  of  the  notice,  or  which  may 
become  due  afterwards.*  A  mortgagee  of  a  term  who 
has  never  taken  possession  is  not  an  assignee  of  the  whole 
term,  or  liable  for  rent  in  arrear,  as  the  mortgage  is  not 
an  absolute  conveyance  of  the  term,  but  a  conditional 
one,  the  title  remaining  in  the  mortgagor.* 

8ec.  326.  What  amounts  to  an  a88ignment.*An  ass'gn- 
ment  must  be  by  deed,  and  must  pass  the  legal  estate  of 
the  assignor ;  for  a  transfer  of  a  mere  equitable  interest 

demanded  the  rent  com  from  the 
tenant.  The  com  had  matured 
before  the  date  of  the  deed  given 
to  the  foreclosure  purchaser,  was 
gathered  before  the  oonveyance  to 
the  pliuntiff  but  was  not  sold  until 
January,  1880.  It  was  held  that 
plaintiff,  and  not  the  ori^al 
owner  of  the  land,  was  entitled 
to  the  rent  com. 

1  Harmer  ▼.  Bean,  8  C.  &  K. 
807 ;  Burrows  v.  Gradin,  1  D.  & 
L.  213 ;  but  see  Edwards  v.  Wick-  . 
war,  L.  R.,  1  Eq.  413. 

'The  assignment  of  a  lease  as 
collateral  security  for  a  loan,  does 
not  entitle  the  assignee  to  the  pos- 


session of  the  demised  pi 
except  upon  a  breach  of  the  agreed 
ment ;  and  he  is  not  liable  to  the 
reversioner  on  the  ground  of  privity 
of  contract,  but  by  privity  of  es- 
tate, or  the  actual  occupation  and 
beneficial  enjoyment.  £ng^  v. 
McKinley,  6  GaL  158 ;  Burton  v. 
Barclay,  7  Bin^.  745. 

'  Moss  V.  Gahmore,  1  Doug.  2T9  ; 
1  Smith  L.  C.  470  (4th  ed.! 

*  Ex  parte  Hankey,  1  M.  &  M. 
247. 

*  Tallman  v.  Bressler,  85  Barb. 
(N.    Y.)  869:   Astor   v.    Hoyt, 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  ($08. 


CHAP.  XXXm.]  ASSIQNKEKT  AND  UNDERLEASE. 


727 


will  not  make  a  man  liable  as  an  assignee.  An  agree* 
ment  to  take  an  assignment  of  a  lease,  followed  by  pos- 
session on  the  part  of  the  equitable  assignee,  is  not  suffi- 
cient to  give  the  lessor  any  right  to  sue  the  equitable 
assignee  in  equity  on  the  covenants  in  the  lease.'  The 
delivery  and  depositixig  of  a  lease  as  a  security  for  money, 
without  any  written  assignment,  passes  no  interest  at 
law,  although  it  may  create  a  Hght  which  may  be  enforced 
in  equity ;  *  but  the  transfer  may  be  complete,  although 
the  assignee  has  never  in  fact  got  possession  of  the  deed 
of  assignment,  by  reason  of  a  claim  of  lien  on  the  part  of 
the  assignor's  attorney  for  the  expense  of  preparing  it.* 
The  covenant  will  not  be  extended  by  construction ;  thus, 
a  covenant  not  to  assign  for  the  benefit  of  creditors,  will 
not  be  broken  by  an  assignment  not  for  the  benefit  of 
creditors ;  *■  nor  will  a  covenant  not  to  assign  to  a  certain 
person  named  be  broken  by  an  assignment  to  a  third 
person,  who  subsequently  assigns  to  the  person  against 
whom  the  covenant  provides,*  unless  made  with  the 
intention  that  such  third  person  should  assign  over  to 
him.' 


Sec.  827.  DistinotlonbetweenanaBsignxiientandaniinder- 
lease.— An  assignment,  as  contra-distinguished  from  an 
underlease,  signifies  a  parting  with  tHe  whole  term ;  and 
when  the  whole  term  is  made  over  by  the  lessee,  although 
in  the  deed  by  which  that  is  done  the  rent  and  a  power 
of  re-entry  for  non-payment  are  reserved  to  himself,  and 
not  to  the  original  lessor,  yet  the  instrument  amounts  to 
an  assignment,  and  not  an  underlease ;  *  and  in  such  a 


>  Cox  T.  Bifihop,  8  DeG.  M.  & 
O.  815. 

*  Doe  d.  Maslin  v.  Roe,  6  Esp. 
105 ;  Williams  v.  Etbiib,  28  Beav. 
289. 

>  Odell  V.  Wake,  8  Camp.  894. 

*  Phila.,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.  v.  Catar 
wissa,  &c.,  R.  R.  Co.,  68  Pemi.  St. 
20. 

» In  Y.  ,  Dyer  45  a,  a 

question  was  raised  whether  a  oon- 
aition  in  a  lease  to  A  upon  condi-  * 
tion  that  he  should  not  assign  to 
J  S,  was  broken  by  his  assignment 
to  R  B,  who  subsequently  assigned 


to  J  S,  and  the  court  held  that  it 
was  not  because  the  condition 
must  be  taken  strictly. 

*  Co.  litt.  228  b, 

*  In  Collamer  v.  Kell^,  13  Iowa, 
819,  it  was  held  that  an  instrument 
under  which  a  lessee  transfers  the 
estate  reserved  to  him,  but  at  an 
increased  rent,  and  with  a  cove- 
nant for  a  redelivery  of  poaaession 
to  him,  was  a  sublease,  and  not  an 
assignment.  In  that  case,  W  hold- 
ing at  a  rent  of  $150  per  annum, 
sublet  for  his  whole  term  at  $250 
per  annum,  possession  to  be  deUv* 


i 


728 


Not  to  Assign  or  Undbblet. 


[§  327, 


case,  the  person  to  whom  it  is  made  over  may  sue  the 
original  lessor  or  his  assignees  of  the  reversion,  or  be  sued 
by  them  as  assignee  of  the  term,  on  the  respective  cove- 
nants in  the  original  lease,  which  run  with  the  land,  even 
though  new  covenants  are  introduced  into  the  assign- 
ment.* It  is  necessary  that  the  person  sought  to  be 
charged  as  an  assignee  should  claim  and  be  in  possession 
through  the  same  estate  as  the  person  whom  he  succeeds  ; 
for  if  he  comes  in  by  an  elder  title,  he  is  not  an  assignee/ 
Nor  is  a  person  who  enters  into  possession  under  a  decree 
without  a  sale,  where  the  law  requires  a  sale,  although 
he  enters  by  the  permission  of  the  lessee,  an  assignee  of 
the  lease,  so  as  to  render  him  liable  upon  its  covenant." 
If  a  lessee  for  years  make  a  lease  for  a  time  exceeding  his 
interest,  it  operates  as  an  assignment :  therefore,  if  a 
lessee  for  three  years  assigns  his  term  for  four  years,  or 
demises  the  premises  for  four  years,  it  operates  as  an 
assignment  of  his  interest.*  A  conveyance  by  a  lessee  of 
the  remainder  of  his  unexpired  term,  though  it  employs 
words  ordinarily  used  in  a  demise,  and  contains  a  reser- 
vation of  i*ent,  and  the  right  of  re-entry  on  covenants 
broken,  is  not  an  underletting  or  sublease,  but  is  consid- 


ered to  him  at  the  last  day  of  the 
term.  This  sublease  was  assigned 
to  Y,  who  mortgaged  his  "  lease- 
hold interest"  under  the  lease  and 
ajBsignment.  Afterward,  W  as- 
signed his  lease  and  it  came 
through  mesne  assignments  to  Y, 
from  whom  it  was  further  as- 
signed to  the  defendant.  In  a  suit 
to  foreclose  the  mortgage  to  which 
the  defendant  was  maae  a  party, 
it  being  claimed  that  his  estate 
was  merged  for  the  benefit  of  the 
mortgagee  by  tiie  union  of  the 
two  States  in  Y,  it  was  held,  that 
there  was  no  such  merger ;  that 
the  original  lease  could  not  be 
merged  in  the  smaller  estate  ;  that 
the  rights  of  the  mortgagee  passed 
by  the  transfer  of  the  original 
lease  to.  Y  ;  but  that  the  effect  of 
this  assignment  was  to  reduce  the 
rent  to  the  rate  of  $150  fixed  by 
the  original  lease.  See  also  Post 
V.  Kearney,  2  N.  Y.  894 ;  Martin 
V.  O'Connor,  48  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  514. 
A  sublease  vests  only  a  part  of  the 


term  in  the  lessee,  but  an  assign- 
ment carries  the  whole.  Constan- 
tino V.  Wake,  1  Sweeney  (N.  Y. 
Superior  Ct.)  289.  See  also  Martin 
V.  O'Connor,  48  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  514, 
where  it  was  held  that  where  a 
lease  of  the  lessee's  whole  term 
was  made,  but  a  right  of  re-entry 
was  reserved,  the  conveyance 
amounted  only  to  a  sublease. 
Hicks  V.  Downing,  1  Ld.  Raym. 
99 ;  Palmer  v.  Edwards,  1  Doug. 
187 ;  Thome  v.  Woolcombe,  8  B. 
&  Ad.  595;  Preece  v.  Corrie,  5 
Bing.  24;  Parmenter  v.  Webber, 
8  Taunt.  593 ;  Wollaston  v.  Hake- 
wiD,  8  M.  &  G.  297 ;  Pascoe  v. 
Pascoe,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  898 ;  Lang- 
ford  V.  Selmes,  8  Kay  &  J.  220  ; 
2  Prest.  Conv.  124 ;  Cole  Elec.  223. 

*  Palmer  v.    Edwards,  1  Douk. 
187,  n. 

*Roach  V.  Wadham,  6  East,  289. 
'  Merchants'  Ins.  Co.  v.  Muzanfire. 
22  Ala.  168. 

*  Hicks  V.  Downing,  1  Ld.  Raym. 
99 ;  Bull.  N.  P.  106. 


OHAP.  xxxnL]  Assignment  and  Underlease. 


729 


ered  in  law  as  an  assignment  of  his  whole  interest,  as 
there  remains  in  him  no  reversion  of  the  estate  ;  it  being 
one  of  the  essentials  of  a  lease  that  it  should  contain  a 
reversion  in  favor  of  the  grantor.  The  reconveyance  of 
the  leasehold  estate  by  mesne  conveyances  of  such  descrip- 
tion to  the  grantor^  passes  the  entire  estate  of  the  lessee, 
which  thereby  becomes  merged  in  the  fee  and  extin- 
guished.'   Where  a  lessee  in  a  lease  containing  the  usual 


>  Smiley  v.  Van  Winkle,  6  Cal. 
605.  It  is  essential  to  an  underlease 
that  it  be  of  a  part  only  of  the  un- 
expired term.  When  the  transfer 
is  of  the  whole  term,  the  jierson 
taking  is  an  assignee,  and  not  a 
subtenant,  even  if  the  form  be  tliat 
of  an  underletting.  In  the  absence 
of  any  evidence  of  the  agreement 
imder  which  parties  entered  into 
possession  of  demised  premises, 
subsequent  to  the  lessees,  if  it  is 
shown  that  tiiey  occupied  during 
the  whole  of  the  unexpired  term 
of  the  lease,  the  fair  presumption 
is  that  they  entered  for  the  whole 
of  such  unexpired  term.  And  as 
such  an  interest  is  given,  not  by 
an  underlease,  but  by  an  assign- 
ment, the  presumption  must  be 
that  the  occupants  are  in  as 
assignees,  and  not  as  undertenants. 
Bedford  v.  Terhune,  80  N.  Y.  458. 
But  this  presumption  may,  in 
either  case,  be  rebutted  by  proof 
that  there  never  was  in  fact  such 
an  assignment.  In  an  action  for 
rent  on  a  lease  of  a  store-room,  it 
appeared  that  the  lease  was  for 
five  years  from  May  1,  1857;  that 
by  its  conditions  the  lessee  could 
not,  without  forfeiture,  assign  or 
underlet  except  upon  the  written 
consent  of  the  lessor,  which  was 
never  given;  that  the  defendant 
bought  the  l^»ee's  stock  of  goods, 
and  occupied  the  premises  from 
December,  1857,  and  paid  the  lessor 
the  rent  named  in  the  lease  for  two 
quarters;  that  he  then  agreed 
with  the  lessor  for  the  use  of  the 
]N%mises  for  one  year  at  a  reduced 
rate ;  that  at  the  expiration  of  that 
year  the  lessor  demanded  the  rent 
named  in  the  lease  for  the  rest  of 
the  term ;  that  the  parties  dis- 
agreed, and  the  defendant,  after 
occupying  the  premises  six  months 
longer,  left  them.  The  defendant 
introduced   evidence    tending  to 


show  that  there  was  no  assignment 
in  fact.  Held,  that  it  was  error 
for  the  court  to  instruct  the  jury, 
that  the  agreement  as  to  rent  for 
one  year  at  a  rate  less  than  that 
called  for  by  the  deed,  *'did  not 
amount  to  a  new  lease,  but  was 
merely  an  agreement  to  reduce 
the  rent  for  one  year  upon  the 
existing  lease;  that  upon  the 
statement  of  all  the  parties  it  had 
only  the  effect  to  temporarily 
diminish  the  rent ;  and  that,  after 
that  year,  all  the  provisions  of  the 
lease  would  be  in  force.''  The 
question  whether  the  defendant,  at 
toe  time  of  such  agreement,  was 
in  under  the  lease,  should  have 
been  submitted  to  the  jury  upon 
the  inference  raised  by  the  law  in 
favor  of  an  assignment,  and  upon 
the  opposing  evidence,  and  not 
upon  that  inference  alone  as 
though  it  were  conclusive.  Upon 
the  racts  put  in  evidence  by  the 
defendant,  he  became  an  under- 
tenant at  will  of  the  lessee ;  but  as 
to  the  lessor,  before  the  reletting 
at  a  diminished  rent,  he  might,  by 
virtue  of  the  covenant  against  un- 
derleasing, with  the  condition  for 
a  forfeiture,  have  been  regarded  as 
a  quasi  tenant  by  sufferance. 
Cross  V.  Upson,  17  Wis.  618; 
Marinor  v.  Crocker,  18  id.  251. 
Where  by  the  terms  of  a  lease  it  is 
made  a  ground  of  forfeiture  ot  the 
term  if  the  lessees  shall  let  or  un- 
derlet without  the  written  consent 
of  the  lessor,  and  parties  other  than 
the  lessees  are  in  possession  witli- 
out  such  consent,  in  the  absence 
of  any  proof  as  to  the  agreement 
under  which  they  entered,  the 
presiunption  (if  any  presumption 
IS  to  be  indulged  in)  is  that  the 
transfer  to  the  occupants  was  by 
assignment,  and  not  by  under- 
letting. Where  the  d^endants 
enter^  by  consent  of  the  lessees. 


no 


Not  to  Assign  or  Undbblbt. 


[§32T. 


covenants,  assigns  by  deed  his  interest  in  the  whole  of  the 
unexpired  term  to  another,  the  latter  stands  in  the  relation 
of  assignee,  not  of  sublessee,  to  the  landlord,  and  is  liable 
to  him  on  the  covenants  contained  in  the  lease.  And  it 
is  so  if  a  part  of  the  premises  is  excepted  in  the  deed  o£ 
the  last  assignor. '  In  an  action  by*  the  lessor  against  a 
person  as  assignee  of  the  term,  to  whom  the  lessee 
demised  for  a  longer  term  than  he  himself  had,  and  at  a 
higher  rent ;  it  was  held  to  operate  in  law  as  an  assign- 
ment and  that  it  might  be  so  described  in  pleading.' 
Where  the  lessee  of  two  farms  had  agreed  in  writing  with 
another  that  the  latter  should  havethem  during  the  lease, 
remaining  tenant  to  the  lessee  during  that  period ;  the 
undertenant  accordingly  took  possession  and  paid  a  year's 
rent  to  the  lessee ,  who  afterwards  distrained  for  rent  in 
arrear :  it  was  held  that  the  agreement  amounted  to  an 
absolute  assignment  of  all  the  lessee's  interests,  and  that 
he  (having  no  reversion)  was  not  enabled  to  distrain.* 
But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation,  or  of  debt  for  rent,  or  of  covenant,  could  not 
have  been  maintained.  A  parting  with  the  whole  term 
by  verbal  agreement  has  been  held  to  create  the  relation 
of  landlord  and  tenant,  as  between  the  parties,  although 
there  was  no  reversion/  So  a  lessee  who  had  underleased 
by  indenture  for  a  term  of  years  longer  than  his  own,  the 
underlessee  covenanting  to  pay  him  rent,  has  been  held 
entitled  to  sue  the  underlessee  for  sijchrent.'    Where  a 


had  the  lease  in  their  hands,  and 
paid  the  rent  thereon,  to  the  lessor, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  lessees,  and 
occupied  for  the  whole  residue  of 
the  term,  and  there  was  no 
evidence  of  a  holding  in  any  other 
character,  it  was  held,  that  under 
these  circumstances  the  law  would 
presume  they  were  in  as  assignees 
of  the  lease ;  and  that  they  were 
liable  as  such  on  the  lease,  for  the 
rent.  But  when  the  law  infers  an 
assignment  of  a  lease  from  certain 
facts  proved,  the  inference  must 
be  of  a  valid,  operative  a^swnmentt 
such  a  one  as  would  he  su0cient  to 
transfer  the  term,  and  it  is  in- 
cumbent  upon  persons  sought  to  he 
charged  vnih  tnerent,  as  assignees^ 


to  j^ove  either  that  there  vxis  no 
assignment,  or  that  it  uxu  one 
void  in  law.  Bedford  v.  Terhune» 
ante. 

»  Lee  V.  Page,  4  Mich.  106. 

<  WoUaston  v.  HakewiU,  8  M.  & 
G.  297. 

*  Parmenter  v.  Webber,  8Taunt» 

593  ; V.  Cooper,  2  Wils.  375  ; 

Preece  v.  Ck)rrie,  5  Binx.  24 ;  Paa* 
coe  V.  Pascoe,  3  Bing.  N.  C.  898  ; 
Langford  v.  Selmes,  8  K.  &  J.  220* 

*  ftreece  v.  Clorrie  and  Pasooe  v. 
Pascoe,  ante. 

^  Baker  v.  Qostling,  1  Bing.  N*. 
C.  19  ;  Williams  v.  Haywood.  1  E. 
&  E.  1040 ;  In  Re  Turner,  11  Ir. 
Ch.  Rep.  804  ;  Adams  v.  Beachi  1 
Phila.CPenn.)99. 


CHAP,  xxxm.] 


Assignments. 


m 


lessee  demised  to  another  for  the  whole  of  his  term  at  a 
weekly  rent,  it  being  the  intention  of  the  parties  to  create 
the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant :  it  was  held,  that  such 
demise  was  not  to  be  deemed  an  assignment  against  the 
intention  of  the  parties  ;  and  that  an  action  for  use  and 
occupation  might  be  brought  by  the  lessee  in  respect  of 
the  whole  term,  although  the  lessee  had  given  a  week's 
notice  to  quit  before  the  expiration  of  the  term,  and  had 
quitted  accordingly.'  A  tenant  from  year  to  year  who 
underlets  for  a  long  term,  does  not  thereby  assign  all  his 
estate  which  may  possibly  continue  longer  than  the  term 
expressed  to  be  granted  by  the  underlease.*  An  assign- 
ment of  a  part  of  the  premises  amounts  only  to  an  under- 
lease, and  the  lessor  can  sustain  no  action  against  the 
assignee,  either  for  rent  or  upon  the  covenants  in  the 
lease.'  There  is  this  important  distinction  to  be  observed 
between  the  effect  of  an  assignment  and  an  underlease. 
An  assignee  is  directly  liable  to  the  lessor  upon  all  the 
covenants  in  the  lease,  that  run  with  the  land,  while  a 
subtenant  is  liable  only  to  his  immediate  landlord — the 
original  lessee — or  his  assignee,  and  then,  only  upon  such 
covenants  as  the  underlease  contains.^  An  undertenant 
cannot  be  charged  by  the  original  landlord,  for  use  and 
occupation  even.' 

Sec.  328.  Operative  words  in  assignmenta.— An  assign- 
ment is  usually  made  by  the  word  "assign,"  but  some- 
times "grant,  assign,  and  set  over,"  are  used ;  no  partic- 
ular words  are  necessary,  provided  the  intention  of  the 
parties  is  sufficiently  expressed.  Where  a  lessee  for  life 
granted  aU  his  estate  and  interest  to  A  and  his  executors : 
it  was  held  not  to  amount  to  an  assignment,  because  a 
grant  to  a  man  and  his  executors  could  not  convey  an 


»  Pollock  V.  Stacy,  9  Q.  B.  1038, 

•  Oxley  V.  James,  18  M.  &  W.  209. 
»  Fulton  V.  Stewart,  2  Ohio,  215. 

*  Way  V.  Hallon,  46  Vt.  184 ; 
Quackenboes  v.  Clarke,  12  Wend. 
(N.  Y.)  655 ;  Babcock  v.  Scoville, 
66  m.  461;  Halford  v.  Hatch, 
Doug.  183 ;  Eain  v.  Hozle,  2  Hilt. 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  811 ;  Jackson  v.  Da- 
vis, 6  C}ow.  (N.  Y.)  129 ;  McFarlan 


V.  Watson,  8N.  Y.  286  ;  Harvey  v. 
McGraw,  44  Tex.  412  ;  but  the  land- 
lord may  eject  him  if  he  violates 
any  of  the  covenants  in  the  lease 
for  which  a  right  of  re-entry  is 
reserved.  Samson  v.  Rose,  6o  N. 
Y.  411. 

*Way  V.  Holton,  ante;  Jen- 
nings V.  Alexander,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  164. 


J 


733  Not  to  Assign  or  Underlet.  [§  329. 

estate  for  life,  being  a  freehold.'  Words  excepted  out 
of  the  lease,  but  subsequently  granted  by  the  lessor  to 
the  lessee,  will  not  pass  by  an  assignment  of  the  lease.* 
An  agreement  to  assign  on  payment  of  a  sum  by  instal- 
ments, the  assignee  in  the  mean  time  to  perform  the 
covenants  in  the  lease  and  keep  the  assignor  harmless, 
and  the  assignor  to  re-enter  on  non-payment  of  any  in- 
stalment, is  merely  an  agreement  for  and  not  an  assign- 
ment." Whei^  a  lessee  agreed  to  execute  an  effectual 
assignment  of  two  leases  of  premises,  *^as  he  held  the 
same  for  terms  of  twenty-eight  years,"  and  the  assignee 
agreed  to  accept  a  proper  assignment  of  the  leases  as 
above  described,  without  requiring  any  guaranty  as  to  the 
lessor's  title,  it  was  held  that  he  was  bound  to  take  aa 
assignment  of  two  consecutive  leases,  though  the  second 
was  void,  because  executed  under  a  power  which  had  not 
befen  pursued.* 

Sec.  329.  ITsiial  covenants  in  asstgnments.— The  proper 
and  usual  covenants  on  the  part  of  the  assignor  of  a  term 
of  years  are,  that  notwithstanding  any  act  or  thing  by 
him  made,  done,  executed  or  knowingly  suffered,  the 
lease  is  valid,  and  in  full  force :  that  all  the  rents,  cove- 
nants and  conditions  have  been  paid,  performed  and 
observed  to  that  time :  that  notwithstanding  any  such 
act  or  thing  as  aforesaid  he  has  power  to  assign :  and  for 
quiet  enjoyment  by  the  assignee  during  the  remainder 
of  the  term,  without  interruption  by  the  assignor  or  any 
I)erson  claiming  under  him :  free  from  incumbrances  by 
him :  and  for  further  assurance.  The  proper  covenants 
on  the  part  of  the  assignee  are,  that  he  will  pay  the  rent 
and  perform  the  covenants  in  the  lease,  and  save  harm- 
less the  assignor  from  any  breach  thereof  by  him  or  his 
assigns.*  On  an  agreement  to  assign  a  lease,  and  to 
idemnify  the  lessee  from  the  rent,  the  assignee  entered 

>  Earl   of   Derby   v.  Taylor,    1  »  Staines  v.  Morris,  1  V.  &  B.  10  ; 

East,  502.  Wolveridge  v.  Steward,  1  Cr.  A; 

« Godb.  188.  M.    644  ;  Harris   v.    Goodwyn,   8 

*  Hartshome  v.  Watson,  5  Bing.  Dowl.  409 ;   Burnett  v.  Lydych,  5 

N.  C.  477.  B.  &  C.  589. 

*Spratt  V.  Jeffery,  10  B.  &  C.  249 ; 
Tweed  v.  Mills,  L.  R.,  1  C.  P.  39. 


:•:: 


CHAP,  xxxm.]     Lessee  and  Assignee. 


733 


before  any  legal  assignment  was  made,  some  goods  of 
the  lessee  being  left  on  the  premises  ;  it  was  held  that 
the  assignee  was  liable  on  his  idemnity,  those  goods  hav- 
ing been  taken  as  a  distress  for  rent,  and  that  it  was 
immaterial  whether  the  goods  left  were  with  the  leave 
of  the  assignee  or  not.' 

Seo.  330.  General  liability  of  lessee  and  assigaee.— A  lessee 
continues  liable  upon  express  covenants  in  the  lease, 
notwithstanding  any  assignment ;  therefore  an  action  of 
covenant  will  lie  against  a  lessee  for  years,  on  an  express 
covenant,  notwithstanding  he  has  assigned  his  term,  and 
the  lessor  has  accepted  rent  from  the  assignee ; '  but  an 
action  of  debt  will  not  lie  after  assignment  and  acceptance 
of  rent.'  The  executor  of  a  lessee  is  liable  to  the  lessor 
and  his  assigns  on  such  covenants,  though  the  lessee 
may  have  assigned  his  term,  and  the  lessor  or  his  assigns 
accepted  rent  of  the  assignee  of  the  term ;  *  but  as  the 
assignee  of  the  term  is  a  stranger  to  the  original  contract 
between  the  lessor  and  lessee,  there  can  only  exist  a 
privity  of  estate  between  himself  and  the  lessor  or  the 
assignee  of  the  reversion ;  and  he  is  bound  only  to  the 
performance  of  the  covenants  during  the  time  such 
privity  exists,  and  then  only  to  such  covenants  as  run 
with  the  land.*  The  lessor  may  at  the  same  time  sue  the 
lessee  upon  his  express  covenant,  and  the  assignee  upon 
the  privity  of  estate ;  but  he  can  have  execution  against 
one  only.*  An  eviction  out  of  part  of  the  land  will  only 
amount  to  a  discharge  of  an  assignee  pro  tanto,^ 

Sec.  331.  On  what  covenants  the  assignee  is  liable.— An 
assignee  must  take  the  thing  assigned  subject  to  all  the 
equity  to  which  the  lessee  was  subject ;  and  is  bound  to 


»  Groom  v.  Bluck,  2  M.  &.  G. 
567. 

•  Port  V.  Jackson,  17  John.  (N. 
Y.)  239,  479  ;  Damb  v.  Hoffman,  3 
E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  361 ;  Barnard 
V.  Godscall,  Cro.  Jac.  309 ;  Thursby 
V.  Plant,  1  Wms.  SamicL  240;  1 
Smith  L.  C.  47. 

8  Eep.  N.  P.  201. 

*Batchelor  v.  Gage,  Cro.  Car. 
188;    Barnard    v.  Godscall,    Cro. 


Jac.  309 ;  Norton  t.  Acland,  Cro. 
Car.  579 ;  Glover  v.  Cape,  4  Mod. 
81 ;  Marsh  v.  Bruce,  Cro.  Jac.  334 ; 
Bret  V.  Cumberland,  Cro.  Jac.  522 ; 
1  Smith,  L.  C.  47. 

'  See  Sec.  on  Covenants  that  Run 
with  the  Liand. 

•  1  Chitty,  Arch.  544. 

^  Stevenson  v.  Lombard,'^2  East, 
575;  Campbell  v.  Lewis,  3  B.  & 
Aid.  392. 


m 


Not  to  Assign  or  Underlet, 


[§331. 


perform  all  the  covenants  which  are  annexed  to  the  estate, 
for  by  the  acceptance  of  the  possession  of  the  land,  he 
makes  himself  subject  to  all  the  covenants  which  run 
with  the  land,  as  well  as  to  covenants  in  law,  which  are 
inherent  in  the  estate ;  and  to  such  he  is  bound  without 
being  named  by  the  special  word  "assigns." '  Thus,  on 
a  covenant  by  a  lessee,  not  naming  assigns,  to  repair  and 
yield  up  in  repair  all  buildings  and  erections  erected  and 
to  be  erected  during  the  term  on  the  demised  premises, 
an  assignee  is  liable  in  respect  of  the  non-repair  of  build- 
ings erected  during  the  term ; '  but  the  assignee  of  a  lease 
is  not  liable  to  the  original  lessor  for  a  breach  of  covenant 
not  running  with  the  land."  He  is,  however,  liable  to 
his  immediate  assignor  upon  any  express  covenants  by 
him  in  the  deed  of  assignment.*  The  assignee  of  a  term 
is  not  liable  to  the  lessor  or  his  assigns  on  mere  collateral 
covenants,  therefore,  where  the  lessee  of  certain  premises 
covenanted  to  pay  annually,  during  the  term  of  twenty- 
one  years,  twenty  shillings  to  the  church-wardens  of  the 
parish,  his  assignee  was  held  to  be  not  liable.*  Where  a 
lessee  of  tithes  covenanted  for  himself  and  his  assigns 
not  to  take  tithe  in  kind  from  the  other  party  (the  owner 
of  lands  in  the  parish),  nor  from  his  tenants,  but  to  accept 
a  reasonable  composition,  not  exceeding  three  shillings 


>  Graves  r.  Porter,  11  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  592 ;  Bull.  N.  P.  159 ;  Parker 
V.  Webb,  8  Salk.  4.  Whether  he 
takes  as  mortgagee  or  direct  pur- 
chaser from  a  tenant,  or  buys  the 
right  at  sheriff's  sale.  Wilson  v. 
Watkins,  8  Pet.  (U.  S.)  60 ;  Mc- 
Murphy  v.  Minat,  4  N.  H.  251. 
But  holding  that  a  mortgagee  in  pos- 
session is  not  liable  as  assignee  upon 
the  covenants  in  the  tease,  see 
Johnson  v.  Sherman,  15  Cal.  287, 
and  he  is  boimd  to  know  the  pro- 
visions of  the  lease,  and  tbe  fact 
that  he  did  not  know  them,  or 
that  he  has  been  deceived  by  the 
lessee  in  reference  thereto,  is  no 
defence.  Barraelhet  v.  Battelle,  7 
CaL  450;  Lee  v.  Payne,  4  Mich. 
106.  But  in  order  to  make  a  per- 
son liable  as  assignee,  the  lessee's, 
whole  term  must  be  conveyed. 
If  he  reserves  a  reversion  even  for 
one  day  or  even  a  shorter  period, 


the  conveyance  is  a  sublease,  and 
the  lessee  alone  is  liable  to  the  les- 
sor, Davis  V.  Morris,  36  N.  Y. 
569.  An  assignee  by  accepting 
the  assignment  of  the  lease  takes 
it  subject  to  all  the  liabilities  of 
the  lessee.  Ck)z  v.  Fenwick,  4 
Bibb.  (Ky.)  538 ;  Graves  v.  Porter, 
11  Barb.  (N.  Y.)592;  Overmans, 
Sanborn,  27  Vt.  54 ;  Blake  v.  San- 
derson, 1  Gray  (Mass.)  382;  Mo- 
Cormick  v.  Young,  2  Dana  (Ky.) 
294 ;  Journey  v.  Sackley,  1  nilt. 
(N.  Y.)  447. 

*  Minshuil  V.  Oakee,  2  H.  &  N.  793. 
•Grey  v.  Cuthbertson,  4  Dou^. 

851 ;  1  Selw.  N.  P.  584. 

*  Harris  v.  Goodwyn,  9  DowL 
409 ;  Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  &  C. 
589 ;  Wolveridge  v.  Steward,  1  Cr. 
&  M.  644. 

*  Mayo  V.  Buckhurst,  Cro.  Jac 
438 ;  Bateman  v.  Allen,  Cro.  Eliz. 
437. 


-".  * 


CHAP.   XXXliL] 


Assignee. 


735 


and  sixpence  per  acre,  his  underlessee  of  the  tithes  was 
held  not  to  be  an  assignee  within  the  meaning  of  the 
covenant,  and  not  bound  by  such  a  covenant  of  the  lessee.' 
Though  generally  a  personal  or  collateral  covenant  does 
not  affect  an  scssignee,  yet  if  the  covenant  regards  some- 
thing to  be  done  upon  the  land,  and  the  assignee  is  named, 
though  it  was  not  in  being  at  the  time*  of  the  demise, 
and  is  in  some  measure  collateral — as  to  build  a  wall  or 
new  house  upon  the  land — ^it  binds  the  assignee.' 

Sec.  332.  BightB  and  UabUities  of  assignee.— A  mere 
deposit  of  a  lease  by  way  of  equitable  mortgage  does  not 
render  the  person  with  whom  is  is  deposited  liable  at  law,* 
or,  perhaps,  in  equity,*  for  the  rent  or  upon  the  cove- 
nants. An  agreement  to  take  an  assignment  of  a  lease, 
followed  by  possession  on  the  part  of  the  equitable 
assignee,  does  not  entitle  the  lessor  to  sue  him  on  the 
covenant  in  the  lease.'  A  person  who  has  accepted  a 
valid  assignment  from  the  lessee,  although  he  has  not 
taken  possession  of  the  premises,'  becolnes  liable  for 
rent  subsequently  accruing,  and  for  breaches  committed 
subsequently  to  the  assignment,  of  such  of  the  lessee's 
covenants  as  run  with  the  land.^  On  the  other  hand,  he 
is  entitled  to  sue  the  lessor  for  breaches,  committed  sub- 
sequently to  the  assignment,  of  such  of  the  lessor's  cove- 
nants as  run  with  the  land.'    The  doctrine  of  covenants 


>  Brewer  v.  Hill,  2  Anst.  418. 
«  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Covenant  (C),  8  ; 
Bull.  N.  P.  159. 
s  Doe  V.  Roe,  5  Esp.  195. 

*  Moores  v.  Choat,  8  Sim.  508 ; 
Robinson  v.  Kosher,  1  Y.  &  C.  C. 
C.  7.  See  Lucas  v.  Comerford,  1 
Yes.  28;  Williams  v.  Evans,  28 
Beav.  289. 

»  Cox  V.  Bishop,  8  De  G.  M.  &  G. 
815.  But  see  Close  v.  Wilberforce, 
1  Beav.  112. 

*  Williams  v.  Besanquet,  1  B.  & 

B.  238 ;  Burton  v.  Barclay,  7  Bing. 
745,  761. 

'  Southwark  v.  Smith,  1  W. ,  Bl. 
851.     See  Hawkins  v.  Sherman,  3 

C.  &  P.  459. 

*  Lewes  v.  Ridge,  Cro.  Eliz.  868. 
The  assignee  succeeds  to  the  les- 
see's ri^ts  to  compensation  for 


improvements  or  new  erections 
nuule  upon  the  premises  which  the 
lessor  has  covenanted  to  pay  for. 
Hunt  V.  Danforth,  2  Curtis,  (U.  S.) 
692.  Li  Wrey  v.  Lemon,  81 
Penn.  St.  278,  A  bought  a  lease 
from  B  under  an  agreement  that 
B  should  refund  any  charge  that 
A  should  be  put  to  by  reason  of 
his  purchase.  The  owner  of  the 
freehold  recovered  against  him  in 
ejectment,  and,  to  remain  in  pos- 
session, he  was  obliged  to  take 
a  new  lease  at  an  increased  rent. 
It  was  held,  that  B  was  liable 
for  the  increase.  In  Bender  v. 
George,  92  Penn.  86,  A  gave  B  a 
lease  for  a  term  of  years.  C  and 
D  were  B's  sureties.  B  assigned 
the  lease  u)  E,  who  assigned  it  to 
F,  for  whom  H  became  securly  as 


»S6 


Not  to  Assign  or  Undertjet. 


[§  332. 


running  with  the  land  applies  only  to  covenants  which 
are  annexed  to  the  estate  by  the  indenture  which  creates 
the  estate,  and  it  seems  that  there  is  no  case  in  which  a 
mere  assignment  of  a  parol  tenancy  has  been  held  to  "pass 
to  the  assignees  the  right  to  enforce  collateral  stipula- 
tions, unless  the  landlord  has  consented  to  the  substitu- 
tion of  the  assignee  in  the  place  of  the  original  tenant, 
so  as  to  create  a  new  contract  between  them  upon  the 
terms  of  the  previous  tenancy.*  The  assignee  of  part 
of  the  premises  is  liable  to  an  action  on  every  covenant 
running  with  the  land  and  affecting  such  part.'  He  is 
not  chargeable  as  assignee  of  the  land  for  the  entire  rent/ 
but  after  an  assignment  by  the  lessee  of  his  interest  in 
part  of  the  demised  land,  the  lessor  may  distrain  upon 
that  part  for  the  rent  which  has  accrued  due  for  the 
whole.'  He  assumes  all  the  habihties  of  the  lessee  under 
such  of  the  lease  as  run  with  the  lanA,  whether  he  goies 
in  under  a  voluntary  assignment  by  the  assignee  or  under 
an  assignment  by  operation  of  law,*  and  succeeds  to  all 


bail  absolute  for  payment  of  the 
rent  and  performance  of  the  cove- 
nants of  the  lease.  F  defaulted 
for  the  rent,  and  D  was  compelled 
to  pay  the  same  to  A.  He  then 
brought  an  action,  in  the  name  of 
A,  for  the  use  of  D,  against  H, 
and  it  was  held  that  he  could  re- 
cover. Where  one  not  the  lessee 
of  premises  is  found  in  possession 
thereof,  the  i)resiunption  is  that  he 
holds  as  assignee  of  the  lessee. 
Ecker  t.  Chicago,  Burlington,  &c., 
E.  R.  Co. ,  8  Mo.  App.  238.  Where 
a  sublessee,  before  the  expiration 
of  the  origmal  lessee*s  lease,  be- 
comes the  owner  of  the  premises  in 
fee-simple,  he  cannot  recover  for 
rent  from  such  lessee.  Leibshutz  v. 
Moore,  70  Ind.  142 ;  36  Am.  Rep. 
182. 

*  Lush,  J.,  in  Elliott  v.  Johnson, 
L.  R.,2Q.  B.  at  p.  127. 

'  TmDAL,  C.  J.,  in  Wollaston  v. 
Hakewill,  3  M.  &  G.  322  ;  Com. 
Dig.  Tit.  Covenant  (C)  3 ;  Cong- 
ham  V.  King,  Cro.  Car.  221  ;  Ste- 
venson V.  Lombard,  2  East,  580. 

» Curtis  V.  Spitty,  1  Bing.  N.  C. 
760. 

*  D' Aquin  v.  Armant,  14  La.  An. 
317  ;  Sutliff  V.  Atwood,  15  Ohio  St. 


186 ;  Dorance  v.  Jones,  27  Ala. 
680  ;  McMurphy  v.  Minat,  4  N.  H. 
261 ;  Wilson  v.  Watkins,  3  Pet 
(U.  S.)  50.  He  is  liable  upon  cov- 
enants for  husbandry  and  repairs. 
(Jordon  v.  George,  12  Ind.  408. 
The  lessee  for  a  year  of  a  fulling- 
mill  covenanted  m  the  lease  to  pay 
$800  rent,  to  repair  the  miU,  ma- 
chines and  dam  (deducting  the  ex- 
Eense  out  of  the  rent),  and  to  de- 
ver  the  same  to  the  lessor,  in 
good  repair,  at  the  end  of  the 
term.  The  lessor  covenanted  in 
the  lease  that,  after  the  repairing 
of  the  dam,  he  would  keep  it  in 
repair,  and  that  the  lessee  should 
enjoy  the  premises  quietly.  Held, 
that  the  assignment  of  the  lease, 
on  the  day  of  its  date,  did  not  au- 
thorize the  assignee  in  his  own 
name  to  sue  the  lessee  for  a  breach 
of  the  covenants.  Allen  v.  Wooley, 
1  Blackf.  (Ind.)  148.  An  assign- 
ment, though  in  writing,  of  an 
agreement  to  pay  rent,  contained 
in  a  written  lease,  does  not  operate 
as  a  transfer  of  the  legal  title 
thereto  ;  and  the  assignor  must, 
in  a  suit  thereon  by  the  assignee, 
be  made  a  defendant  to  answer  as 
to  his  interest.    Hopkins  v.  Organ, 


••J-. 


CHAP,  xxxm.] 


Covenants. 


737 


his  rights  under  such  covenants  so  long  as  he  stands  in 
the  relation  of  assignee.*  Where  the  assignee  expressly 
covenants  to  perform  all  the  covenants  contained  in  the 
lease^  he  assumes  the  same  position  to  the  lessor,  so  far  as 
liability  upon  such  covenants  are  concerned,  as  the 
original  lessee  stood  in,  whsther  the  covenants  run  with 
the  land  or  not*  He  may  enforce  against  the  lessor  all 
covenants  running  with  the  land,  as  a  covenant  for  a 
renewal  of  the  lease,"  for  further  assurance,*  to  supply 
the  premises  with  water,*  to  insure  where  the  money  is 
to  be  used  in  repairing  or  rebuilding  the  premises ;  *  or 
indeed  any  covenant  that  concerns  the  estate  and  con- 
sequently runs  with  the  land.' 

Sec.  333.  Where  covenants  run  with   the   land.— Where 
<< assigns"   are  not  mentioned.— Where  a  covenant   in  a 


15  Ind.  188.  An  assignee  is  not 
liable  where  the  word  **  assigns  "  is 
not  used  in  the  lease  upon  any 
covenant  relating  to  things  not  in 
esse  when  the  lease  was  executed, 
Thus,  when  the  lease  i)rovided 
that  the  lessee  should  put  in  coun- 
ters and  shelving,  ''which  said 
counters  and  shelving"  and  the 
lessor  covenanted  to  purchase  of 
the  lessee  such  counters  and  shelv- 
ing at  the  end  of  the  term,  for  a 
reasonable  price,  and  there  was  a 
clause  in  the  lease  providing  that 
the  lease  should  be  binding  upon 
the  parties,  ''their  executors  and 
adnunistrators,"  but  the  word"  aa- 
signs  '*  was  not  used,  it  was  held, 
that  the  lessee  could  not  enforce 
the  covenant  as  to  the  piurchase  of 
the  counters  and  shelves,  against 
an  assignee  of  the  lessor.  Han- 
sen V.  Meyers,  81  ni.  331 ;  25  Am. 
Rep.  282.  See  also,  Grey  v.  Cuth- 
bertson,  2  Chit.  482.  But  the  rul^ 
is  otherwise  where  the  word  "  as- 
signs" is  used.  Hunt  v.  Danforth, 
2  Curtis  (U.  S.)  592.  Where  the 
right  to  the  unexpired  term  of  a 
lease,  together  with  the  movables 
on  the  premises,  were  sold  under 
an  execution  against  the  lessee, 
and  the  leased  premises  were  af- 
terwards destroyed  by  fire,  it  was 
held,  that  the  purchaser  had  no 
right  of  action  against  the  lessor 
for  the  recovery  of  the  rent  which 


had  been  paid  to  him  on  the  dis~ 
tribution  of  the  proceeds  of  the 
sale.  Hayden  v.  Heirs  of  Shiff, 
12  La.  An.  624. 

'  Hintze  v.  Thomas,  7  Md.  846  ; 
Page  V.  Hughes,  2  B.  Mon.  rKy.j 
445  ;  Sienteaud  v.  Jeanneaua,  20 
La.  An.  327.  He  may  sue  a  sub- 
tenant of  his  assignor  for  rents 
accruing  subsequent  to  the  assign- 
ment.  Fatten  v.  Deshon,  1  Gray 
(Mass.)  825.  But  his  rights  under 
the  lease  may  be  restrained  by  the 
terms  of  the  assignment.  Halbert 
V.  Bruce,  2  A.  K.  Mar.  (Ky.)  591. 

•  Rawlings  v.  Duvall,  4  H.  &  J. 
(Md.)  1 ;  Jackson  v.  Port,  17  John. 
(N.  Y.)  479,  239. 

'Blackmore  v.  Boardman,  28 
Mo.  420,  but  the  assignment  of 
an  expired  lease,  containing  a  cov- 
enant for  renewal,  does  not  give 
the  assignee  a  right  to  enter  upon 
the  land.  Clason  v.  Rankin,  1 
Duer  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  387. 
Upon  the  point  made  in  the  text, 
see  Bamf  ord  v.  Haylej,  12  East,  464. 

*  Campbell  v.  Lewis,  3  B.  &  Aid. 
392 ;  Miadlemore  v.  G^oodale,  Cro. 
Car.  508 ;  Spencer  v.  Boyes,  4  Ves. 
376. 

*  Jourdain  v.  Wilson,  4  B.  & 
Aid.  267. 

•  Vernon  v.  Smith,  5  B.  &  Aid.  1. 
'  Webb  V.  Russell,  3  T.  R.  402. 

See  sec.  entitled  Covenants  that 
Run  with  the  Land. 

47 


788 


Not  to  Assign  ob  Underlet. 


[§834. 


demise  of  corporeal  or  incorporeal '  hereditaments  relates 
to  a  thing  in  esse,  a  part  of  the  demise,  the  thing  to  be 
done  by  force  of  the  covenant  is  qtiodam  modo  annexed 
and  appurtenant  to  the  thing  demised,  and  goes  with  the 
land,  and  binds  the  assignee,  although  he  is  not  bound  by 
express  words,  and  the  word  assigns  is  not  used:^  as 
covenants  by  the  lessee  to  repair ;'  to  leave  in  repair  ;* 
to  pay  rent ;  *  or  render  services  in  the  nature  of  rent ;  * 
to  allow  deductions  out  of  rent ; '  not  to  plough  more 
than  a  certain  quantity  of  land ; '  to  reside  upon  the 
demised  premises  during  the  demise ;  *  to  use  a  house  as 
a  private  dwelling-house  only ;  or  to  use  a  building  for 
the  prosecution  of  a  particular  trade  or  business,  or  not 
to  permit  certain  trades  to  be  carried  on,  or  things  to  be 
done  therein ; "  to  insure  against  fire ; "  to  pay  compen- 
sation for  damage  done  to  the  surface  under  a  mining 
lease ; "  covenants  for  ^uiet  enjoyment ;  *"  and  to  pay 
taxes." 

Sec.  334.  Where  *' assigns"  are  mentioned.— Where  a 
covenant  relates  to  a  thing  not  in  esse  at  the  time  of  the 
demise,  yet  if  it  directly  touches  or  concerns  the  thing 
demised,'*  and  the  word  assigns  is  used  in  the  covenant, 
the  assignee  will  be  bound  by,  or  may  take  advantage  of 
it.    The  following  covenants  belong  to  this  class :— Cov- 


'  Hooper  v.  Clark,  L.  R.,  3  Q.  B. 
200  ;  Martyn  v.  Williams,  1  H.  & 
N.  817. 

«  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke,  16. 

'Windsor's  Case,  5  Coke,  24; 
Wakefield  v.  Brown,  9  Q.  B.  209, 
228. 

•  Matures  v.  Westwood,  Cro. 
Eliz.  599 ;  Martyn  v.  Que,  18  Q. 
B.  661. 

'  Stevenson  v.  Lombard,  2  East, 
675 ;  Parker  v.  Webb,  8  Salk.  5 ; 
Williams  v.  Bosanquet,  1  Br.  &  B. 
288. 

« Vyvyan  v.  Arthur,  1  B.  &  C. 
410;  2My.  &K.  541. 

'  Baylye  v.  Offord.  Cro.  Car.  187. 

•  CoclEson  V.  Cock^Cro.  Jac.  125. 

•  Tatem  v.  Chaplin,  2  H.  Bl.  188. 
10  Wilkinson  t.  Rogers,  2  De  G. 

J.  &  S.  62.    A  recital  in  a  lease 


that  the  premises  "now  are  oc- 
cupied and  to  be  occupied  as  a 
lumber  yard"  runs  with  the  land, 
and  is  broken  by  the  erection  <^ 
buildings  by  an  assignee  of  the 
lease.  De  Forest  v.  Bryne,  1  Hilt. 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  48. 

"  Vernon  v.  Smith,  6  B.  &  Aid- 1. 

»  Nerval  v.  Pascoe,  84  L.  J.  Ch. 
82. 

♦  "Noke  v.  Awder,  Cro.  Eliz. 
878  ;  Campbell  v.  Lewis,  8  B.  & 
Aid.  892. 

^*  Kearney  v.  Post,  1  Sandt  (N. 
Y.)  597. 

"  Spencer'd  Cajae,  5  Coke,  16  a; 
Thomas  v.  Hay  ward,  L.  B.,  4  £z. 
311 ;  Mayor  of  Congleton  v.  Pfttti- 
son,  10  East,  185 ;  Doughty  v. 
Bowman,  11  Q.  B.  444.  But  see 
Minshull  v.  Oakes,  2  H.  &  N.  79a 


CHAP,  xxxm.] 


Covenants. 


789 


enants  to  build  a  wall/  or  a  house/  on  the  demised  prem- 
ises ;  to  build  a  smelting  mill  on  waste  land  not  demised ; ' 
to  convey  upon  a  railway,  for  making  which,  land  is 
demised,  all  coal  got  in  a  certain  coUiery ;  *  to  leave  the 
land  at  the  end  of  the  term  in  as  good  condition  as  it  was 
at  the  time  of  the  demise ;  or  not  to  assign  without  the 
consent  in  writing  of  the  lessor.* 

Sec.  335.  covenants  which  wm  not  run  with  land.>-If  the 
thing  to  be  done  under  the  covenant  is  merely  col- 
lateral to  the  land,  and  does  not  touch  or  concern  the 
thing  demised  in  any  way,*  the  assignee  will  not  be 


^  spencer's  Case,  5  Ck)ke,  at  p. 
16  a. 

*  Doughty  V.  Bowman,  11  Q.  B. 
444  ;  47  L.  J.  Q.  B.  111. 

*  Sampson  v.  Easterby,  6  Bing. 
044. 

^  Hemmingway  v.  Eemandes,  18 
Sim,  228. 

» Hooper  v.  Clark,  L.  R.,  2  Q.  B. 
200. 

•'Williamfl  v.  Earle,  L.  R.,  8  Q. 
B.  789 ;  as  explained  by  Black- 
BUBN,  J.,  in  West  v.  Dobbe,  88  L. 
J.  Q.  B.  at  p.  291.  On  August  20, 
1866,  W  owned  certain  oil-produc- 
ing lands,  subject  only  to  the  un- 
expired terms  of  leases  theretofore 
fiven  by  his  grantors.  The  New- 
urg  retroteum  Company,  by 
assignment,  owned  such  leases, 
and  on  that  day  released  and  quit- 
claimed to  W  ul  its  right,  title  and 
interest  in  such  lands,  without  any 
reservation,  and  it  put  him  into 
possession.  In  part  consideration 
for  this  conveyance,  W  covenanted 
and  agrcMBd  for  himself  with  the 
oomx)any  to  pay  and  deliver  to  the 
company,  its  successors  and  as- 
signs, upon  the  leased  premises, 
the  one-sixth  part  of  all  the  oil 
and  other  mineral  substances 
produced  or  pumped  thereon  or 
therefrom  dail^,  as  produced 
during  the  remainder  of  the  terms 
granted  in  the  leases.  On  Sep- 
tember 8,  1886,  such  conveyance 
and  agreement  were  duly  recorded, 
and  on  that  day  W  sold  and.  con- 
veyed to  sundry  parties  all  his 
inter^t  in  the  different  parts  of 
such  lands,  and  he  put  each 
grantee  into  possession  of  the  part 
so  conveyed.    Thereafter  and  dur- 


ing the  terms  of  the  leases,  Ws 
grantees  produced  large  quantities 
of  oil  from  the  respective  parts, 
but  W  and  his  grantees  f  ailea  and 
refused  to  account  to  the  N.  P.  Co. 
for  such  production,  or  to  pay  and 
deliver  the  one-sixth  part  thereof, 
as  W  agieed  to  do.  The  N.  P.  Co. 
brought  its  action  against  W  and 
his  grantees  on  W's  agreement 
with  the  N.  P.  Co.,  and  it 
sought  to  hold  these  grantees  lia- 
ble for  the  covenant  of  W.  To  the 
petition  alleging  such  facts  these 
grantees  demurred.  It  was  held, 
such  agreement  is  personal  to  W, 
and  did  not  run  with  the  land  so 
as  to  bind  the  grantees  of  W  for 
his  failure  to  penorm  such  agree- 
ment. It  is  claimed  that  the 
plaintiff  may  hold  the  assignees  of 
W  by  virtue  of  the  principte  in  the 
first  rule  given  in  Spencer's  case, 
1  Smith  Lead.  Cas.  *69:  (1) 
''When  the  covenant  extends  to  a 
thing  in  esse,  parcel  of  the  demise, 
the  thing  to  oe  done  by  force  of 
the  covenant  is  quo  annexed  and 
appurtenant  to  the  thing  demised, 
and  shall  go  with  the  land,  and 
shall  bind  the  assignee,  although 
he  be  not  bound  by  express  wor£ : 
but  when  the  covenant  extends  to 
a  thing  which  is  not  in  being  at 
the  time  of  the  demise  made,  it 
cannot  be  appurtenant  or  annexed 
to  the  thin^  which  had  no  being.** 
The  plaintiff,  as  assignee  of  these 
leases,  owned  no  part  of  these 
lands,  and  it  had  only  a  riffht,  for 
a  term  of  years,  to  produce  or 
pump  oil  and  other  mmeral  sub- 
stances on  and  from  these  lands. 
Subject  to  this  right  for  such  term 


740 


Not  to  Assign  or  Undeelet. 


[§336. 


charged. '  Therefore,  covenants  to  build  a  house  upon  land 
not  demised  ; '  to  pay  a  collateral  sum  to  the  lessor  or  to  a 
stranger ; '  not  to  hire  a  certain  class  of  persons  to  work 
in  a  mill ;  *  by  the  lessor  to  give  the  lessee  an  offer  of 
pre-emption  of  an  adjoining  piece  of  ground ;  *  not  to  per- 
mit a  certain  business  to  be  carried  on  upon  the  demised 
premises,  or  within  a  certain  distance  thereof  upon  prem- 
ises controlled  by  the  lessee ; '  a  condition  for  re-entry  if 
the  lessee  or  his  assigns,  or  any  occupier  of  the  land 
demised,  shall  at  any  time  during  the  term  be  lawfully 
convicted  of  committing  any  offence  against  the  laws/ 

Sec.  336.  When  the  assigzLee's  liability  conmiences.~An 
assignee  of  a  term  may  be  sued  on  the  covenants  which 
run  with  the  land,  although  he  has  not  taken  actual  pos- 
session ;  ^  so  the  assignee  of  an  assignee  is  liable,  although 
he  has  not  taken  actual  possession,  for  breaches  of  cov- 
enant happening  after  the  assignment  to  him,  and  before 
any  assignment  over  by  him : '  so  a  mortgagee  by  assign- 
ment of  the  term,  though  not  in  possession,  is  liable  to 
j)erf orm  the  covenants  in  the  lease  which  run  with  the 
jand.'^    Where  a  lessee  covenanted  for  himself  and  his 


of  years,  W  owned  these  lands, 
and  all  that  was  appurtenant  there- 
to; and  when  the  plaintiff  released 
and  conveyed  to  W ,  without  res- 
ervation, tnis  right,  and  all  the 
plaintiff's  intereSi  in  the  lands, 
and  put  him  into  possession  of  the 
same,  and  when  it  took  W's 
agreement  to  pa^  and  deliver  to 
plaintiff  the  one-sixth  part  of  what 
should  be  produced  and  pumped 
thereon  and  therefrom,  there  was 
no  **  thing  in  ease,  parcel  of  the 
demise,"  ttiat  was  "annexed  and 
appurtenant  to  the  thing  demised,^' 
so  as  to  bring  this  case  within  the 
first  part  of  that  rule  in  Spencer's 
case,  and  it  seems  to  fall  within 
the  second  part  of  that  rule,  and 
that  the  covenant  biads  '*  the  cove- 
nantor, his  executors  or  adminis- 
trators, and  not  the  assignee."  W 
did  not  attempt  to  bind  his  assigns 
in  express  terms,  and  he  did  not 
make  the  payment  of  the  one-sixth 
part  of  the  production  a  charge  on 
the  land.  Neither  did  the  law 
make  such  payment  or  delivery  a 


lien  upon  the  land,  as  it  does  in 
case  of  a  tax  on  land.  We  need 
but  to  refer  to  the  "  much  learn- 
ing "  upon  this  general  subject  col- 
lected m  connection  with  Spencer's 
case,  in  1  Smith  Lead.  Cas.  *^  et 
aeq.  Newbuig  Petroleum  Ca  v. 
Weare,  44  Ohio  St.  604. 

*  Thomas  v.  Hayward,  L.  R.,  4 
Ex.  811 ;  Spencer's  Case,  5  Coke, 
16  a. 

'  Sampson  v.  Easterby,  ante ; 
Spencer*s  Case,  ante. 

^  Mayho  v.  Buckhurst,  Cro.  Jac 
438. 

*  Mayor  of  Congleton  v.  Patti- 
sou,  10  East,  130. 

^  CoUison  V.  Lettsom,  6  Taunt. 
224. 

*  Thomas  v.  Hayward,  L.  R.»  4 
Ex.  811. 

'  Stevens  v.  Copp,  L.  R.,  4Ex.  20. 

«  Walker  v.  Reeves,  2  Doug.  461, 
n.;  8  id  19 ;  Babcock  v.  Scoville, 
56  ni.  461. 

»  Taylor  v.  Shum,  1  Bos.  &  P.  21. 

'0  Stone  V.  Evans,  Peake,  Ad.  Ca. 
94;  Burton  v.  Barclay  and  Per- 


CHAP,  xxxm.] '       Assignment  Over.  741 

assigns  to  pull  down  certain  old  houses  and  build  others 
within  seven  years,  but  did  not  perform  the  covenant, 
and  after  the  end  of  seven  years  assigned,  an  action  of 
covenant  was  held  not  to  lie  against  the  assignee  because 
the  breach  was  complete  before  the  assignment,  and  the 
liability  of  the  assignee  depends  solely  upon  the  privity 
of  estate ;  had  the  covenant,  however,  been  broken  after 
the  assignment,  as  if  the  lessee  had  assigned  before  the 
seven  years  expired,  the  assignee  would  have  been  lia- 
ble.' And  he  would  have  been  liable  to  an  ejectment  for 
the  forfeiture  committed  prior  to  the  assignment  to  him, 
imless  such  forfeiture  had  been  waived.'  An  assignee  of 
a  lease  under  seal  remains  Uable  upon  all  the  covenants 
in  the  lease  until  he  has  assigned  it  by  a  valid  assignment 
which  is  operative  to  convey  his  title ;  consequently, 
although  he  assigns  by  parol  or  by  a  writing  not  under 
seal,  or  which  is  not  recorded,  where  those  formalities 
are  required,  and  his  assignee  does  not  enter,  the  original 
assignee  still  remains  liable  upon  the  covenants  in  the 
lease,*  and  an  assignee,  although  he  has  only  been  in 
possession  for  a  day  or  two,  cannot  absolve  himself  from 
liability  for  rent  by  abandoning  the  possession.  Thus,  a 
lessee  made  a  general  assignment  of  aU  his  property  for 
the  benefit  of  his  creditors,  and  the  assignee  went  into 
possession  of  a  store  leased  by  the  lessee  and  sold  the  goods 
therein  at  auction,  and  then  tendered  the  key  to  the  land- 
lord and  abandoned  the  possession,  but  the  court  held, 
that  having  taken  possession  he  was  bound  as  assignee 
for  the  rent.* 

Sec.  337.  EfEbot  of  an  asaignment  over.^An  assignee 
being  liable  to  the  original  lessor  or  his  assigns  only  in 
respect  of  privity  of  estate,  may  get  rid  of  such  liability 
by  an  assignment  over,*  except  as  to  previous  breaches  ; 

kins,  7    Bing.   745;    WiUiams    v.  Hawkins  v.  Sherman,  3  C.&  P.  459. 

Bosanquet,  1  Brod.  &  B.  238 ;  over-  «  Bennett  v.  Herring,  3  C.  B.  N 

ruling  Eaton  v.  Jaques,  2  Doug.  S.  870. 

425 ;  Myers  v.  Bums,  33  Barb.  (N.  ^  Sanders  v.  Partridge,  108  Mass. 

Y.)401.  556. 

*  Southwark  v.  Smith,  8  Burr.  *  Dorrance  v.  Jones,  27  Ala.  680. 

1272 ;  Grescott  v.  Green,   1  Salk.  *  Valliant  v.   Dodemede,  2  Atk. 

199 ;  Britton  v.  Vaux,  Lutw.  109 ;  546 ;   Pitcher  v.   Tovey,  13  Mod. 


142 


Not  to  Assign  or  XJndbrlet. 


[§  837. 


with  respect  to  which  he  will  continue  liable  both  at 
law'  and  in  equity.'  Such  an  assignment  may  be 
made  even  to  a  beggar  or  to  a  married  woman.'  After 
such  assignment  over,  the  assignee  will  continue  liable 
upon  any  express  covenant  entered  into  by  him  in  the 
assignment  to  himself.  The  assignee  of  a  term,  declared 
against  as  such,  has  been  held  not  to  be  liable  for  rent 
accruing  after  he  had  assigned  over,  though  it  was  stated 
that  the  lessor  was  a  party  executing  the  assignment, 
and  agreed  thereby  that  the  term,  which  was  determin- 
able at  its  option,  should  be  absolute ;  *  yet  if  the  breach  had 
been  continuing,  it  would  have  been  otherwise :  as  on  a 
covenant  to  repair  within  a  certain  time  after  ndtio^  and 
the  repairs  not  done  ac<^ording  to  such  notice,  though  the 
premises  were  out  of  repair  before  the  assignment.* 
A  lessee,  during  his  occupation,  hold&  both  by  privity  of 
estate  and  contract.  His  privity  of  estate  terminates 
with  the  term  and  by  an  assignment  he  divests  himself 
of  this  privity  and  transfers  it  to  his  assignee,  because  it 
is  annexed  to  and  passes  with  the  estate.  The  assignee 
takes  all  the  interest  of  his  assignor,  and  subject  to  aUthe 
covenants  and  conditions  which  are  annexed  to  the  estate, 
and  run  with  the  land,  and,  so  long  as  he  remains  in 
possession,  must  perform  them,'  and  this  embraces  a 
covenant  to  pay  the  taxes  assessed  upon  the  lands.* 


28;  Le  Keuz  v.  Nash,  2  Stra. 
1223 ;  Walker  v.  Reeves,  2  Doug. 
461,  n.;  3  id.  19;  Taylor  t.  Shum, 
1  B.  &  P.  21 ;  Co.  Litt.  8  a,  856  h; 
Boulton  T.  Canon,  Freem.  886; 
Chancellor  t.  Poole,  2  Doug.  764. 
He  is  only  liable  so  long  as  he  re- 
mains assignee,  and  he  may  at  any 
tune  discharge  himself  from  fur- 
ther liability  by  assigning  over  the 
term.  Armstrong  v.  Wheeler,  9 
Cow.  (N.  Y.)  88 ;  Childs  v.  Clark, 
8  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  Ch.  62 ;  Bayley  v. 
Freeman,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  196. 
Nor  is  he  liable  for  any  breaches 
that  accrued  either  before  assign- 
ment to  him,  or  after  he  haa  as- 
signed. Armstrong  v.  Wheeler, 
ante ;  Astor  v.  Hoyt,  6  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  603;  Tillotson  v.  Boyd,  4 
Sandf.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  516; 
Carter  v.  Hammett,  18  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  608;  Astor  v.  L'Amoreuz,  4 


Sandf.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  516 ; 
But  the  fact  that  the  assignee  is 
not  in  possession,  but  has  sublet 
(he  premises  to  a  tenant,  who,  by 
his  order,  has  paid  the  rent  to  tfaie 
lessor,  does  not  relieve  him  from 
liability.  Carter  v.  Hammett,  ante. 

*  Harley  v.  King,  2  C.  M.  &  R. 
18  ;  Pitcher  v.  Tovey,  1  Salk.  81. 

•  Philipot  V.  Hoare,  2  Atk.  219; 
Amb.  480;  Treade  v.  Coke,  1 
Vem.  165;  2  Eq.  Ca.  47;  Onslow 
T.  Corrie,  2  Madd.  880. 

»  LeKeux  v.  Nash,  2  Stra,  1221 ; 
Taylor  v.  Shum,  1  Bos.  &  P.  21 ; 
Onslow  V.  Corrie,  2  Madd.  880; 
Cole  Ejec.  540. 

*  Chancellor  v.  Poole,  2  Doug.  764. 
*Com.  Dig.  tit.  Covenant  (5.). 

•  Bedford  v.  Terhune,  80  N.  Y.  488. 
'Postv.  Kearney,  2  N.  Y.  894; 

State  V.  Martin,  14  Lea.  (Tenii.)42 ; 
52  Am.  Bep.  167. 


OHAP.  XXXm.]  ASSIGNHE5T.  743 

Where  the  lessee  assigned  to  A  his  interest  jh  demised 
premises  by  indenture,  executed  by  both  parties,  ''sub- 
ject to  the  payment  of  the  rent  and  performance  of  the 
covenants  and  agreements  reserved  and  contained  in  the 
original  lease : "  and  A  took  possession  and  occupied  the 
premises  under  this  assignment,  and  before  the  expira- 
tion of  the  term  assigned  to  a  third  person ;  after  such 
assignment  the  lessee  was  called  upon  by  the  lessor  to 
pay  rent  which  the  assignee  had  suffered  to  be  in  arrear ; 
it  was  held,  that  the  lessee  could  not  maintain  an 
action  of  covenant  against  A  in  respect  of  such  breach, 
the  words  "subject  to  the  payment  of  rent;  &c.,"  being 
words  of  quahfication  and  not  words  of  contract.'  If  a 
man  lease  for  years,  and  the  lessee  covenant  for  himself 
and  his  assigns  to  pay  the  rent,  so  long  as  he  and  they 
shall  have  the  possession  of  the  thing  let,  and  the  lessee 
assigns,  and  the  term  expires,  and  the  assignee  con- 
tinues in  possession  afterwards  ;  an  action  will  lie  against 
him  for  rent  which  accrues  after  the  expiration  of  the 
term,  for  though  he  is  not  an  assignee  strictly  according 
to  the  rules  of  law,  yet  he  shall  be  accounted  such  an 
assignee  as  will  make  him  liable  to  perform  the  cove- 
nants.* An  executor  or  administrator  of  a  lessee  for 
years  may,  like  any  other  assignee,  assign  the  term  and 
divest  himself  of  all  liability  upon  the  privity  of  estate, 
but  not  upon  the  privity  of  contract :  •  so  may  the 
assignees  of  a  bankrupt  lessee.* 

Sec.  338.  ABsignment  of  part  of  the  land.—An  assignee 
of  part  of  the  land  cannot  be  charged,  in  an  action  of 
debt,  with  the  whole  rent,  but  only  for  a  proportionate 
part  thereof.*  If  an  issue  is  taken  on  the  usual  allegation 
that  all  the  estate  of  the  lessee  jbecame  vested  in  the 
assignee,  and  the  proof  shows  that  only  a*  part  of  the 
estate  became  vested  in  him,  it  is  a  fatal  variance,  unless 

>  Wolveridge  v.  Steward,  1  Cr.  *  Onslow  t.  Come,  2  MaddL  880. 

&  M.  644.  ^  Fulton  t.  Stewart,  2  Ohio,  216 ; 

*  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Covenant  (E),  3.  Curtis  v.  Spittr,  1  Bing.  N.  C.  756  ; 

s  Auriol  T.   Mills,  4  T.  R.  94 ;  1  Merceron  y.  Dowson,  5  B.  &  C. 

Smith  L.  C.  660.  479. 


7M 


Not  to  Assign  oe  Underlet. 


[§  339. 


amended.    But  an  assignee  of  part  is  liable  to  a  distress 
for  rent  due  for  the  whole  of  the  demised  premises.* 

An  assignee  cannot  discharge  himself  of  all  his  liability 
to  the  lessor  or  his  assigns,  unless  he  assigns  the  whole  of 
the  estate,  for  covenants  running  with  the  land  are  in 
their  nature  divisible  ;  therefore,  if  he  assigns  a  part  only 
of  the  estate,  he  will  remain  liable  for  so  much  as  remains 
in  his  hands. ' 


Sec.  339.  Bights  of  assignees  of  a  term. —Assignees  of  a 
term  may  sue  the  reversioner,  or  his  assigns,  for  breaches 
of  covenant  running  with  the  land  which  are  committ^ 
by  him  or  them  after  the  assignment ; '  and  an  assignee 
of  a  lease  by  estoppel  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.*  But 
an  assignee  cannot  have  an  action  upon  a  breach  of  cove- 
nant before  the  assignment  to  him,*  nor  for  the  \jreach  of 
any  covenant  which  does  not  run  with  the  land  or  the 
reversion,  as  a  covenant  to  purchase  improvements,  &c., 
at  the  end  of  the  term,  at  a  valuation.* 

Sec.  340.  By  way  of  mortgage.— Mortgagee's  liability.— A 
mortgagee  of  a  leasehold  estate  hy  assignment  is  liable,  so 
long  as  he  has  the  legal  estate^  to  perform  the  covenants 
which  are  obligatory  on  any  ordinary  assignee,  whether 
he  is  in  possession  or  not : '  and  he  may  assign  it  without 
being  in  actual  possession  ;  *  but  where  he  has  merely  an 
equitable  estate,  he  is  not  liable  for  rent  unless  he  is  in 
actual  possession.'  A  mortgagee  may  avoid  the  liability 
of  an  assignee  by  taking  an  imderlease  instead  of  an 


«  Hare  v.  Gator,  Cowp.  766 ;  Hol- 
f  ord  V.  Hatch,  1  Doug.  188 ;  Cur- 
tis V.  Spitty,  1  Binfif.  N.  C  756. 

^Ck)ngham  v.  King,  Cro.  Car. 
221 ;  Gamon  v,  Vernon,  2  Lev.  281 ; 
Stevenson  v.  Lombard,  2  East,  576 ; 
Twynam  v.  Pickard,  2  B.  &  Aid. 
105 ;  Merceron  v#  Dowson,  supra ; 
Badeley  v.  Vigurs,  4  E.  &  B.  71. 

•  Bac.  Abr.  tit.  Covenant  (E),  5. 
*Cuthbert8on  v.  Irving,  4  H.  & 

N.  742  ;  6  id.  185. 

•  Lewis  V.  Ridge,  Cro.  Eliz.  863  ; 
Martyn  v.  Williams,  1  H.  &  N.  817. 

•  Gorton  v.  Gregory,  3  B.  AS.  90. 
'  Stone  V.  Evans,  Peake,  Ad.  Ca. 

U;l  East,  341 ;  Williams  v.  Bosan- 


quet,  1  Brod.  &  B.  238;  Wester- 
dell  V.  Dale,  7  T.  R.  812 ;  Burton 
V.  Barclay  and  Perkins,  7  Bini 
745  ;  Wilson  v.  Watkins,  8  Pet.  rf 
S.)  50 ;  Murphy  v.  Minot,  4  N.  I 
251.  But  m  New  York,  and  in- 
deed in  all  the  States,  where  the 
mortgagee  is  treated  as  taking 
only  an  equitable  estate,  he  is  not 
liable  as  assignee  unless  he  is 
in  possession.  Astor  v.  Hoyt,  5 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  603;  Johnson  v. 
Sherman,  15  Cal.  287. 

^Smartle  v.  Williams,   3   Lev. 
388. 

*McKee  v.  Angelrodt,   16  Mo 
283. 


CHAP,  xxxin.] 


ASSIQNHEITTS. 


Y45 


assignment,  and  this  is  frequently  done.  If  he  becomes 
assignee,  equity  will  not  afford  him  any  relief,  though  he 
may  offer  to  forego  his  charge  and  lose  his  money.'  If, 
however,  he  has  never  been  in  possession,  the  court  will 
not  entertain  a  bill  to  discover  whether  the  lease  has 
been  assigned  to  him,  but  will  leave  the  plaintiff  to  recover 
at  law  as  well  as  he  can.'  A  trustee  to  whom  a  lease  is 
assigned  to  secure  an  annuity  to  a  third  person  is  strictly 
an  assignee.'  A  power  given  to  a  trustee  in  a  mortgage 
deed  to  sell  if  the  mortgagee  requests  it,  does  not  neces- 
sarily imply  a  right  to  enter  on  the  premises.^ 

Sec.  841.  Equitable  assignments  by  deposit.— A  species  of 
quasi  assignment  may  be  made  by  a  deposit  of  the  lease  as 
a  security  for  money  advanced ;  •  but  this  will  not  have 
the  effect  of  giving  the  creditor  any  legal  title.*  In  one 
case  where  the  creditor  had  taken  possession  of  the  prem- 
ises, it  was  held  to  amount  to  an  equitable  assignment 
of  the  term,  which  enabled  the  lessor  to  maintain  a  bill 
in  equity  against  the  creditor  for  the  specific  performance 
of  covenants  running  with  the  land.^ 

Sec.  342.  Eleotlon  by  trustees  to  accept  or  di80la.1m  a  lease.— 
It  seems  that  trustees  under  a  deed  of  assignment  for  the 
benefit  of  ci'editors  of  all  the  debtor's  property  may  elect 
to  accept,  or  to  reject  and  disclaim,  any  lease  or  agree- 


>  Anon.,  Freem.  Ch.  258  ;  Cash- 
/berd  v.  Att.-Gen.,  6  Price,  411 ; 
Sparkes  v.  Smith,  2  Vem.  275. 

'Sparkes  v.  Smith,  ante.  In 
Johnson  v.  Sherman,  15Cal.  287,  it 
was  held  that  even  a  mortgagee  in 
possession  is  not  liable  upon  the 
covenant  in  the  lease.  In  Eng- 
land, and  indeed  in  all  those  States 
where  the  mortgagee  is  treated  as 
tiUcing  the  legal  estate  under  his 
mortgage,  he  would  be  treated  as 
assignee  from  the  delivery  of  his 
mortgage;  but  in  those  States 
where  he  is  treated  as  taking  only 
a  chattel  mterest  in  the  propert^r, 
he  is  not  treated  as  assignee  until 
he  takes  possession.  Astor  v. 
Hoyt,  ante.  In  Trimm  v.  Marsh, 
54  K.  Y.  599,  a  mortgage  of  the 
lease  was  held  not  to  operate  as  a 


breach  of  a  covenant  not  to  assi^, 
as  a  mortgi^  is  a  mere  security 
and  does  not  convey  the  legal  title. 
See  {dso,  to  the  same  effect,  Riggs 
V.  Russell,  66  id.  198. 

'Gretton  v.  Diggles,  4  Taunt. 
766. 

*  Watson  V.  Waltham,  2  Ad.  & 
El.  766. 

*  Williams  v.  Evans,  28  Beav. 
239 ;  Matthews  v.  Goodday,  8  Jur. 
N.  S.  90 ;  Bulfin  v.  Dunne,  12  Ir. 
Ch.  R  67. 

*  Maslin  v.  Roe,  5  Esp.  105. 

'  Lucas  V.  Comerford,  1  Ves. 
285.  But  see  Mooresv.  Choat,  8 
Sim.  508  (overruling  Flight  v. 
Bentley,  7  Sim.  149)  ;  Close  v. 
Wilberforce,  1  Beav.  112 ;  Cox  y. 
Bishop,  8  De  G.  M.  &  G.  815. 


746  Not  to  Assign  or  Underlet.  [§  35*. 

ment  for  a  lease  which  forms  part  of  such  property,  and 
that  they  are  entitled  to  a  reasonable  time  to  make  such 
election.  They  are  not  bound  to  accept  a  lease  of  which 
they  were  ignorant  when  they  executed  the  assignment, 
and  which  they  think  likely  to  be  injurious  to  the  credit- 
ors ;  but  it  is  for  the  jury  to  say  whether  they  have  done 
anything  which  amounts  to  an  election  to  accept  the 
lease.  If  they  act  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  the 
premises  of  less  value  to  the  lessor,  or  deal  with  the 
property  as  if  the  lease  were  vested  in  them,  they  will 
probably  be  held  personally  liable  for  the  rent  and  cove- 
nants.' If  they  elect  to  reject  a  lease  of  no  value,  the 
debtor  will  continue  tenant.  If  the  lease  is  under  seal, 
and  the  words  of  the  assignment  are  sufficient  to  com- 
prise it,  it  would  be  safer  for  the  trustees  to  re-assign  it  to 
the  debtor  or  to  assign  it  over  (even  to  a  pauper)  before 
any  of  the  rent  becomes  due.  Where  a  lease  by  deed 
forms  part  of  the  proi)erty  assigned,  the  trustees  for 
creditors  will  be  liable  as  assignees  without  any  entry, 
in  like  manner  as  mortgagees.  Trustees  for  the  benefit 
of  creditors  are  not  liable  to  an  action  for  use  and  occupa- 
tion until  after  they  have  entered  to  take  possession 
or  done  some  equivalent  act,  but  it  is  otherwise  in  an 
action  of  covenant  or  debt  for  rent,  wherein  they  are 
sued  as  assignees  of  the  term.' 

Sec.  343.  What  property  passes  by  general  words  in  sucb 
assignments.  —Where  a  lessee  of  premises  assigned,  for  the 
benefit  of  his  creditors,  all  and  singular  his  stock  in  trade, 
&c.,  and  all  other  his  personal  estate  and  effects  what- 
soever, and  the  assignees  were  to  pay  the  rent  accruing 
due  up  to  a  future  day  named,  it  was  held  that  the  lease 
passed  under  the  assignment.'  So  a  deed  of  assignment 
by  A,  of  all  his  personal  estate  and  effects  whatsoever, 
to  trustees  for  the  benefit  of  his  creditors,  passes  lease- 
hold premises  assigned  to  A  by  way  of  mortgage,  with 

1  Carter  v.  Wame,  4  C.  &  P.  191 ;  (N.  Y.)  185  ;  Young  v.  Peyser,  8  id. 

Ringer  v.  Cann,  3  M.  &  W.  348.  808. 

s  Howe  V.  Kennett,  3  Ad.  &  El.  >  Ringer  t.  Canned  M.  &  W.  842. 
659;   Martin  v.  Pinckney,  8  Bos. 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  Underlease.  ^47 

power  of  sale.*  Where  a  tenant  assigned  all  his  house- 
hold goods,  &c.,  and  '*  all  his  tenant  right  and  interest 
yet  to  come  and  unexpired"  in  and  to  the  farm  and 
premises,  it  was  held  that  the  tenant's  interest  in  crops 
not  yet  sown  passed.'  An  assignment  for  benefit  of 
creditors  by  a  trader  and  farmer  of  aU  her  "effects,  stock, 
books  and  book  debts,"  conveys  the  cattle  on  the  farm.' 

Sec.  844.  Underlease.— Distinction  between,  and  assign- 
ments.—An  underlease  is  a  demise  by  a  lessee  (or  his 
assignee)  for  a  less  terin  than  he  himself  has ;  a  demise 
for  the  whole  term  amounts  to  an  assignment.^  If  a 
lessee  for  three  years  make  a  lease  for  five  years,  it  will 
operate  as  an  assignment  and  not  as  an  underlease.  *  But 
it  may  be  construed,  as  between  the  parties  themselves, 
to  be  an  underlease  rather  than  an  assignment,  where 
that  is  necessary  to  carry  into  effect  their  obvious  inten- 
tions :  this,  however,  is  an  exception  to  the  general  rule.' 

An  underlease  for  years  made  by  a  lessee  for  years,  to 
commence  immediately  on  his  death,  is  good,  if  he  dies 
during  his  own  term ;  therefore,  a  man  possessed  of  a 
term  for  twenty  years  may  grant  the  lands  for  nineteen 
years  to  commence  after  his  death,  and  it  will  be  good 
for  so  many  of  the  twenty  years  as  shall  be  unexpired  at 
the  time  of  his  death.  Where  a  lessee  has  power  to 
renew  his  term  upon  giving  six  months*  notice  of  his 
intention  before  its  expiration,  and  upon  his  preparing  a 
new  lease,  &c.,  he  cannot,  though  he  gave  notice  of  such 
intention,  demise  the  premises  to  another  party  beyond 
the  expiration  of  the  first  term,  unless  he  prepares  such 
new  lease  and  gets  it  executed,  or  at  least  endeavors  so 
to  do.^  An  injunction  will  be  granted  to  restram  a  ten- 
ant from  subletting  the  premises  without  the  consent 

'  West  V.  steward,  14  M.  &  W.  47.  »  BuU.  N.  P.  186. 

•  Fetch  V.  Tutin,  15  M.  &  W.  •  PoUock  v.  Stacy,  9  Q.  B.  1088 ; 

110 ;  Congreve  v.  Evetts,  10  Exch.  Williams  v.  Hayward,  1  E.  &  £. 

298  ;  Hope  v.  Hayley,  5  E.  &  B.  1040  ;  Preece  v.  Corrie,  5  Bing.  24 ; 

880,  846.    But  see  Gale  v.  Bumell,  Baker  v.  Gostling,  1  Bing/N.  C. 

7  Q.  B.  850.  19 ;  InRe Turner,  11  Ir.  Ch.  R.  802. 

'Lewisv.  Rogers,  IC.  M.  &R.  48.  ''Mackay  y.  Mackreth,  2  Doug. 

^  Hicks  T.  Downing,  1  Ld.  Raym.  218. 
99 ;  Wollaston  v.  Hakewill,  8  M. 
&  G.  297. 


748 


Sale  of. 


[§345. 


of  the  landlord.  Where  the  tenant  has  covenanted  not 
to  sublet  without  such  consent,  and  it  is  of  no  impor- 
tance, whether  the  landlord  will  be  injured  by  such  sub- 
letting or  not.'  The  landlord  has  made  the  terms  upon 
which  he  will  let  the  premises,  and  the  lessee  having 
covenanted  not  to  do  certain  acts,  which  the  landlord  in 
the  lease  says  he  shall  not  do,  a  court  of  equity  will,  in  a 
proper  case,  restrain  him  from  violating  his  covenant.* 

Sec.  345.  Sales  ofimderleaseB.—A  contract  to  sell  a  lease 
is  not  satisfied  by  the  conveyance  of  an  underlease,  for 
the  underlease  might  become  void  if  the  covenants  and 
conditions  in  the  original  lease  were  not  duly  performed.' 
But  on  the  purchase  of  an  underlease  it  is  not  a  valid 
objection  to  the  title  that  the  underlease  may  become 
forfeited  by  the  non-performance  of  the  covenants  in  the 
original  lease.'  It  is  the  duty  of  a  person  contracting  for 
an  underlease  to  ascertain  the  contents  of  the  original 
lease.'  So,  also,  a  purchaser  of  leasehold  property  is 
bound  to  inform  himself  of  the  contents  of  the  lease,  and 
cannot  avoid  specific  performance  on  the  ground  that  it 


'  Barrington  Apartment  Asso- 
ciation V.  Watson,  88  Hun  (N. 
Y.)  545.  In  this  case  the  plaintiff, 
owning  an  apartment  house,  leased 
rooms  to  the  defendant,  Stewart, 
with  a  covenant  that  he  should  not 
sublet  without  consent,  and  that 
consent  being  once  given,  a  fresh 
consent  should  be  obtained  for 
every  subletting  by  sublessees. 
Consent  was  given  for  a  sublease 
to  the  defendant,  Watson,  and  he 
threatening  to  sublet  without  con- 
sent, it  was  held  that  an  injunc- 
tion against  such  subletting  might 
issue.  The  court,  Bradt,  J. ,  said  : 
"  Tlie  learned  justice  in  disposing 
of  the  motion  expressed  hunself 
elaborately,  and  in  an  opinion 
which  clearly  and  satisfactorily 
disposes  of  the  questions  involved. 
His  judgment  was  founded  upon 
a  conclusion  justified  by  the  evi- 
dence submitted  to  him,  that  the 
appellant  not  having  obtained  from 
the  plaintiff  its  consent  to  sublet- 
ting the  premises  occupied  by  him, 
his  attempt  to  do  so  was  a  viola- 
tion of  the  covenant.    And  that 


conclusion  disposes  of  the  whole 
case.  The  learned  counsel  for  Hie 
appellant  seems  to  think  it  was 
necessary  to  show  the  contem- 
plated act,  one  which  would  oc- 
casion injury,  and  that  none  was 
shown,  nor  was  it  demonstrated 
that  irreparable  damage  would  re- 
sult from  the  act  designed  ;  which 
was  necessary  in  order  to  entitle 
the  plaintiff  to  the  injunction 
sought.  This  may  be  r^aided 
as  tne  general  rule.  T.  &  B.  R. 
R.  Ck).  V.  B.  H.  T.  4&  W.  R.  R.  Co., 
86  N.  Y.  107.  But  courts  of  equity 
very  frequently  grant  injunctions 
in  the  nature  of  a  specific  per- 
formance to  restrain  the  violation 
by  a  tenant  of  his  a^eement.** 

^  Eden  on  Injuni:;tion8. 

» Madeley  v.  Booth,  2  De  6.  & 
S.  718 ;  Darlington  v.  Hamilton, 
Kay,  550 ;  Blake  v.  Phinn,  3  C.  R 
976  ;  Muston  v.  Gladwin,  6  Q.  B. 
953 ;  Logan  v.  Hall,  2  C.  B.  598. 

*  Hayford  v.  Criddle,  22  Beav. 
277. 

*  Cesser  v.  Collinge,  3  MyL  &  K. 
283. 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  Effect  of  Ee- Assignment. 


749 


contains  an  unusual  covenant  (not  to  exercise  certain 
trades,  &c.,)  which  was  not  mentioned  in  the  particulars 
of  sale,  or  at  the  sale.  An  underlease  should  always 
contain  an  express  covenant  by  the  underlessee,  to  observe 
and  perform  all  the  covenants  and  conditions  in  the  orig- 
inal lease,  except  those  which  he  is  not  to  perform.  It 
is  not  sufficient  that  he  enters  into  similar  covenants, 
copied  verbatim  (except  as  to  names,  &c.,)  from  the 
original  lease,  although  this  is  frequently  done.* 

Sec.  346.  EfCbot  of  re-asslgmnexit.— The  assignee  may  rid 
himself  of  all  future  UabiUty  to  the  lessor  for  rent,  and 
the  covenants  in  the  original^lease,  by  re-assigning  the 
lease  to  any  person.'  He  may  do  this  without  giving 
notice  to  the  lessor,  or  obtaining  his  leave ;  *  and,  notwith- 
standing a  covenant  in  the  original  lease,  that  the  lessee, 
his  executors  or  administrators,  should  not  assign  with- 
out  the  Ucense  of  the  lessor.*  There  is  no  fraud  in  the 
assignee  of  a  lease  re-assigning  his  interest  with  a  view  to 
getting  rid  of  the  lease ;  hence  he  may  re-assign  it  to  a 
beggar,*  or  a  married  woman,'  or  a  person  leaving  the 
kingdom,'  for  the  express  purpose  of  reheving  himself 
of  liabiUty  under  the  covenants.  It  is  not  even  necessary 
that  the  person  to  whom  the  re-assignment  is  made  should 
take  possession  of  the  premises,  or  assent  to  the  lease.' 
In  one  case  it  was  held  that  a  re-assignment  of  a  lease 
might  be  lawfully  made  to  a  prisoner  in  a  Meet,  who  was 
paid  a  sum  of  money  to  accept  of  the  assignment.* 

Sec  347.  Continued  liabmty  of  lessee.— A  lessee  cannot, 
by  assigning  his  lease,  rid  himself  of  liability  under  the 


'  Grosvenor  t.  Green,  5  Jur.  N. 
S.  117 ;  Logan  v.  HaU,  2  C.  B.  5»8  ; 
Walker  v.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W. 
229 ;  Penley  v.  W;atts,  7  M.  &  W. 
601 ;  Clow  V.  Brogden,  2  M.  &  G. 
89 

«  Paul  V.  Nurse,  8  B.  &  C.  486  ; 
Odell  V.  Wake,  8  Camp.  394 ;  Chan- 
cellor V.  Poole,  2  Dougl.  764. 

•  ValUant  v.  Dodemede,  2  Atk. 
546 ;  Le  Keux  v.  Wash,  2  Stra. 
1221 ;  Onslow  v.  Come,  2  Madd. 
880. 


*  Paul  V.  Nurse,  8  B.  &  C.  486. 

*  Taylor  v.  Sh\im,  1  B.  &  P.  21, 
28.  See  Odell  v.  Wake,  8  Camp. 
894. 

*  Bamfather  v.  Jordan,  2  Dougl. 
452. 

^  Per  Eyre,  C.  J.,  Taylor  v. 
Shum,  1  B.  &  P.  28. 

*  Taylor  v.  Shum,  ante. 

*  Valliant  v.  Dodemede,  2  Atk. 
546. 


760  Bights  of  Assignee.  [§  848. 

covenants.  The  effect  of  an  assignment  is  to  make  the 
lessee  a  surety  to  the  lessor  for  the  assignee ;  who,  as 
between  himself  and  the  lessor,  is  the  principal,  bound 
whilst  he  is  assignee  to  pay  the  rent  and  perform  the 
covenants.'  If  the  lessor,  tacitly  or  expressly  accepts 
the  assignee  as  his  tenant,  it  appears  that  an  action  of  debt 
for  rent  will  not  lie  against  the  lessee ; '  but  if  the  lease 
contains  an  express  covenant  by  the  lessee,  an  action  on 
such  covenant  may  be  brought  against  him  or  his  exec- 
utor '  at  any  time  during  the  term,  notwithstanding  the 
lessee  has  assigned  his  interest  and  parted  with  the  pos- 
session of  the  premises,  and  the  lessor  has  received  rent 
from  the  assignee.*  The  lessor  may  sue  either  the  lessee 
or  his  assignee,  or  both  at  the  same  time,  but  he  can  have 
execution  against  only  one  of  them. 


bEC.  «>48.  Bights  andliabilities  of  assignee  as  against  lessee. 
— ^To  protect  themselves  from  this  continued  liability,  les- 
sees, on  assigning  their  leases,  are  entitled  to  require  the 
assignees  to  indemnify  them  against  future  payment  of 
rent  and  performance  of  covenants.  Even  executors,  who 
cannot  be  compelled  to  enter  into  the  ordinary  covenants 
for  title,  may  require  a  covenant  of  indemnity  from  their 
assignees.*  Upon  a  covenant  of  indemnity,  contained  in 
the  assignment,  the  assignee  will  be  liable  to  the 
lessee  during  the  residue  of  the  term,  he  cannot 
reUeve  himself  from  this  liability  by  re-assigning  the 
lease.  An  assignee  who  has  covenanted  to  indemnify 
the  lessee  against  the  covenants  in  the  lease  may,  on  re- 
assigning the  lease,  require  a  sii^niliar  covenant  from  his 
assignee.' 

During  the  continuance  of  the  interest  of  each  succes- 
sive assignee,  there  is  a  duty  on  his  part  to  pay  the  rent 

*  Lord  Denman  in  Wolveridge  v.  ^  Barnard  v.  Godscall,  Cro.  Car. 

Steward.  1  Or.  &  M.  659;  Parke,  Jac.  800.    See  Auriol  v.  Mills,  4  T. 

B.,  in  Humble  v.  Langston,  7  M.  R.  98;  Staines  t.  Morris,  1   V.  & 

&W.  580.  B.    11;    Orgill    v.  Kemshead,    4 

« Auriol    V.  Mills,  4   T.   R.  98.  Taunt.  642. 

See  Wadham  v.  Marlowe,  8  East,  ^  Staines  v.  Morris,  1  V.  &  B.  S. 

814,  note  (c).  As  to  the    construction  of  cove* 

'  Bret  V.  Cumberland,  Cro.  Jac.  nants  of  indemnity,  see  Ooasfield 

621.    See  Bachelour  v.  Gage,  Bro.  v.  Morrison,  7  C.  B.  286. 

Car.  188.  •  See  Staines  v.  Morris,  1 V.  &  R  8. 


CHAP,  xxsan.]      AssiaNEE  and  Lessee. 


Y51 


and  perfonu  the  covenants.'  If  the  lessee,  in  his 
capacity  of  a  surety  as  between  himself  and  the  assignee 
for  the  payment  of  rent  and  performance  of  covenants, 
has  paid  the  rent  or  discharged  the  obligation,  he  has  his 
remedy  over-  against  the  principal ; '  and  he  has  the 
remedy  over  against  each  subsequent  assignee,  in  respect 
of  breaches  committed  during  the  continuance  of  the 
interest  of  each  of  them  ;  for  the  lessee  is  in  effect  a 
surety  for  each  of  them  to  the  lessor.*  The  assignee  is 
liable  for  a  breach  of  any  covenant  running  with  the 
land,  incurred  in  his  own  time,  though  the  action  is  not 
commenced  until  after  he  has  assigned  the  premises.*  A 
lessee  who  has  paid  the  rent  to  the  landlord,  may  recover 
the  same  of  his  assignee,  but  not  otherwise. '  The  lessee 
notwithstanding  the  assignment  of  his  entire  interest  in 
the  estate,  is  liable  to  the  lessor  on  his  covenants  to  pay 
rent ; '  and  the  assignee  is  also  liable  to  the  lessor  for  the 
performance  of  all  the  covenants  which  run  with  the 
tond  by  virtue  of  the  privity  of  estate  created 
by  the  assignment.  Both  are  liable,  and  the  lessor 
has  the  option  to  sue  either.  When  the  lessee  is 
obUged  to  pay.  by  reason  of  his  covenants  to  pay  rent, 
the  question  arises,  what  are  his  rights  against  the 
assignee  who  has  not  performed  his  duty,  but  has  taken 
the  whole  benefit  of  the  lease.' 


*  See  Wolveridge  v.  Steward,  1 
Cr.  &  M.  659 ;  Mule  v.  Oaxrett,  L. 
R.,  5  Ex.  182. 

'Paree,  B.,  in  Humble  v.  Lang-* 
ston,  7  M.  &  W.  530 ;  Burnett  v. 
Lynch,  6B.  &  C.  589;  Wolveridge 
V.  Steward,  1  Cr.  &  M.  659. 

«  Mule  V.  Garrett,  89  L.  J.  Ex. 
73 ;  Wolveridge  v.  Steward,  1  Cr, 
&  M.  660. 

<  Burnett  v.  Lynch,  6  B.  &  C. 
589 :  Harley  v.  Kmg,  2Cr.  M.  &  R, 

'Farrington  v.  Kimball,  126 
Mass.  818  ;  80  Am.  Rep.  680. 

•  Endicott,  J.,  in  Farrington  v. 
Kimball,  ante ;  Wall  v.  Hinds,  4 
Gray  (Mass.)  256 ;  Blake  v.  Sander- 
son, 1  id.  882 ;  Sanders  v.  Partridge, 
108  Mass.  556. 

"*  It  was  said  in  general  terms  by 
Chief  Justice  Shaw  in  Patten  v. 
Deshon,  1  Gray  (Mass.)  825,  880, 


that  "the  first  lessee,  notwith- 
standing the  assignment,  remains 
liable  t6r  the  rent,  in  virtue  of  his 
express  covenants  if  the  lessor 
elects  to  hold  him,  in  which  case 
he  will  be  entitled  to  the  rent  from 
the  assignees."  The  leading  case 
in  England  is  Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5 
B.  &  C.  589,  where  it  was  held  that 
a  lessee,  who  had  assigned  the 
lease  by  a  deed  poll)  and  had  been 
compelled  to  pay  damages  to  the 
lessor  for  breach  of  the  covenants 
of  the  lease  while  his  assignee  was 
in  occupation,  could  maintain  an 
action  against  the  assignee  for 
having  neglected  to  peiiorm  the 
covenants  whereby  the  lessee  suf- 
fered damage.  liORD  Denman,  in 
commenting  on  this  case,  when  de- 
livering the  judgment  of  the  Ex- 
chequer Chamber,  in  Wolveridge 


752 


Bights  of  Assignee. 


[§M9. 


Sec.  349.  Bights  as  to  title.— Unless  there  is  an  express 
stipulation  to  the  contrary,  every  contract  for  the  sale  of 
a  lease  contains  an  implied  undertaking,  available  at  law 
as  well  as  in  equity  to  make  out  the  lessor's  title  to 
demise  as  well  as  that  of  the  vendor  to  the  lease  itself.' 
But  upon  the  sale  of  an  agreement  for  a  lease,  there  is 


T.  steward,  1  Or.  &  M.  644,  660, 
stated  that  ''  the  effect  of  the  as- 
signment is,  that  the  lessee  be- 
comes a  surety  to  the  lessor  for 
the  assignee,  who,  as  between  him- 
self and  the  lessor,  is  the  princi- 
pal, bound,  whilst  he  is  assignee, 
to  pay  the  rent  and  perform  the 
covenant  running  with  the  estate  ; 
and  the  surety  after  paving  the 
debt,  or  dischar^g  the  obligation 
to  which  he  is  liable,  has  his  rem- 
edy over  against  the  principal. 
And  he  would  also,  in  all  proba- 
bility, have  the  same  remedy  over 
against  each  subseauent  assi^ee, 
in  respect  of  breacnes  committed 
during  the  continuance  of  the  in- 
terest of  each,  for  the  lessee  is,  in 
effect,  a  surety  for  each  of  them 
tothe  lessor. "  And  Baron  Parke, 
who  took  part  in  that  judgment, 
afterward,  m  Humble  v.  Xangston, 
7  M.  &  W.  517,  530,  also  expressed 
the  opinion  that  the  lessee  was  li- 
able m  the  nature  of  a  surety,  as 
between  himself  and  the  assignee, 
for  the  performance  of  the  cove- 
nants of  the  lease.  In  Moule  v. 
Garrett,  L.  R.,  6  Ex.  132,  the  as- 
signee, for  whose  breach  of  the 
covenants  of  the  lease  the  lessee 
was  obliged  to  pav,  did  not  take 
directly  from  the  lessee,  but  was 
second  assignee,  and  the  question 
suggested  by  Lord  Denman  arose 
as  it  does  in  the  case  at  bar.  It 
was  held  that  there  was  an  implied 
promise  on  the  part  of  each  succes- 
sive assignee  of  a  lease  to  indemni- 
fy the  original  lessee  against 
breaches  of  covenant  in  the  lease 
committed  by  each  assignee  dur- 
ing the  continuance  of  his  own 
term.  The  decision  was  afterward 
affirmed  in  the  Exchequer  Cham- 
ber. L.  R.,  7  Ex.  101.  Chief 
Justice  Cockburn,  while  conced- 
ing tliat  the  defendants  might  be 
held  on  the  ground  of  implied 
contract,  was  of  opinion  that 
the  liability  of  the  assignee  might 


be  put  on  another  and  preferable 
ground,  namely,  that  when  one 
person  is  compelled  to  pay  dam- 
ages for  the  legal  default  of 
another,  he  is  entitled  to  recover 
from  the  person  by  whose  default 
the  damage  was  occasioned,  the 
money  so  paid,  and  that  it  was 
a  matter  of  indifference  whether 
the  liability  rested  on  an  implied 
contract  or  on  an  obligation  im- 
posed by  law ;  it  was  a  duty  the 
taw  enforces,  Mr.  Jcshcb 
WiLLBS  stated  his  concurrence  in 
this  concise  language  :  "  I  am  of 
the  same  opinion,  on  the  ground 
that  where  a  party  is  liable  at  law 
by  inunediate  privity  of  contract, 
which  contract  also  confers  a  heU' 
efit,  and  the  obligation  of  the  con- 
tract is  common  to  him  and  to  the 
defendant,  but  the  whole  ben^t 
of  the  contract  Ib  taken  by  the  de- 
fendant, the  former  is  entitled  to 
be  indemnified  by  the  latter  in  re- 
spect of  the  peif  ormance  of  the 
oDligation.  '*  Assuming,  therefore, 
that  a  lessee  may  maintain  an  ac- 
tion against  an  assignee  on  either 
of  the  grounds  suggested  in  these 
cases,  it  is  very  clear  that  he  can 
do  so  onlv  after  he  has  paid  the 
lessor  for  breach  of  the  covenants 
of  the  lease  bv  the  assignee.  If  he 
is  a  surety,  then  he  must  pay  the 
debt  for  which  he  is  liable  before 
he  can  recover  of  the  principal. 
Hoyt  V.  Wilkinson,  10  Pick.  (M^) 
31.  If  it  is  a  debt  imposed  upon 
him  by  the  default  or  act  of  the  as- 
signee, it  must  of  course  be  dis- 
cliarged  before  the  liability  of  the 
assignee  accrues.  Until  the  debt  is 
discharged  the  lessee  has  no  right 
of  action  against  the  assignee, 
and  no  recovery  can  be  had  for 
rent  which  has  not  been  paid  by 
the  lessee. 

>  Ld.  Denman,  C.  J.,  in  Souter 
V.  Drake,  5  B.  &  Ad.  1002 ;  Purvis 
v.  Rayer,  9  Price,  488. 


CHAP,  xxxm.]     Gbant  op  Reversion.  ^53 

no  implied  contract  that  the  lessor  has  power  to  grant 
the  lease.* 

Sec.  350.  Grant  by. the  landlord  of  his  reversion.  —  By 
the  statute  32  Henry  8,  chapter  34,  sections  1  and  2,  it  is 
provided  that  upon  a  grant  by  deed  by  a  landlord  of  his 
reversion,  the  grantees,  *^and  the  heirs,  executors,  suc- 
cessors and  assigns  of  every  of  them,  shall  have  like 
advantages  against  the  lessees,  their  executors,  adminis- 
trators and  assigns,  by  entry  for  non-payment  of  rent,  or 
for  doing  of  waste  or  other  forfeiture ;  and  the  same 
remedies  by  action  for  not  performing  of  other  condi- 
tions, covenants  or  agreements  (running  with  the  land) 
contained  in  the  indentures  of  their  said  leases,  as  the 
said  lessors  themselves,  or  theil*  heirs  or  successors  had. " 

All  lessees  of  hereditaments  for  term  of  years,  life  or 
lives,  their  executors,  administrators  and  assigns,  shaU 
have  like  remedy  against  all  persons  and  bodies  politic, 
their  heirs,  successors  and  assigns,  who  shall  have  any  gift 
or  grant  of  the  reversion  of  the  same  hereditaments,  or 
any  parcel  thereof,  for  any  condition,  covenant  or  agree- 
ment contained  in  the  indentures  of  their  leases,  as  the 
same  lessees  might  have  had  against  the  said  lessors, 
their  heirs  and  successors.* 

Sec.  851.  Conveyanoesgood  without  attornment  of  tenant. 
— By  4  Anne,  chap.  16,  section  9,  aU  grants  or  convey- 
ances, of  any  manors  or  rents,  or  of  the  reversion  or 
remainder  of  any  messuages  or  lands,  shall  be  good  and 
effectual  without  any  attornment  of  the  tenants  of  any 
such  manors,  or  of  land  out  of  which  such  rent  shall  be 
issuing,  or  upon  whose  estates  any  such  reversions  or 
remainders  shaU  be  expectant  or  depending;  and  by 
section  10  it  is  provided  that  no  such  tenant  shall  be  prej- 
udiced or  damaged  by  payment  of  any  rent  to  any  such 
grantor,  or  by  breach  of  any  condition  for  non- payment 
of  rent,  before  notice  shall  be  given  to  him  of  such  grant 
by  the  grantee. 

'  Kintrea  v.  Perston,  1  H.  &  N.         *  Standen  t.  ChristmaB,  10  Q.  B. 
357.  185 ;  Webb  v.  Ruasell,  3  T.  R.  393. 

48 


754  Bights  of  Assignee.  [§  353. 

• 

Sec.  852.  Sflbot  of  death  of  the  lessor.— Arrears  of  rent 
accrued  and  payable  in  the  lifetime  of  the  landlord  go  to 
his  executor  or  administrator  as  part  of  his  personal 
estate.*  Executors  may  sue  upon  any  covenant  with  the 
testator  which  has  been  broken  in  his  lifetime.'  But 
where  the  covenant  runs  with  the  land  and  descends  to 
the  heir,  though  there  may  have  been  a  formal  breach  in 
the  ancestor's  lifetime,  yet  if  the  substantial  damage 
has  taken  place  since  lus  death,  the  heir  is  the  proper 
plaintiff.* 

Sec.  858.  Deathoflessee.— Upon  the  deatli  of  a  tenant 
from  year  to  year,  or  for  a  term  of  years,  the  lease  vests 
in  his  executor  or  administrator.*    Even  where  a  term 
of  years  is  specifically  bequeathed,  it  will,  in  the  first 
instance,  vest  in  the  executor,  by  virtue  of  his  oflSce,  for 
the  usual  purposes  to  which  the  testator's  assets  are 
applied,  and  the  legatee  has  no  right  to  enter  without 
the  executor's  special  assent.*    The  executor  or  admin- 
istrator cannot,  generally  speaking,  refuse  the  lease, 
though  it  is  worth  nothing,  for  he  must  renounce  the 
executorship  in  toto  or  not  at  all ;  *  but  if  the  value  of  the 
land  is  less  than  the  rent,  and  there  is  a  deficiency  of  assets, 
he  may  waive  the  lease./    He  is  liable,  to  the  extent  of 
the  lease  for  arreara  for  rent  accruing  and  breaches  of 
covenant  committed  during   the  life  of    the    tenant.' 
Although  the  executor  or  administrator  does  not  enter 
into  possession  of  the  demised  premises,  he  may  be  sued 
as  assignee  of  the  lease  for  rent  due  and  breaches  of 
covenant  committed  subsequently  to  the  death  of  the 
lessee.*    But  he  may,   by  proper    pleading,    discharge 
himself  from  personal  liability,  by  alleging  that  he  is  no 
otherwise  assignee  than  by  being  executor  or  admin- 
istrator of  the  lessee,  and  that  he  has  never  entered  or 

'  See  1  Williams  on  Exors.  783 ;  '1  Williams  on  Exore.  601. 

Dollen  V.  Batt,  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  760.  •  Denman,  C.  J.,  in  Rubeiy  v. 

»  Raymond  v.  Fitch,  2  Cr.  M.  &  Stevens,  4  B.  &  Ad.  244. 

R.  588 ;  Ricketts  v.  Weaver,  13  M.  '2  Williams  on  Exors.  1591. 

&  W.  718,  «  Id.  1587. 

» Kingdon  v.  Nottle,  1  M.  &  S.  •  Wollaston  v.    HakewiU,  3    M. 

855.    See  2  Cr.  M.  &  R.  598.  &  Gr.  297.  320. 

<Doe    V.   Port«r,    8    T.   R.   13; 
James  V.  Dean,  15  Ves.  241. 


J 


CHAP,  xxxm.]       Death  of  Lessee. 


756 


taken  possession  of  the  demised  premises ;  and  he  may 
also  discharge  himself  from  all  liability  as  executor,  by 
alleging  that  the  term  is  of  no  value,  and  that  he  has 
fully  administered  all  the  assets  which  have  come  to  his 
hands.'  If  the  executor  or  administrator  enters  upon 
the  demised  premises,  he  becomes  personally  liable,  so 
long  as  he  continues  in  possession,  for  so  much  of  the 
rent  accruing  due  after  the  testator's  death  as  the  prem- 
ises are  worth,'  t.  e.,  the  amount  of  rent  for  which  they 
could  have  been  let.* 

When  an  executor  is  sued  for  use  and  occupation  in 
his  own  right,  he  must  show  that  his  occupation  is  as 
executor,  and  that  he  entered  in  that  character ;  that  he 
has  no  assets,  and  that  the  value  of  the  land  is  not  equal 
to  the  rent.  Where  the  land  yields  some  profit,  but  less 
than  the  rent,  he  may  tender  the  amount  of  profit  and 
plead  a  tender,  or  he  may  pay  it  into  court.  *  The  executor 
is  liable  to  the  same  extent  as  any  other  assignee  for  any 
breaches  of  the  covenants  in  the  lease  committed  since 
the  death  of  the  tenant.^  But  by  assigning  the  term  the 
executor  or  administrator  may  free  himself  from  liability 
for  subsequent  rent  and  breaches  of  covenant.* 


» Id.  821. 

>  See  1  WmB.  Saund.  112,  note 
(c) ;  Rabery  ▼.  SteTens,  4  B.  &,  Ad. 
241 ;  Hopwood  v.  Whaley,  6  C.  B. 
744;  Homidge  v.  Wilson,  11  Ad. 
&E1.  645. 

» Hopwood  V,  Whaley,  6  C.  B. 
744. 


*  Patten  v.  Reid,  6  L.  T.  N.  S.  281. 
*Tremeere  v.   Moriaon,  1  Bing. 

N.  C.  89,  97  ;  Sleap  v.  Newman,  12 
C.  B.  N.  S.  116.  See  Buckworth 
V.  Simpeon,  1  Cr.   M.  &.  R.  884. 

•  Taylor  v.  Shum,  1  B.  &  P.  21. 
See  Collins  y.  Crouch,  13  Q.  B. 
542.  * 


766 


PABUCULAB  Ck)YBITANTS. 


[§35*. 


CHAPTER   XXXTV. 


PABTICULAR  COVENANTS.— gUIBT  ENJOYMENT- 

Sec.  854.  Covenants  for  quiet  enjoyment. 

Sec.  855.  No  implied  covenant  or  promiBe  when  an  express  one. 

Sec.  856.  Cessor  of  implied  covenant 

Sec.  857.  Form  of  usual  qualified  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment. 

SEa  858.  Unqualified  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment. 

Sec  859.  Any  express  covenant  excludes  an  implied  one. 

Sec.  860.  Decisions  on  express  covenants  for  quiet  enjoyment. 

Sec.  861.  What  is  a  breach  of . 

Sec.  862.  Damages  for  breach  of  covenant. 

Sec.  868.  On  whom  binding. 

Sec.  864.  Breaches. — ^How  plead. 

Sec.  354.  Covenants  for  quiet  enjoyment.— The  object  of 
a  convenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  is  to  afford  to  the  lessee 
an  assurance  against  the  consequences  of  a  defective 
title,  and  consequently  it  necessarilj  imports  that  he 
shall  enter  and  enjoy  the  premises  without  the  permission 
of  any  one ;  therefore,  if  any  other  person  is  in  possession 
of  the  premises,  qjither  imder  a  person  having  a  better 
title  thereto  than  the  lessor,  or  under  a  lease  or  deed 
from  the  lessor,  and  the  lease  takes  effect  in  prcRsenii, 
there  is  an  immediate  breach  of  the  covenant,  and  an 
action  lies  therefor  at  once.'    But  the  covenant  is  not 


>  Garfield  v.  Williams,  3  Vt.  327. 
In  King  v.  Reynolds,  67  Ala.  229, 
it  was  held  that  when  there  is  no 
stipulation  to  the  contrarv  in  the 
lease  the  lessor  impliedly  cove- 
nants, that  the  demised  premises 
shall  be  open  to  entry  by  the  les- 
see, at  the  time  fixed  by  the  con- 
tract for  him  to  take  possession. 
But  if  after  the  time  when  the 
lessee  is  entitled  to  possession  un- 
der the  lease  whether  he  has  actual 


possession  or  not,  a  stranger  tres- 
passes on,  or  takes  possession  of 
and  holds  the  lancus,  this  is  a 
wrong  to  the  lessee  for  which  the 
lessor  is  not  responsible.  When 
in  an  action  by  a  lessee  against  his 
lessor,  for  a  breach  of  the  implied 
covenant  to  deliver  ix)ese8sion,  the 
evidence  is  conflicting,  as  to  wheth- 
er a  trespasser  was  in  possession  of 
the  lands,  at  the  time  fixed  in  the 
lease  for  taking  possession,  it  is 


■:^. 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]    For  Quiet  Enjoyiient. 


767 


broken  because  of  the  entry  of  a  mere  tort  feasor  or, 


error  to  refuse  a  charge  which  sub- 
mits this  question  to  the  jury. 
In  Snodgrass  v.  Reynolds,  79  Ala. 
452,  it  was  held  that,  as  between 
lessor  and  lessee  where  the  latter 
sues  for  the  breach  of  an  express 
stipulation  to  put  him  in  posses- 
sion, the  general  rule  must  govern 
though  the  lessor  was  guilty  of  no 
fraud  or  wrongful  conduct ;  and 
the  measure  of  damages  is,  not  the 
consideration  paid,  with  interest, 
but  the  value  of  the  lease.  The 
leased  premises  consisting  of  a 
meadow  of  about  thirty  acres, 
sown  in  *'  Johnson  grass,"  a  crop 
of  which  was  then  ready  to  be 
mowed,  the  plaintiff  may  prove 
how  many  crops  the  lana  would 
produce  each  year  with  ordinary 
seasons,  and  the  probable  quantity 
and  market  value  of  each  crop, 
not  as  a  basis  for  the  recovery  of 
profits  as  such,  but  as  facts  to  be 
considered  by  the  jury  in  estimat- 
ing the  value  of  the  use  of  the 
land  during  the  term — ^that  is,  the 
value  of  the  lease.  When  the  pos- 
session of  the  leased  premises  is 
open  and  unobstructed  at  the  time 
of  the  renting,  and  there  is  only 
an  imphed  covenant  on  the  part 
of  the  lessor  that  they  shall  be 
open  to  entry,  a  subsequent  tres- 
pass or  intrusion  by  a  third  person 
IS  a  wron^  against  the  lessee ;  but, 
if  there  is  an  express  stipulation 
by  the  lessor  to  put  the  lessee  in 
possession,  such  subsequent  tres- 
pass, before  the  lessee  has  entered, 
IS  a  wrong  against  the  lessor. 
Howell  V.  Richards,  11  East,  638 ; 
Ludwell  V.  Newman,  5  Bing.  440 ; 
Holder  v.  Tavlor,  Hob.  12 ;  Hack- 
et  V.  Glover/  10  Mod.  142 ;  Qoak 
V.  Hooper,  Freem.  122 ;  Levett  v. 
Wirthington,  Sutw.  97.  A  con- 
tract for  quiet  enjoyment  is  im- 
plied under  a  parol  demise  of  a 
tenement.  Bandy  v.  Cartwright, 
8  Ex.  913 ;  Hall  v.  City  of  London 
Brewery  Co.,  2  B.  &  S.  737.  See 
Granger  v.  Collins,  6  M.  &  W.  458 ; 
Messent  v.  Reynolds,  8  C.  B.  194. 
An  action  of  Covenant  will  lie 
against  the  lessor  upon  the  word 
** demise"  in  a  lease  by  deed,  for 
that  word  imports  a  covenant  in 
law  on  the  part  of  the  lessor  that 
he  has  good  title,  and  that  the  les- 
see BhsSl  quietly  enjoy  during  the 


term.  Per  LnrLEDALE  J. ,  in  Bur- 
nett V.  Lynch,  6  B.  &  C.  609; 
Iggulden  V.  May,  9  Ves.  830.  But 
this  implied  covenant  ceases  with 
the  estate  of  the  lessor ;  hence  if , 
under  a  lease  made  by  a  tenant  for 
life  not  containing  any  express 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyments  the 
lessee  is  evicted  by  the  remainder- 
man after  the  death  of  the  lessor^ 
the  lessee  cannot  maintain  an  ac- 
tion upon  an  implied  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment  against  the  ex- 
ecutor of  the  tenant  for  life. 
Adams  v.  Gibney,  6  Bing.  656. 
See  Penfold  v.  Abbott,  7  L.  T.  N. 
S.  384.  A  person  who  lets  premises 
agrees  to  give  possession,  and  not 
merely  to  give  a  chance  of  a  law- 
suit. Coe  V.  Clay,  5  Bin^.  440. 
If  he  does  not  give  possession  the 
lessee  mav  recover  damages  against 
]^m,  and  is  not  obliged  to  oring 
ejectment  against  an  occupier  who 
wrongfully  refuses  to  quit.  Coe  v. 
Clay  ,5  Biag.  440 ;  Jinks  v.  Edwards, 
11  Ex.  775.  See  Drury  v.  Mac- 
namara,  5  £.  &  B.  612.  One  of 
the  necessary  consequences  of  the 
implied  agreement  on  the  part  of 
every  landlord  for  his  tenant's 
quiet  enjoyment  is,  that  the  land- 
lord, if  himself  a  lessee,  shall,  bv 
paying  over  to  the  superior  lana- 
lord  tne  rent  received  from  the 
undertenant,  protect  such  under- 
tenant from  the  superior  landlord's 
distress.  Hancock  v.  Coffyn,  8 
Bing.  866 ;  Upton  v.  Ferguson,  3 
Moo.  &  Sc.  88.  The  covenant  im- 
plied in  the  word  "demise"  will 
be  qualified  and  restrained  by  an 
express  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment. Line  v.  Stephenson,  4 
Bing.  N.  C.  678;  5  Bing.  N.  Q. 
183.  Hence,  the  lessee,  upon  an 
eviction  by  a  paramount  title,  can- 
not recover  under  tlie  implied 
covenant  if  the  lease  contains.-  an 
express  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment against  the  lessor  and  those 
who  claim  under  him.  Merrill  v. 
Frame,  4  Taunt.  829.  The  im- 
plied indemnity  ia  also  limited  to 
the  wrongful  entry  of  the  lessor 
or  of  persons  claiming  under  or 
paramount  to  him.  Smith,  L.  & 
T.  285.  No  action  will  lie  upon  it 
for  an  eviction  of  the  tenant  by  a 
stranger.  Andrew's  Case,  Cro. 
Eliz.  214. 


i 


758 


Pabtioxjlar  Oovknants. 


[§354. 


because  of  the  premises  being  in  the  possession  of  a  per- 
son having  no  right  or  title  thereto.  To  sustain  an 
action  for  a  breach  of  this  covenant  it  is  necessary  for 
the  plaintiff  to  prove  that  he  was  evicted  by  a  person 
who  had  a  lawful  and  paramount  title  existing  before 
or  at  the  time  that  the  covenant  was  made. '  There  must 
be  an  interruption  by  title ;  and  a  declaration  that  merely 
alleges  an  eviction  by  a  trespasser  is  bad.'  If  the  tenant 
enters  into  possession,  the  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  is 
not  broken  by  a  demand  of  possession  by  a  person  claiming 
to  hold  by,  or  having  a  superior  title,"  nor  by  a  mere 
trespass  of  the  lessor.*  The  covenant  relates  to  the  estate 
and  title  demised,  and  not  to  the  person  of  the  lessee ; 
therefore  the  covenant  is  not  broken  by  an  entry  by  the 
landlord,  and  an  aasBault  and  battery  committed  by  him 
upon  the  tenant,*  nor  by  nxt  entry  of  the  landlord  to 
repair,  when  he  has  covenanted  to  dT>8ii,'iior  by  a  notice  to 
an  undertenant  not  to  pay  the  rent  to  the  tcraoit^^  at 
least,  unless  the  rent  is  withheld  because  of  such  notice.* 
The  destruction  of  the  buildings  by  fire  or  other  casualty, 
and  a  refusal  by  the  landlord  to  repair  or  rebuild  them» 
is  not  a  breach  of  this  covenant,  as  the  covenant  imposes 
no  such  obhgation  upon  him.* 

Whether  a  lease  contains  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment or  not,  is,  so  far  as  the  rights  of  the  tenant  are 


'  Knapp  V.  Marlboro,  84  Vt.  285 ; 
ElliB  V.  Welch,  6  Mass.  246  ;  Frost 
V.  Earnest,  4  Whart.  (PennO  86 ; 
Hodgkin  v.  Queenborough,  Willes, 
18  n :  Gardner  v.  Keteltas,  8  Hill, 
(N.  Y.)  380 ;  Underwood  v.  Birch- 
ard,  47  Vt.  805 ;  Hoppus  v.  Cheek, 
21  Ark.  185. 

*  Rantin  v.  Bobertson,  2  Strobh. 
(S.  C.)  866. 

'Cowan  V.  Silliman,  4  Dev.  (N. 
C.)  L.  46.  Especially  is  this  the 
case  where  the  person  making  the 
demand  had  no  right  to  eject  the 
tenant  Poole  v.  Whitt,  15  M.  &. 
W.  571.  But  if  the  person  making 
the  demand  really  had  a  paramount 
title,  and  threatened  to  expel  the 
tenant,  and  in  consequence  of  such 
threat  the  tenant  attorned  to  him, 
this  is  equivalent  to  an  expulsion. 
Poole  V,  Whitt,  ante.     And  the 


same  is  true  if  the  tenant  gives  up 
possession  to  one  having  a  superior 
title,  on  demand.  Carpenter  ▼. 
Parker,  8  C.  B.  N.  S.  206, 

*  Mayor,  &c.,  v.  Mabie,  18  N.  Y. 
151.  But  contra  see  Sedgwick  v. 
Hollenbeck,  7   John.  (N.  Y.)  376. 

'Morgan  v.  Hunt,  2  Vent  218 ; 
Penn  v.  Glover,  Cro.  Ehz.  421. 
An  entry  by  one  having  no  law- 
ful claim  at  the  time  of  the  con- 
veyance does  not  constitute  a 
breach.  Webb  v.  Alexander,  t 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  281. 

'  Hodgkin  v.  QueenboroTigh, 
ante. 

'  Withcot  V.  Nine,  1  Br.  &.  G. 
81. 

'  Anonymous,  1  And.  137. 

»  Brown  v.  Quitter,  2  AmbL  618. 
See  jpo8^,  Chapter  on  Bepairs. 


' 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]    For  Quiet  Enjoyment. 


769 


concerned,  immaterial,  as  in  all  cases,  unless  otherwise 
expressly  provided,  the  law  will  imply  such  a  covenant. 
The  rule  is,  that  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  is  implied 
in  every  mutual  contract  for  leasing  land,  by  whatever 
form  of  words  the  agreement  is  made ;  and  for  the  breach 
of  such  covenant,  occasioned  through  the  fault  of  the  les- 
sor ^  the  lessee  has  his  remedy  for  such  damages  as  result 
to  him  therefrom.'  In  pursuance  of  this  rule,  it  has  been 
held  that,  where  the  damages  arose  from  acts  done  by 
the  landlord  under  a  valid  ordinance  of  a  municipal  gov- 
ernment, the  tenant  could  not  charge  the  landlord  with 
the  damages,  but,  in  order  to  shield  himself  from  liabihty, 
the  landlord  must  establish  the  validity  of  the  ordinance, 
and  failing  to  do  so,  or  if  the  ordinance  is  in  fact  invaUd, 
he  is  liable  the  same  as  though  the  act  had  been  volun- 
tary on  his  part.*  The  word"  demise, 'Mn  a  lease,  implies 
a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment.  This  word  imports  a 
covenant  that  the  lessor  had  authority  to  make  a  valid 
lease  of  the  premises  (Grannis  v.  Clark.  8  Cow.  86) ;  and 
a  covenant  for  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  the  premises 


>  Mack  V.  Patchin,  43  N.  Y.  167 ; 
Akerly  v.  Vilas,  28  Wis.  207 ;  El- 
dred  v.  Leahy,  81  Wis.  551  ;  Man- 
ville  V.  (Jay,  1  Wis.  250 ;  Vamum 
V.  Smith,  15  N.  Y.  828 ;  The  Mayor, 
&c.,  V.  Mabie,  11  Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.) 
566 ;  Burwell  v.  Jackson,  9  N.  Y. 
585 ;  Sigmund  v.  Bank,  29  Md.  824 ; 
Baugher  v.  Wilkins,  16  id.  75. 
Even  where  a  parol  lease  is  made, 
an  implied  promise  is  raised  that 
corresponds  with  the  implied  cove- 
nants that  arise  when  tne  estate, 
right  or  interest  is  created  by  deed. 
Therefore,  mider  a  parol  lease  there 
is  an  implied  promise  from  the 
lessor  to  put  the  lessee  into  posses- 
sion. Hart  V.  Windsor,  12  M.  &  W. 
85 ;  Coe  v.  Clay,  5  Bing.  440,  and 
to  secure  him  the  free  and  undis- 
turbed possession  thereof  for  the 
term  for  which  the  premises  were 
let.  Bandy  v.  Cartwright,  8 
Exchq.  918 ;  Messent  v.  Reynolds, 
8  B.  &  C.  201.  If  there  is  a  con- 
tract for  the  sale  and  purchase  of 
a  lease  the  law  implies  a  promise 
from  the  vendor  to  establish  and 
make  good  his  title  to  the  lease ; 
Doe  V.  Stanion,  1  M.  &  W.  701 ; 


Souter  v.  Drake,  5  B.  d^  Ad.  992 ; 
Hall  V.  Betty,  5  Scott,  N.  R.,  508; 
and  when  the  purchaser  has  ac- 
cepted the  lease,  the  law  implies  ft 
promise  on  the  assignee's  part  to 
pay  the  rent  reserved,  and  per- 
form the  covenants  in  the  lease. 
Burnett  v.  Lynch,  5  B.  &  C.  602. 
Not  only  may  a  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  be  implied,  but  the 
fact  that  the  lessor  nas  no  title,  or 
power  or  authority  to  let  the  prem- 
ises, may  amount  to  a  fraudulent 
representation,  which  will  form  the 
basis  of  an  action  in  favor  of  the 
tenant  for  the  damages  that  result 
to  him  therefrom.  In  MiUiken  v. 
Thomdike,  108  Mass.  882,  a  false 
oral  representation  made  at  the 
time  of  the  execution  of  the  lease 
that  the  drains  were  where  they 
were  to  be  according  to  the  plans, 
was  held  admissible  m  defence  of 
an  action  for  rent,  although  the 
defendant  had  entered  and  re- 
mained in  possession  a  week  be- 
fore he  discovered  the  fraud  and 
quit  possession.  See,  also,  Whit- 
ney V.  Allau-e,  1  N.  Y.  805. 
» Ekbed  v.  Leahy,  81  Wis.  560. 


(TOO  Pabticjulab  Covenants.  [§  355. 

leased.'  Though  the  covenant  be  an  implied  one,  it  may 
be  stated  according  to  its  legal  effect.'  In  an  action  upon 
such  covenant,  when  the  declaration  does  not  allege  an 
eviction  of  the  plaintiff,  nor  the  taking  of  anything  from 
the  premises  leased^  the  action  cannot  be  maintained." 

Sec.  355.  No  implied  covenant  or  promise  when  an  express 
one.— Any  express  covenant  or  promise  in  a  lease,  either 
for  title  or  quiet  enjoyment,  however  qualified  or  restrict* 
ed,  will  prevent  any  more  general  covenant  or  promise 
on  the  same  subject  being  implied  by  law,  from  the  word 
^ demise"  or  any  equivalent  word — the  maxim  being 
expressum  facit  cessare  taciturn.  The  usual  qualified 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  is  commonly  inserted  for 
the  purpose  of  preventing  a  more  general  and  unqualified 
covenant  being  impUed  by  law.  Where  a  person  held 
under  an  agreement  which  amounted  to  an  actual  demise, 
subject  to  the  same  conditions  as  were  mentioned  in  the 
memorandum  under  which  the  lessor  held  the  premises, 
and  it  did  not  appear  what  those  conditions  were,  it  was 
held,  that  a  contract  for  quiet  enjoyment  could  not  be 
implied.*  Where  the  plaintiff  took  of  the  defendant  a 
house  at  a  yearly  rent,  under  an  agreement  by  the  terms 
of  which  the  latter  agreed  that  up  to  the  date  thereof  he 
had  paid  all  arrears  of  rent ;  and  the  former  agreed  that 
**from  and  after  that  day  the  same  should  be  kept  paid 
by  him  for  the  period  he  might  occupy ; "  and  at  the 
expiration  of  the  first  quarter  the  superior  landlord  dis- 
trained :  it  was  held,  that  there  was  no  impUed  duty  on 
the  defendant  to  indemnify  the  plaintiff  against  this 
claim,  although  the  agreement  stipulated  for  a  ^  *  yearly  ^ 
rent,  the  defendant  having  by  the  subsequent  clause 
expressly  undertaken  to  keep  the  reserved  rent  paid/ 
By  writing  not  under  seal,  signed  by  the  plaintiff  and 
defendant,  plaintiff  agreed  to  take  of  defendant  a  farm 
at  a  yearly  rent,  'Hhe  tenancy  to  commence  from  the 

*  Barney  v.  Keith,  4  Wend.  (N.  *  Ware  v.  Lithgow,  71  Me. 

Y.)  503 ;  Crouch  v.  Fowle,  9  N.  H.  -*  Messent  v.  Reynolds,  8  B.  &  C. 

219.  194. 

*  Dexter   v.    Manley,   4    Gush.  *  Upton  v.  Fergusson,  3  Moa  & 
(Maas.)  14.  Sc.  88. 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]     Express  and  Implied. 


761 


29th  of  September  next,  for  a  term  of  eight  years,  subject 
to  a  lease  "  to  be  drawn  up  by  defendant ;  held,  that  there 
was  no  contract  by  the  defendant  to  give  the  plaintiff 
possession  of  the  farm  on  the  day  named ;  for  that  pos- 
session was  to  be  given  only  on  the  commencement  of  a 
tenancy  under  a  lease  for  eight  years,  and  not  under  that 
agreement,  which  was  void  as  a  lease  under  the  Statute 
of  Frauds,  nor  under  an  implied  tenancy  at  will,  or  from 
year  to  year,  to  be  created  by  entry,  or  entry  and  payment 
of  rent  under  that  agreement.*  But  where  there  is  an 
actual  demise  for  one  year  or  more,  the  lessor  impliedly 
contracts  to  give  the  lessee  possession  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  term,  and  if  he  fails  to  do  so,  by  reason  of  a 
previous  tenant  wrongfully  holding  over,  the  lessee  may 
recover  damages,  and  is  not  driven  to  bring  ejectment 
against  the  previous  tenant.'    By  agreeing  to  grant  a 


1  Dmiy  T.  Macnamara,  5  E.  & 
B.  612  ;  iBrashier  y.  Jackson,  6  M. 
&  W.  549. 

*  Coe  V.  Clay,  5  Bing.  440  ;  Jinks 
V.  Edwards,  11  Excn.  775;  Lud- 
well  V.  Newman,  6  T.  R.*458.  The 
lessor  binds  himself  to  give  posses- 
sion, and  not  to  give  the  party  to 
whom  he  demises  a  mere  right  to 
take  possession  from  a  wrongdoer 
hv  an  action  of  ejectment,  Coe  v. 
Ciiay,  5  Bing.  469 ;  Neale  v.  Mac- 
kenzie, 1  M.  &  W.  747,  and  the 
lessee  Impliedly  binds  himself  to 
accept  possession  and  p^ment. 
Stanley  v.  Hayes,  3  Q.  B.  105. 
But  a  lessee  who  has  contracted 
orally  for  the  hire  of  realty,  and 
who  neglects  or  refuses  to  accept 
possession  of  the  demised  prem- 
ises, cannot  be  sued  upon  such  oral 
agreement  for  damages  for  not 
t^dng  possession,  nor  upon  any 
oral  promise  to  pay  rent  reservea 
by  such  agreement,  nor  for  use 
and  occupation.  But  he  is  liable 
for  rent  where  he  enters  into  pos- 
session, or  may  be  sued  for  use 
and  occupation,  and  the  price 
agreed  upon  will  be  the  measure 
of  recovery.  Indeed  the  liability 
of  a  lessee  upon  his  covenants  and 
agreements,  express  or  implied, 
for  the  payment  of  rent,  is  con- 
ditional upon  his  being  put  into 
possession,  or  being  tendered,  of- 


fered or  afforded  an  opportunity 
to  take  possession  of  the  premises. 
McKeebin  v.  Whitcroft,  4  H.  & 
McH.  (Md.)  135 ;  Lewis  v.  Payn,  4 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  423 ;  Loverin^  v. 
Loverine,  13  N.  H.  513 ;  Mame  v. 
Ashmead,  20  Perm.  St.  484.  In 
Dexter  v.  Manly,  4  Cush.  (Mass.) 
14,  the  court  held  that  in  a  lease 
for  years  of  real  estate  comprising 
a  factory,  water  power,  tools,  ma- 
chinery, &c.,  for  carrying  on  a 
particular  branch  of  manufacture, 
there  is  an  implied  covenant  on  the 
lessor's  part  that  the  lessee  shsJl 
have  the  free  and  peaceable  en- 
joyment of  the  premises  during 
the  term  so  as  to  enable  him  to 
make  use  of  them  for  purposes  for 
which  they  were  intended,  with- 
out interruption  or  disturbance  by 
the  lessor.  "If,"  say  the  court, 
Holgate  V.  Kajr,  1  C.  &  K.  341, 
*' vou  cannot  give  full  possession 
of  the  thing  demised,  you  cannot 
sue  in  covenant  for  the  rent." 
Neither  can  an  action  for  rent  be 
maintained  if  the  tenant  has  been 
disturbed  in  his  possession,  in  the 
legal  sense  of  the  term.  Wood  v. 
Partridge,  11  Mass.  488;  Bennett 
V.  Bittle,  4  Rawle  (Penn.)  839; 
Bandure  v.  Fletcher,  11  S.  &  B. 
(Penn.)  419;  Kessler  v.  McCon- 
ahy,  1  Rawle  (Penn.)  435.  But 
unless  there  is  an  eviction  by  the 


762 


Paktictjlar  Covenants. 


[§355. 


lease,  the  intended  lessor  does  not  impliedly  engage  for  a 
general  warranty,  nor  imdertake  to  deliver  an  abstract 
of  his  title ; '  nor  that  he  has  a  good  title  to  the  fee  simple, 
and  will  deliver  a  written  abstract.  Except  in  those 
States  where  the  statute  gives  the  tenant  a  right  of  action 
to  dispossess  a  trespasser  upon  the  leased  premises*  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  landlord  impliedly  covenants 
that  the  premises  shall  be  open  for  entry  by  the  tenant 
when  the  period  for  the  commencement  of  the  term 
arrives,  and  if  they  are  at  that  time  so  open,  his  duty  is 
performed,  although  subsequently  a  stranger  enters  into 
possession.  Stowe,  J.,  in  an  Alabama  case'  states  the 
rule  very  clearly,  and  as  we  believe,  correctly,  thus  "The 
moment  the  lessor^s  right  of  possession  ceases  by  virtue 
of  the  lease,  that  moment  the  lessee's  right  "of  possession 
begins.  There  is  no  appreciable  interval  between  them, 
and  hence  there  can  be  no  interregnum,  or  neutral  ground 
between  the  two  attaching  rights  of  possession,  for  a 
trespasser  to  step  in  and  occupy.  If  there  be  actual, 
tortious  occupancy,  when  the  transition  moment  comes, 
thai  it  is  a  trespass  or  wrong  done  to*  the  lessor's  posses- 
sion. If  the  trespass  or  intrusion  have  its  beginning 
after  this,  then  it  is  a  trespass  or  wrong  done  to  the  les- 
see's possession ;  for  the  right  and  title  to  the  pi'operty 
being  then  in  the  lessee  for  a  term,  it  draws  to  it  the 
possession,  unless  there  is  another  in  the  actual  possession. 
We  hold  that  when  there  is  a  contract  of  lease,  and  no 
stipulation  to  the  contrary,  there  is  an  implied  covenant 
on  the  part  of  the  lessor,  that  when  the  time  comes  for 
the  lessee  to  take  possession  under  the  lease,  according  to 


landlord  himself,  liability  under 
the  lease  continues.  Bandy  v. 
Cartwright,  8  Exchq.  918  ;  Line  v. 
Stephenson,  7  Scott,  68.  In  Stan- 
ley V.  Hayes,  8  Q.  B.  105,  it  was 
held  that  an  entry  upon  the  prem- 
ises by  the  land  tax  collector,  and 
a  seizure  of  goods  by  him  to  pay  a 
tax  due  before  the  lease  was  made, 
was  not  a  breach  of  the  covenant 
for  quiet  enjoyment.  **  This  dis- 
tress," said  liOBD  Denman,  C.  J., 
**was  certainly  not  a  proceeding 
within  the  terms  of  the  covenant. 


We  cannot  extend  the  remedy  pro- 
vided by  the  indenture.  'Let, 
suit,  disturbance  or  interruption 
by  the  defendant  or  others  claiin- 
ing  by,  from  or  under  him,'  are 
different  things  from  the  injuiT* 
here  complained  of,  those  worc& 
implying  a  claim  by  title  from,  the 
lessor.  Here,  the  claim  was 
against  him." 

>  Gwillim  V.  Stone,  8  Taunt  488. 

>  Gardner  v.  Keteltas,  8  Hilt.  (N. 
Y.)  880. 

*  King  T.  Reynolds,  67  Ala,  2da 


CHAP,  xxxiv.]    Express  and  Implied.  763 

the  terms  of  the  contract,  the  premises  shall  be  open  to 
his  entry.  In  other  words,  that  there  shall  then  be  no 
impediment  to  his  taking  possession.  But  this  implied 
covenant  or  agreement  does  not  extend  beyond  that 
time.  If  after  the  time  when  the  lessee  is  entitled  to 
have  the  possession,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  con- 
tract, a  stranger  trespass  on,  or  take  possession  and  hold, 
this  is  a  wrong  done  to  the  lessee,  for  which  the  lessor  is 
in  no  way  responsible.  And  this  is  the  rule,  whether  the 
trespass  is  committed  before  or  after  the  lessee  obtains 
actual  possession.  The  lessor's  covenant  extends  no 
farther  than  to  guarantee  he  had  authority  to  make  the 
lease,  and  that  the  premises  will  be  open  for  occupancy, 
when  the  contract  gives  to  the  lessee  the  right  to  enter. 
The  lease  in  this  case  was  made  to  take  effect  as  soon 
as  the  lessee  complied  with  his  part  of  the  contract,  by 
paying  and  securing  the  rent.  When  he  did  that,  he 
was  entitled  to  the  possession.  Was  a  trespasser  then  in 
possession  of  the  premises,  so  as  to  forbid  his  taking  pos- 
BBBBfDii !  If  BO,  King's  implied  covenant  of  quiet  enjoy- 
ment was  broken.  The  bill  of  exceptions  informs  us  that . 
the  testimony  on  this  point  was  in  conflict.  It  became 
necessary  then  to  submit  this  question  to  the  jury.  The 
defendant,  appellant  here,  requasted  the  following  written 
charge:  ''When  the  defendant  leased  the  land  to  the 
plaintiff,  the  contract  of  leasing  transferred  to  the  plaint- 
iff all  the  possession  the  defendant  had ;  and  if  a  trespas- 
ser afterward  went  into  possession,  his  acts  were  a  tres- 
pass against  the  lessee,  and  not  against  the  landlord." 
This  charge  was  refused,  and  defendant  excepted.  This 
charge  was  based  on  one  phase  of  the  testimony,  namely : 
that  portion  which  tended  to  show  that  the  trespasser,  or 
third  party,  was  not  in  possession,  until  after  Reynolds' 
right  to  take  possession  under  the  lease,  had  accrued.  It 
the  possession  was  open  when  the  contract  was  completed, 
on  the  part  of  Reynolds,  then  the  trespass  afterward  gave 
him  no  right  of  action  against  King.  His  sole  recourse 
would  be  against  the  trespasser.  The  charge  requested 
ought  to  have  been  given." 


764  Particular  Covenants.  [§  356. 

Sec.  356.  Cessor  of  implied  oovenant.— A  covenant  in  la^ 
i,  e.,  an  implied  covenant,  ceases  with  the  estate  of  the 
lessor,  and  does  not  necessarily  continue  during  the  whole 
term  expressed  to  be  granted.  Therefore,  if  a  tenant  for  life 
demise  by  indenture  for  fifteen  years,  without  any  express 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  upon  his  death  during  the 
term  the  covenant  in  law  implied  from  the  word  *  ^  demise  '* 
will  cease.  *  But  an  express  covenant  or  one  to  be  imphed 
by  construction  of  words  used  in  the  deed  by  way  of  war- 
ranty or  contract,  would  continue  in  force  to  the  end  of  the 
term  expressed  to  be  granted,  and  not  merely  during  the 
actual  continuance  of  such  term.'  A  covenant  in  law 
shall  go  to  the  assignee  of  the  term,  and  he  shall  give 
advantage  of  it  during  the  actual  continuance  of  the  term, 
but  the  executors  or  adminstrators  of  the  lessor  are  not 
hable  where  the  term  ceases  on  his  death  and  the  lessee 
is  subsequently  evicted.  Where  tenant  for  life,  with 
remainder  over,  demised  by  indenture  for  years,  vdthout 
any  express  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  and  the  lessee 
was  evicted  by  the  remainder-man  after  the  death  of  the 
tenant  for  hfe,  but  before  the  expiration  of  the  term ;  it 
was  held,  that  he  could  not  maintain  an  action  of  covenant 
against  the  executor  of  the  tenant  for  life.'  If  the 
incumbent  of  a  living  let  lands  belonging  to  the  bene- 
fice for  a  term  of  years,  his  resignation  of  the  living  dur- 
ing the  term  is  a  breach  of  the  contract.*  Where  an 
agreement  for  letting  part  of  a  house  at  a  rent  of  302.  con- 
tained a  clause  that  the  tenant  should  be  hable  only  to 
the  said  rent,  such  clause  was  held  to  be  a  clause  of  indem- 
nity, and  that  an  action  would  he  upon  it  where  the  ten- 
ant's goods  were  seized  under  a  distress  for  rent  by  the 
original  landlord,  though  the  party  giving  the  indemnity 
was  not  the  immediate  tenant  of  such  original  landlord  ; 
it  was  also  held,  that  if  uq  notice  be  given  to  the  party 
indemnifying,  and  he  pay  the  rent,  and  protect  his  ten- 
ant's goods,  such  tenant  cannot  recover  specially  on  a 

*  Temple  v.  Brown,  6  Taunt.  60.  » Adams  v.  Gibney,  6  Bing.  656 ; 

-  Evans  v.  Vaughn,  4  B.  &  C.  Woodhouse   v.  Jenkins,  9   Bin^. 

261 ;    WUliams  v.  Burrel,  1  C.  B.  431. 

402  ;   Locke  v.  Furze,  19  C.  B.  N.  *  Price  v.  Williams,  1  M,  &.  'W; 

S.  96.  6. 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  Form  of,  765 

count  framed  on  the  indemnity,  though  he  may  recover 
the  money  on  the  common  counts.'  In  these  cases  of 
impUed  contract  of  indemnity  against  the  consequences  of 
distress,  an  action  of  tort  is  the  proper  form  of  renjedy.' 

Sec.  357.  Formof  usual  qualified  oovenant  for  quiet  eigoy- 
ment.— The  usual  qualified  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment 
is  to  the  following  effect,  viz. :  ^^  And  the  said  [lessor]  doth 
hereby  for  himself,  his  heirs,  executors,  and  administra- 
tors, covenant  with  the  said  [lessee],  his  executors,  admin- 
istrators and  assigns,  that  be  and  they  paying  the  rent 
hereby  reserved,  and  performing  the  covenants  herein- 
before on  his  and  their  part  contained,  shall  and  may 
■peacetaOj  possess  and  enjoy  the  said  demised  premises 
for  the  term  hereby  granted,  without  any  interruption  or 
disturbance  from  or  by  the  said  [lessor],  his  heirs,  execu- 
tors, administrators  or  assigns,  or  any  other  person  or 
persons  claiming  by,  from,  or  under  him,  them  or  any  of 
ihemJ*^  Such  a  covenant  may  be  safely  entered  into  by 
any  lessor  who  never  had  any  title  whatever  to  the  demised 
premises,  or  any  part  thereof  ;  because  any  subsequent 
entry,  eviction,  ejectment  or  other  interruption  or  distm'b- 
ance  by  the  real  owner,  or  by  the  party  entitled  to  posses- 
sion, or  by  any  other  person  who  does  not  claim  **by, 
from  or  under  "  the  lessor,  would  be  no  breach  of  such 
qualified  covenants."  The  wrongful  acts  of  a  tenant  of 
the  lessor,  under  a  previous  lease,  who  does  things  not 
authorized  by  such  lease,  do  not  amount  to  a  breach  of 
the  usual  qualified  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment.*  So,  in 
conveyances  containing  the  usual  qualified  covenants  for 
title,  &c.,*  a  distress  for  previous  arrears  of  land  tax  due 
from  the  lessor  would  be  no  breach  of  such  covenant, 
because  the  collector  does  not  claim  by,  from,  or  under, 
but  against  the  lessor.* 

Sec.  358.     UnquaUfied  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment.— A 
lessee  is  a  purchaser  pro   tanto  to   whom  the  maxim 

>  Evans  v.  Curtis,  2  C.  &  P.  296.  <  Jeffryes  v.  Erans,  19  C.  B.  N. 

«  Hancock  v.  Ck)ffyn,  8  Bing.  858.  S.  246. 

» Merrill  v.  Frame.  4  Taunt.  329 :  » Thackeray  v.  Wood,  5  B.  &  S. 

Smith,  L.  &  T.  290  (2d  ed.) ;  2  Piatt  325. 

on  Leases,  285.  •  Stanley  v.  Hayes,  3  Q.  B.  105, 


766  Particxjlae  Oovenaots,  [§  858. 

caveat  emptor  applies.'  Therefore  he  must,  at  his  peril, 
ascertain  that  the  intended  lessor  has  sufficient  title  to 
demise  for  the  proposed  term,'  and  that  his  conveyance 
does  not  restrict  him  from  permitting  the  premises  to  be 
used  for  any  trade  or  business  intended/  or  the  lessee 
should  obtain  from  the  lessor  an  unqualified  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment  during  the  term,  without  any  interrup- 
tion or  disturbance  by  the  lessor,  "  or  by  any  other  person 
or  persons  whomsoever  ;^^  i.  e.,  against  all  persons  having 
lawful  title :  or  he  must  take  his  chance  and  run  all  risk 
as  to  the  lessor's  title.  Such  risk  may  sometimes  be 
incurred  without  much  danger  where  the  premises  are 
demised  for  a  short  term.  But  where  the  lessee  is  to 
build  upon  or  otherwise  improve  the  demised  premises, 
or  pays  a  premium  for  the  lease,  he  should  take  care 
either  to  investigate  the  lessor's  title  or  obtain  an  unequal- 
ified  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  during  the  term.  *  Such 
covenant  does  not  extend  to  unlawful  acts  of  third 
persons  having  no  title.*  The  lessor  ought  not  to  refuse 
to  enter  into  such  a  covenant  where  no  investigation  of 
his  title  takes  place.  It  is  much  more  reasonable  that 
he,  rather  than  the  tenant,  should  run  any  risk  as  to  his 
own  title  when  he  does  not  allow  it  to  be  investigated  by 
or  on  behalf  of  the  tenant.  But  it  frequently  happens 
that  an  intended  lessee  fears  to  give  offence  and  to  lose 
the  proposed  lease  by  asking  either  for  an  investigation 
of  the  lessor's  title  or  for  an  unqualified  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment.  It  should  however,  be  remembered, 
^  that  a  lessee  cannot  at  any  time  sell  his  lease,  either  by 
auction  or  by  private  contract,  without  producing  and 
proving  his  lessor's  title,  unless  there  be  some  condition 
of  sale  or  other  express  stipulation  to  the  contrary.  An 
underlessee,  who  neglects  to  inquire  into  the  provisions 
of  the  original  lease,  does  so  at  his  own  risk,  and  may, 

»  Sugd.  V.  &  p.   Chap.  x.  b.  L,  R.,  1  Eq.  541 ;  Wilson  v.  Hart,  11 

pi.  12.  Jur.  N.  8.  735. 

'  Spencer  v.  Marriott,  1  B.  &  C.  *  Onions  v.  Cohen,  2  H.  &  M. 

457.  534.  . 

8  Parker  v.  Whyte,  1  H.  &  M.  »  Stanley  v.  Hayes,  3  Q.  B.  105 ; 

167;  Jay  v.  Richardson,  80  Beav.  line  v.  Stephenson,  7  Scott,  68; 

563;   Clements  v.  Welles,  L.  R.,  Bandy   v.   Cartwiight,  8   Exchq. 

1  Eq.  200 ;  Mitchell  v.  Steward,  L.  913. 


«■« 


CHAP.  XXXIV.] 


Express. 


767 


at  the  instance  of  the  original  lessor,  be  restrained  by 
injunction  from  breaking  the  covenants  in  such  lease, 
€ilthough  they  are  not  repeated  in  the  underlease  ;  *  or  he 
may  be  ejected  for  a  forfeiture,  and  perhaps  have  no 
remedy  over  against  his  immediate  lessor.' 

Sec.  359.  Any  express  ooTenantexoludes  an  implied  one. 
— ^The  usual  qualified  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  is 
frequently  inserted  more  for  the  protection  of  the  lessor 
than  of  the  lessee,  and  to  prevent  a  more  general  and 
unqualified  covenant  being  implied  by  law  from  the  word 
"demise,"*  or  any  equivalent  word,  such  as  "let"  or 
"lease."*  So,  in  conveyances  the  usual  qualified  cove- 
nants for  title,  &c.,  are  introduced  '^for  the  purpose  of 
qualifying  the  general  warranty  with  the  old  common 
law  covenant  implied."*  An  implied  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  extends  to  aU  lawful  interruptions  and  dis- 
turbances by  any  person  or  persons  whomsoever  during 
the  continuance  of  the  term ;  but  not  to  unlawful  inteiTup- 
tions  and  disturbances  by  strangers,  against  whom  the 
law  provides  a  remedy  by  action  f  trespass,  &c.  An 
express  qualified  covenant  continues  during  the  whole 
term  expressed  to  be  granted,  but  is  confined  to  interrup- 
tions and  disturbances  by  the  lessor,  or  by  persons  law- 
fully claiming  by,  from,  or  under  him :  or  otherwise,  as 
expressed  in  the  covenant.* 

Sec.  860.  Decisions  on  express  eoYenants  for  .quiet  ei^oy- 
xnent.— A  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  by  the  lessee,  his 
executors,  administrators  and  assigns,  during  the  term, 
Jie  or  they  paying  the  rent  thereby  reserved  and  perform- 
ing the  covenants  on  his  and  their  part  therein  contained, 


>  Parker  v.  Whyte,  1  H.  &  M. 
167 ;  Jay  v.  Richardson,  80  Beav. 
563  ;  Herbert  v.  Mclean,  12  Ir.  Ch. 
R  84;  Clements  v.  Welles,  L.  R., 

I  Eq.  200 ;  Robson  v.  Flight,  84  L. 
J.  Oh.  101 ;  MitcheU  v.  Steward, 
L.  R.,  1  Eq..  541 ;  Wilson  v.  Hart, 

II  Jur.  N.  S.  786. 

*  Spencer  v.  Marriott,  1  B.  &  C. 
457 ;  Hayward  v.  Parke,  16  C.  B. 
205,827. 


•Haves  v.  Bickerstaff,  Vaugh, 
126 ;  2''Platt  on  Lewises,  285  ;  Smith 
L.  &  T.  280  (2d  ed.). 

*  Hall  V.  City  of  London  Brewery 
Ck>.  (Limited),  2  B.  &  S.  737. 

"Per  Buller,  J.,  in  Browning  v. 
Wright,  2  B.  &  P.  18  ;  cited  5  B.  & 
S.  840. 

*  Spencer  v.  Marriott,  1  B.  &  C. 
457  ;  Lock  v.  Furze,  19  C.  B.  N.  a 
96. 


768  PARncuLAR  Covenants,  [§  360. 

is  not  a  covenant  subject  to  a  condition  precedent.'    The 
words  **  during  the  said  term"  mean  during  the  whole 
term  expressed  to  be  granted,  and  not  merely  during  the 
actual  continuance  of  the  term.    But  it  is  otherwise 
where  the  covenant  is  implied  by  law.    A  tenant  for  life, 
with  a  power  of  leasing,  made  a  lease  for  years,  in  which 
was  a  clause  that  ^'he,  for  himself,  his  heirs  and  assigns, 
the  said    demised   premises  unto  the  said  lessee,   his 
executors,  administrators  and  assigns,  under  the  rent, 
covenants,  conditions,  exceptions  and  agreements  before 
expressed,  against  all  persons  whatsoever  lawfully  claim- 
ing the  same,  shall  and  will  during  the  said  term  warrant 
and  defend : "    held,  that  this  amounted  to  an  express 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  during  the  whole  term 
expressed  to  be  granted .'    A  general  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  without  any  interruption  or  disturbance  by 
the  lessor,  his  heirs  or  assigns,  "or  by  any  other  person 
or  persons  whomsoever,"  does  not  extend  to  the  tmlaw- 
Jul  acts  of  third  persons  having  no  title.*    The  law  will 
never  adjudge  that  a  lessor  covenants  against  the  wrong- 
ful acts  of  strangers,  except  his  covenant  is  express  to 
that  purpose ;  for  the  law  itself  does  defend  every  man 
against  wrong ;  and  therefore,  though  one  warrants  land 
to  another  expressly,  or  covenants  for  quiet  enjoyment 
generally y  yet  he  does  not  defend  against  tortious  entries.* 
*  ^  Where  a  man  covenants  to  indemnify  against  all  persons, 
this  is  but  a  covenant  to  indemnify  against  a  lawful  title. 
And  the  reason  is,  because,  as  it  regards  such  acts  as 
may  arise  from  rightful  claims,   a  man  may  well  be 
supposed  to  covenant  against  all  the  world  ;  but  it  would 
be  an  extravagant  extension  of  such  a  covenant,  if  it 
were  good  against  all  the  acts  which  the  folly  or  malice 
of  strangers  might  suggest ;  and  therefore  the  law  has 

1  Dawson  v.  Dyer,  Bart.,  5  B.  &  'Year  Bk.  22  Hen.  6,  52  6;  32 

Ad.  584 ;    Hays  v  Bickerstaff ,  2  Hen.  6,  32  b ;   Tisdale  v.  Sir  W. 

Mod.  34 ;    Allen    t.    Babbington,  Essex,    Hob.    34,    85 ;    H^es  v. 

Sid.  280;  Ludwell  v.  Newman,  6  Bickerstaff,  Vaugh.    118;   Dudley 

T.  R.  458.  V.  FoUiott,  3  T.  R.  585 ;  Foster  v. 

» WilUams  v.   Burrell,   1  C.  B.  Pierson,  4  T.   R.   617 ;   Young  v. 

402  ;    Wotton  v.    Hele,  2    Wms.  Raincock,  7  C.  B.  810. 

Saund.  177  ;  Lock  v.  Furze,  19  C.  *  Wms.  Saund.  178  a,  n.  (8). 
B.  N.  S.  96. 


■«, 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  Express.  769 

properly  restrained  it  within  its  reasonable  import ;  that 
is,  to  rightful  title.  It  is,  however,  different  where  an 
individual  is  named,  for  there  the  covenantor  is  pre- 
sumed to  know  the  person  against  whose  acts  he  is  con- 
tent to  covenant,  and  may  therefore  be  reasonably 
expected  to  stipulate  against  any  disturbance  from  him, 
whether  by  lawful  title  or  otherwise."'  Therefore  a 
covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  or  for  indemnity  against 
all  actio'ns,  suits,  claims  and  demands  whatsoever,  both 
in  law  and  equity,  of  certain  named  persons,  extends  to 
their  unlawful  acts,  claims  and  demands,  without  any 
lawful  right  or  title,"  as  well  as  to  their  lawful  acts.* 
The  covenant  applies  to  all  interruptions  and  disturb- 
ances  by  the  lessor  himself,  he  being  a  party  named/ 
Therefore,  if  a  lessor  covenants  that  he  will  not  inter- 
rupt the  lessee  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  close  demised,  the 
erection  by  him  of  a  gate  on  a  necessary  way  leading  to 
it,  so  as  to  intercept  it,  is  a  breach  of  the  covenant, 
although  the  lesfsor  had  a  legal  right  to  erect  the  gate 
there,  but  for  his  covenant.*  So  if  the  lessor  of  a  mine 
excavates  a  stone  quarry  over  it,  in  such  a  manner  as 
thereby  to  interrupt  the  lessee  in  his  occupation  of  the 
mine,  that  is  a  breach  of  the  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment, whether  the  lessor  has  or  has  not  a  legal  right  to 
excavate  the  quarry.*  K  the  lessor  covenants  with  the 
lessee  that  he  has  not  done  any  acts  to  prejudice  the  lease, 
but  that  the  lessee  shall  enjoy  it  against  all  persons ;  in  this 
case,  the  words  "against  all  persons"  refers  to  the  first 
branch  of  the  covenant,  and  are  limited  and  restrained 
to  acts  done  by  him.'  Where  the  lessors  covenanted 
that  the  lessee  of  a  mill  should  enjoy  the  mill  and  stream 
without  interruption  by  them,  or  by  persons  claim- 
ing under  them,  or  by  their  acts  or  procurement,  a 
diminution  of  the  water  occasioned  by  supplies  under 
contracts  entered  into  by  the  lessors  prior  f  o  making  the 
lease,  is  not  a  breach  of  the  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 

» Nash  V.  Palmer,  6  M.  &  S.  874,  *  Andrews  v.  Paradise,  8Mod.  818. 

879;  Foster  v.Mape8,Cro.Eliz.  213.  *Conis  v ,   Cro.    Eliz.  544; 

« Fowle  V.  Welsh,  1  B.  &  C.  29.  Lloyd  v.  Tomkies,  1 T.  R.  671. 

'  Foster  v.   Mapes,  ante ;  Perry  •  Shaw  v.  Stenton,  2  H.  &  N.  858. 

▼.  Edwards,  1  Stra.  400.  ^  Shep.  ToucL  166. 

49 


no  Paetioulab  Covenants.  [§  860. 

ment/  But  where  the  covenants  for  title  are  general 
and  absolute  against  all  persons  they  will  not  be  quali- 
fied by  reference  to  other  covenants,  unless  there  are 
words,  either  in  the  absolute  covenants  themselves,  or  in 
the  preceding  or  subsequent  ones,  to  connect  them/ 
Where  A  B  covenanted  with  his  lessee  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment as  against  any  person  '^claimii^  by,  from  or 
under"  him,  it  was  held,  that  an  eviction  by  a  prior 
appointee  of  A  B  and  C  D  was  a  breach  of  the  covenant, 
and  that  the  case  was  not  altered  by  the  grant  to  the 
lessee  being  ^^ as  far  as  in  his  power  lay,  or  he  lawfully 
might  or  could." "  So  an  eviction  by  the  lessor's  widow, 
clsdming  under  a  settlement  executed  by  him  before  the 
lease,  constitutes  a  breach/  The  usual  qualified  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjoyment  is  broken  by  an  eviction, 
molestation  or  disturbance  of  the  lessee  by  persons  claim- 
ing under  a  prior  mortgage  for  a  long  term  granted  by 
the  trustees  of  a  settlement  tvith  the  concurrence  of  the 
defendantj  who  joined  therein  and  covenanted  for  pay- 
ment of  the  mortgage  money,  and  for  title,  &c.'  In  an 
action  against  executors  in  their  own  right,  on  a  cove- 
nant for  ^'good  title  and  quiet  enjoyment  against  any 
person  or  persons  whatsoever,"  contained  in  an  assign- 
ment of  a  lease  of  the  testator  by  way  of  mortgage,  it 
was  held,  that  the  cause  of  action  must  arise  from  some 
act  of  the  covenantors.*  Covenant  is  an  underlease  by 
A  to  B  that  B  should  hold  the  premises  without  any  law- 
ful let,  suit,  interruption  or  eviction  by  A,  or  by  or 
through  his  acts,  meanSy  right,  title,  forfeiture,  &c.  A 
held  under  a  lease  for  a  longer  term,  which  contained  a 
clause  of  re-entry  by  the  original  lessor  in  case  the  prem- 
ises should  be  used  for  a  shop.  The  underlease  contained 
no  such  clause,  nor  was  B  informed  of  it.  He  underlet 
to  C,  who  incurred  a  forfeiture  by  using  the  premises  for 
a  shop,  and  the  original  lessor  thereupon  evicted  him  : 

1  Blatchford  v.   Mayor,  &c,,  of  156 ;  and  see  Lock  t.  Furse,  19  C. 

Plymouth,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  691  ;  and  B.  N.  S.  96. 

0ee  Thackeray  v.  Wood,  5  B.  &  S.  *  Butler  y.  Swmnerton,  Cro.  Jac 

825.  656 ;  Palm.  889;  2  RoU.  286. 

f  Smith  V.  Compton,  8  B.  &  Ad.  *  Carpenter  v.  Parker,  8  C.  BL  N. 

189.  S.  206. 

'  Calyert  v.  Sebright,  15  Beav.  *  Noble  v.  Smith,  1  H.  Blao.  84« 


* 


CHAP.  XXXI v.]     What  is  a  Breach  op. 


Yn 


held,  that  this  was  not  an  eviction  hy  means  of  A  within 
the  meaning  of  the  covenant  in  the  underlease. '  In  a 
demise  for  500  years  the  lessor  covenanted  that  he  had 
not  done,  nor  permitted  or  suffered  to  be  done,  any  act 
whereby  the  property  was  encumbered :  held,  that  his 
having  assented  to  an  act  which  he  could  not  prevent 
was  not  a  breach  of  the  covenant.'  A  covenant  that  the 
lessee  shall  quietly  enjoy  against  all  claiming  or  pretend- 
ing  to  claim^  a  right  in  the  premises,  extends  to  all  inter- 
ruptions, be  the  claim  legal  or  not,  provided  it  appear 
that  the  disturber  do  not  claim  under  the  lessee  himself.^ 


Sec.  361.  What  is  a  breach  of,— A  breach  of  the  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjoyment  may  occur  either  by  a  moles- 
tation arising  from  a  suit  at  law  or  in  equity  relating  to 
the  title  or  possession,  or  by  any  act  by  which  the  lessee 
is  disturbed  in  the  possession  of  the  premises.  Of  the 
first  kind  is  a  recovery  by  ejectment  by  a  person  having 
a  lawful  title ;  or  any  other  suit  by  which  the  peaceable 
occupation  of  the  premises  is  prevented :  thus,  a  cove- 
nant in  a  lease,  that  the  lessee  should  quietly  enjoy  the 
estate  discharged  from  tithes,  is  broken  by  a  suit  for  them, 
although  commenced  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  :  * 
but  where  in  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  the  breach 
assigned  was,  '^  that  the  defendant  had  exhibited  a  bill 
in  chancery  against  him  for  plowing  meadow,  and 
obtained  an  injimction,  which  had  been  dissolved  with 
costs ; "  it  was  held  on  demurrer  to  be  no  breach  of  cove- 
nant, for  the  covenant  was  for  quiet  enjoyment,  and  this 
was  a  suit  for  waste.'  But  a  suit  in  equity  that  involves 
the  title  and  estate  operates  as  a  breach ; '  so  does  a 


'  Spencer  "w  Marriott,  1  B.  &  C. 
457. 

<  HohBon  Y.  Middleton,  6  B.  &  C. 
295 ;  and  see  Thackeray  v.  Wood, 
5  B.  &:  S.  825. 

'  Chaplin  y.  Southgate,  10  Mod. 
884 ;  1  Comyn,  280 ;  and  see  Ib- 
bett  V.  De  la  SaUe,  6  H.  &:  N.  288. 

«  Luuing  y.  Laming,  Cro.  Eliz. 
216. 

*  Morgan  y.  Hunt,  2  Ventr.  215. 

*  Oou£ton  y.  Carr,  Cro.  Eliz. 
847;  Lanning    y.    XiOyering,    id. 


916;  Morgan  y.  Hi|nt,  2  Vent. 
218;  Daerdemaj  y.  Qland,  Cro. 
Eliz.  768;  Ashton  y.  Martyn,  2 
Keb.  268.  The  coyenant  goes  to 
the  possession,  and  not  to  tne  title, 
and  is  not  broken  by  a  failure  of 
the  lessor's  title  merely,  Parker  y, 
Dunn,  2  Jones  (N.  C.)  L.  208; 
Waldron  y.  MoCarty,  8  John.  (N. 
Y.)  471;  Howard  y.  DooUttle,  8 
Duer  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.)  464; 
Whitbeck  y.  Cook,  11  John.  (N. 
Y.)  488;  Boothby  y.  Hathaway, 


772 


Quiet  Enjoyment. 


[§  361.« 


recovery  ia  ejectment/  or  in  trespass  where  the  title  is 
involved.*  But  the  language  of  the  covenant  must  be 
looked  to,  and  it  may  foe  such  that  a  mere  judgment  in  an 
action  involving  the  title  will  not  operate  as  a  breach. 
Thus,  if  the  covenant  is  that  ^'the  lessee  shall  enjoy  the 
premises  without  lawful  eviction," "  it  has  been  held  that 
a  bill  in  equity  involving  the  title,  brought  against  the 
lessor  alone,  does  not  operate  as  a  breach.*  The  covenant 
may  be  either  general  or  qualified,  but  in  either  case  it 
runs  with  the  land.*  Even  though  the  language  of  the 
covenants  is  that,  ^^  subject  to  the  payment  of  the  rent 
and  the  performance  of  the  covenants,"  the  lessee  shall 
quietly  enjoy,  yet  such  words  do  not  constitute  a  condi- 
tion precedent,  and  a  recovery  may  be  had  by  the  lessee 
for  a  breach  of  the  covenant,  although  he  has  not  paid 
the  rent  or  performed  his  covenants.*    Any  description 


20  Me.  251 ;  Webb  v.  Alexander, 
7  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  281;  Kortz  v. 
Carpenter,  5  John.  (N.  Y.)  120; 
Van  Slyck  v.  Kimball,  8  id.  198 ; 
Grist  V.  Hodges,  Dev.  3  (N.  C.)  L. 
200 ;  Cable  v.  Welbom,  2  id.  888, 
and  it  has  been  held  that  a  mere 
recovery  in  ejectment  does  not 
have  that  effect,  KeiT  v.  Shaw,  13 
John.  (N.  Y.)  286,  or  in  trespass  as 
a  person  claiming  title  to  the  land. 
Webb  V.  Alexander,  ante.  But 
the  better  rule  would  seem  to  be 
that  a  recovery  against  the  lessor 
in  any  action  either  at  law  or  in 
equity  involving  his  title  or  estate, 
and  affecting  his  immediate  right 
of  possession,  operates  as  a  breach 
of  the  ordinary  covenant  for  ^uiet 
enjoyment.  Martin  v.  Martm,  1 
Dev.  (N.  C.)  L.  43;  2  Piatt  on 
Leases,  289,  and  cases  cited.  But 
in  order  to  constitute  a  breach 
there  must  be  a  union  of  acts  of 
disturbance  and  title,  and  a  dis- 
turbance by  a  mere  intruder  does 
not  create  a  breach,  Uoppes  v. 
Cheek,  21  Ark.  685;  Runtin  v. 
Robertson,  2  Strobh.  (S.  C.)  866, 
and  the  eviction  and  disturbance 
must  be  under  rights  or  a  title  ex- 
isting at  the  time  when  the  lease 
was  made,  and  not  under  rights 
subsequently  acquired.  Ellis  v. 
Welch,  6  IVlass.  246.  The  rule  is 
as  expressed  in  Knapp  v.  Marl- 
boro, 84  Vt.  235,  that,  to  sustain 


an  action  for  the  breach  of  a  cove- 
nant for  quiet  enjo3rment,  it  is 
necessary  for  the  plaintiff  to  prove 
that  he  was  evicted  by  a  person 
who  had  a  lawful  and  paramount 
title,  existing  before,  or  at  the  time 
when  the  covenant  was  entered 
intOy  as  the  covenant  relates  only 
to  the  acts  of  those  claiming  title 
and  to  rights  existing  at  the  time 
it  was  entered  into.  See  also. 
Grist  V.  Hodges,  3  Dev.  (N.  C.)  L. 
200.  A  mere  demand  of  poesee- 
sion  by  a  person  having  title  does 
not  operate  as  a  breach  of  this 
covenant.  Cowan  v.  Silliman,  4  id. 
46,  nor  does  an  eviction  from  a 
part  of  the  premises  under  a 
statute,  or  municipal  authority. 
Frost  V.  Earnest,  4  Whart  (Penn.) 
86. 

»  Cobb  V,  Wellborn,  2  Dev.  (N. 
C.)  L.  388  ;  MitcheU  v.  Warner,  5 
Conn.  522.  But  contra,  and  hold- 
ing that  it  does  not  constitute  a 
breach,  see  Kerr  v.  Shaw,  13  John. 
(N.  Y.)  236. 

» Cobb  V.  Wellborn,  ante.  But 
contra,  see  Webb  v.  Alexander,  7 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  281. 

*  Anonymous,  8  Leon.  71,  pi.  109. 

*  See  also,  Selby  v.  Chute,  1  RoL 
Ab.  430,  pi.  15. 

*  Campoell  v.  Lewis,  8  Taunt. 
715 ;  Noke  v.  Awder,  Cro.  EUz.  373. 

*  Dawson  v.  Dver,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
584;    Allen  v.  Babbington,  1  Sid. 


CHAP.  xxxTv.]     What  is  a  Breach  of. 


773 


of  annoyance  to  the  occupation  of  the  premises,  which 
prevents  the  lessee  from  enjoying  his  property  in  so 
ample  a  manner  as  he  is  entitled  to  do  by  the  terms  of 
the  lease,  amounts  to  a  breach  of  the  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  of  the  second  sort :  thus,  if  a  man  covenants 
that  he  will  not  interrupt  the  covenantee  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  premises,  the  erection  of  a  gate  which  intercepts 
them  is  a  breach  of  the  covenant,  although  he  had  a 
right  to  erect  it.  *  So  if,  after  a  demise  of  mines  containing 
the  usual  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  the  lessor  digs 
a  quarry  over  the  mines  and  makes  holes,  through  which 
water  percolates  and  escapes  into  the  mines,  although  he 
had  a  legal  right  to  work  the  quarry,  his  doing  so  in  such 
a  manner  amounts  to  a  breach  of  the  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  of  the  mines.'  An  action  on  the  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment  may  be  maintained  for  the  disturbance 
of  a  way  of  necessity  ;  *  or  of  a  way  by  grant  from  the 
covenantor.*  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the 
act  done  must  be  in  the  assertion  of  title,  and  not  a 
mere  tortious  act  for  which  an  action  of  trespass  might 
be  maintained.*  A  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  does 
not  oblige  the  lessor  to  rebuild  or  repair,  in  case  the 
buildings  are  destroyed  or  injured  by  fire,  tempest  or 
otherwise. '  The  covenant  extends  only  to  lawful  interrup- 


280 ;  Hayes  v.  Bickerstaff ,  2  Mod. 
34;  Anonymous,  2  Show.  202  ; 
Wakeman  v.  Waker,  1  Vent.  294. 
*  Andrews  v.  Paradise,  8  Mod. 
818 ;  A  mere  demand  of  rent  by  a 
person  having  a  superior  title  aoes 
not  amount  to  a  breach,  nor  does 
any  act  of  the  lessor  that  merely 
amounts  to  a  trespass.  There 
must  be  either  an  actual  or  con- 
structive eviction.  Cowan  v.  SiUi- 
man,  4  Dev.  (N.  C.)  L.  46  ;  Mayor 
V.  Mabie,  13  N.  Y.  151 ;  Valet  v. 
Hemer,  1  Hilt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  149 ; 
Lounsbury  v.  Snyder,  81  N.  Y. 
514,  nor  does  an  unlawful  act  of 
another  disturbing  the  tenant's 
possession  amount  to  a  breach. 
There  must  be  a  rightful  inter- 
ruption by  a  paramount  title, 
Robtin  V.  Robertson,  2  Btrobh.  (S. 
C.)  866,  but  there  may  be  an  evic- 
tion and  a  consequent  breach  with- 
out a  judgment.     Cobb  v.  Well- 


born, 2  Dev.  (N.  C.)  L.  388  ;  Stew- 
art V.  Drake,  9  N.  J.  L.  139 ;  Mc- 
Garry  v.  Hastings,  39  Cal.  360 ; 
Grist  V.  Hodges,  3  Dev.  (N.  C.)  L. 
200.  Such  a  covenant  may  be  said 
to  be  broken  whenever  there  has 
been  an  involuntary  loss  of  pos- 
session by  the  hostue  assertion  of 
an  irresistible  title,  whether  with 
or  without  Judgment,  or  whetlier 
an  axitual  dispossession  lias  trans- 
pired or  not.  It  is  enough  if  the 
title  is  paramount,  and  is  asserted 
so  that  the  tenant  must  either  quit 
possession  or  yield  to  it.  MoGarry 
V.  Hastings,  89  Cal.  860. 

« Shaw  V.  Stenton,  2  H.  &  N. 
858. 

^  Morris  v.  Edgington,  3  Taunt. 
24. 

*  Pomfret  v.  Ricroft,  1  Saimd. 
822 

*  Sedden  v.  Senate,  13  East,  72. 

*  Brown  v,  Quilter,  Ambler,  620. 


Y74 


Quiet  "ftrwTWiBNT. 


[§361. 


tiGDSy  whether  the  ward  lawful  is  used  1&  4he  ooyenant 
or  not.* 

But  a  disturbance  of  the  lessee  by  the  lessor  himself  is 
not  regarded  with  the  same  lenity  as  an  eviction  by  a 
stranger ;  it  being  clear,  that  the  lessor  exposes  himself 
to  an  action  on  his  covenant,  although  he  enters  wrong- 
fully, notwithstanding  the  coTenant  provides  against 
lawful  evictions  only ; '  for,  in  such  a  case,  the  court  will 
not  consider  the  word  lawful ;  nor  drive  the  plaintiff  to 
his  action  of  trespass,  when  by  the  general  implied  cove- 
nant in  law  the  lessor  has  engaged  not  to  avoid  his  own 
deed,  either  by  a  rightful  or  tortious  entry.*  Indeed,  it 
would  hardly  be  consistent  with  reason  to  allow  the  les- 
sor to  defeat  the  tenancy  by  pleading  his  own  wrong. 

So,  if  a  lessor  covenants  for  quiet  enjoyment  against 
himself  and  his  executors,  the  lessee,  on  eviction  by  the 
executor,  need  not  show  that  the  executor  entered  by 
title,  any  more  than  in  the  case  of  the  lessor  himself.* 

To  support  an  action  against  the  lessor,  it  is  not  neces- 
sary that  he  should  have  a  title  to  enter ;  it  is  sufSdent 
if  he  enters  under  a  claim  of  one.*  And  in  the  case  just 
cited,  where  a  vendor  prevented  a  purchaser  from  enjoy- 
ing a  new  appurtenant  to  the  house  sold,  by  locking  it 
up  against  the  purchaser's  wiU,  the  court  held  that  this 


»  Foster  v.  Pierson,  4  T.  R.  617  ; 
Dudley  v.  Falliott,  8  id.  684  ;  Ma- 
jor y.  Grigg,  2  Mod.  218,  and  an 
allegation  of  a  breach  that  does 
not  show  an  interruption  by  title 
is  bad ;  Rantin  ▼.  Robertson,  2 
Strobh.  (S.  C.)  866  ;  Mayor  v.  Ma- 
bie,  18  N.  Y.  151 ;  Perry  v.  Ed- 
wards, 1  Strange,  4CK) ;  Nicholas  v. 
Pullin,  1  Lev.  83 ;  Holmes  v.  Seller, 
8  id.  305 ;  Bailey  t.  Hughes,  W. 
Jo.  242 ;  Hamond  v.  Dod,  Cro.  Car. 
5 ;  Anonymous,  Lofft.  460 ;  Chaund- 
flower  V.  Priestley,  Yelv.  80  ;  and 
it  makes  no  difference  whether  the 
word  "  lawful"  is  used  in  the  cov- 
enantor not.  General  covenants 
for  quiet  enjoyment  are  not  broken 
by  a  tortious  eviction,  but  by  an 
eviction  by  title  only,  H^es  v. 
Bickerstaff,  Vaughn,  118  ;  Hunt  v. 
Allen,  Winch,  25 ;  Tisdale  v.  Es- 
sex, Hob.  85,  and  in  an  action  for 
a  breach  of  such  a  covenant,  the 


plaintiffs  declaration  must  set  m» 
an  eviction  by  title  paramount. 
Walton  V.  Hele,  2  Saund.  177 ;  Lan- 
ning  V.  Levering,  Cro.  Eliz.  916 ; 
Nokes'  Case,  4  Cdke,  80  h  ;  Blozam 
V.  Walker,  Freem.  124  ;  Foster  t. 
Mapes,  Cro.  Eliz.  212 ;  Brockinf  v. 
Cham.  Cro.  Jac.  425 ;  Hamond  v. 
Dod,  Cro.  Car.  6 ;  Cowper  v.  Pol- 
lard, W.  Jo.  197. 

«  Corns  V.  ,  Cro.  Eliz.  544 ; 

Andrew's  Case,  Cro.  Ehz.  214; 
Penning  v.  Plat,  Cro.  Jac.  888  ; 
Pemberton  v.  Piatt,  1  Rol.  287; 
Cave  V.  Brookesby,  W.  Jo.  850 ; 
Crosse  v.  Young,  2  Show.  425 ; 
Uoyd  V.  Tomkies,  1  T.  R,  671. 
And  see  Seaman  v.  Browning,  1 
Leon,  157. 

>  Crosse.  V.  Young,  ante  ;  Lloyd 
v.  Tomkies,  ante. 

*  Forte  V.  Vine,  2  RoL  21 ;  Rat- 
cliff  V. ,  1  Bl.  &  Gold,  80. 

»  Lloyd  V.  Tomkiee,  1  T.  R.  67U 


CHAP,  XXXIV.]     What  is  a  Breach  op. 


776 


was  such  an  assertion  of  right  as  to  render  the  lessor  lia- 
ble to  an  action.' 

An  accidental  trespass  on  the  premises  in  hunting/  or 
an  entry  for  the  purpose  of  beating  the  lessee,  would  not 
have  that  effect.'  If  the  lessor  covenants  for  quiet  en- 
joyment against  the  acts  of  a  person  partictUarly  sped- 
fiedy  a  disturbance  by  that  person  will  amount  to  a  breach, 
whether  it  is  a  rightful  or  tortious  distiu'bance.*  So, 
where  one  covenanted  for  quiet  enjoyment  without  in 
terruptibn  by  any  person  *' having  or  claiming,  or  pre- 
tending t)o  have  or  daim,''  any  right  of  common ;  and  a 
breach  was  assigned,  aUeging  an  interruption  by  one  J  B, 
who  claimed  common,  &c. ;  it  was  held,  that  the  plaint- 
iff need  not  show  any  title  in  J  B ;  for  the  covenant  ex- 
pressly extended  not  only  to  those  who  had  right,  but  to 
those  who  claimed  or  pretended  to  a  right ;  and,  there, 
fore,  whether  the  claim  were  rightful  or  groundless,  the 
covenantor  was  liable.* 

If  a  general  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  contains  an 
exception  of  particular  persons,  the  exception  will  be  con- 
strued strictly,  so  as  not  to  include  any  others  than  those 
expressly  named.*  A  covenant  for  the  quiet  enjoyment 
of  certain  premises  demised,  excepting  from  the  demise 
to  one  E  K  a  certain  close,  parcel  thereof,  does  not  amount 
to  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  against  an  interruption 
by  E  E  as  to  the  lands  actually  comprised  in  the  lease.' 

In  assigning  a  breach  of  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoy- 
ment, where  the  interruption  is  the  act  of  a  third  party, 
against  whom  the  covenant  has  not  specifically  provided, 
it  is  not  sufiicient  to  allege  that  having  lawful  right  and 
title  he  entered,  without  alleging  also  that  he  had  such 
lawful  title  Ixfore  or  at  the  time  of  the  date  of  the  lease 
to  the  plaintiff  J  for  possibly  he  might  have  derived  title 


'  Lloyd  V.  Tomkies,  1  T.  R.  671. 

'  Seddon  v.  Senate,  13  East»  72. 

»  Perm  v.  Glover,  Cro.  Eliz.  421. 

^  Foster  v.  Mapes,  Cro.  Eliz.  212 ; 
Tisdale  v.  Essex,  Hob.  85 ;  Hill  v. 
Browne,  Freem.  142 ;  Perry  v.  Ed- 
wards, 1  Stra.  400 ;  Nash  v.  Pal- 
mer, 5  M.  &  S.  874;  Fowle  v. 
V^elsh,  IB.   &  C.  29.    But  see 


Hayes  v.  Bickerstaff,  Yaiu^.  118. 

*  Southgate  v.  Chaplin,  10  Mod. 
388 ;  Perry  v.  Edwards,  Stra.  400. 

•  Woodroflse  v.  Greenwood,  Cro. 
EUz.  617. 

'  Woodrosse  v.  Greenwood,  Crc* 
Eliz.  517  ;  Rashleigh  v.  WillJams. 
2  Vent.  61. 


776 


Quiet  Enjoyment. 


[§  361. 


from  the  plaintiff  himself.*  It  is  not  necessary,  how- 
ever, for  the  declaration  to  show  what  title  he  had.  A 
different  rule  would  impose  insuperable  difficulties  on 
the  plaintiff,  a  knowledge  of  the  title  being  only  to  be 
acquired  by  inspection  of  the  deeds,  to  which  he  could 
not  have  access.'  But  where  the  interruption  is  by  the 
lessor  himself,*  or  by  a  person  against  whose  acts  the 
covenant  has  specially  provided,  it  is  sufficient  to  allege 
an  entry  by  him,  without  stating  under  what  title  or  pre- 
tence, or  whether  by  right  or  wrong.*  Some  particular 
act,  however,  by  which  the  plaintiff  is  interrupted  must 
be  shown,  otherwise  the  breach  will  not  be  well  assigned.* 
In  an  action  on  a  covenant  that  the  lessor  is  seized  in  fee, 
a  breach  may  be  assigned  in  terms  as  general  as  the  cov- 
enant, viz. ,  that  he  was  not  seized  in  fee,  without  show- 
ing that  another  was  so  seized,  nor  why  the  defendant 
was  not  so  seized.*  So,  on  a  covenant  that  the  lessor  has 
good  right  to  demise,  the  lessee  may  assign  as  a  breach 
that  he  had  not  good  right,  without  showing  in  whom 
the  right  was  vested.* 

In  an  action  on  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment,  an  al- 
legation, as  a  breach,  that  the  plaintiff  (lessee),  entered 
and  was  evicted  by  the  defendant  (lessor),  is  not  sup- 
ported by  proof  that  he  made  a  demand  of  possession 
and  was  refused,  an  expulsion,  which  is  a  putting  out, 
not  having  taken  place ;  for  a  party  who  comes  to  claim, 
but  has  never  entered,  cannot  be  expelled.  The  breach 
is  not  for  expelling,  but  for  not  letting  in."    The  ordi- 


'  Kirby  v,  Hanksaker,  Cro.  Jac. 
815 ;  Wooten  v.  Hele,  2  Saund. 
177 ;  Proctor  v.  Newton,  1  Vent. 
184 ;  Norman  v.  Foster,  1  Mod. 
101 ;  Forte  v.  Vine,  2  Rol.  21 ;  Skin- 
ner V.  Kilbys,  1  Show.  70  ;  Anon., 

2  Vent.  46 ;  Rashleigh  v.  Williams, 

3  Vent.  61 ;  Buckley  v.  Williams, 
3  Lev.  325 ;  Jordan  v.  Twells,  Ca. 
temp.  Hardw.  171 ;  Foster  v.  Pier- 
son,  4  T.  R.  617 ;  Hodgson  v.  The 
East  India  Company,  8  T.  R.  278 ; 
Campbell  v.  Lewis,  3  B.  &  Aid. 
892.  And  see  Noble  v.  King,  1  H. 
Bl.  34 ;  Brookes  v.  Humphreys,  5 
Bing.  N.  C.  55  ;  Fraser  v,  Skey,  3 
Chit.  646. 


*  Proctor  V.  Newton,  ante ;  Fos- 
ter V.  Pierson,  ante;  Hodgson  v. 
The  East  India  Company,  ante. 

•  Corns  V. ,  Cro.  Eliz.  544. 

^  Foster  v.  Mapes,  ante. 
•Anon.,  Com.  228. 

•  Muscot  V.  Ballet,  Cro.  Jac.  869 ; 
Glinister  v.  Audley,  T.  Rayn..  14 ; 
Glimston  v.  Audly,  1  Keb.  58. 

^  Bradshaw's  Case,  9  Coke,  60  &; 
Salman  v.  Bradshaw,  Cro.  Jac 
304 ;  Lancashire  v.  Glover,  2  Show. 
460. 

*  Hawkes  v.  Orton,  5  Ad.  &  EL 
867  ;  Warn  v.  Bickf  ord,  9  Pri,  43. 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]     What  is  a  Breach  of,  777 

nary  cwenmit^  by  the  lessor^  for  quiet  enjoyment  ns 
against  any  person  claiming  by  ^  from' or  under  him,  is 
broken  by  an  eviction  of  the  tenant  by  the  lessor' s  widow 
entitled  under  a  conveyance  taken  by  the  lessor  to  the 
nse  of  himself  and  his  wife ; '  also  by  an  eviction  by  a 
person  claiming  under  a  prior  appointment  by  the  cov- 
enantor and  another  person ; '  but  a  distress  for  arrears 
of  land  tax  due  from  the  lessor  at  the  time  of  the  demise 
will  not  operate  as  a  breach.*  The  lessee  of  a  house  and 
garden,  forming  part  of  a  large  area  of  building  ground, 
is  not  entitled  under  this  covenant  to  restrain  the  lessor 
or  persons  claiming  under  him  from  building  on  the  ad- 
joining land  so  as  to  obstruct  the  free  access  of  light  and 
air  to  the  garden.*  When  contained  in  a  lease  of  the 
exclusive  right  of  shooting  and  sporting  over  a  farm, 
this  covenant  does  not  hinder  the  tenant  of  the  farm  from 
using  the  land  in  tEe  ordinary  way,  or  from  destroying 
furze  and  underwood  in  the  reasonable  use  of  the  land  as 
a  farm ;  and  the  lessor  will  not  be  liable  for  wrongful 
acts  committed  by  such  tenant  contrary  to  the  reserva- 
tion of  his  landlord.*  Under  a  covenant  in  the  form 
above  mentioned  contained  in  a  lease  of  a  stream  of 
water,  excepting  so  much  as  should  be  sufficient  for  the 
supply  of  persons  with  whom  the  lessor  should  have 
already  contracted,  diversions  occasioned  by  contracts 
made  previously  to  the  demise  will  not  constitute 
breaches.*  Where  the  covenant  provides  that  the  lessee 
shall  quietly  hold  and  enjoy  the  premises  for  and  dur- 
ing the  said  term^  the  last  words  must  be  taken  to  refer 
to  the  term  which  the  lessor  assumed  to  grant  by  the 
lease,  and  not  to  the  term  which  he  actually  had  power 
to  grant.' 

A  general  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  extends  only 
to  the  acts  of  persons  claiming  under  a  lawful  title ; '  for 

'  Butler  V.  Swinnerton,  Cro.  Jac.  '  Jeffryes  v.  Evans,  19  C.  B.  N. 

657.  S.  246.    See  Newton  v.  Wilmot,  8 

•  Calvert  v.  Sebright,  15  Beav.      M-  &  W.  711. 

156.    As  to  what  constitutes  an  *  Blatchford  v.  Plymouth,  8  Bing. 

eviction,  see  Chapter  on  Eviction,  N.  C.  ^1. 

post.  ^  Evans  v.  Vaughan,  4  B.  &  C% 

8  Stanley  v.  Hayes,  8  Q.  B.   105.  261,  268. 

*  Potts  V.  Smith,  L.  R,  6  Eq.  311.  »  Dudley  v.  FolUott,  3  T.  R.  584. 


778 


QuiuT  Enjoyment. 


[§36L 


the  law  will  never  adjudge  that  a  lessor  covenantB 
against  the  wrongful  acts  of  strangers,  except  his  cove- 
nant is  express  to  that  purpose.'  The  construction, 
however,  is  different  where  an  individual  is  named  ;  for 
there  the  covenantor  is  presumed  to  know  the  person 
against  whose  acts  he  is  content  to  covenant,  and  may 
therefore  be  reasonably  expected  to  stipulate  against  any 
disturbance  from  him,  whether  by  lawful  title  or  other- 
wise.* 

Under  a  general  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  con- 
tained in  the  lease  of  a  coal  mine,  the  working  of  iron- 
stone lying  between  the  surface  and  the  demised  coal  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  interrupt  the  lessee  in  his  occui)a- 
tion  of  the  mine,  will  constitute  a  breach.' 

Under  a  covenant  hy  the  lessor^  in  an  underleasej  that 
the  lessee  shall  hold  the  premises  with^t  any  lawful  evic- 
tion  J  cfcc,  hy  the  lessor^  or  any  persons  whomsoever  daim- 
ing  hyy  frorriy  under  or  in  trust  for  hery  or  by  or  through 
her  acts,  means,  right y  cfcc,  an  eviction  of  the  underlessee 
by  the  original  lessor  for  a  forfeiture  incurred  by  the  use 
of  the  premises  as  a  shop,  contrary  to  a  covenant  in  the 
original  lease,  of  which  the  underlessee  had  not  been  in- 
formed, is  not  an  eviction  by  means  of  the  lessor  within 
the  meaning  of  the  covenant.*  Under  a  covenant  that 
the  tenant y  paying  ihe  rent  and  performing  the  covenants^ 
shall  quietly  enjoy ,  the  payment  of  rent  is  not  a  condi- 
tion precedent  to  the  j)erformance  of  the  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment.'  A  clause  in  a  deed^  whereby  the  lessor 
^^for  himself  his  heirs  and  assigns,  the  premises  unto  the 
lessee.,  his  executors,  administrators  and  assigns,  under 
the  rents,  covenants,  cfcc,  before  expressed,  against  all 
persons  whatsoever  lawfully  claiming  the  same,  shall  and 


»  Wottan  V.  Hele,  2  Wins.  Saand. 
178,  note  (8). 

*  Ld.  Ellenborough,  C.  J.,  in 
Nash  V.  Palmer,  5  M.  &  S.  880 ; 
Fowle  V.  Welsh,  1  B.  &  C.  29. 

« Shaw  T.  Stenton,  2  H.  &  N. 
858. 

*  Spencer  v.  Marriott,  1  B.  &  C. 
457.  See  Woodhouse  v.  Jenkins, 
9  Bing.  431.  The  landlord  is  ab- 
solved  f  rom  a  covenant  to  deliver 


possession  of  premises  on  a  oertam 
day,  if,  on  tnat  day  he  is  ready 
to  give  possession,  and  the  f^u3t 
that  the  tenant  is  prevented  from 
obtaining  possession  the  next  day 
because  of  the  entry  of  a  tres- 
passer, does  not  render  the  land- 
lord liable  on  the  covenant.  Herts- 
berg  v.  Brisenberg,  64  Tex.  262. 

'Dawson  V,  Dyer,  5  B.  &  Ad. 
684. 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]    Damages  for  Breach  of. 


779 


wtUy  during  the  term^  warrant  and  defendj^^  ox)eTates  as 
an  express  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  dnzing  the 
vholaiiennj^iantedby.J^leaae/  ^ 

Sec.  362.  Damages  for  breach  of  ooTonant.— Upon  the 
breach  of  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  in  a  lease, 
which  turns  out  to  be  void,  and  under  which  the  lessee 
has  entered,  the  lessee  is  entitled  to  recover  the  value  of 
the  term  and  the  costs  of  defending  an  action  of  eject- 
ment, and  also  the  sum  recovered  as  mesne  profits  by  the 
plaintiff  in  such  action.  The  same  rule  applies  where 
the  lessee  has  not  actually  entered,  but  has  only  an 
iTiteresse  termini;*  and  where  he  has  accepted  a  new 
lease 'of  the  premises  from  the  person  entitled  to  them, 
the  difference  in  value  between  the  two  leases  may  be 
used  as  a  list  of  the  amount  of  damages  to  which  he  is 
entitled.'  The  rule  was  formerly  to  give  nominal 
damages,  and  such  mesne  profits  as  the  tenant  has  been 
comi)elled  to  pay,  with  costs,*  and  nothing  for  the  market 
value  of  the  term.  *  But  a  more  just  and  liberal  rule  is  now- 
adopted,  and,  especially  where  the  lessor  has  been  guilty 
of  fraud,  or  negligence  in  omitting  to  prevent  an  ouster 
when  he  had  the  power  to  do  so,  it  is  held  that  the  tenant 
may  recover  the  difference  between  the  rent  he  was  to  pay, 
and  the  actual  value  of  the  unexpired  termy  as  well  as 


>  "Williams  v.  Burrell,  1 C.  B.  402. 

*  Williams  v.  Burrell,  ante. 

» Lock  V.  Furze,  L.  R.,  1  C.  P. 
441. 

*  Baldwin  v.  Munn,  2  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  99  ;  Flureau  v.  Thomhill,  2  W. 
BL  1078 ;  Conger  v.  Weaver,  20  N. 
Y.  140  ;  TruU  t.  Granger,  8  N.  Y. 
115. 

*  Burnett  v.  Fromberger,  4  Dall. 
(Penn.)  441. 

*  Dyer  v.  Wightman,  66  Penn. 
St.  455;  Rickett  v.  Losteller,  19 
Ind.  125 ;  Wilson  v.  Raybould,  56 
HL  417  ;  Shaw  v.  Hoffman,  Chat- 
terton  v.  Fox,  6  Duer  (N.  Y.)  64. 
Sno(^;raM  v.  Reynolds,  79  Ala.  452, 
58  Am.  Rep.  601.    See  upon  this 

?uestion  Trull  v.  Granger,  8  N.  Y. 
15  ;  Doherty  v.  Dalan,  68  Me.  87 ; 
Walker  v.  Moore,  10  B.  &  C.  416 ; 
Newborough  v.  Walker,  8  Gratt. 
(Va.)  16 ;  Dexter  v.  Manley,  4  Cush. 


gj 


ass.)  14;  Dobbins  t.  Duguid,  6S 
IL  464 ;  Adair  t.  Bogle,  %  Iowa, 
138 :  Rose  v.  Wynn,  42  Ark.  257  ; 
Messero  t.  Oestreichy  63  Wis.  684 ; 
Nichol  V.  Alexander,  28  Wis.  118. 
In  some  cases  the  rule  is  stated  to 
be  the  difference  between  the  rent 
reserved  and  the  fair  rental  value 
for  the  term,  Dennlson  v.  Ford,  41^ 
Dalv  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  412  ;  Foudavill© 
V.  «jourgensen,  52  N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.  403  ;  Ck)leman  v.  King,  19 
Weekly  Dig.  (N.  Y.)  551 ;  Fitzgib- 
bons  V.  Freisen,  12  Daly,  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  419 ;  Mack  v.  Patchin,  4a 
N.  Y.  167.  In  Papaskey  v.  Mank- 
ivetz,  68  Wis.  822,  March  1st,  1887, 
the  court  say  :  "We  agree  witii 
Mr.  Justice  Paine,  in  l^epardv. 
Gfls-Ii^ht  Co.,  15  Wis.  318 ;  that  to 
ascertam  the  value  of  a  businesa 
an  inquiry  as  to  the  profits  ttiereof 
is    necessary.     Probable    lvalue* 


780 


Pabticulab  Covenant. 


[§  362. 


such  damages  and  extra  expenses  in  addition  thereto  as 


,and  'net  profits*  are  convertible 
/  terms  as  applied  to  a  business.  Tet 
/  the  law  in  many  cajses  gives  dama- 
'  ges  for  breaches  of  contracts, 
based  on  prospective  profits,  when 
thejr  are  fairly  within  the  contem- 
plation of  the  parties,  are  not  too 
remote  and  conjectural,  and  are 
susceptible  of  being  ascertained 
with  reasonable  certainty.  If  the 
plaintiff  shows  himself  entitled  to 
recover  for  damages  to  his  busi- 
ness, the  character,  extent,  and 
value  of  his  established  business 
when  the  lease  was  executed,  and 
before,  will  furnish  a  guide  to  the 
jurv  in  assessing  the  prospective 
and  probable  value  thereof  had  the 
plaintiff  been  permitted  to  trans- 
fer it  to  the  store  No.  411  Broad- 
way. Carried  on  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  old  stand,  and  by 
the  same  person,  presumably  the 
business  would  have  been  equally 

grosperous.  This  presumption  may 
e  rebutted  by  proof  of  facts  and 
circumstances  tending  to  show 
that  the  business  would  probably 
have  been  less  remunerative  haa 
it  been  so  continued.  *'It  was 
said  in  the  argument  that  no  case 
can  be  found  which  gives  damages 
for  the  loss  of  anticipated  profits, 
because  a  landlord  fails  to  give 
possession  at  the  time  agreed  upon. 
This  is  scarcely  a  correct  statement. 
The  case  Wad  v.  Smith,  11  Price, 
19,  cited  by  Mr.  Justice  Paine  in 
Shepard  v.  Gas-light  Co.,  styara, 
seems  to  be  lust  such  a  case.  It 
is  conceded  tnat  if  the  plaintiff  had 
not  a  business  alreaay  built  up 
and  established  in  the  same  vi- 
cinity, which  with  its  good-will 
could  have  been  transferred  to  the 
store  No.  411  Broadway,  there 
would  be  no  basis  upon  which  to 
•estimate  the  prospective  vahie  of 
the  business  which  the  plaintiff 
would  have  done  there  had  he  ob- 
tained possession  and  carried  on 
the  business  therein.  In  such 
case,  profits  would  probably  be  too 
conjectural  and  uncertain  to  be 
the  oasis  of  recovery.  Some  of  the 
cases  refer  to  this  distinction.  In 
Chapman  v.  Kirby,  49  111.  211,  the 
court  in  speaking  of  the  case  of 
Green  v.  Williams,  45  HI.  206,  says  : 
*  In  the  case  the  lessee  had  not  en- 
tered upon  the  term,  had  not  built 


up  or  established  a  business,  and 
had  not  suffered  such  a  loss,  there 
was  not  in  that  case  any  basis 
upon  which  to  estimate  them.'  In 
the  present  case  the  offer  was  to 
prove  facts  which  would  have 
shown  a  sufficient  basis  to  deter- 
mine whether  there  would  be  prof- 
its, and  upon  which  they  might 
be  estimated."  "  In  Hughes  v. 
Hood,  60  Mo.  850,  it  was  held  that 
in  an  action  of  damages  for  with- 
holding possession  of  leasehold 
property,  where  plaintiff  had  been 
a  non-resident  and  had  removed  to 
this  State  for  the  purpose  of  ooco- 

Eying  the  premises,  he  would  not 
e  entitled  to  recover,  on  the  cove- 
nant to  deliver  possession  contained 
in  the  lease,  the  amount  of  his  ex. 
penses  incurred  in  the  removal- 
The  court  said :  **  What  connec- 
tion with  this  covenant  has  the 
plaintiff's  place  of  residence?  It 
so  happens  that  they  resided  in  In- 
diana and  had  to  remove  to  Mis- 
souri. This  did  not  result  from 
the  terms  of  the  contract.  It  made 
no  kind  of  a  difference  where  they 
resided,  or  how  much  it  cost  to  re- 
move their  families  to  Missouri  If 
they  had  resided  in  Europe  or 
Afiia,  or  some  other  remote  coun- 
try, it  might  have  cost  them  ten 
times  as  much  to  remove  here  as 
it  did  from  Indiana.  Such  con- 
siderations are  in  nowise  connected 
with  the  contract,  and  are  too 
remote  to  be  taken  by  the  court  or 
jury  as  a  part  of  the  measure  of 
damages  in  a  case  like  this.  *'  I 
know  that  the  courts  have  differed 
in  regard  to  this  subject  of  remote 
damages.  Some  of  them  have  al- 
lowed such  damages,  while  others 
have  rejected  them.  We  think  the 
better  rule  is  to  exclude  such  dam- 
ages from  the  consideration  of  the 
jury  where  they  are  not  provided 
for  by  the  terms  of  the  contract. 
*'  The  true  rule  of  damages  in  this 
case  was  the  difference  between 
the  rent  as  provided  for  in  the 
lease  and  rental  value  of  the 
premises.  See  TYull  v.  Granger, 
4  Seld.  115.  If  the  rental  value 
was  more  than  the  rent  reserved, 
the  plaintiffs  would  be  entitled  to 
recover  such  difference.  The  ren- 
tal value  is  not  what  it  might  be 
worth  to  the  plaintiffs,  but  what 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]       On  Whom  Binding. 


181 


axe  the  natural  result  of  the  breach.  *  Indeed,  the  true 
rule  seems  to  be,  and  the  one  now  generally  adopted, 
that  the  true  measure  of  damages  is  what  the  tenant  has 
lost  by  the  breach,'  and  if  the  circumstances  are  such  as 
evince  fraud  on  the  lessor's  part,  and  of  an  aggravating 
character,  exemplary  damages  may  also  be  given.' 

Sec.  363.  On  whom  binding.—  The  covenant  for  quiet 
enjoyment  runs  with  the  land,^  and  is  therefore  binding 
on  the  assignees  of  the  reversion ;  and  may  be  rendered 
available  by  the  assignees  of  the  term. 

Sec.  364.  Breaches-how  plead.-A  declaration  alleging 
an  eviction  as  a  breach  of  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment 
must  not  leave  it  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  the  evictor 
might  not  have  come  in  under  title  from  the  plaintiff 
himself.'    When  the  covenant  is  general,  the  alleged 


the  premises  would  rent  for  in  that 
neignborhood.  They  might  be 
worth  very  little  to  the  plaintiffs, 
or  owing  to  some  fortuitous  cir- 
cumstances, they  might  value 
them  higher  than  they  were  really 
worth." 

^  In  Chatterton  v.  Fox,  ante,  it 
was  held  proper  to  consider  the 
difference  oetween  the  expense  of 
moving  at  the  time  when  the  ten- 
ant was  ousted,  and  at  the  season 
of  the  year  when  the  lease  expired, 
and  tliat  the  excess  of  expense 
might  be  recovered.  See  also,  to 
tha  same  effect,  the  cases  cited  in 
the  last  note. 

•Blackburn,  J.,  in  Lock  v. 
Furze,  L,  R.,  1  C.  P.  441.  "  I  take 
it,"  says  Channel,  B.,  in  the  same 
case,  p.  451,.  "  to  be  an  indisputa- 
ble rule  of  law,  that,  where  a  man 
enters  into  a  contract  and  fails  to 
perform  it,  he  must  make  com- 
pensation to  the  extent  of  the  in- 
jury sustained  by  the  person  with 
whom  he  has  contracted."  Far- 
ther on  he  says:  "I  think  the 
§  roper  principle  upon  which  the 
amages  should  be  assessed,  is  a 
fiiU  compensation  to  the  plaintiff 
for  that  which  he  has  tasty  not 
limited  to  the  amount  actually 
paid  by  him."  The  same  rule  is 
laid  down  in  Robinson  v.  Harman, 
1  Exchq.  855,  and  the  case  of  Flu- 


reau  v.  Thomhill,  3  W.  Bl.  1078 
is  distinguished,  as  applying  to  an 
executory,  rather  than  an  executed 
contract.  Williams  v.  Burrell,  1 
C.  B.  402 ;  Mack  v.  Patchin,  42  N. 
Y.  167,  hold  that  the  measure  of 
recovery  is  the  value  of  the  unex- 

Eired  term  less  the  rent  reserved. 
II  Maine  and  Massachusetts  the 
value  of  the  term  at  the  time  of 
eviction  is  held  to  affocd  the  true 
test.  Hardy  v.  Nelson,  27  Me.  625 ; 
Dexter  v.  Manly,  4  Gush.  (Mass.) 
14;  Smith  v.  Strong,  14  Pick. 
(Mass.)  128,  and  where  the  disturb- 
ance or  eviction  extends  only  to 
apart  of  the  premises  the  recov- 
ery is  limited  to  the  value  of  that 
part  of  the  premises.  Cornell  v. 
Jackson,  Cusn.  (Mass.)  506  ;  Hunt 
V.  Orwig,  17  B.  Mon.  (Ky.)  73 ; 
Michael  v.  Mills,  17  Ohio,  601. 

•Smith  V.  Wunderlich,  70  EL 
426. 

*  Lewis  V.  Campbell,  8  Taunt. 
715 ;  8  B.  &  Aid.  302 ;  Noke  v. 
Awder,  Cro.  Eliz.  875. 

*  Brooks  V.  Humphreys,  5  Bing. 
N.  C.  55;  Norman  v.  Fisher,  1 
Mod.  101 ;  Hall  v.  Citjr  of  Lon- 
don Brewery  Co.  (Limited),  2  B. 
&  S.  737  ;  see  a  good  form  in  Lock 
V.  Furze,  Executor,  Ac.,  19  C.  B. 
N.  S.  96;  Jeffryes  v.  Evans,  Id. 
246;  Bulleu &  L.  PL  177  (2d ed.). 


782 


Quiet  Enjoyheft. 


[§364. 


breach  must  show  an  interrupt:  on  or  distorbance  by  some 
person  having  lawful  title  and  right  of  entry.'  When 
the  covenant  applies  to  the  acts  of  any  particnlar  x>erson 
or  persons  tTierein  Tiamed,  an  interruption  or  disturbance 
by  any  such  person  (whether  lawful  or  unlawful)  amounts 
to  a  breach.'  Where  the  covenant  is  qualified  and  con- 
fined to  interruptions  and  disturbances  by  the  lessor,  his 
heirs  and  assigns,  '^or  by  any  other  person  or  persons 
claiming  by,  from,  or  under  him,  them  or  any  of  them," 
the  breach  must  show  an  interruption  or  disturbance  by 
the  lessor,'  his  heirs  or  assigns,  or  by  some  other 
person  lawfully  claiming  by,  from,  or  under  him,  them 
or  some  of  them.  One  who  claims  under  a  deed  of 
settlement  made  by  A  is  a  person  claiming  under  A 
within  the  meaning  of  the  usual  qualified  covenant  for 
quiet  enjoyment.*  So  is  a  i)erson  who  claims  under  a 
lease  previously  granted  by  the  lessor,  although  such 
lease  has  expired.'  So  is  a  superior  or  ground  landlord,- 
because  of  the  privity  of  estate  between  him  and  the 
lessor.'  The  alleged  breach  should  always  show  an 
eviction,  molestation  or  disturbance  within  the  words 
and  meaning  of  the  covenant,  and  according  to  the  real 
facts.*  And  such  breach  must  have  hap{)ened  during 
the  term,  and  not  prior  to  its  commencement.'  Where 
an  eviction  has  actually  taken  place,  in  assigning  a  breach 
it  is  sufficient  to  allege  that  at  the  time  of  the  demise  to 
the  plaintiff,  A  B  had  lawful  right  and  title  to  the  prem- 
ises, and  having  such  lawful  right  and  title  entered  and 
evicted  the  plaintiff ;  without  showing  that  A  B  evicted 


^  Lacy  T.  Leviston,  Freem.  108 ; 
S  Keb.  163 ;  Dudley  v.  Folliott,  8 
T,  R.  585 ;  Foster  ▼.  Pieraon,  4  T. 
R.  617 ;  Yoxing  v.  Ramcock,  7  C. 
B.  810;  Hall  v.  London  Brewery 
Ck).,  and  Jeffryes  ▼.  Evans,  ante. 

*  Foster  v.  Mapes,  Cro.  Dliz.  212 
Lucy  V.  Leviston,  Freem.  108 
Fowle  V.  Welsh,  1  B.  &  C.  29 
Nash  y.  Pahner,  5  M.  &  S.  874. 

« CJorus  V. ,  Cro.  Eliz.  544 

Andrews  v.  Paradise,  8  Mod.  818 
Lloyd  V.  Tomkies,  1  T.  R.  671 
Shaw  ▼.  Stenton,  2  H.  &  N.  858 

«Huid  v.  Fletcher,  1  Doug.  48 


Evans  v.  Vaughan,  4  B.  &  C.  961  ; 
Carpenter  t.  Parker,  3  C.  B.  N.  S. 
206. 

» Ludwell  V.  Newman,  6  T.  R. 
458;  Coe  V.  Clay,  5  Bine.  440; 
Jinks  V.  Edwards,  11  ExcL  775 ; 
but  see  Jeffreys  v.  Evans,  19  C.  B. 
N.  S.  246. 

*  Campbell  v.  Lewis,  8  B.  &  Aid 
892  ;  Hall  v.  Qty  of  London  Brew- 
ery  Co.  (Limited),  2  B.  &  S.  737. 

^  Carpenter  v.  Parker,  8  C.  B. 
N.  S.  206. 

B  Lreland  v.  Bircham,  2  Bing.  N. 
C.  90. 


CHAF.  XXXTV.]  BrEACHBS.  783 

the  plaintifl  by  legal  process,  or  what  title  A  B  had  ;  the 
allegation  that  A  B  having  lawful  right  and  title  entered, 
being  tantamonnt  to  saying  that  he  entered  by  lawful 
right  and  title.* 

1  Foster  v.  Pierson,  4  T.  R.  617 ;      B.  278 ;  BuUen  &  L.  PL  177  (2d 
Hodgson  V.  East  India  Co.,  8  T.      ed.). 


784  Bbpaibs,  [§  365. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

BEPAIBS. 

Sec.  865.  Gteneral  liability. 

Sec.  806.  Express  covenants  to  repair. 

Sec.  867.  Covenant  to  repair  and  keep  in  repair  during  the  term. 

Sec.  868.  General  covenant  to  repair. — ^How  construed. 

Sec.  869.  Buildings  erected  during  the  term. 

Sec.  870.  In  case  of  fire. 

Sec.  871.  Covenant  to  rebuild. 

Sec.  872.  Covenant  to  repair  after  notice. 

Sec.  878.  Conditional  or  qualified  covenants  to  repair,  &a 

Sec.  874.  Liability  of  landlord  on  express  covenants  to  repair. 

Sec.  875.  To  what  lessor's  covenant  extends. 

Sec.  876.  Landlord's  right  to  enter  to  repair. 

Sec.  877.  What  tenant  must  do  to  charge  landlord. 

Sec.  *  378.  Neglect  of  landlord,  under  obligation  to  repair,  will  not 

lieve  tenant  from  liability  for  rent. 

Sec.  879.  No  implied  covenant  that  premises  are,  or  shall  remain  fit 

for  use  for  purposes  for  which  they  were  leased. 

Sec.  365.  General  liability.— Independently  of  any 
contract,  a  tenant  from  year  to  year,  for  years  or  for  life, 
must  keep  the  premises  wind  and  watertight,*  and  make 
fair  and  reasonable  repairs,  as  by  putting  up  fences,'  or 
replacing  or  restoring  doors  or  windows  broken  dming 
his  occupation/  but  he  is  not  liable  for  the  ordinary  wear 
and  tear  of  the  premises,  nor  bound  to  rebuild  in  case  the 
buildings  are  destroyed  by  fire  or  become  ruinous  from 
any  accidental  cause,*  nor  to  replace  doors  or  windows 

'  Fisher  v.  Maguire,  Anns.  Mac.  818 ;  Gregory  v.  Mighell,  18  Vea. 

&  Og.  51  ;  Au worth  v.  Johnson,  5  331. 

C.  &  P.  239  ;  Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  » Ferguson  v. ,  2  Esp.  590. 

id.  327  ;  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  182.  *  Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C.  &  P. 

«  Cheetham  v.  Hampson,  4  T.  R.  8 ;   HorsefftU  v.  Mather,  Holt  7; 


CHAP,  xxxiv.]       General  Liability. 


786 


worn  ont  by  tiine/  nor  are  they  called  upon  to  make 
lasting  or  substantial  repairs,  as  to  put  on  a  new  roof,  or 
make  what  are  called  general  repairs.'  In  the  case  of 
tenants  for  life  or  a  term  of  years,  in  the  absence  of  an 
express  stipulation,  there  is  no  obligation  upon  either 
party  as  between  themselves  to  repair.  *    The  fact  that  the 


Auworth  V.  Johnson,  5  C.  &  P. 
289.  In  "E&gle  v.  Swayze,  8  Daly, 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  140,  it  was  held  that 
a  tenant  from  year  to  year  was 
not  bound  to  rebuild  a  fallen  chim- 
ney ;  and  that  where  the  landlord 
permitted  a  chimney  to  go  to  ruin 
and  fall  unon  the  tenant's  goods, 
he  was  liable  for  the  damage,  and 
the  same  rule  applies  to  a  tenant 
from  week  to  week,  or  month  to 
month.  Johnson  v.  Dixon,  1  id. 
178.  And  in  this  case  it  was  held 
that,  where  such  a  tenant  notified 
the  landlord  of  a  defect  in  the 
floor  of  a  stable  rented  by  him, 
and  the  kmdlord  g^ve  an  explana- 
tion of  it,  and  said  he  would  at- 
tend to  it,  but  did  not,  and  the 
tenant,  relyine  upon  the  landlord's 
promise,  and  explanation,  kept 
nis  horse  there,  and  by  reason  of 
the  insecurity  of  the  floor  the  horse 
was  injured,  it  was  held  that  the 
landlord  was  liable  for  the  dun- 
ages.  **  The  lessor  is  bound,*'  said 
the  court,  "  to  make  such  repairs 
as  are  necessary  to  make  the  prem- 
ises safe  and  secure  for  the  purposes 
for  which  they  were  rented,  and 
if  their  insecupty  is  known  to  him 
it  is  negligence  for  him  not  to  do  so. " 
^  In  Atiworth  v.  Johnson,  ante, 
LoBD  Tentebden,  C.  J.,  said :  *'  It 
api)eaT8  that  this  was  a  very  di- 
lapidated house  when  the  defend- 
ant took  it,  and  that  they  have 
had  a  very  considerable  quantity 
of  work  done  upon  it.  The  flrst 
question  is,  what  are  the  thin^ 
which  an  occupier  of  a  house  is 
bound  to  do?  I  am  of  opinion 
that  he  is  only  boimd  to  keep  the 
house  wind  and  water  tight  and 
that  is  all  he  is  bound  to  do.  A 
tenant  who  covenants  to  repair,  is 
TO  sustain  and  uphold  the  premi- 
ses, but  that  is  not  the  case  with  a 
tenant  from  year  to  year.  A  great 
part  of  what  was  claimed  by  the 
plaintiff  consists  of  new  materials 
when  the  old  were  actuaUy  worn 
out ;  for  that,  the  defendants  are 
clearly  not  liable.'* 


•  Ferguson   v. 


ante ; 


Fisher  v.  Maguire,  ante ;  Leach  v. 
Thomas,  7  C.  &  P.  827  ;  Thompson 
V.  Amey,  12  Ad.  &  El.  476 ;  Brown 
V.  Crunrp,  1  Marsh,  667 ;  Horse- 
fall  V.  Mather,  Holt,  7 ;  Johnson 
V.  Dixon,  1  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  178 ; 
Eagle  V.  Swayze,  2  id.  140. 

•  Johnson  v.  Dixon,  1  Daly  (N. 
Y.  C.  P.)  178 ;  Estep  v.  Estep,  23 
Ind.  114;  Brown  v.  Burrington, 
86  Vt.  40 ;  Brewster  v,  DeFremeny, 
88  Gal.  841 ;  Post  v.  Yetter,  2  E. 
D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  PO  248 ;  Arden  v. 
Pullen,  10  M.  &  W.  821 ;  Izon  v. 
Gorton,  6  Bing.  N.  C.  601 ;  Stames 
V.  Morris,  1  vT  &  B,  8 ;  Pindar  v, 
Ainsley,  cited,  1  T.  R.  812 ;  Rhodes 
V.  BalLEtrd,  7  East,  116 ;  Pomfret  v. 
Ricroft,  1  Saund.  821 ;  Balfour  v. 
Weston,  1  T.  R.  810.  No  covenant 
on  the  landlord's  part  is  implied, 
even  though  the  lessor  has  cove- 
nanted to  repair,  excepting  dam- 
ages  by  flre,  or  other  casualties. 
Wittey  V.  Matthews,  62  N.  Y.  612  ; 
Weig^  V.  Waters,  6  T.  R.  488 ; 
Brown  v.  Quilter,  Amb.  619  ;  Sur- 
plice V.  Famsworth,  7  M.  &  G. 
676 ;  Leavitt  v.  Fletcher,  10  Allen 
(Mass.)  121 ;  Davis  v.  Bancks,  2 
Sweeney  (N.  Y.)  184 ;  Killenberger 
V.  Forseman,  18  Ind.  476 ;  Elliott 
V.  Aiken,  46  N.  H.  80 ;  Colebeck  v. 
Girdler's  Co..  1  L.  R.  Q.  B.  Div. 
284  ;  Sherwood  v.  Sehman,  2  Bos. 
(N.  Y.)  157  ;  Clark.  23  Mich.  104 ; 
Morris  v.  Tillson,  81  Bl.  907.  He 
is  not  bound  to  repair  water-pipes 
outside  the  premises  so  as  to  Keep 
up  a  supply  of  water.  Codlington 
V.  Durhiun,  8  J.  S.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)412.  It  is  no  defence  to  an 
action  for  rent  imder  an  express 
covenant,  that  the  premises  were 
for  a  part  of  the  term  rendered  un- 
tenantable by  reason  of  water  flll- 
ing  the  cellar  and  lower  story,  and 
depositiuK  mud,  &c. ;  and  if  the  de- 
fendant files  an  answer  by  waj  of 
set-off,  for  damages  sustuned 
thereby,  it  will  be  stricken  out  on 
motion.  Neidelt  v.  Wales,  16  Mo* 
214. 

50 


786 


Bepairs. 


[§  365. 


lease  contains  a  covenant  for  quiet  enjoyment  does  not 
impose  any  liability  upon  the  landlord  to  repair/  or  that 
he  has  insured  the  premises  and  received  the  insurance 
money  therefor,'  nor  even  though  the  tenant's  covenant 
to  repair  contains  an  exp'ress  exception  against  a  destruc- 
tion of,  or  injury  to,  the  building  by  fire,*  and  equity 
has  no  power  to  relieve  the  tenant  from  his  liability  for 
rent  in  such  cases,  or  to  compel  the  landlord  to  repair  or 
rebuild/  But,  while  the  tenant  takes  the  premises  as 
they  are,  and  is  bound  to  pay  the  rent  no  matter  what 
state  of  disrepair  they  are  in,  and  is  under  no  obligation 
in  the  first  instance  to  repair  them  unless  he  chooses  to 
do  so,  yet  in  all  leases  there  is  an  implied  obligation 
imposed  upon  the  tenant,  unless  excluded  by  the  express 
terms  of  the  lease,  to  so  use  the  property  as  not  unneces- 
sarily to  injury  it ;  consequently,  if  the  tenant  breaks  a 
window  or  door,  or  does  any  other  injury  to  the  build- 
ing, he  is  bound  to  repair  the  injury,  or  compensate  the 
landlord  therefor.  This  implied  obligation  does  not  bind 
the  tenant  to  repair,  but  to  so  use  the  'pToperty  as  to 
make  future  repairs  unnecessary  as  far  as  possible.  It  is, 
in  effect,  a  covenant  or  agreement  against  voluntary 
waste.  It  has  never  been  so  construed  as  to  make  a  ten- 
ant answerable  for  accidental  injuries,  or  for  an  acci- 
dental destruction  of  the  buildings  by  fire  or  other  cause.* 


*  Brown  v.  Quilter,  2  Ambler, 
620. 

*  Lofft  V.  Dennis,  1  E.  &  E.  474 ; 
Leeds  v.  Cheetham,  1  Sim.  146. 

«  Weigall  V.  Waters,  6  T.  R.  488. 

*  Leeds  v.  Cheetham,  ante.  A 
city's  lease  of  a  pier  to  a  steam- 
boat company  provided  that  the 
company  shoula  keep  the  pier  in 
good  condition  and  safe  and  proper 
repair  at  its  own  expense,  all  the 
improvements  to  revert  to  the  city 
at  the  end  of  the  lease.  Held,  that 
prior  oral  representations  by  the 
city,  that  the  city  would  make 
substantial  repairs,  leaving  only 
ordinary  repairs  to  be  made  by 
the  companv,  were  merged  in  the 
lease,  and  the  company  could  not 
maintain  an  action  for  having  been 
obliged  to  build  a  new  pier,  owing 
to  decay,  &c. ,  hidden  under  water. 


Hartford  &  New  York  Steamboat 
Co.  V.  New  York,  78  N.  Y.  1. 
Where  a  written  lease  required 
the  tenant  to  ke^  the  premises  in 
repair,  it  was  held  that,  although 
parol  evidence  was  inadmissible, 
that,  prior  to  the  last  renewal,  the 
parties  agreed  that  the  landlord 
should  make  the  repairs,  a  subse- 
quent parol  agreement  reducing 
tne  rent  for  the  future,  which  had 
been  acted  on  by  the  parties,  was 
obhgatory.  Niooll  v.  Burke,  78  N. 
Y.  581. 

>  United  States  v.  Bostwick,  94 
U.  S.  53.  In  Walker  v.  Tucker, 
70  111.  527,  it  was  held  that  upon  a 
demise  of  farming  lands,  an  im- 
plied covenant  is  raised  that  they 
shall  be  used  as  such,  and  in  the 
absence  of  express  covenants  the 
law  implies  a  covenant  on  the  pert 


CHAP.  XXXV.]       General  Liability. 


787 


^Such  a  tenant  is  merely  required  to  keep  the  premises  in 
as  good  repair  as  he  receives  them,  ordinary  wear  and 
tear  and  accidental  injuries  excepted.  In  other  words, 
lie  is  only  bonnd  to  so  use  the  premises  as  not  to  be  guilty 
of  voluntary  waste.'  He  is  not  bound  to  replace  an  old 
floor  with  a  new  one,*  or  to  rebuild  a  fallen  chimney,' 
or  to  put  on  a:  new  roof,*  or  to  put  in  new  window  sashes 
or  doors  in  place  of  those  that  are  worn  out,  nor  to 
rebuild  or  repair  premises  accidentally  destroyed  or 
injured  by  fire  or  other  cause  not  resulting  from  his 
negligence.*  Nor  is  he  bound,  even  though  he  has 
expressly  covenanted  to  leave  the  premises  in  good  ten- 
antable  repair,  to  do  anything  that  is  merely  ornamental, 
as  to  paper,  whitewash,  or  paint  the  premises.*  But  in 
all  lettings  of  premises  there  is  an  implied  understanding, 
in  the  absence  of  an  express  one,  that  the  tenant  shall 
use  the  premises  in  a  tenant  like  manner,  and  that  he  will 
not  suffer  them  to  faU  into  decay,  beyond  such  as  is  the 
result  of  natural  wear  and  tear.  Therefore  he  is  bound  to 
use  the  premises  prudently,  and  to  repair  all  breakages 
of  windows,  doors,  sashes,  &c.,  &c.,  that  hapi>en  during 
his  term,  except  such  as  happen  as  the  effects  of  natural 


of  the  lessee  that  he  wiU  not  com- 
mit waste,  and  that  he  will  farm 
the  land  in 'a  husband  like  man- 
ner, and  wiU  not  exhaust  the  soil 
by  negligent  or  improper  tillage, 
and  that  ne  will  repair  the  fences, 
&c.,  so  far  as  the  rules  of  ^ood 
husbandry  require.  His  obliga- 
tion is  simply  to  return  the  prem- 
ises in  as  good  condition  as  he 
takes  them.  Foster  v.  Batt,  6 
Mass.  63. 

*  In  Ferguson  v. ,  2  Esp. 

690,  the  defendant  rented  a  house 
as  ten&nt  at  wiU  at  a  certain  yearly 
rent.  After  he  quit  possession  the 
house  was  found  to  be  very  much 
out  of  repair,  and  the  landlord 
caused  an  estimate  to  be  made  of 
the  sum  necessary  to  put  the  house 
in  repair,  and  brought  an  action 
ther^or.  Lord  Kenyon,  C.  J., 
said :  **  A  tenant  from  year  to 
year  is  boimd  to  commit  no  waste, 
and  to  make  fair  and  tenantable 
repairs,  such  as  putting  in  win- 
dows and  doors  that  nave  been 
broken  by  him,  so  as  to  prevent 


waste  and  decay  of  the  premises  ; 
but  in  the  present  case  the  plaint- 
iff has  claimed  a  sum  for  putting 
on  a  new  roof  on  an  old,  worn-out 
house.  This,  I  think,  the  tenant 
is  not  bound  to  do."  See  also  re- 
marks of  Tenterden,  C.  J.,  in 
Auworth  V.  Johnson,  5  C.  &  P. 
289.  See  also  Gibson  v.  Wells,  1 
N.  R.  290 ;  Hitner  v.  Ege,  28  Penn. 
St.  805. 

'  Auworth  V.  Johnson,  ante ; 
Johnson  V.  Dixon,  1  Daly,  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  178. 

'  Leach  v.  Thomas,  7  C.  &  P. 
827  •  Eagle  v.  Swayze,  ante. 

*  Ferguson  v.  ,  ante. 

«  Eagle  V.  Swayze,  2  Daly  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  140;  Jomison  v,  Dixon,  I 
id.  178;  Thompson  v.  Amey,  12 
Ad.  &  El.  476 ;  Horsef all  v.  Math- 
er, Holt.  7 ;  Torriano  v.  Young,  6 
C.  &  P.  8 ;  Leach  v.  Thomas,  ante ; 
Brown  v.  Crump,  1  Marsh.  567 ; 
United  States  v.  Bostwick,  94  U. 
S.  58 ;  MiUer  v.  Shields,  56  Ind. 
71. 

•  Wise  V.  Metcalf ,  10  B.  &  C.  229. 


788 


BSPAHtS. 


[§365. 


wear  and  tear  or  decay,  and  the  act  of  Gk>d/  If  a  fnr- 
nished  house  is  let,  the  tenant  is  bound  to  use  the  premises 
and  the  furniture  as  weU  as  aU  the  appurtenances,  in  a 
proper  and  tenantlike  manner,  and  leave  it  in  as  good  a 
condition  as  he  received  it,  natural  wear  and  tear  and 
unavoidable  accidents  excepted ;  and  if  the  house  and 
furniture,  was  clean  when  he  received  it,  he  must  leave 
it  clean."  But,  where  there  is  an  express  covenant  as  to 
the  manner  in  which  the  premises  shall  be  used,  no 
implied  covenant  can  be  raised  for  expressum  /cunt 
cess  are  tddtum^  In  Georgia  it  is  held  under  the  code, 
which  makes  it  the  duty  of  a  landlord  to  repair  demised 
premises  that  when  a  person  lets  a  building  for  a  par- 
ticular purpose,  there  is  an  implied  covenant  not  only 
that  the  building  is  fit  for  that  purpose,  but  also  that  it 
shaU  remain  so ;  ^  but  at  the  common  law  no  such  rule 
applies,  except  in  the  case  of  a  letting  of  furnished  houses, 
in  which  cases  there  is,  unless  the  tenant  has  himself 
inspected  the  premises,  an  impjied  covenant  or  agree- 
ment, on  the  landlord's  part,  that  they  are  suitably 
furnished  for  habitation/  But  in  determining  the 
extent  of  the  liability  of  a  landlord  in  this  respect,  in  the 


*  Miller  v.  Shields,  ante ;  John- 
son V.  Dixon,  ante.  In  Rider  v. 
Smith,  8  T.  R.  767,  the  plaintiff 
brought  an  action  against  the  de- 
fendant for  not  repairing  a  private 
road  leading  throuj^h  the  defend- 
ant's close,  and  simply  declared 
against  him  as  occupier.  The 
court  held*  this  sufficient.  See  al- 
so to  the  same  effect,  Tenant  v. 
Goldwin,  Salk.  300 ;  Wingford  v. 
Wallaston,  8  Lev.  266;  Rex  v. 
Bucknall,  2  Ld.  Rayd.  804.  In 
Cheetham  v.  Hampson,  4  T.  R. 
818,  an  action  was  brought  asainst 
a  tenant  for  not  repairing  a  fence, 
whereby  the  plaintiff  was  dam- 
aged, and  it  was  upheld,  Ix>rd 
KENYON,  C.  J.,  saying:  "It  is  so 
notoriously  the  duty  of  the  actual 
occupier  to  repair  the  fences,  and 
so  little  the  duty  of  the  landlord, 
that,  without  any  agreement  to 
that  effect,  the  laSodlord  may 
maintain  an  action  against  the 
tenant  for  not  doing  so." 

'^  Stanley  v.  Agnew,  12  M.  &  W. 
827. 


'  Standen  v.  Christmas,  10  Q.  B 
135. 

*  Whittle  V.  Webster,  55  Ga. 
180.  In  Geor^,  the  Ifindlord  is 
bound  to  repair  and  keep  in  re- 

gair.    White  v.  Montgomery,  58 
^a.  204. 

*  Sutton  V.  Temple,  15  BL  &  W. 
61 ;  Smith  v.  Murable,  11  BL  ^ 
W.  5 ;  Wilson  v.  Finch  Hatton,  L. 
R.,  2  Ex.  Div.  886.  But  in  an 
ordinary  contract  of  lettinK,  there 
is  no  implied  warranty  tnat  the 
premises  are  tenantable.  Mayer 
V.  Moller,  1  HUt.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  491. 
The  landlord  is  not  bound  tore- 

Skir,  imless  by  snecial  agreement, 
oward  v.  Uoolittle,  8  Duer  (N. 
Y.)  454,  and  a  tenant  cannot,  with- 
out special  agreement,  make  re- 
pairs at  the  expense  of  his  land- 
lord. Mumf  ord  v.  Brown,  6  Cow, 
(N.  Y.)  475.  To  the  same  effect, 
McCarty  v.  Ely,  4  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y. 
C.  P.)  875.  A  sub8e(^uent  parol 
promise  to  repair  is  void  as  with- 
out consideration.  Speckles  v. 
Sax,  1  E.  D.  S.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  268b 


CHAP.  XXXV.]        General  LiABiLmr. 


789 


case  of  a  famished  house,  the  language  of  the  lease  must 
control,  and  the  question  as  to  whether  the  lessee 
examined  the  premises  for  himself  is  important.  If  the 
lease  merely  covers  a  certain  building,  '*  together  with 
the  furniture  therein, "  no  implied  covenant  can  be  raised 
that  the  house  either  is,  or  shall  be,  completely  furnished, 
nor  can  the  tenant  show  by  parol  that  the  landlord 
agreed  to  supply  any  deficiencies  in  that  respect.  The 
tenant  must  see  to  it  that  there  is  sufficient  furniture,  or 
that  the  lease  contains  the  whole  contract,  or  he  will  be 
bound  by  the  fair  construction  of  the  instrument.'  In 
the  case  of  a  letting  of  real  estate  for  a  particular  purpose, 
there  is  not,  in  the  absence  of  words  necessaiily  import- 
ing such  an  agreement,  any  implied  covenant  or  contract 
that  they  are  fit  for  that  purpose.*    This  doctrine  was 


Unless  if  made  upon  a  new  and 
sufficient  consideration.  Post  v. 
Vetter,  2  E.  D.  8.  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  248 ; 
Doutibe  V.  Gennin,  82  How.  Pr. 
(N.  Y.)  6 ;  Walker  v.  Gilbert,  2 
Robt.  (N.  Y.)  214. 

» In  Wilson  v.  Deen,  74  N.  Y. 
581,  the  defendant  leased  to  the 
plaintiff  a  certain  dwelling-house, 
"together  with  the  furniture 
therein,*'  and  there  was  a  further 
provision  that  a  schedule  of  the 
furniture  should  be  made  and  at- 
tached to  the  lease  before  the  de- 
fendant went  into  possebsion.  The 
plaintiff  insisted,  and  offered  to 
prove  by  parol,  that  the  furniture 
was  incomplete  and  deficient,  and 
that  the  d^endant  agreed  bv  parol 
to  supply  all  deficiencies.  The  de- 
fendant never  took  possession  be- 
cause the  plaintiff  refused  to  sup- 
ply such  deficiencies.  Th^  court 
neld  that  this  proof  was  not  ad- 
missible, and  that  the  plaintiff 
was  not  entitled  to  have  the  lease 
cancelled  or  reformed,  there  being 
no  fraud  or*  mistake  shown. 
Turner  v.  Lucsa,  13  Gratt.  (Va.) 
705 ;  Stevens  v.  Cooper,  1  John. 
Ch.  (N.  Y.)  425  ;  Dwight  v.  Pome- 
rov,  17  Mass.  803. 

'Sutton  V.  Temple,  ante.  In 
Hart  V.  Windsor,  12  M.  &  W.  86, 
Parks,  B.,  gave  expression  to  the 
rule  thus  :  ' '  We  are  all  of  the  opin- 
ion that  there  is  no  contract,  still  less 
a  condition  implied  by  law,  on  the 
demise  of  real  prepay,  that  it  is 


fit  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  is 
let.  The  principles  of  the  com- 
mon law  oo  not  warrant  such  a 
provision  ;  and  though  in  the  case 
of  a  dwelling  house  taken  for  hab- 
itation there  is  an  apparent  justice 
in  inferring  a  contract  of  this  nat- 
ure, the  same  rule  must  apply  aa 
land  taken  for  other  purposes." 
In  this  case  a  lease  of  a  house 
was  taken  for  three  years,  and  the 
tenant  quit  because  the  premises 
were  so  badly  infested  with  bugs 
as  to  render  the  house  unfit  for 
habitation,  but  it  was  held  to  con- 
stitute no  ground  for  the  tenant's 
abandonment  of  the  premises,  and 
no  answer  to  an  action-  for  the 
rent.  The  same  principle  is 
adopted  in  this  country.  Meeks  v. 
Bowerman,  1  Daly,  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
90  ;  Gilhooley  v.  Washington,  4  N. 
Y.  217  ;  Bloomer  v.  Merrill,  1  Daly, 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  485  ;  Westlake  v.  De- 
Grau,  25  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  669.  In 
Carson  v.  Godley,  26  Penn.  St.  Ill, 
it  was  held  that  where  a  person 
erects  a  buildine  and  leases  it  as  a 
warehouse  to  the  g^eral  govern- 
ment, he  is  liable  to  an  owner  of 
goods  deposited  therein,  if  the 
goods  are  injured  or  destroyed  by 
the  fall  of  the  building  hj  reason 
of  inherent  defects  therem,  unfit- 
ting it  for  the  purpose  for  which 
it  was  let,  even  though  the  lease 
contained  no  statement  of  the  pur- 
pose for  which  the  building  was 
let.     This   liability  is  predicated 


790  Sepaibs.  [§365. 

well  illustrated  in  an  English  case,*  where  the  tenant 
took  a  demise  of  the  vesture  of  land  for  the  purposes  of 
pasturage  for  a  specific  term,  at  a  certain  rent,  and,  upon 
turning  cattle  in  to  feed  there,  several  of  them  died  from 
the  effects  of  a  i)oisonous  substance  which  had  been 
accidentally  spread  there.  The  tenant  withdrew  his 
cattle,  and  declined  to  pay  the  rent,  for  the  reason  that 
the  premises  were,  not  fit  for  the  purposes  of  pasturage ; 
but  the  court  held  that  the  facts  constituted  no  defence 
or  justification  for  an  abandonment  of  the  land.  ^^I 
take  it,"  said  Lobd  Abing£r,  C.  B.,  in  the  last  named 
case,  at  p.  61,  "that  if  a  person  contracts  for  the  use  and 
occupation  of  land  for  a  specified  time  and  at  a  specified 
rent,  he  is  bound  by  that  bargain^  though  he  took  it  for 
a  specific  purpose^  and  that  purpose  be  not  attained. 
Suppose,  for  instance,  he  took  it  with  the  object  of  mak- 
ing a  handsome  income  out  of  it,  as  a  farm.  If  his  object 
fails  altogether,  is  it  to  be  said  that  he  is  not  liable  for 
any  rent  ?  It  might  have  been  that  the  grass  was  wet  and 
injurious  at  particular  seasons  of  the  year;  is  he 
not,  therefore,  to  pay  any  rent  for  that  period! 
The  general  rule  must,  therefore,  be  that  where 
a  man  utidertakes  to  pay  a  specific  rent  for  a  piece  of 
landy  he  is  obliged  to  pay  the  rent  whether  it 
answers  the  purpose  for  which  he  took  itj  or  not.  "  *  But 
where  a  landlord  lets  premises /or  a  certain  purpose^  and 
covenants  or  agrees  that  the  building  shall  be  ready  for 
occupancy  by  a  certain  time,  there  is  an  implied  covenant 
that  the  building  shall  befiifor  occupancy  for  the  purpose 
for  which  it  was  lety  at  the  time  named.  As  if  the  land- 
lord lets  a  building  to  be  used  as  a  store,  a  dweUing- 

upon  the  principle  that  the  build-  built  entirely  on  another  lot 
ing  in  such  a  condition  amounts  owned  by  another^  person.  The 
to  a  nuisance,  rendering  the  land-  owner  of  the  brick  building  re- 
lord  liable  for  any  ill  effects  result-  moved   it,    leaving   the   wooden 


ing  in  such  a  condition  amounts      owned  by  another^  person.     The 

)f 

lects  result-      moved 
noy^ 
B.  &  S.  78.     See  S.  C.  5  id.  485 ;      weather  on    that  side,  in  conse- 


to  a  nuisance,  rendering  the  land-      owner  of  the  brick  building  re- 

anyilleffe 
ing  therefrom,  (iandy  v.  Jubber,  5      building    unprotected    from    the 


Rich  V.  Basterfield,  4  C.  B.  788.  quence  of  which,  the  lessee's  goods 
'  Sutton  V.  Temple,  ante.  and  stock  in  trade  were  injured. 
'  In  Moore  v.  Webber,  71  Penn.  It  was  held  that  the  tenant  hiad  no 
St.  429,  a  lease  embraced  a  build-  right  of  action  against  the  land- 
ing, biult  of  wood,  the  sides  being  lord  for  permitting  the  brick 
only  lathed  and  plastered.  Along-  building  to  oe  torn  down, 
side  of  it  was  a  brick  building, 


>  *-■* 


€HAP.  xxxvj       Express  Covenant. 


791 


house,  or  a  hotel,  and  covenants  to  have  it  ready  for 
occupancy  within  a  certain  time,  he  is  liable  to  the  ten- 
ant for  damages  sustained  by  reason  of  any  defects 
unfitting  it  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  let,  and  the 
&ct  that  the  tenant  goes  into  possession  at  the  time  fixed 
therefor  uutth  knowledge  of  the  defects^  but  without 
objections  on  the  landlord's  part,  does  not  bar  his  right 
of  recovery,  nor  can  he  excuse  his  liability  upon  the 
ground  that  he  employed  skilful  mechanics  to  make  the 
repairs/ 

Sec.  366.  Express  oovenants  to  repair.— A  tenant  is  not 
liable  for  a  breach  of  a  covenant  to  repair,  committed 
before  the  lease  is  executed,  although  after  he  went  into 
possession.  The  lease  does  not  operate  as  a  grant,  nor 
create  any  term  prior  to  its  execution."  The  duration  of 
the  term  is  to  be  computed  from  the  day  mentioned  in 
the  habendum,  and  not  from  a  subsequent  day  on  which 
the  lease  was  executed.*  Where  the  defendant,  in  an 
agi-eement  for  a  lease,  covenanted  that  he  would  from 
time  to  time  during  the  term  to  he  granted  keep  the  prem- 
ises in  repair,  and  entered  upon  the  premises  and  occupied 
them  until  the  expiration  of  the  term  agreed  to  be  grant- 
ed :  it  was  held,  that  he  was  liable  to  repair  according  to 
the  covenant,  although  no  lease  had  ever  been  made  to 
him  pursuant  to  the  agreement,  which  was  under  seal.* 
So  the  assignees  of  a  void  lease,  which  had  been  treated 
by  all  pai-ties  as  valid,  were  held  liable  for  rent  and 


'  Swift  V.  East  Waterloo  Hotel 
Co.,  40  Iowa,  822.  In  an  agree- 
ment to  let  a  furnished  house 
there  is  an  implied  condition  that 
the  house  shau  be  fit  for  occupa- 
tion at  the  time  at  which  the  ten- 
ancy is  to  begin,  and  if  the  condi- 
tion is  notftdflUed  the  lessee  is  en- 
titled thereupon  to  rescind  the  con- 
tract. The  defendant  agreed  to 
rent  the  plaintifTs  furnished  house 
for  three  months  from  the  7th  of 
May,  but  having  at  the  beginning 
of  uie  intended  tenancy  discoTered 
that  the  house  was,  o««*ing  to  de- 
fective drainage,  unfit  for  habita- 
tion, refused  to  occupy  it.  The 
plaintifts  repaired  the  drains,  and 


on  the  26th  of  May  tendered  the 
house  in  a  wholesome  condition  to 
the  defendant,  who  refused  to  oc- 
cupy or  to  pay  any  rent.  Plaint- 
iffs having  sued  for  the  rent  and 
for  use  and  occupation,  held^  that 
the  state  of  the  nouse  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  intended  tenancy 
entitled  the  defendant  to  rescind 
the  contract,  and  that  he  was  not 
liable  for  the  rent  or  for  use  and 
occupation.  Wilson  v.  Finch  Hat- 
ton,  L.  R.,  2  Ex.  D.  886. 

« Shaw  V.  Kay,  1  Exchq.  412 ;  Jer- 
vis  V.  Tompkinson,  1  H.  &  N.  192. 

«  Bird  V.  Baker,  1  E.  &  E.  12. 

*  Pistor  V.  Carter,  9  M,  AW.  15. 


793 


Repaibs. 


[§36T. 


repairs  up  to  the  end  of  the  term,  according  to  the  cove* 
nants  in  the  lease.'  It  must  be  remembered,  however, 
that  in  such  cases  an  actual  tenancy  from  year  to  year 
''upon  the  terms"  of  the  intended  lease,  so  far  as  they 
are  applicable  to  and  not  inconsistent  with  a  yearly  ten- 
ancy, is  created  by  the  entry.*  Where  a  tenant  holds 
over,  under  a  lease  that  contains  covenants  for  repairs, 
he  is  treated  as  holding  under  the  terms  of  the  former 
lease,  and  is  still  liable  to  repair ;  and  if  the  premises  are  * 
burned  down  or  otherwise  destroyed,  he  must  rebuild 
them.'  An  agreement  made  to  take  premises  from  a 
future  day,  the  landlord  agreeing  to  take  back  the 
fixtures  at  the  end  of  the  term,  provided  they  are  in  as 
good  a  condition  as  they  now  are,  and  the  tenant  agree- 
ing to  leave  the  premises  in  the  same  state  as  they  now 
are,  there  being  at  the  time  another  tenant  in  possession, 
and  the  new  'tenant  not  taking  possession  until  the  day 
named,  refers  to  the  state  of  the  premises  at  the  time 
when  the  tenant  is  to  take  possession.^ 

A  Covenant  to  put  premises  into  repair  at  once  must 
receive  a  reasonable  construction,  and  is  not  limited  to 
any  specific  time :  therefore  it  is  for  the  jury  to  say,  upon 
the  evidence,  whether  the  defendant  has  done  what  he 
i^easonably  ought  in  performance  of  it.*  There  is  no 
dpubt  that  the  words  at  once,  immediately,  forthuntJi^ 
&c.,  mean  with  all  reasonable  celerity,  but  they  do  not 
bin,d  the  tenant  to  repair  immediately.' 

S|IC.  867.  Covenant  to  repair  and  keep  in  repair  during  the 
tern;. —A  covenant  to  repair  and  keep  the  premises  in 
repair  during  the  term  requires  the  lessee  to  keep  them  in 
repair  at  ail  times  during  the  term ;  and  if  they  are  at  any 


*  Beale  v.  Sanders,  3  Bing.  N.  C. 
850. 

3  Tress  v.  Savage,  4  E.  &  B.  86  ; 
Pennington  v.  Taniere,  12  Q.  B.  998. 

2  Digby  V.  Atkinson,  4  Canip. 
275 ;  B^le  v.  Sanders,  8  Bing.  N. 
C.  850 :  Beaven  v.  Delahay,  1  H. 
BL  8 ;  Torriano  v.  Young,  6  C.  & 
P.  8. 

*  White  V.  Nicholson,  4  M.  &  G. 
95. 


» Pitman  v.  Sutton,  9  C.  &  P.  706. 

*  Burgess  v.  Boetef eur,  7  M.  &  6. 
494  :  Cole  Ejec.  116  ;  Roberts  v. 
Brett,  34  L.  J.  Ch.  241.  When  no 
time  is  specified  within  which  re- 
pairs are  to  be  made,  it  is  presomed 
that  they  are  to  be  made  within  a 
reasonable  time.  Lunn  y.  Gteige. 
87nL19. 


■.» 


J! 


J 


caiAP.  xxxv.] 


Covenants. 


793 


time  out  of  repair,  he  is  guilty  of  a  breach  of  covenant ;  ^ 
for  which  theCr  or  hto  aigo,  uu.j.  ev«  during  tho 
term,  recover  damages  commensurate  with  the  injury 
thereby  done  to  the  reversion.'  Or  he  may  maintain  an 
action  of  ejectment,  if  there  is  a  proviso  for  re-entry 
applicable  to  such  covenant.'  On  a  covenant  to  keep 
premises  in  repair,  it  is  a  breach  to  pull  them  down  either 
wholly  or  partially,  even  so  far  as  to  open  doors  in  a  wall ; 
and  it  is  a  breach  for  which  the  lessor  may  sue  and  recover 
substantial  damages  during  the  term  :  nor  is  it  any  equit- 
able defence  that  it  was  done  with  the  ^^  consent  and 
acquiescence"  of  the  lessor,  unless  it  appears  thai  it  was 
with  his  previous  consent.^    At  one  time  it  was  supposed 


'  Lozmore  v.  Bobeon,  1 B.  &  Aid. 
584  ;  Schieffelm  v.  Carpenter,  15 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  400  ;  Buck  v.  Pike, 
25  Vt.  529.  They  are  oontinuing 
covenants,  and  a  recovery  may  be 
had  for  successive  breaches  as  thev 
occur.  Block  v.  Ebner,  54  Ind. 
544.  The  tenant  may,  when  the 
landlord  has  covenanted  to  repair, 
and  does  not,  make  the  repairs 
himself  and  recover  the  expenses 
of  the  landlord,  or  he  may  let  the 
repairs  go  and  sue  for  (iamages. 
Hexter  v.  Knox,  68  N.  Y.  561. 

•  Smith  V.  Peat,  9  Exch.  161 ; 
Tomer  v.  Lamb,  14  M.  &  W.  412 ; 
Worcester  School  Trustees  v.  Row- 
lands, 9  C.  &  P.  784,  789  ;  Bell  v. 
Hayden,  9  Ir.  C.  L.  R.  801 ;  Gauge 
V.  Lockwood,  2  F.  &F.  115  ;  Smith 
L.  &  T.  274  (2d  ed.). 

'Cole  Eiec.  422;  Bayliss  v.  Le 
Gros,  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  587  ;  Bennett  v. 
Herring,  8  C.  B.  N.  8.  870. 

*  Gauge  V.  Lockwood,  2  F.  &  F. 
115;  Vickery  v.  Jackson,  2  Stark. 
298.  Li  order  to  constitute  a  breach 
of  this  covenant,  there  must  be  an 
actual  state  of  non-repair ;  a  mere 
trifling  omission  on  the  tenant's 
part  will  not  constitute  a  breach, 
such  as  a  scratch  upon  the  walls,  a 
crack  in  a  pane  of  glass,  &c. ,  &c. 
But  an  aggregation  of  such  small 
defects,  when  sufficient  to  consti- 
tute a  substantial  want  of  repair, 
will  operate  as  a  breach.  Leaving 
a  quantity  of  rubbish  in  the  cellar 
has  been  held  not  to  operate  as  a 
breach  of  this  covenant.  Thorn- 
dike  V.  Burrage,  111  Mass.  681.  Of 
coune  the  question  as  to  what  con- 


stitutes a  breach  depends  upon  the 
language  of  the  covenant,  and  is 
essentially  a  question  of  fact  for 
the  jury.  Burdett  v.  Withers,  7 
Ad.  &  EL  186 ;  Stanley  v.  Tow- 
good,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  4.  if  a  tenant 
epecially  covenants  to  do  a  certain 
thing,  he  must  do  it,  however  tri- 
fling or  unimportant  it  may  be ; 
as,  if  he  covenants  to  restore  all 
broken  glass,  or  all  defacements  of 
the  wall,  or  to  keep  the  cellar  free 
from  rubbish,  he  must  replace  all 
cracked  glass  with  new,  and  must 
repair  the  walls  when  scratched, 
and  keep  the  cellar  free  from  aU 
rubbish,  or  he  will  be  liable  upon 
his  covenant.  So,  if  he  covenants 
to  erect  a  gate  and  make  all  neces- 
sary repairs  thereon,  he  is  bound 
to  maintain  and  keep  the  gate  up, 
and  if  it  is  removed  oy  a  trespass- 
er, he  is  bound  to  replace  it. 
Beach  v.  Cam,  2  N.  Y.  86.  So,  if 
the  tenant  of  a  mill  covenants  to 
keep  the  mill  and  machinery  in 
rveceaaary  repair,  it  has  been  held 
that  he  is  bound  to  renew  the  map 
chinery  when  it  gets  so  old  and 
worn  as  to  be  unfit  for  the  purpos- 
es for  which  it  is  employed.  Coke 
V.  England,  27  Md.  14.  But  he 
would  have  been  under  no  such 
obligation  if  the  word  "  neces- 
sary "  has  been  omitted,  as,  luider 
the  ordinary  covenant  to  repair, 
the  tenant  is  not  boiuid  to  put  or 
keep  the  premises  in  a  better  con- 
dition than  they  were  when  he 
went  into  possession.  The  ques- 
tion as  to  whether  alterations  or 
changes  made  in  a  building  con- 


794 


Bbpaibs. 


[§387. 


that  only  nominal  damages  could  be  recovered  in  an 
action  commenced  during  the  term^  but  such  is  not  now 
the  rule.'  Where  there  is  a  lease  for  a  certain  number  of 
years,  and  thenceforth  from  year  to  year,  the  covenants 
to  repair,  as  well  as  all  other  covenants,  continue  in  force 
after  the  expiration  of  the  term  named,  and  so  long  as 
the  lessee  occupies.  A  covenant  "to  keep  in  repair,'' 
and  **  to  keep  the  premises  in  as  good  repair  as  they  now 
are, "  are  identically  the  same  covenants,  and  the  former 
covenant  imposes  upon  the  tenant  the  duty  of  keeping 
the  premises  in  as  good  condition  aa  they  were  when  the 
covenant  was  entered  into.'  A  covenant  by  a  lessee  to 
make  all  smaU  repairs  that  he  can  easily  do  himself, 
imposes  no  duty  upon  him  beyond  such  as  the  law 
imposes  upon  a  lessee  to  exercise  ordinary  care  to  prevent 
the  deterioration  of  the  premises;^  and  the  same  is  true 
where  the  tenant  covenants  to  make  all  repairs.  He  is, 
under  such  a  covenant,  boimd  only  to  keep  the  premises 
in  the  condition  they  were  in  when  the  Ipase  was  made/ 
But  when  the  covenant  is,  that  the  landlord  or  tenant 
wiU  keep  the  premises  **  in  good  repair, "  he  is  bound  to 
repair  all  defects  existing  when  the  lease  was  made,*  and 


stitutes  a  breach  of  this  covenant, 
will  depend  entirely  upon  the  lan- 
guage of  the  covenant  and  the 
evident  intention  of  the  parties  to 

be  gathered   therefrom.      v. 

Jones,  4  B.  &  Ad.  126. 

»  Marriott  v.  Cotton,  2  C.  &  K. 
558. 

*  Brown  v.  Tnunper,  26  Beav.  11. 

3  Stalk  V.  Locke,  47  Md.  562.  A 
tenant,  holding  under  a  lease  con- 
taining a  covenant  on  his  part  to 
quit  and  surrender  the  premises, 
at  the  expiration  x>f  the  term  in  as 
good  state  and  condition  as  rea- 
sonable wear  and  tear  would  per- 
mit, but  providing  that  he  should 
have  the  right  to  make  any  inside 
alterations  he  might  think  proper, 
provided  they  did  not  injure  the 
premises  ; — ^removed  the  partitions 
on  the  upper  floors  of  the  leased 
building,  so  as  to  use  them  for 
lofts  ine^iead  of  apartments  for  ho- 
tel purposes, — Held,  that  this  was 
within  the  privilege  granted  him 
by  the  lease,  unless  the  pecuniary 


value  of  the  x>remises  as  a  whole 
was  thereby  injured.  Gregory  v. 
Brooks,  1  Hun,  (N.  Y.  S.  C.)404. 

*  Flint  V.  Pearce,  11  R.  I.  676. 

» White  V.  Albany  Railway,  17 
Hun,  (N.  y.)  98. 

«  Myers  v.  Bums,  85  N.  Y.  269. 
A  lease  contained  a  covenant  to 
make  repairs  and  also  a  covenant  to 
surrender  the  premises  in  good 
condition,  "damages  by  the  ele- 
ments excepted.'*  It  was  held, 
that  the  first  covenant  was  not 
qualified  by  the  second,  and  that 
tne  lessor  could  recover  damages 
for  the  omission,  on  the  part  of  the 
lessee,  to  repair  damages  caused 
by  the  elements.  Eling  v.  Dress, 
5  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior  a.)  521. 
In  a  lease  the  lessee  covenanted 
to  keep  the  leased  building  in 
good  repair  and  condition.  At 
the  time  he  took  possession  the 
roof  and  steps  were  in  bad  con- 
dition. The  lessee  made  such  re- 
pairs only  as  were  required  for  his 
own  comfort,  and  the  steps  became 


QHAP.  XXXV.] 


Covenants. 


T96 


the  same  is  true  as  to  a  covenant  to  make  all  '^necessary 
repairs." '  The  distinction  between  an  express  and  an 
implied  covenant  is  most  marked,  in  reference  to  injuries 
resulting  from  the  elements.  Under  an  implied  covenant, 
the  tenant  cannot  be  charged  with  the  dutjr  of  replacing 
buildings  destroyed  by  tempest,  fire,  flood,  or  inevitable 
accident ;  but  under  an  express  covenant  to  keep  and 
leave  the  premises  in  repair,  the  lessee  is  bound  to  make 
good  an  injury  from  any  cause  not  resulting  from  the  act 
or  neglect  of  the  landlord,'  as  the  agreement  of  the 
parties  is  merged  in  the  lease,  and  if  it  was  the  intention 
of  the  parties  to  provide  against  the  result  of  such  cas- 
ualties, it  is  presumed  that  such  an  exception  would  have 
been  incorporated  into  the  lease. 

A  covenant  by  the  lessee  to  repair  is  sometimes  made 
conditional  on  the  performance  of  some  act  by  the  lessor ; 
as,  for  instance,  on  his  first  putting  the  premises  into 
repair.  Under  this  covenant  the  lessee  is  not  liable  for 
the  non-repair  of  any  part  of  the  premises  until  the  lessor 
has  entirely  performed  his  condition. "  A  covenant  by  the 
tenant  to  repair,  '^having  or  taking  suflScient  materials 
for  the  doing  thereof,  without  committing  any  waste  or 
spoil,"  is  an  absolute  covenant  to  repair.*  The  liability 
of  the  lessee  upon  a  covenant  to  repair  commences  only 
from  the  execution  of  the  lease  by  the  lessor.  He  is  not 
liable  for  breaches  of  this  covenant  committed  before  the 
time  of  the  execution  of  the  lease,  although  the  haben- 
dum of  the  lease  states  the  premises  to  be  held  from  a 
day  prior  to  its  execution.' 


rotten  and  thd  roof  leaked  so  as  to 
injure  the  walls.  After  the  lessee's 
term  expired  the  lessor  had  the 
roof  shingled,  gutter  repaired,  and 
new  steps  made.  Held,  that  these 
were  repairs  within  the  coyenant 
of  the  lease,  and  that  the  lessee 
was  liable  for  the  expense  of 
making  them.  1874,  Green  v. 
Eden,  2  T.  &  C.  (N.  Y.)  582. 

'  Lockrow  V.  Horgan,  58  N.  Y. 
e85. 

*  Phillips  V.  Stevens,  16  Mass. 
288 ;  Halfett  v.  Wylie,  8  John.  (N. 
Y. )  44  ;  Wiegall  v.  Waters,  6  T.  R. 
660;  Green  v.  Eales,  2  Q.  B.  225. 


In  Allen  v.  Howe,  105  Mass.  241, 
the  tenant  took  the  premises  upon 
condition  that  he  should  use  them 
as  a  hoteL  Held,  Broken  by  his 
failure  to  rebuild  after  their  de- 
struction by  fire. 

«  Neale  v.  Ratcliffe,  15  Q.  B.  916 ; 
Cannock  v.  Jones,  8  Ex.  283, 
Coimt^-  V.  Macpherson,  5  Moore  P. 
C.  C.  83  ;  Coward  v.  Gregory.  Lw 
B.,  2  C.  P.  158. 

*  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Bristol  *«^ 
Jones,  IE.  &  E.  484. 

»  Shaw  V.  Kay,  1  Ex.  412. 


4- 


796  Repairs.  [§  368. 

A  covenant  by  the  lessee  to  "fceep  in  repair  the  prem- 
ises and  all  erectionSy  buUdings  and  improvements  erected 
thereon  during  the  term,  and  yield  up  the  same  in  good 
repair y^^  binds  the  lessee  to  leave  a  veranda  erected  by 
him^  the  lower  part  of  which  is  attached  to  posts  fixed  in 
the  ground.' 

A  covenant  by  the  lessee  of  afarm^  well  and  substantially 
to  repair y  and  keep  in  good  substantial  repair,  and  so 
weU  and  svbstantially  repaired  to  yield  up  at  the  end  of 
the  termy'*  binds  the  tenant  to  give  up  the  premises  in  as 
good  a  state  of  repair  as  they  were  in  when  he  took  pos- 
session, and  they  must  be  inferred  to  have  been  then  in 
a  tenantable  state.'  An  agreement  by  a  tenant  to  leave 
a  farm  in  as  good  condition  as  he  found  if,  is  an  agree- 
ment to  leave  it  in  tenantable  repair  if  he  found  it  so,  as 
it  wiU  be  presumed  he  did.' 

A  covenant  by  a  lessee  of  a  coal  mine  at  the  end  of  the 
term  to  yield  up  the  works  and  mines,  and  aU  ways  and 
^  roads,  in  such  good  repair y  order  and  conditiony  thai  the 
works  may  be  continued  and  carried  on  by  the  lessor, 
does  not  extend  to  movable  chattels,  such  as  iron  tram- 
plates  fastened  to  wooden  sleepers  not  let  into  the 
ground.*  A  covenant  by  the  lessee  of  a  farmy  to.  repair 
and  leave  in  good  repair  ail  buildings  to  be  erected  there- 
on during  the  termy  extends  to  a  farm-house  as  well  as  all 
other  buildings  erected  during  the  term,  partly  on  the 
land  demised  and  partly  on  land  adjoining  belonging  to 
the  lessor.*  A  covenant  to  repair  and  keep  in  repair  aU 
the  external  parts  of  the  demised  premises,  extends  to  a 
partition-wall  dividing  the  demised  house  from  an 
adjoining  house.' 

Sec.  368.  General  oovenantto  repair.—How  oonstraed.— A 
general  covenant  to  repair  is  satisfied  by  the  lessee  keep- 
ing the  premises  in  substantial  repair :  and  a  literal  per- 

»  Penry  v.  Brown,  2  Stark.  403.  » Winn  v.  White.  2  W.  BL  840. 

ifirown  V.  Trumper,26Beav.ll.  ♦Beaufort  v.  Bates,  8  DeG.   F. 

The  leaving  of   several  loads  of  Sc  J.  881. 

ashes  and  rubbish  lying  upon  the  *  White  v,  Wakley,  26  Beav.  17. 

premises  is  not  a  breach  6t  such  a  *  Green  v.  Eales,  2  Q.  K  2UL 
covenant.    Thomdikev.  Burrage, 
111  Mass.  531. 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


COVENAKTS. 


Y97 


formance  of  the  covenant  is  not  required/  Where  a  les- 
see covenants  to  keep  old  premises  in  repair,  he  is  not 
liable  for  such  dilapidations  as  result  from  the  natural 
(operation  of  time  and  the  elements;*  and  with  a  view  to 
determine  the  relative  suflSciency  of  repair,  the  jury  may 
inquire  whether  the  house  was  new  or  old  at  the  time 
the  lease  was  made;'  and  what  was  its  then  state  of 
repair  and  condition  generalfg/;*  but  not  in  detail/  A 
covenant  to  keep  old  premises  in  repair^  and  to  leave 
them  in  repair  at  the  end  of  the  term,  means  that  the 
lessee  will,  if  necessary,  put  them  into  repair ;  for  other- 
wise they  cannot  be  kept  or  left  in  repair  pursuant  to 
the  covenant.  Their  age,  and  class,  and  general  condi- 
tion^ must  be  taken  into  consideration,  but  not  partic- 
ular defects  or  want  of  repair  at  the  time  the  term  com- 
menced.' A  covenant  to  repair  contained  in  an  under- 
lease, though  in  the  same  words  as  the  covenant  in  the 
original  lease,  has  not  the  same  legal  effect  and  meaning, 
because  of  the  different  ages  and  conditions  of  the  prem- 
ises at  the  respective  times  of  the  lease  and  underlease/ 


1  In  a  leaae  of  a  flnt-class  hotel, 
a  covenant  to  keep  the  same 
in  repair  is  broken  by  permitting 
the  flues  to  remain  in  such  condi- 
tion that  the  rooms  cannot  be  used 
with  fires.  Myers  v.  Bums,  85  N. 
T.  269.  It  seems  that,  under  a 
landlord's  covenant  to  do  all 
necessary  repairs  within  reasonable 
time  after  notice,  the  landlord  is 
hound  not  only  to  keep  the  premises 
in  repair  but  to  put  them  in  that 
condition,  Myers  v.  Bums,  85  N. 
Y.  269 ;  Ward  v.  Kelsey,  88  N. 
Y.  80.  In  an  action  by  a  lessor  to 
recover  possession  of  the  demised 
premises  on  the  ground  of  a 
forfeiture  of  the  term  by  reason  of 
a  non-performance  by  the  lessee  of 
a  covenant  contained  in  the  lease, 
**  to  keep  the  premises  in  good  re- 
pair, and  do  all  necessary  repairs 
upon  the  building'*  (upon  such 
premises),  if  it  be  established  that 
the  builcung  was  allowed  to.be  out 
of  repair  at  any  time,  the  plamtiff 
is  entitled  to  recover,  from  what- 
ever cause  such  defect  may  have 
arisen,  notwithstanding  such  lease 
contains  an  additional  covenant 


by  the  lessee  to  *^  quit  and  sur- 
render the  premises  in  as  good 
state  and  condition  as  reasonable 
use  and  wear  thereof  would  per- 
mit, damagejs  by  the  elements  ex- 
cepted." There  is  no  rule  of  con- 
struction which  would  graft  the 
exception  contained  in  the  last 
covenant  upon  the  first,  as  they 
are  entirely  opposite  in  character. 
Klin^  V.  Dress,  5  Robt.  (N.  Y.)  521 ; 
Hams  V.  Jones,  1  Moo.  &  R.  178. 

*  Qutteridge  v.  Mimyard,  1  Moo. 
ft  R.  884. 

*  Stanley  v.  Towgood,  8  Bing.  N. 
C.  4. 

*  Burdett  v.  Withers,  7  Ad.  & 
£1.  186. 

*  Mantz  V.  (Coring,  4  Bing.  N.  C. 
461  ;  Young  v.  Mantz,  6  Scott,  277 ; 
Belcher  v.  M'Intosh,  8  C.  &  P.  720 ; 
Woolcock  V.  Dew,  1  F.  &  F.  887. 

*  Payne  v.  Haine,  16  M.  &  W. 
541 ;  Easton  v.  Pratt,  2  H.  &  C. 
676  ;  Haldane  v.  Newcomb,  12  W. 
R.  185 ;  Schroder  v.  Ward,  13  C. 
B.  N.  S.  410. 

'  Walker  v.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W. 
249. 


798 


Bepaibs. 


[§86a 


^'  It  is  now  well  settled  that  a  general  covenant  to  repair 
must  be  construed  to  have  reference  to  the  condition  of 
the  premises  at  the  time  when  the  covenant  begins  to  oper- 
aie.^'  *  Where  a  very  old  house  is  leased  with  a  covenant 
to  repair  and  leave  it  in  repair,  it  is  not  meant  that  the 
house  shall  be  restored  in  an  improved  state,  or  that  the 
consequences  of  the  action  of  the  elements  shall  be 
averted ;  but  the  tenant  hqg  the  duty  of  keeping  the  house 
in  the  same  state  in  which  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  demise 
by  the  timely  expenditure  of  money  and  care. '  A  covenant 
to  repair  buildings  and  to  rebuild  them  if  necessary, 
compels  the  tenant  always  during  the  term  to  keep  them 


»  Walker  v.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W. 
258 ;  Opinion  of  Pahke,  B.  If  the 
house  is  an  old  one,  the  tenant  is 
only  bound  to  keep  it  up  as  an  old 
house,  and  is  not  obliged  to  give 
the  landlord  the  benent  of  new 
work.  TiNDAL,  C.  J.,  in  Harris  v. 
Jones,  1  Moo.  &  Rob.  175.  It  is 
not  meant,  in  fact,  that  the  old 
building  is  to  be  restored  in  a  re- 
newed form  at  the  end  of  the  term, 
so  as  to  make  the  value  of  it  great- 
er than  it  was  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  tern).  Diminution  in 
value,  resulting  from  the  natural 
operation  of  tmie  and  elements, 
falls  upon  the  landlord ;  hat  the 
tenant  must  take  care  that  the 
premises  do  not  suffer  more  damr 
ages  than  the  operation  of  these 
causes  wpidd  effect,  ana  he  is 
bound,  by  reasonable  applications 
of  labor,  to  keep  the  house  as  near- 
ly as  possible  in  the  same  condition 
as  when  it  was  demised.  Gutter- 
idge  V.  Mun^ard,  1  Mon.  &  Rob. 
236.  He  is  liable  for  repairs  only, 
and  not  for  alterations,  such  as 
laying  a  new  floor  on  an  improved 
plan.  Saward  v.  Leggatt,  7  C.  & 
V.  618.  An  agreement  to  keep  a 
piece  of  ornamental  water  in  good 
and  substantial  repair  is  performed 
by  keeping  the  water  from  burst- 
ing its  oanks  and  maintaining  the 
sluices  in  working  order.  Bird  v. 
Elwes,  L.  R.  8  Ex.  225.  Unless 
the  covenant  by  the  tenant  to  re- 
pair contains  an  express  exception 
of  damage  by  fire  or  other  casu- 
alty, he  will  oe  bound  to  rebuild 
or  repair  the  demised  premises  if 
they  should  be  burned  down,  Bul- 
lock V.  DommiU,  6  T.  R.  650 ;  Dig- 


bv  V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  275.  See 
Clark  V.  Glasgow  Ass.  Co.,  1  Mac- 
queen,  668 ;  Gregg  v.  Coates,  ^ 
Beav.  88,  or  otherwise  destroyed, 
or  injured  during  the  term.  Breck- 
nock Co.  V.  Pritchard,  6  T.  R.  750. 
*  Giitteridge  v.  Munyard,  7  C.  ft 
P.  129 ;  Burdett,  Bart  v.  Withers, 
7  Ad.  &  El.  136  ;  Stanley  v.  Tow- 
good,  8  Bing.  N.  C.  4 ;  Mantz  v. 
Goring,  4  id.  451 .  He  is  onlv  bound 
to  keei>  ^^  premises  in  tne  con- 
ditioti  in  which  they  were  when 
he  went  into  possession.  He  is  not 
boimd  to  rebuild,  to  put  on  a  new 
roof  or  lay  down  a  new  floor,  al- 
though either  would  be  more  sub- 
stantial, and  serve  the  purposes 
for  which  the  building  is  to  be  used 
much  better.  Harris  v.  Jones,  1 
Moo.  &  R.  173.  Ardesco  Oil  Co.  v. 
Richardson,  68  Penn.  St.  162 ;  Har- 
ris V.  Colbum,  8  Harr.  (I>eL)338  ; 
Stanley  V.  Towgood,  3  Bing.  N.  C. 
4 ;  Mantz  v.  Goring,  4  Bing.  N.  C. 
451.  But,  as  previously  stated,  if 
he  covenants  *'  to  keep  and  deliver 
them  up  in  good  repair,"  he  is 
bound  to  put  them  in  good  repair, 
and  cannot  spreen  himself  rrom 
liabilitv  for  not  doinff  so,  upon  the 
ground  that  the  builoings  were  in 
bad  repair  when  he  went  into  pos- 
session. Payne  v.  Haine,  16  M.  db 
W.  541 ;  Easton  v.  Pratt,  2  H.  & 
C.  He  must  keep  them  in  good 
repair,  as  he  has  covenanted  to  do, 
in  view  of  their  age  and  condition. 
He  is  boimd  to  do  this  although 
the  lease,  so  far  as  the  duration  of 
the  term  is  concerned,  is  void  under 
the  Statute  of  Frauds.  Richardsoa 
V.  Gifford,  1  Ad.  &  EL  52. 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


Covenants. 


799 


in  good  repair,  and  a  deduction  in  damages  for  their  age 
has  been  disallowed.'  Where  a  tenant  agrees  to  put  the 
premises  in  habitable  repair j  he  is  to  put  them  in  a  better 
state  than  that  in  which  he  found  them,  and  into  a  state 
reasonably  fit  for  the  occupation  of  the  class  of  persons 
likely  to  inhabit  them.^  A  direction  in  a  will  to  keep 
buildings  in  good  repair,  has  been  held  to  mean  not  the 
state  of  repair  in  which  they  were  at  the  testator's  death, 

Robeon,  1  B.  &  Ad.  584,  585.  As 
this  covenant  is  a  continuing  one, 
the  recovery  of  daniages  upon  it  in 
a  previous  action  is  no  d&t  to  a 
subsequent  action  against  the  ten- 
ant or  his  assignee,  so  long  as  the 
premises  are  out  of  repair,  but  the 
fact  may  be  used  in  mitigation  of 
damages.  Ck)ward  v.  Gregory,  L. 
R.,  2  C.  P.  153.  It  is  a  breach  of 
this  covenant  to  pull  down  the  de- 
mised premises  either  wholly  or 
partially,  or  to  open  a  doorway  in 
a  wall.  Gauge  v.  Lockwood,  2  F. 
&  F.  115 ;  Doe  v.  Jackson,  2  Stark. 
293 ;  Doe  v.  Bird,  6  C.  &  P.  195, 
unless  by  the  terms  of  the  lease  it 
is  implied  that  additions  and  im- 
provements are  to  be  made.  8^ 
hoe  V.  Jones,  1  B.  &  Ad.  126.  A 
tenant  who  has  covenanted  to  sub' 
stantiaUy  repair,  uphold  and  main- 
tain a  house,  is  bound  to  paint  the 
inside  woodwork,  &c.  Monk  v. 
Noyes,  1  C.  &  P.  265.  See  Scales 
V.  Lawrence,  2  F.  &  F.  289. 
Where  there  is  a  general  cove- 
nant by  the  lessee  to  re^ir  and 
keep  and  leave  in  repair,  it  will  be 
inferred  that  he  undertakes  to  re- 
pair buildings  which  may  be  erect- 
ed during  the  term.  Douse  v. 
Earle,  3  Lev.  264 ;  2  Ventr.  126 ; 
Channbll,  B.  ,  in  Ck)rnish  v.  Cleif e, 
34  L.  J.  Ex.  at  p.  22.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  particular  covenant  to  re- 
pair the  demised  buildings  will  be 
construed  as  referring  only  to  ex- 
isting buildings.  See  Cornish  v. 
Cleife,  3  H.  &  C.  446.  Covenants 
on  the  part  of  the  tenant  to  rejxiir 
and  keep  in  repair  the  demised 
premises  durine^  the  term,  and  to 
repair  ^^edfied  defects  vnthin  a 
certain  time  after  notice,  are  con- 
sidered separate  and  independent 
covenants,  if  they  severally  make 
a  complete  sentence,  or  are  found 
in  different  parts  of  the  same  deed ; 
Horsefall  v.  Testar,  7  Taunt.  888; 


*  Worcester  School  Trustees  v. 
Rowlands,  9  C.  &  P.  734. 

«  Belcher  v.  IVTIntosh,  8  C.  &  P. 
720.  Under  a  covenant  to  put  into 
habitable  repair,  the  tenant  must, 
if  necessary,  place  the  demised 
premiseEt  in  a  better  state  ihaA 
that  in  which  he  foimd  them. 
Belcher  v.  M'Intosh,  8  C.  &  P.  720. 
He  is  not  bound  to  make  a  new 
house,  but  regard  being  had  to  the 
state  of  the  premises  at  the  time  of 
the  agreement,  and  to  their  situa- 
tion, and  to  title  class  of  persons 
who  are  likely  to  inhabit  them,  he 
is  to  put  them  into  a  condition  fit 
for  a  tenant  to  inhabit.  Belcher 
V.  M'Intoeh,  8  C.  &  P.  720.  A 
covenant "  forthwith"  toput  prem- 
ises into  complete  repair  is  not  con- 
strued as  referring  to  any  specific 
time ;  it  is  for  a  jury  to  say,  upon 
a  reasonable  construction,  whether 
it  has  been  performed.  Doe  v. 
Sutton,  9  C.  &  P.  706.  A  cove- 
nant to  put  in  repair  can  only  be 
broken  once  for  all,  and  therefore 
if  a  breach  has  been  committed  in 
the  time  of  the  lessee,  and  dam- 
ages recovered  from  him  by  the 
lessor  in  respect  of  such  breach, 
the  assignee  of  the  lessee  will  not 
be  liable.  Coward  v.  Gregory,  L. 
R.,  2  C.  P.  153.  A  covenant  to 
keep  premises  in  good  rejKiir  binds 
the  lessee  to  put  them  into  good 
repair  with  reference  to  their  age 
and  class,  to  maintain  them  in  that 
state,  and  in  that  state  to  deliver 
them  up  at  the  end  of  the  term. 
Payne  v.  Haine,  16  M.  &  W.  541 ; 
Burdett  v.  Withers,  7  Ad.  &  El. 
136 ;  Woolcock  v.  Dew,  1  F.  &  F. 
837.  He  must  have  them  con- 
stantly in  repair,  and  if  at  any 
time  during  the  term  they  are  out 
of  repair  he  is  guilty  of  a  breach 
of  covenant,  which  is  the  proper 
subject  of  an  action  before  the  ex- 
piration of  the  lease.    Luxmore  v. 


800 


Bepaibs. 


[§368. 


but  in  habitable  repair,^  A  tenant  who  covenants  to 
repair  is  liable  for  repairs  only,  and  not  for  the  extra 
expense  of  laying  a  new  floor  on  an  improved  plan.* 
It  is  well  settled  that  a  covenant  to  repair  must  be  con- 
strued to  have  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  premises 
at  the  time  when  the  covenant  begins  to  operate.*  If 
the  house  is  an  old  one  he  is  only  bound  to  keep  it  up  as 
such,  and  is  not  bound  to  give  the  landlord  the  benefit 
of  new  work/  It  is  not  meant  that  the  old  building  is  to 
be  restored  in  a  renewed  condition  at  the  end  of  the  term, 
so  as  to  make  it  more  valuable  than  it  was  when  the 
term  commenced.  Decrease  in  value  resulting  from  th^ 
natural  operation  of  time  and  the  elements,  falls  upon 
the  landlord ;  but  the  tenant  must  take  care  that  the  prem- 
ises do  not  suffer  more  damages  than  the  operation  of 
these  causes  would  effect,  and  he  is  bound  to  make  a  sea- 
sonable application  of  labor  to  keep  the  house  as  nearly 
as  possible  in  as  good  a  condition  as  it  was  when  it  was 
leased  to  him/  He  is  liable  for  repairs  only,  and  is  not 
bound  to  put  on  a  new  roof  or  lay  down  a  new  floor.* 
In  a  case  where  the  tenant  contracted  to  keep  a  pond  of 
ornamental  water  ^^in  good  and  substantial  repair,"  it 
was  held  that  his  covenant  was  met  by  keeping  the  water 
from  bursting  its  banks,  and  maintaining  the  sluices  and 
other  necessary  appendages/  Under  a  covenant  that 
the  tenant  shall  and  will  substantially  repair,  uphold 
and  maintain  a  house,  he  is  bound  to  keep  up  the  inside 
painting/  If  the  tenant  breaks  a  doorway  though  the 
wall  of  a  house  into  an  adjoining  house  it  is  a  breach  of 
the  general  covenant  to  keep  in  repair,  and  so  is  the 
continuing  of  it  so  broken ;  *  but  the  enlargement  of  win- 


Roe  V.  Paine,  2  Camp,  520  ;  Baylis 
V.  LeGros,  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  537,  554. 
See  Doe  v.  Lewis,  5  Ad.  &  £1.  277 ; 
Few  V.  Perkins,  L.  R.,  2  Kxchq. 
92  ;  but  if  the  whole  stands  in  the 
same  sentence,  it  may  be  held  to 
be  one  entire  covenant.  Horsefall 
Y.  Testar,  ante. 

>  Cooke  V.  Cholmondely,  4  Drew. 
826. 

« Saward  v.  Leggatt ,  7  C.  &  P.  61 3. 

« Walker  v.  Hatton,  10  M.  &  W. 
268. 


*  Harris  v.  Jones,  ante. 

"Giittridge  v.  Mxmywl,  1  Mool 
&  Rob.  336. 

•Saward  v.  Leggatt,  7  C.  &  P. 
613. 

'  Bird  V.  Elwes,  L.  R.,  3  Exchq. 
225.  See  also,  Wabash,  &c. ,  CaDai 
Co.  V.  Brett,  25  Ind.  409. 

«  Monk  V.  Noyes,  1  C.  &  P.  265. 

•Vickery  v.  Jackson,  2  Stark. 
293 ;  Gange  v.   Lockwood,  2  F.  d;rU 
F.  115 ;  Borgnisv.  Edwards,  id.  111^. 


OHAP.  XXXV.]  COTENAISTTS.  801 

dows,  the  opening  of  external  doors,  or  the  taking  down 
of  partitions,  are  no  breach  of  a  covenant  to  repair  and  keep 
in  repair,  a  dwelling-house  or  other  building,  together  with 
all  such  building  improvements  and  additions  asshouLd  be 
executed,  set  up,  or  made  by  the  lessee ;  for  the  lease  evi- 
dently contemplates  such  alterations,and  allows  them  to  be 
made.'  A  covenant  by  a  lessee  that  he  will,  during  the 
term,  repair,  uphold,  support,  maintain. and  sustain  the 
walls  to  the  demised  premises  belonging,  is  broken  if  he 
pulls  down  a  wall  which  divides  the  yard  at  the  front  of 
the  house  from  another  yard  at  the  side  of  the  house.' 
A  covenant  to  repair  the  external  parts  of  the  demised 
house  comprises  the  partition  wall  between  i  t  and  an  adjoin- 
ing house. '  Ordinary  and  natural  decay  is  held  not  to  be  a 
breach  of  a  covenant  to  keep  a  house  in  repair  and  to  de- 
liver it  up  in  as  good  condition  as  at  the  commencement 
of  the  lease ;  *  but  a  tenant  who  covenants  to  repair  is 
bound  to  sustain  and  uphold  the  premises  :  *  he  is  liable 
to  do  his  best  to  keep  it  in  the  same  condition,  and  there- 
fore should  keep  it  covered  and  use  other  necessary  care.* 
If  the  tenant  has  covenanted  to  repair,  he  commits  a 
breach  by  losing  or  earring  away  gas  burners,  keys,  or 
any  fixtures  belonging  to  the  building,  such  as  shelves, 
drawers,  wall  brackets,  stalls  in  a  barn  ;  or  by  destroying 
or  injuring  the  walls  of  the  building,  even  though  for  the 
purpose  of  putting  in  a  door  for  more  convenient  access 
to  other  rooms  in  the  building. '  So,  removing  a  box-stall 
from  a  stable,"  neglecting  to  replace  a  gate  taken  away 
by  a  stranger/  or  to  replace  broken  or  worn  out  machin- 
ery in  a  mill,"  or  the  breaking  of  glass,  tearing  up  a  pave- 
ment," or,  indeed,  the  doing  of  any  act  that  diminishes 
the  value  of  the  premises,  or  neglecting  to  do  any  act 
necessary  to  keep  the  premises  in  as  good  a  condition  as 

'  Dalton  V.  Jones,  4  B.  &  Ad.  »  Ferguson  v.  ,  2  Esp.  590 ; 

126.  Fly  nn  v.  Traak,  11  Allen  (Mass.). 

« Wetherell  v.  Bird,  6  C.  &  P.  ^  Doe  v.  Jackson,  2  Starkie,  208 

195.  Morgan  v.  Morse,  27  Mich.  208. 

3  Green   v.   Eales,  2  Q.  B.  225.  «  Morgan  v.  Morse,  27  Mich.  208. 

*  Fitz  Abr.  tit.  Covenant,  f oL  4.  •  Beach  v.  Grain,  2  N.  Y.  86. 

»  Auworth  V.  Johnson,  5  C.  &  P.  >»  Coke  v.  England,  27  Md.  14. 

289 ;  Saward  v.  Leggatt,  7  C.  P.  "  Doe  y.  Jackaon,  ante. 
618. 

51 


8Q2  Bepairs.  [§368. 

when  they  were  leased,  is  a  breach  of  this  covenant. 
Where  the  tenant  of  a  farm  covenanted  ^^  well  and  sub- 
stantially" to  repair  and  ^'keep  in  good  substantial 
repair,"  and  so  ^^  well  and  substantially  repaired"  to  yield 
up  at  the  end  of  the  term :  it  was  held,  that  the  tenant 
was  bound  to  give  up  the  premises  in  as  good  a  state  of 
repair  as  when  he  took  possession^  and  that  they  must  be 
inferred  to  have  .been  then  in  a  tenantable  state.'  A  cov- 
enant to  leave  the  premises  at  the  end  of  the  term  su£S- 
ciently  maintained,  repaired,  paved  and  fenced,  is  broken 
if  the  pavement  is  out  of  repair  or  the  glass  in  the  windows 
broken."  •  On  a  covenant  as  often  as  necessary  well  and 
suflGiciently  to  repair,  uphold,  sustain,  paint,  glaze,  cleanse 
and  scour,  and  keep  and  leave  the  premises  in  such  repair, 
reasonable  wear  and  tear  excepted ;  the  tenant,  if  he  has 
repaired  within  a  reasonable  time  before  leaving,  is  bound 
only,  in  addition  to  the  repair  of  actual  dilapidations,  to 
clean  the  old  paint,  and  is  not  bound  to  repaint.'  The 
fact  the  buildings  are  intended  to  be  immediately  pulled 
down  and  rebuilt  by  an  incoming  tenant,  does  not  reUeve 
the  tenant  from  repairing,  and  the  landlord  may  recover 
more  than  nominal  damages  against  him  for  not  perform- 
ing his  covenant  to  keep  and  leave  them  in  good  repair.* 
While  a  tenant  cannot  charge  the  landlord  with  the 
expense  of  repairs  made  by  him  when  neither  party  has 
covenanted  to  repair,  yet,  as  he  is  under  no  obligation  to 
do  more  than  make  ordinary  repairs,  if  the  landlord  directs 
him  to  make  other  repairs,  or  promises  that  if  he  will 
make  improvements,  which,  as  tenant,  he  is  not  bound  to 
make,  he  may  recover  therefor.'  But  if  the  landlord, 
after  the  lease  ^is  executed,  promises  to  make  certain 
repairs,  but  fails  to  do  so,  no  action  lies  against  him  for 
his  failure,  because  his  promise  is  without  consideration.' 
A  lessee  who  covenants  to  repair  cannot  for  that  reason  be 

>  Brown  v.  Trumper,  26  Beav.  »Hintner  v.  Ege,    23  Penn  St 

11.  806 ;  Ck)mell  v.  Yauntsdalm,  4  id. 

»  Ryot  V.  Lady  St.  John,  Cro.  364  ;  Oettinger  v.  Levy,  4  £.  D.  a 

Jac.  329.  (N.  Y.)  288. 

»  Scales  V.  Lawrence,  2  F.  &  F.  'Libbey  v.  Talford,  48  Me.  816; 

289.  Gottsberger  v.  Radway,  2  Hilt,  (N. 

*  Rawlings  v.  Morgan,  18  C.  B.  Y.  C.  P.)  842 ;  PhilUpe  v.  Moiges, 

N.  S.  776.  4  Whart.  ^enn.)  226. 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


Buildings. 


803 


made  liable  to  a  third  person  for  injuries  because  of  a 
failure  to  repair.  His  liability  to  third  persons  rests  upon 
the  ground  of  negligence,  and  not  upon  his  contractual 
duty  to  the  landlord. ' 

Sec.  369.  BidldingB  ereoted  during  the  term.— A  general 
covenant  to  repair  and  leave  in  repair,  extends  to  all 
buildings  erected  during  the  term ; '  but  where,  in  a 
lease  of  land  with  buildings  on  it,  the  covenant  was  to 
repair  the  buildings  demised,  and  to  rebuild  them  if  nec- 
essary, and  to  keep  the  fences  in  repair ;  it  was  held, 
that  the  tenant  was  not  bound  .to  keep  in  repair  addi- 


>  OdeU  ▼.  Solomon,  99  N.  T.  685. 

«lE8p.  N.  P.  277;  Dowse  v.. 
Cale,  2  Yentr.  126  ;  Douse  v.  Earle, 
8  Lev.  264 ;  Bac.  Abr.  Covenant 
(F).  In  a  recent  case  in  the  Court 
of  Appeals  of  New  York,  Mc- 
Oreeor  v.  Board  of  Education  of 
N.    Y.     (107     N.    Y.     51  n     the 

Slaintiff  leased  the  defendant  a 
woUing-house  with  permission  to 
change  for  the  purposes  of  a  pub- 
lic school,  to  be  surrendered  in  the 
same  condition  as  at  the  execution 
of  the  lease,  "  reasonable  use  and 
wear  thereof  as  a  public  school, 
and  damages  bv  the  elements,  ex- 
cepted. "  she  showed  the  condition 
at  the  time  of  the  renting,  and  the 
damages  at  the  surrender.  It  was 
held  that  it  i/^as  for  the  jiuy  to 
decide  whether  they  were  caused 
by  the  reasonable  use  of  the  prem- 
ises. New  leases  wete  made  from 
time  to  time ;  the  tenancv  ex- 
tending over  seven  years.  It  was 
held  that  there  was  no  waiver  of 
the  right  of  action  for  the  breach 
of  this  covenant  by  making  the 
consecutive  leases,  and  the  question 
of  the  breach  should  relate  to  the 
final  and  actual  surrender,  and  not 
to  the  technical  surrenders  during 
the  tenancy.  Finch,  J.,  said ;  *'  It 
is  perhaps  true  that  each  new  lease 
involved  a  surrender  to  the  land- 
lord of  the  lessee's  possession, 
though  they  all  ran  to  their  ter- 
mination, and  there  was  no  sur- 
render of  the  leases  themselves 
under  the  prior  one.  Livingston 
V.  Potts,  16  Johns.  (N.  Y.)  28 ; 
Springstein  v.  Schermerhom,  12  id. 
857.  But  such  surrender,  instead 
of  being  actual,  was  implied  from 


the  presumed  intention  of  the 
parties,  and  devised  to  give  con- 
sistency to  the  new  lease.  I  think 
it  never  should  be  made  to  work 
an  injustice  to  the  contracting 
parties  in  hostility  to  their  reu 
agreement.  It  is  also  true,  that 
where  there  has  been  such  implied 
surrender,  the  tenant  loses  all 
rights  dependent  upon  the  con- 
tinued existence  and  validitv  of 
the  surrendered  lease.  Loughran 
V.  Ross,  45  N.  Y.  792.  But  that  is 
because  the  right  lost  or  extin- 
guished could  not  survive  the 
destruction  of  the  lease  and  the 
ending  of  its  term,  and  could  exist 
OTdj  while  the  lease  continued. 
Takine  the  new  lease,  and  ending 
the  old  one,  destroyed  the  right  to 
remove  buildings,  or  the  right  to 
estover,  dependent  wholly  upon 
the  ended  lease.  And  I  cannot 
discover  that  the  doctrine  ever 
went  further,  and  sufficiently  to 
include  the  present  cajse.  Certainly, 
a  surrender  of  the  lease  during  the 
term,  and  its  acceptance  by  the 
landlord,  does  not  extinguish  rights 
of  action  already  accrued.  \Ve 
have  held  that  ns  to  rent  in  arrears 
and  overdue.  Sperry  v.  Miller,  16 
N.  Y.  407.  And  where  at  the  close 
of  a  term,  there  is  surrender  of 
possession  by  a  tenant  in  such 
condition  as  to  violate  a  cove- 
nant in  the  lease,  and  an  accept- 
ance of  possession  by  the  landlord, 
the  two  things  occuring  eo  instante, 
I  am  not  ready  to  admit  that  the 
right  of  action  for  a  breach  dies  at 
the  moment  of  its  birth.  It  is  true 
that  the  landlord,  accepting  the 
possession  with  knowleage  of  the 


804 


Bepairs. 


[§369. 


tional  buildings  erected  on  other  parts  of  the  land.^  Under 
a  lease  of  a  farm,  if  the  tenant  is  bound  by  his  covenants 
to  keep  in  repair  the  buildings  that  may  be  erected  thereon 
during  the  term,  he  has  been  held  bound  to  repair  build- 
ings erected  by  him  upon  adjoining  lands,  with  the  land- 
lord's permission,  if  they  are  used  with  thefarm^  although 
upon  lands  not  embraced  in  the  lease.*  A  covenant  to 
yield  up  in  repair  all  buildings  and  improvements  erected 
during  the  term,  has  been  held  to  be  broken  by  the 
removal  of  a  veranda  erected  by  the  tenant,  the  lower 
part  of  which  was  attached  to  posts  fixed  in  the  ground ; " 
but  if  the  buildings  erected  during  the  term  be  solely  for 
the  purpose  of  trade  and  manufacture,  and  rest  merely 
upon  blocks  or  pattens,  the  covenant  to  yield  up  in  repair 
all  buildings  to  be  erected  during  the  term  does  not  extend 
to  them,*  although  it  would  be  otherwise  if  they  had 
been  let  into  the  soil :  on  this  point,  however,  many  dis- 
tinctions in  favor  of  trade  have  been  taken.  If,  however, 
a  tenant  erects  fixtures  for  the  purpose  of  his  trade  on 
the  premises,  and  afterwards  takes  a  new  lease  to  com- 
mence at  the  expiration  of  the  former  one,  and  the  latter 
lease  contains  a  general  covenant  to  repair,  the  lessee  is 
bound  to  repair  the  fixtures,  unless  it  can  he  shoivn  thai 
they  were  not  intended  to  pass  under  the  general  words  of 
the  second  lease.* 

A  covenant  by  the  lessor  to  repair,  and  by  the  lessee  to 
pay  rent,  are  independent  covenants,  and  if  the  lessee 
goes  into  possession  and  occupies  during  the  whole  term, 
he  cannot  defend  against  an  action  upon  his  covenant 
for  the  rent,  upon  the  ground  that  the  repairs  were  not 


facts  or  full  opportunity  to  know, 
and  without  protest  or  claim  of 
injury  or  of  violated  covenants, 
may  be  deemed  to  have  admitted 
performance  of  the  covenant,  and 
waived  any  right  of  action  for  its 
breach ;  but  the  mere  acceptance 
of  possession,  in  and  of  itself,  dis- 
severed from  the  surrounding  cir- 
cumstances which  characterize  and 
Sualif  V  it,  I  think  should  not  pro- 
uce  that  result.  At  least,  it  should 
not  flow  from  a  mere  technical  or 
implied  surrender,  where  there  is 
of  course  neither  opportunity  of 


knowledge  nor  occasion  for  protest, 
and  where  as  here  consecutive 
leases  operate  in  effect  as  renewals, 
and  produce  in  substantial  result 
one  unbroken  and  continuous 
term.  " 

*  Worcester  School  Trustees  v. 
Rowlands,  9  C.  &  P.  734 ;  ComialL 
V.  aeife,  8  H.  &  C.  446. 

« White  V.  Wakley,  26  Beav.  17 ; 
Cole  Ejec.  248. 

«  Penry  v.  Brown,  2  Stark.  R.  403. 

*Naylor  v.  Ck)llinge,  1  Tannt.  19. 

^  Thresher  T.  East  London  Water-  • 
works  Co.,  2  B.  &C.  608.  ' 


CHAP.  XXXV.] 


Buildings. 


805 


made/  nor  will  it  justify  him  in  abandoning  the  prem. 
ises  before  his  term  expires ;  *  but  in  many  of  the  States, 
as  the  damages  arise  out  of  the  same  contract,  he  may 
recoup  them.  A  covenant  to  keep  up  repairs  upon  a  mill  of 
other  building  does  not  bind  the  lessee  to  insure  against  nat- 


>HiU  T.  Bishop,  2  Ala.  820; 
Spieckels  v.  Sax,  1  E.  D.  Smith  (N. 
Y.  C.  P.)  253.  In  a  contract  for 
the  lease  of  land  for  a  term  of 
years,  it  was  agreed  that  the  les- 
sor should  clear  out  a  ditch  on  the 
land,  and  that  the  lessee  should 
clear  a  portion  of  the  land,  erect 
certain  fences,  pay  the  taxes,  &c. 
To  an  action  by  the  lessor  upon 
the  lease,  alleging  a  failiure  on  the 
part  of  the  lessee  to  discharge  his 
covenants,  the  defendant,  for  the 
defence,  set  up  that  the  plaintiff 
had  f tuled  for  fifteen  months  to 
clear  out  the  ditch,  as  he  agreed, 
for  which  cause  the  defendant  had 
abandoned  the  land  and  the  lease. 
Held,  that  the  answer  was  no  bar 
to  the  suit,  no  damage  being  al- 
leged to  have  resulted  from  the 
failure  of  the  plaintiff  to  perform 
his  covenant.  The  agreement  of 
the  lessor  was  not  a  condition  pre- 
cedent. Handschy  v.  Sutton,  28 
Ind.  159.  And  m  any  event  a 
covenantee  can  be  recompensed 
for  a  breach,  only  to  the  extent 
that  he  has  been  injured.  Where 
a  tenant  violates  a  covenant  to 
pays  assessments,  a  landlord,  who 
nas  not  actually  paid  the  assess- 
ment, can  recover  only  nominal 
damages.  Trinity  Church  v.  Hig- 
mns,  4  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.) 
1.  A  breach  of  the  landlord's  con- 
tract to  build  on  the  demised 
premises  is  no  defence  to  his  de- 
mand for  rent.  It  is  available  on- 
ly by  way  of  a  coimter-claim  or 
recoupment,  or  in  a  cross  action. 
Kelsey  v.  Ward,  16  Abb.  Pr.  (N. 
S.)  08.  The  statute  of  New  York, 
— ^permitting  lessees  to  surrender 
buildings  rendered  untenantable 
by  the  elements, — applies  only 
where  the  injury  or  destruction 
occurs  after  the  lessee's  entry,  and 
not  where  it  existed  at  the  time  of 
making  the  lease.  Bloomer  v. 
Merrilt,  1  Daly,  (N.  Y.  C.  P.)  485. 
A  lease  of  basement  rooms,  or 
chambers,  in  a  building  of  several 
sfeariesin  height,  without  any  stip- 


ulation, by  the  lessor  or  lessee,  for 
rebuilding,  in  case  of  fire  or  other 
casualties,  gives  the  lessee  no  in- 
terest in  the  land  upon  which  the 
building  stands.  If  the  whole 
building  is  destroyed  by  fire,  the 
lessee's  interest  m  the  demised 
rooms  is  terminated,  and  the  les- 
sor may,  after  the  destruction  of 
the  building,  enter  upon  the  soil, 
and  rebuild  upon  the  ruins  of  the 
former  edifice.  Conversely,  the 
tenant  is  entitled,  in  such  a  case, 
to  an  apportionment  of  rent. — 1. 
Where  he  takes  no  interest  in  the 
soil,  he  cannot  enjoy  the  premises 
in  any  manner  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  building,  nor  can  he 
rebuild  the  edifice.  He  cannot 
have  the  exclusive  enjoyment  of 
the  vacant  space  formerly  occu- 
pied by  the  aemised  rooms.  The 
effect  IS  analogous  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  demised  premises  by  en- 
croachments of  tne  sea;  Itolle's 
Abridgment,  286;  and  the  estab- 
lished rule  for  the  abatement  or 
apportionment  of  the  rent,  should 
be  applied  in  the  former  as  well  as 
in  the  latter  case.  2.  Elven  if  the 
lessee's  interest  was  terminated  by 
the  total  destruction  of  the  build- 
ing, it  may  be  doubted  whether 
the  lessor  could  recover  rent  so 
long  as  he  failed  to  give  to  the  de- 
mised upper  rooms  the  support 
necessary  to  them  for  special  en- 
joyment. In  a  lease  of  the  upper 
rooms  by  the  owner  of  the  entire 
building  a  covenant  should  be  em- 
ployed on  the  part  of  the  lessor,  to 
give  such  support  to  the  upper 
rooms  as  is  necessary  for  their 
special  enjovment.  Graves  v.  Ber- 
dan,  26  N.  Y.  498. 

*  Spreckels  v.  Sax,  ante ;  Ed- 
waras  v.  Gale,  52  Me.  860 ;  Arden 
V.  Pullen,  10  M.  &  W.  821 ;  Hand- 
schy  V.  Sutton,  28  Ind.  159 ;  Hess 
V.  Newcomer,  7  Md.  825.  Nor  will 
a  court  of  equity  compel  the  land- 
lord to  accept  a  surrender.  Wa- 
ters V.  Weigall,  6  T.  R.  488. 


806 


Bepaibs. 


[§  369. 


ural  wear  and  decay,  but  only  to  do  ordinary  repairs ;  *  nor 
does  a  covenant  to  repair,  except  "damages  by  the 
elements  or  acts  of  Providence,"  bind  the  lessee  to  make 
any  repairs  except  those  which  human  agency  has  contrib- 
uted to  produce.*     A  covenant  to  repair,  keep,  and  leave 


1  Harris  v.  Coulboum,  8  Harr. 
(Del.)  838.  A  lease  of  a  saw-mill 
provided  that  repairs  costing  over 
nye  dollars  should  be  made  by  the 
lessors  and  others  by  the  lessees; 
*'and  positively,  all  repairs  are  to 
be  made  by  eitner  or  both  parties, 
as  soon  as  there  is  an  appearance 
of  anything  failing,  to  avoid  a 
breakdown,  or  a  heavy  repair,  or 
delay, — ^the  head  sawyers  to  be  the 
judges  of  the  mill-gearing,  and  the 
engineers  to  be  judges  of  the  en- 
gine and  boiler.  Held,  that  the 
engineers  were  to  judge  whether 
repairs  were  needea  to  prevent  a 
breakdown,  &c.,  but,  in  case  of  an 
actual  breakdown,  the  right 
of  the  lessees  to  have  repairs 
made,  costing  over  five  dollars, 
did  not  depend  on  the  advice  of 
the  engineers.  Such .  lease  also 
provided  that  the  lessor  should  se- 
lect the  two  engineers,  and  the 
lessees  the  sawyers,  and  "to  run 
the  mill  not  to  exceed  800  cuts  of 
the  saw  per  minute,  the  engineers 
to  be  the  judges.*'  Held,  that 
this  agreement  of  the  lessees  as  to 
speed  was  independent  of  that  of 
tne  lessors  to  repair ;  and  the  les- 
sors could  not  set  up  the  mainte- 
nance of  an  excessive  speed  to  de- 
feat a  recovery  for  their  neglect  to 
repair,  without  showing  that  the 
lessees  were  ld  some  way  respon- 
sible for  such  excess.  Hinckley 
V.  Beckwith,  23  Wis.  828. 

*  Polack  V.  Pioche,  85  Cal.  416. 
There  can  be  no  breach  of  such  a 
covenant  until  the  term  is  ended. 
So  loDg  as  the  .tenant  is  in  the  oc- 
cupation he  viay  repair,  and  thus 
keep  his  covenant.  Hopkins  v. 
Bradford,  1  Pittsburgh  (Penn.) 
165  ;  Schifflin  v.  Carpenter,  15 
Wend.  (N.  Y.)  406  ;  Calhoun  v. 
Wilson,  27  Gratt.  (Va.)  63ft. 
Under  a  general  covenant  to  re- 
X>air,  on  certain  notice  being  giv- 
en, the  landlord  can  maintain  no 
action  except  for  the  injury  to  the 
reversion.  AViUiams  v.  Williams, 
L.  R.,  9  C.  P.  659  ;  Atkins  v.  Cil- 
son,  9  Met.  (Bfass.)  52.    A  lease  of 


a  elass  manufactory,  and  of  the 
tools  and  moulds  connected  there- 
with, contained  a  covenant  by  the 
tenant  to  return  the  tools  and 
moulds  to  the  landlord,  at  the  ex- 
piration of  the  term,  in  as  good 
order  as  they  were  in  at  the  time 
of  the  demise,  reasonable  wear  and 
tear  and  fire  excepted ;  and  also 
an  agreement  by  the  landlord  that 
the  tenant  should  have  the  priv- 
ilege of  expending  one  hundred 
douars  per  year  in  repairs  on  said 
property,  deducting  the  same  from 
the  rent.  Held,  that  the  terms  of 
the  lease  neither  limited  the  duties 
of  the  tenant  in  the  matter  of  re- 
pairs, nor  excused  permissive  waste 
arising  from  his  suffering  the  prem- 
ises to  decay  for  want  of  necessary 
repairs.  Moore  v.  Townshend,  83 
N.  J.  L.  284.  A  covenant  in  a 
lease  of  premises  to  deliver  up  the 
same  in  as  good  repair,  &c.,  does 
not  bind  the  tenant  to  repair  per- 
sonal chattels  connected  with  the 
§  remises,  but  not  aflixed  thereto, 
[olbrook  V.  Chamberlain,  116 
Mass.  161 ;  Allen  v.  Culver,  3 
Den.  (N.  Y.)  284.  When  the  ten- 
ant covenants  to  keep  the  premises 
in  good  repair,  or«in  repair,  he  is 
bound  to  put  them  in  repair  within 
a  reasonable  time  after  entry  ;  and 
a  right  of  ^tion  for  a  breach  ac- 
crues to  me  landlord  after  the 
lapse  of  a  reasonaUe  time.  Black 
V.  Ebner,  S4  Ind. ;  Gauge  v.  Lock- 
wood,  2  F.  &  F.  115 ;  Luxmore  v. 
Robson,  1  B.  &  Aid.  584;  Wor- 
cester v.  Rowlands,  9  C.  &  P.  734, 
and  the  same  is  true  as  to  a  cove- 
nant to  "  maintain  in  repair,^* 
Buck  V.  Pike,  27  Vt.  529,  and  the 
landlord  is  entitled  to  recover  the 
damages  to  the  reversion,  and  is 
not  limited  to  the  mere  cost  of  re- 
pairing. Buck  V.  Pike,  ante ;  Tur- 
ner V.  Lamb,  14  M.  &  W.  413; 
Smith  V.  Peat,  9  Exchq.  161 ;  Bur- 
dett  V.  Withers,  7  Ad.  &  EL  137. 
Where  a  tenant  covenants  to 
"Areep"  the  premises  **in  good 
repair,'*  he  is  Dound  to  put  them 
in  good  repair,  and  is  not  jiistidKI 


'* 


1 


CHAP.    XXXV.] 


Buildings. 


807 


the  premises  in  repair,  at  the  end  of  the  term,  does  not 
bind  the  tenant  to  keep  or  leave  them  in  any  better  repair 
than  they  were  when  he  went  into  possession ;  *  he  is 
merely  bound  to  maintain  them  as  they  are.  But  if  he 
covenants  to  put  and  keep  them  in  repair,  he  is  bound 
to  put  and  keep  them  in  a  reasonable  state  of  repair  in 
view  of  the  character  and  purposes  of  the  building.*  A 
covenant  to  "maintain  the  buildings"  binds  the  lessee 
to  keep  them  in  proper  repair  at  all  times  during  th^ 
term,  and  the  lessor  may  maintain  an  action  upon  the 
covenant  at  any  time,  either  before  or  after  the  term  has 
expired,  •  even  without  previous  notice  to  him  of  want  of 
repair.*  Where  the  lease  contains  a  covenant  to  repair, 
which  is  unqualified,  and  also  a  covenant  to  surrender 
the  premises  in  good  condition,  "damages  by  the  elements 
excepted,"  the  covenant  to  repair  is  not  qualified  by  the 
exception  in  the  covenant  to  surrender,  so  as  to  excuse 
the  tenant  from  repairing  damages  caused  by  the 
elements.'  A  covenant  to  pay  the  expenses  of  repairs  is 
not  a  covenant  to  repair.*  Where  a  lessee  covenants  to 
make  certain  improvements  upon  the  premises,,  in  the 
absence  of  any  special  stipulation  as  to  the  time  within 
which  they  shall  be  made,  he  has  the  whole  term  in  which 


in  keeping  them  in  bad  repair  siuir 
plj  because  he  found  them  in  that 
condition.  Payne  v.  Haine,  16  M. 
A  W.  541.  Whether  the  tenant 
has  repaired  within  a  reasonable 
time,  or  whether  he  has  made  such 
repairs  as  he  ought  to  have  made, 
is  a  question  for  the  jury.  Doe  r. 
Sutton,  9  C.  &  P.  706.  A  tenant 
who  covenants  to  "repair  and 
leave  in  repair"  has  the  whole 
time  to  repair  in.  Doe  v.  Davis,  1 
E.  &  E.  408,  and  if  an  action  is 
brought  during  the  tenancy  for 
the  breach  of  a  covenant  to  keep 
in  repair,  only  nominal  damages 
have  been  held  to  be  reasonable. 
Harriot  v.  Cotton,  2  C.  &  K.  553. 
Under  a  covenant  to  repair  and 
keep  in  repair,  or  to  repair  forth- 
with. Doe  V.  Sutton,  ante,  or  to  re- 
pair before  a  certain  dav,  and  by 
mevitable  accident  or  the  act  of 
'God  it  becomes  impossible  to  re- 
pair forthwith,  or  by  the  day 
Bttmed,   perfonnanoe  as  soon  as 


possible  after  is  sufficient.  Main's 
Case,  5  Coke,  21 ;  Shep.  Touch. 
173;  Compton  v.  Allen,  Styles, 
162;  Walton  v.  Waterhouse,  2 
Saund.  420,  n.  2 ;  Anonymous, 
Dyer,  33  a. 

*  West  V.  Hart,  7  J.  J.  Marsh. 
(KyO  258. 

*  Harris  v.  Coulboum,  3  Harr. 
(Del.)  338 ;  Harris  v.  Jones,  1  Moo. 
&  Rob.  17a 

»  Buck  V.  Pike,  27  Vt.  529. 
*Hayden   v.    Bradley,   6   Gray 
(Mass.)  425. 

*  Kling  V.  Dress,  5  Robt.  (N.  Y. 
Supr.  Ct.)  52  ;  Lawrence  v.  Wood, 

4  Bos.  (N.  Y.)  354  ;  Williams  v. 
Williams,  L.  R.  9  C.  P.  659 ;  Wood 
V.  Day,  7  Taunt,  646  ;  Doe  v.  Lewis, 

5  Ad.  &  El.  277 ;  Roe  v.  Paine,  2 
Camp.  520  ;  Doe  v.  Meuz,  4  B.  & 
C.  666.  But  see  Bull  v.  Wyeth,  8 
Allen  (Mass.)  275. 

*Loomis  V.  Ruelter,  9  Watts, 
(Penn.)  516. 


808 


Eepairs. 


[§•370:. 


to  make  them.'  If  the  covenant  is  merely  ''to  leave  the 
buildings  in  repair, "  no  action  lies  against  him  until  the 
term  has  ended,  even  though  he  tears  the  buildings  down, 
because  he  may  comply  with  the  covenant  at  any  time 
before  the  term  is  ended. '  When  a  tenant  has  covenanted 
to  make  certain  specified  repairs^  or  to  keep  certain  spec- 
ified portions  of  the  premises  in  repair^  and  he  fails  te 
do  so,  and  the  landlord,  for  the  preservation  of  the  prop- 
erty, or  in  compliance  with  the  orders  of  the  board  of 
health,  is  compelled  to  make  such  repairs,  the  tenant  is 
liable  to  him  for  the  cost  of  such  repairs  in  addition  to 
the  agreed  rent.* 

Sec.  370.  in  case  of  fire.— If  a  lessee  covenants  to  repair 
and  keep  the  premises  in  repair  during  the  term,  not 
excepting  damage  by  fire  or  the  elements,  he  is  bound  to 
rebuild  them  if  burnt  down  by  accident,  negligence,  or 
otherwise.*  It  is  of  no  importance  how  the  covenant  is 
worded ;  unless  it  is  qualified,  the  lessee  is  bound  to  rebuild 
in  case  the  buildings  are  destroyed  by  fire  or  other  casu- 
alty during  the  term ;  the  tenant,  if  the  burden,  of  the 
covenant  rests  upon  him,  or  the  landlord,  if  he  is  the 
covenantor,  must  rebuild.  Thus,  a  covenant  "to  repair, 
uphold  and  support, "  or  to  ''well  and  sufficiently  repair," " 
or  to  keep  in  repair  and  leave  as  found,*  or  to  "repair 
and  keep  in  repair, " '  to  keep  in  "good  repair,  natural 
wear  and  tear  excepted,"'  to  make  "all  necessary 
repairs,"*  to  deliver  up   "in  tenantable  repair,""  or  to 


^  Pulthrop  V.  Bergner,  52  Perm. 
St.  149. 

«  Shep.  Touch.  173.     • 

»  Hull  V.  Bums,  17  Abb.  N.  C. 
(N.  Y.)  817. 

■*  A  covenant  to  repair  and  keep 
in  repair  binds  the  lessee  to  rebuild 
in  case  of  the  destruction  of  the 
building  by  fire.  Hay  v.  Holt,  91 
Penn.  8t.  88  ;  Ldnn  v.  Ross,  10 
Ohio,  412 ;  Phillips  v.  Stevens,  16 
Aiass.  288 ;  Bullock  v.  Dommitt,  6 
T.  R.  650 ;  Earl  of  Chesterfield  v. 
Duke  of  Bolton,  Comyn,  267 ;  Poole 
V.  Archer,  Skin.  210  ;  Digby  v.  At- 
kinson, 4  Camp.  275  ;  Clarke  v. 
Glasgow  Insurance  Co.,  1  Macq. 
H.  L.  Cas.  668. 


*  Digby  V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp. 
275  ;  Walton  v.  Waterhouse,  2 
Saund.  420 ;  Beach  v.  Crain,  2  N. 
Y.  86. 

*  Phillips  V.  Stevens,  16  Mass. 
238 ;  Ely  v.  Elv,  8  IlL  528 ;  Pym 
V.  Blackburn,  8  Ves.  34 ;  Bigelow 
V.  Collamore,  5CuBh.(Ma88.)  231. 

^  Green  v.  Eales,  2  Q.  B.  225. 

^Mcintosh  V.  Lown,  49  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  550 :  TUden,  18  Gray  (Mass.) 
108 ;  Cowell  v.  Lumley,  89  CaL 
151  ;  Cline  v.  Black,  4  McCord,  (S. 
C.)  481. 

*Leavitt  v.  Fletcher,  10  Allen 
(Mass.)  121 ;  Myers  v.  Bums,  85  l/L 
Y. ;  Beach  v.  Crain,  ante. 

»•  Ross  V.  Overton,  8  Call.  C 


CHAP.  XXXV.]         In  Case  op  Fire. 


809 


"deliver  up  the  premises  in  as  good  a  condition  as  they 
now  are/' '  all  impose  upon  the  covenantor  the  duty  of 
rebuilding  or  restoring  premises  destroyed  or  injured  by 
the  elements  ;  but  under  a  covenant  to  deliver  up  as 
they  now  are,  it  has  been  held  that  the  covenantor  is, 
not  bound  to  rebuild  or  restore  premises  destroyed  or 
injured  by  inevitable  accident,  as  the  covenant  is  not 
strictly  a  covenant  to  repair,  but  for  re-delivery ; '  but 
this  latter  doctrine'  is  opposed  to  the  weight  of  authority. 
He  must  continue  to  pay  his  rent  in  the  same  manner  as 
if  no  fire  had  happened  ;  *  and  it  makes  no  difference  in 


* 

'  Jacoues  v.  Qoiild,  4  Cush. 
Qfas8.)884 ;  Ross  v^.  Overton^  ante ; 
Ely  V.  Ely,  ante  ;  Kramer  v.  Ck)ak, 
7  Gray,  (Mass.)  550. 

*  Horwitz  Yi  Anderson,  25  Tex. 
557  ;  Warner  v.  Uitchins,  5*  Barb. 
(N.  Y.)  666,  and  in  Mcintosh  v. 
McLawn,  49  id.  550,  it  was  held 
that  a  covenant  to  '*  repair  and 
leave  in  the  same  repair  as  at  date 
of  lease  '*  did  not  impose  upon  the 
tenant  the  duty  of  rebuilding. 

»  Belfour  v.  Weston,  1  T.  R.  810 
Baker  v.  Holtzapffell,  4  Taunt.  45 
Holtzapffell  v.  Baker,  18  Ves.  118 
Izon  v.  Gorton,  5  Bing.  N.  C.  501 
Parker  v.  Gibbins,  1  Q.  B.  4:21 
Lofft  V.  Dennis,  1  E.  &  E.  474.  As 
to  buildings  and  other  erections, 
the  tenant  is  not  excused  from 
performance  by  the  act  of  God,  as 
if  the  buHding  is  blown  down  by  a 
tempest,  sw^pt  away  by  a  flood, 
Compton  V.  Allen,  St  vies,  162 ; 
Main's  Case,  5  Coke,  20  6;  Polack 
V.  Pioche,  34  Cal.  416  ;  Canal  Co. 
V.  Pritchard,  6  T.  R.  750,  or  falls 
by  reason  of  a  sinking  of  the  soil, 
or  of  its  defective  construction. 
Arden  v.  PuUen,  10  M.  &  W.  821. 
But  he  is  not  liable  to  restore  that 
which  can  be  restored  only  by 
natural  processes,  as  trees  blown 
down,  &c.,  because  it  cannot  be 
done  by  man,  and  the  covenant 
cannot  be  treated  as  requiring  im- 
possible  things  to  be  done.  Main's 
Case,  ante.  If  the  tenant  excepts 
**  natural  wear  and  tear,"  or 
"usual  wear  and  tear,"  or  "fair 
wear  and  tear,"  he  is  liable  for  all 
want  of  repair  except  such  as  re- 
sults from  natural  and  usual 
.causes ;  and  even  though  the  in- 
jury' results  from  the  act  of  a  tres- 


passer the  tenant  must  repair  it, 
and  is  entitled  to  recover  the  dam- 
ages from  the  person  wrongfully 
causing  the  injury.  Cook  v. 
Champlain  T.  Co.,  1  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
91 ;  Polack  v.  Pioche,  85  Cal.  416. 
But  under  such  a  covenant,  wiUi 
such  exceptions,  he  is  not  bound 
to  repair  in  case  the  building  faUs 
by  reason  of  inherent  defects 
tnerein,  Arden  v.  Pullen,  10  M.  & 
W.  821,  but  he  caimot  put  an  end 
to  his  term  because  the  landlord 
neglects  to  repair  defects  arising 
fi'om  such  w^ear  and  tear.  Hess 
,  V.  Newcomer,  7  Md.  825 ;  Arden 
V.  Pullen,  ante.  But  such  excep- 
tion does,  not  relieve  liim  of  lia- 
bility to  rebuild  in  case  the  build- 
ings are  destroyed  by  iire  or  fiood, 
if  he  covenants  to  repair,  as  if  he 
covenants  to  *  *  well  and  sufficiently 
repair,  8upix)rt  and  uphold,''  Wal- 
ton V.  Waterhouse,  2  Saund.  420  ; 
Beach  v.  Cain,  2  N.  Y.  86 :  Di;^by 
V.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  275,  or  to 
"  keep  in  rei)air  and  leave  as 
found,"  Phillii>s  v.  Stevens,  16 
Mass.  238 ;  Ely  v.  Ely,  80  111.  532  ; 
Bigelow  V.  Catlamore,  5  Cush. 
(Mass.)  231  ;  Pym  v.  Blackburn,  3 
Ves.  84,  or  where  he  covenants  to 
leave  *'in  tenantable  repair,"  Ross 
V.  Overton,  3  Call.  (Va.)  309,  or  to 
*'  keep  in  good  repair."  Tilden  v. 
Tilden,  13  Gray  (Mass.)  103.  In- 
deed, where  there  is  a  general 
covenant  to  repair,  says  Mr.  Platt, 
2  Platt  on  Leases,  186,  it  is  binding 
on  the  tenant,  whatever  may  he 
the  cause  of  the  dilapidation^ 
whether  the  injury  or  destruction 
proceeds  from  the  act  of  a  stranger, 
Green  v.  Bales,  2  Q.  B,  225,  from 
*<  storms,  floods,  the  Queen's  en0-. 


810 


Repairs. 


[§  370. 


that  respect,  even  though  the  landlord  has,  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  tenant,  insured  the  premises,  and 
received  during  his  term  the  sum  insured,  without 
expending  it,  or  any  part  thereof,  in  rebuilding  or  restor- 
ing the  premises  to  their  former  condition.*  Even  where 
the  lessee's  covenant  to  repair  contains  an  express  excep- 
tion of  damage  by  fire  and  tempest,   whereby  he  is 


mies,  lightning,  or  accidental  fire.' 
Walton  V.  Waterhouse,  2  Saund. 
420;  Walton  t.  Johnson,  2  Eeb. 
685 ;  Paradine  v.  Jane,  Styles,  47  ; 
Anonymous,  Dyer,  824  a,  pi.  84 ; 
Bokannon  v.  Lewis,  87  B.  Mon. 
(Ky.)  870 ;  Ck>mpton  v.  Allen,  Sty. 
162 ;  Poole  v.  Archer>  2Show.  401 ; 
Chesterfield  v.  Bolton,  Com.  627  ; 
Bullock  V.  Dommitt,  6  T.  R.  650 ; 
Pym  V.  Blackburn,  8  Ves.  88; 
Monk  y.  Cooper,  2  Stra.  768 ;  Canal 
Co.  V.  Pritchard,  6  T.  R.  750. 
Where  there  is  no  covenant  to  re- 
pair, but  a  mere  covenant  to  de- 
liver up  in  good  repair,  and  condi- 
tion, **  natural  wear  and  tear 
excepted,"  he  is  not  bound  to 
rebuild  in  case  the  premises  are 
destroyed  by  such  casualty.  War- 
ner V.  Hitchins,  6  Barb.  jfN.  Y.) 
666  ;  Horwitz  v.  Anderson,  25  Tex. 
557.  But  if  the  covenant  is  **to 
repair  and  leave  in  as  good  repair 
as  at  the  date  of  the  lease,''  he  is 
bound  to  rebuild  in  case  the  build- 
ing is  destroyed  from  any  cause. 
Jacques  v.  Grould,  4  Cush.  (Mass.) 
384 ;  Overton  v.  Ely,  ante ;  Kra- 
mer v.  Cook,  7  Gray  (Mass.)  550, 
Contra,  see  Mcintosh  v.  Lown,  49 
Barb.  (N.  Y.)  650.  **  The  tenant's 
liability  under  this  covenant,"  says 
Mr.  Platt,  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  187, 
"is  founded  on  a  distinction  be- 
tween a  duty  created  by  the  act  of 
the  law  and  the  act  of  the  party  ; 
for,  where  the  law  creates  a  duty 
or  charge,  and  the  party  is  dis- 
abled to  perform  it,  without  any 
default  in  him,  and  hath  no  I'eme- 
dy  over,  there  the  law  will  excuse 
hun,  as  formerly  in  the  case  of 
waste,  if  a  house  were  destroyed 
by  the  tempest,  ,or  by  enemies,  the 
lessee  was  excused  ;  but  when  the 
party f  by  his  own  contraxsty  creates 
€L  duty  or  charge  upon  himself^  he 
is  hound  to  make  it  good,  %f  he 
may,,  notwithstanding  any  ar- 
dent by  inevitable  necessity,  because 
he  might  have  provided  against  it 


by  his  contract,**  Paradine  v. 
Jane,  Styles,  47.  Ek^uity  will  not 
relieve  a  tenant  from  the  hardship 
of  a  covenant  to  repair,  even 
where  performance  becomes  im- 
possible, nor  will  it  relieve  him 
from .  the  payment  of  rent,  when 
the  premises  have  been  destroyed, 
even  though  the  lessor  is  bound  to 
repair  ana  has  received  the  insur- 
ance upon  the  buildings.  Hare  v. 
Groves,  8  An.  &  W.  693 ;  Holtz- 
apffellv.  Baker,  18  Ves.  116  ;  Leeds 
V.  Cheetham,  1  Sim.  146.  It  is 
upon  this  principle  that,  if  a  tenant 
covenants  to  repair,  under  a  pen- 
alty, and  the  premises  are  de- 
stroyed by  the  elements,  or  any 
casuaitrjT  to  which  he  does  not  in 
any  wise  contribute,  ho  will  be 
excused  from  the  penalty,  but  will 
be  liable  upon  his  covenant  to  re- 
pair, because  he  has  expressly 
contracted  to  do  so.  Anonvmous, 
Dyer,  38  a,  pi.  10.  It  is  laid  down 
in  some  legal  works,  Lawrence  v. 
Twentiman,  1  Rol.  Abr.  450,  pL 
10 ;  Shep.  Touch.  174,  as  a  rule 
of  law,  that  the  presence  of  the 
plague  in  a  house  is  a  good  excuse 
for  the  non-performance  of  a  cove- 
nant to  repair  by  a  particular  day, 
but  is  liable  if  he  does  not  perform 
the  covenant  within  a  reasonable 
time  after  the  i)lague  has  disap- 
peared. But  this  doctrine  is  in- 
consistent with  the  general  doc- 
trine, and  is  by  no  means  free  from 
doubt.  2  Platt  on  Leases,  188; 
Thompson  v.  Miles,  RoIIe's  Abr. 
426 ;  T.  R.  884 ;  Shubrick  v.  Sal- 
mond,  8  Burr.  1687;  Barker  v. 
Hodgson,  8  M.  &  8.  267.  Indeed, 
it  is  held  that  the  fact  that  per- 
formance is  impossible  wiU  not 
operate  as  a  defence  to  an  action 
upon  a  bond  conditioned  to  be 
void,  upon  the  making  certain  re- 
pairs. Wood  V.  Avery,  2  Leon, 
189. 

'  Leeds  v.  Cheetham,  1  Sim.  1 
Loff t  V.  Dennis,  1  E.  ^  E. 


.] 


In  Case  of  Fibe. 


811 


exonerated  from  rebuilding,  the  landlord  is  not  bound  to 
rebuild  or  repair  in  the  event  of  loss  or  damage  by  fire 
or  tempest,  unless  there  is  in  the  lease  an  express  cove- 
nant by  him  to  that  effect/  and  a  mere  covenant  for  quiet 


»  V^eigall  V.  Waters,  6  T.  R.  488. 
In  Levey  v.  DyesS)  51  Miss.  501,  it 
'was  held  that  a  lessee  is  not  re- 
sponsible for  demised  property  ao 
ddentally  consumed  by  fire,  unless 
by  his  covenant  he  has  made  him- 
self liable.  It  was  also  held  that  a 
covenantto^^redelwer  or  restore  the 
property  in  the  same  condition  or 
plight"  does  not  bind  the  tenant  to 
rebuild  in  case  of  casual  consump- 
tion by  fire.  In  this  case  the  stip- 
ulation in  the  lease  was,  that  at 
the  expiration  of  twelve  months 
the  lessee  was  to  deliver  to  the 
lessor  a  saw-mill,  implements, 
tenements,  &c.,  *'  without  damage^ 
except  the  running,  wear  and 
tisage,"  During  the  term  of  the 
lease  the  property  was  destroyed 
by  casual  fire.  It  was  held  that 
the  lessee  was  not  responsible.  In 
Fowler  v.  Payne,  49  Miss.  82 ; 
Leavitt  v.  lletcher,  10  Allen 
(Mass.)  119,  and  Abby  v.  Billups, 
85  Miss.  680,  it  was  held  that  a 
covenant  *'to  repair*'  bound  the 
lessee  to  ** rebuild"  See  Walton 
V.  Waterhouse,  8  Saund.  422.  In 
Maggott  V.  Hemsber^er,  8  Lei^h 
(Va.)  586,  the  grist-miU,  saw-mill 
and  carding  machine,  tlxe  subject 
of  the  lease,  were  accidentally  de-, 
Btroyed  by  fire.  The  court,  com-' 
menting  on  the  covenant  of  the 
leasee, "  to  return  the  said  property 
with  aM  its  appurtenances,  said 
in  effect :  **  There  are  strong  con- 
siderations that  would  render  the 
court  averse  to  extending  the  doc- 
trine of  the  tenant*s  liability  in 
any  denree  beyond  the  decided 
cases.  To  bind  him  to  so  unequal 
a  risk,  his  covenant  ought  to  be 
special  and  express,  and  so  clear 
as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  he  in- 
tended to  take  the  risk.'*  This  was 
held  to  be  no  more  than  a  cove- 
nant "not  to  hold  over."  In 
Harris  v.  Nicholas,  5  Munf.  (Va.), 
the  covenant  was  to  return  the 
slave  well  clothed.  The  court  re- 
marked that,  by  looking  at  the 
mere  words,  the  hirer  was  bound 
at  all  events  to  return ;  but  such 
could  not  have  been  the  intention 


of  the  parses.  In  Nave  v.  Berry* 
22  Ala.  888,  the  covenant  was» 
'*  t?ie  said  house  toith  the  appurter 
nances  thereto  attaehedy  to  deliver 
upon,  iStc"  In  the  judgment,  the 
distinction  is  taken  between  a  cov- 
enant to  deliver  up,  and  to  repair. 
The  latter  binds  the  lessee  to  re- 
build in  case  of  loss  bv  fire,  whilst 
the  the  former  is  an  obli^tion  not 
to  hold  over.  That  distinction  is 
also  enforced  in  Phillips  v.  Steph- 
ens, 16  Mass.  288.  Sdcr^ll,  J., 
who  delivered  the  opinion  in  Levy 
V.  Dyess,  deducted  the  following 

? repositions  from  the  authorities  : 
.  That  the  lessee  is  not  respon- 
sible to  the  lessor  for  the  accident- 
al, casual  destruction  by  fire  of 
the  property  demised,  unless  by 
the  covenants  he  has  made  him- 
self so.  2.  In  construing  the  cov- 
enants, the  cardinal  rule  is  the 
intention  of  the  parties;  and  the 
courts  will  not  extend  or  enlarge 
the  obligations  of  the  lessee  beyond 
the  plain  meaning  and  intention 
of  the  parties.  If  there  is  not  an 
express  stipulation  to  restore  edi- 
fices and  structures  destroyed  by 
casualty,  or  some  covenant  which 
is  equivalent  thereto,  such  as  a 
covenant  to  "uphold  and  repair,*' 
or  "  to  repair,*'  then  the  loss  must 
fall  upon  the  reversioner.  ♦  '  ♦  ♦ 
8.  A  covenant  to  redeliver  or  re- 
store to  the  lessor,  in  the  same 
plight  and  condition,  usual  wear 
and  tear  excepted  (or  other  words 
of  like  import,)  does  not  bind  the 
covenantor  to  rebuild  in  case  of 
casual  destruction  by  fire,  or  im- 

r)  the  burden  of  the  loss  on  him. 
The  contemplation  of  the  par- 
ties to  such  a  covenant,  applied  to 
a  house,  saw-mill,  machinery  and 
appliances,  is,  that  the  lessee  will 
take  ordinary  reasonable  care  of 
the  property,  according  to  its  niub- 
ure,  and  that  he   will  surrender 

Cession  when  his  right  to  enjoy 
expired.  It  is  not  within  the 
intendment  and  according  to  gen- 
eral understanding,  that  such  stip- 
ulation imposes  on  the  tenant  the 
responsibility  of  insurer.    If  that 


812 


Eepaibs. 


[§  370- 


enjoyment  during  the  term  is  not  sufficient.'  Thus, 
where  a  farmhouse  was  burnt  by  accident,  it  was  held 
that  the  landlord  was  not  bound  to  rebuild.*  It  may  be 
that  neither  party  is  liable  to  rebuild  or  repair ;  but, 
nevertheless,  the  .tenant  must  continue  to  pay  his  rent 
as  though  no  fire  had  happened,  unless  the  covenant  for 
payment  of  rent  contains  an  express  exception  relieving 
him  therefrom,*  or  the  lease  contains  an  express  proviso 
for  cesser  or  suspension  of  the  rent  in  case  the  premises 
are  destroyed  or  damaged  by  fire  ^  and  even  then,  a  pro- 
portionable part  of  the  rent  will  be  recoverable  before  the 
premises  are  rebuilt  or  repaired,  unless  the  proviso  is 
clearly  to  the  contrary.*  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is 
a  covenant  by  the  tenant  to  keep  the  premises  in  repair, 
and  also  a  covenant  to  insure  them  for  a  specific  amount 
against  fire,  on  their  being  burnt  down,  the  tenant's 
liability  on  the  former  covenant  is  not  limited  to  the 
amount  to  be  insured  under  the  latter  covenant.'  A 
stipulation  to  "repair  and  deliver  up,"  binds  the  lessee 
to  rebuild  in  case  of  a  destruction  of  the  buildings  by 
fire;  but  a  naked  stipulation  to  '* deliver  up,"  simply 
imposes  an  obligation  against  holding  over.'  But  if  the 
lessee  covenants  that  the  premises  "are  to  be  kept  in 
repair,  and  maintained  in  good  repair,  and  maintained 
in  good  condition  by  the  lessee,"  and  the  printed  clauses 
in  the  lease  provide  that  he  shall  at  the  end  of  the  term 
quit  and  dehver  up  the  premises  "  in  as  good  order,  repair, 
and  condition,  reasonable  use  and  wearing  thereof,  fire 
and  other  unavoidable  casualties  excepted,  as  the  same 
now  are,  or  may  be  put  into  "  by  the  lessor,  and  that  the 
lessee  shall  keep  the  buildings  insured  against  loss  by 
fire,  in  a  specified  sum  payable  to  the  lessor,  does  not 
impose  upon  the  lessee  liability  for  the  repair  of  injuries 
which  occur  through  ordinary  wear,  or  fire,  or  other 


greater  risk  is  assumed,  it  must  be 

'      clearly  and  explicitly  set  forth  in 

the  contract. 

» Brown  v.  Quilter,  2  Amb.  619. 

« Bayne  v.  Walker,  8  Dow,  288. 

•Monk  V.   Cooper,  2  Stra.  763; 

;   2  Ld.  Raym.  1477. 


*  Bennett  v.  Ireland,  E.  B.  &  E. 
326. 

^Digby  V.    Atkinson,  4  Cami:^. 
275. 

*  Nave  V.  Barry,  22  Ala.  282. 


V.*j 


CHAP.  XXXV.]         In  Case  op  Fire. 


813 


unavoidable  casualty.'    If  there  is  no  covenant  to  repair 


>  Ball  V.  Wyeth,  8  AUen  (Mass.) 
275.  In  Miller  v.  Morris,  5  Tex. 
L.  J.  113,  it  was  held  that  a  cove- 
nant to  redeliyer  or  restore  to  the 
lessor,  in  the  same  pUght  and  con- 
dition, usual  wear  and  tear  ex- 
cepted, or  other  words  of  like  im- 
port, does  not  bind  the  covenantor 
to  rebuild  in  case  of  casual  de- 
struction by  fire,  or  impose  the 
loss  on  him.  A  distinction  was 
drawn  between  that  case  and  Rosa 
V.  Overton,  8  CaU.  (Va.)  309  ;  Phil- 
lips V.  Stevens,  16  Mass.  288 ;  Bul- 
lock V.  Dommitt,  6T. R.  650 ;  Digly 
v.  Atkinson,  4  Camp.  275,  and 
others,  in  which  there  was  an  ex- 
press covenant  to  repair.  In 
Wainscott  v.  Silvers,  18  Ind.  500, 
the  rule  is  stated,  that  the  tenant 
is  not  responsible  for  buildings  ao- 
cidentally  burned  down  during  his 
tenancy,  unless  he  haa  expressly 
covenanted  or  a^eed  to  repair. 
That  it  is  not  sufficient  to  charge 
him  that  he  agreed  or  covenanted 
to  surrender  the  premises  at  the 
end  of  his  term  in  the  same  repair 
or  condition  that  they  were  in  at 
the  time  of  the  contract.  In  War- 
ner V.  Hitchins,  6  Barb.  (N.  Y.) 
666,  the  covenant  was  to  surrender 
up  the  possession  of  the  premises, 
at  the  expiration  of  the  lease,  in 
the  same  condition  they  were  in  at 
the  date  of  the  lease,  natural  wear 
and  tear  excepted.  The  biulding 
wasdestroyed  oy  fire,  and  it  was 
h^d  that  the  covenant  did  not. 
amount  to  one  to  repair ,  and  that  the 
tenants  were  not  bound  to  rebuild. 
Mcintosh  V.  Lown,  49  Barb.  (N. 
Y.)  554;  Howeth  v.  Anderson,  25 
Tex.  557  ;  Trigg  v.  Hally,  4 
Humph.  (Tenn.)  498 ;  Graham  v. 
Swearingin,  9  Yerg.  (Tenn.)  276 ; 
Harris  v.  Nicholas,  4  Munf.  (Va.) 
488;  Townsend  v.  Hill,  18  Tex. 
426 ;  Levey  v.  Dyess,  51  Miss.  501. 
In  Halbret  v.  Forrest  City,  84  Ark. 
246,  it  was  held  that  whenever 
there  is  an  agreement  of  the  ten- 
ant to  redeliver  the  premises  in 
any  prescribed  condition  of  good 
order,  it  is  a  question  of  the  real 
iiatention  and  meaning  of  the 
parties  whether  he  meant  to  be- 
come bound  to  rebuild,  in  case  of 
their  casual  destruction  by  fire 
during  the  term.  In  arrivmg  at 
thi»  meaning,  the  circumstances 


and  probable  intention  of  the 
parties  wiU  be  considered.  In 
Warren  v.  Wagner,  75  Ala.  188, 
it  was  held  that  an  express  stipula- 
tion in  a  lease,  binding  the  lessee 
to  surrender  the  premises  **in  as 
good  order  and  condition  as  the 
same  now  are,  reasonable  use  and 
wear  and  tear  excepted,"  is  merely 
the  expression  of  an  obligation, 
which  the  law  would  imply  in  its 
absence,  and  does  not  impose  upon 
tiie  lessee  a  liability  to  repair  or  to 
restore,  in  the  event  of  a  destruc- 
tion of  the  premises,  or  a  material 
part  thereof,  during  the  term,  by 
fire,  or  other  ima voidable  accident. 
A  lessee  of  premises  destroyed  dur- 
ing the  term  by  unavoidable  acci- 
dent is  not  excused  from  the  per- 
f ormance  of  an  express  provision 
or  covenant  to  pay  rent  for  the 
term,  unless  he  has  protected  him- 
self by  an  express  stipulation  for 
the  cessation  of  rent  in  that  event, 
or  the  landlord  has  covenanted  to 
repair  or  rebiuld  ;  but  there  is  an 
exception  to  this  general  rule  that 
the  destruction  must  not  be  of  the 
entire  subject  matter  of  the  lease, 
leaving  nothing  capable  of  holding 
and  enjoyment  by  the  lessee. 
When  the  lease  is  of  lands  and 
tenements,  with  the  right  of  quar- 
rying stone  during  the  term,  a  de- 
struction of  a  lime  kiln  located  on 
the  lands  does  not  excuse  the  lessee 
from  payment  of  the  rent  for  the 
balance  of  the  term,  although  the 
use  of  the  kiln  may  have  been  the 
principal  consideration  moving  the 
lessee  to  enter  into  the  lease,  and 
from  it  he  may  have  expected  to 
have  derived  his  principal  profits. 
The  eviction  of  a  tenant  consists  in 
the  disturbance  of  his  possession, 
his  expulsion  or  amotion,  by  title 
paramount,  or  by  the  entry  and 
act  of  the  landlord  depriving  him 
of  the  enjoyment  of  the  demised 
premises,  or  a  portion  thereof,  and 
operating  partially  or  wholly,  a  bar 
to  the  right  of  the  landlord  to  de- 
mand rent  falling  due  in  the 
future.  A  mere  trespass  by  the 
landlord  upon  the  demised  prem- 
ises, not  intended  by  him  as  a  per- 
manent amotion  or  expulsion  of  , 
the  tenant,  or  to  deprive  him  of  * 
the  possession  and  enjoyment  of 
the  premises,  may  entitle  the  ten- 


814 


Bepaibs 


[§  370, 


in  the  lease  of  a  building,  where  the  land  on  which  it 
rests  is  not  also  leased  the  destruction  of  the  building 
terminates  the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  and  no 
rent  for  the  building  can  be  recovered  subsequent  to  its 
destruction. '  By  the  lease  of  apartments  in  a  building,  in 
a  town  for  purposes  of  trade,  the  lessee  takes  only  such 
interest  in  the  subjacent  land  as  is  dependent  upon  the 
enjoyment  of  the  apartments  rented  and  is  necessary 
thereto.  The  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  upon  such 
a  lease,  is  dissolved  by  the  destruction  of  the  apartments 
by  fire,  and  thenceforward  the  lessee  has  no  interest  in  or 
right  to  the  land,  of  which  an  eviction  can  be  predicated." 
Of  course  it  is  competent  for  the  parties  to  provide  that 
the  rent  shall  cease,  or  the  term  end,  in  case  the  premises 
are  rendered  untenantable  for  any  cause,'  but  in  such  a 
case,  unless  the  premises  are  rendered  wholly  untenant- 
able, the  tenant  is  not  released  from  his  liability  for  rent. 
Thus,  where  there  was  a  covenant  that,  if  the  building 
should  be  destroyed  and  burned  down,  and  the  lessor 
should  not  rebuild  within  a  reasonable  time,  the  lessees 
might  terminate  the  lease,  it  was  held  that  a  partial 
destruction  of  the  building,  that  could  be  repaired  with- 
out rebuilding,  did  not  come  within  the  meaning  of  the 
clause.* 


ant  to  damages,  but  does  not 
amount  to  an  eviction.  If  the 
landlord  by  himself,  or  by  the 
act  of  another,  which  he  author- 
ized, or  to  which  he  assents,  enters 
upon  and  takes  possession  of  a  ma- 
terial portion  of  the  demised  prem- 
ises, the  entry  and  possession  con- 
stitute, at  the  election  of  the  ten- 
ant, an  eviction  from  the  whole, 
authorizing  an  abandonment  of  the 
lease,  and  absolving  the  tenant 
from  the  payment  of  rent  falling 
due  in  the  future,  or  a  partial  evic- 
tion only,  discharging  the  rent  oro 
tantp.  Nothing,  however,  less 
than  an  entire  abandonment  or 
surrender  will  operate  a  dissolu- 
tion of  the  tenancy,  and  a  suspen- 
sion or  discharge  of  the  whole 
rent.  When  the  landlord  enters 
upon,  and  takes  possession  of  the 
demised  premises,  there  is  no  duty 
vesting  upon  the  tenant  to  demand 
of  the  landlord  restoration,  and  of 


consequence  there  can  be  no  neces- 
sity for  a  refusal  to  restore,  as  an 
element  of  eviction.  When  the 
act  of  the  husbimd  is  relied  on  as 
an  eviction  of  the  wife*s  tenant, 
his  agency  or  her  assent  to  his  act 
may  oe  proved  by  circumstantial 
evidence,  and  may  be  inferred 
from  his  employment  in  the  trans- 
action of  her  business,  her  acquies- 
cence in  his  former  acts  in  refer- 
ence to  the  leasing  of  the  premiseSy 
their  relationshii^  and  the  nature 
and  character  of  the  act  imputed 
to  him  ;  the  inference,  however,  in 
such  case,  is  one  of  fact,  to  be  drawn 
by  the  jury,  and  not  one  of  law. 

>  Ainsworth  v.  Ritt,  88  CaL  89. 

'  McMillan  v.  Solomon,  42 
856.    Compare  Austin  v.  Field 
Abb,  (N.  Y.)  Pr.  N.  S.  29  ;  Bue 
V.  Boyd,  25  Ark.  441. 

«  Kip  V.  Merwin,  62  N.  Y. 

*Vanderpool  v.  Smith,  2 
(N.  Y.  C.  P.)  135. 


•I 


54S 


,*r 


CHAP.  XXXV  J     Covenant  to  Bebuild. 


815 


Sec.  371.  Coyenant  to  rebuild.— Where  a  lessee  of  three 
huildings  covenanted  to  pull  them  down  and  rebuild 
three  others  in  their  place,  and  that  he  would  repair  the 
houses  so  agreed  to  be  built,  and  also  that  he  would 
repair  the  demised  premises^  and  leave  the  said  premises 
in  repair ;  and  he  pulled  down  the  three  and  built  four 
in  their  stead ;  it  was  held,  that  though  he  was  obUged 
to  build  only  three  houses,  yet  he  was  bound  to  deliver 
up  all  in  repair ;  the  last  covenant  being  general,  and 
not  confined,  as  the  former,  to  the  houses  agreed  to  be 
built.*  Where,  however,  in  a  lease  of  four  buildings  for 
99  years,  the  lessee  covenanted  within  two  years  to  put 
them  in  good  repair,  and  keep  them  in  repair  during  the 
term,  and  further,  within  the  first  fifty  years  of  the 
term,  to  take  down  the  buildings  ''as  occasion  may 
require,"  and  in  the  place  thereof  to  erect  four  new  brick 
messuages :  it  was  intimated  by  the  court  that,  if  with- 


>  Douse  T.  Earle,  8  Ley.  264; 
Dowse  V.  Gale,  3  Vent  126.  A 
stipulation  in  the  lease  of  an  en- 
tire *•  store  now  being  erected  by  " 
the  lessor,  that,  if  the  premiBes*be 
destroyed  or  damaged  dy  fire,  the 
rent  "  shall  be  suspended  or  abated 
until  they  shall  have  been  put  in 
proper  condition  for  use  and  hab- 
itation by  the  said  lessor," — con- 
strued to  render  a  more  expensive 
building  voluntarily  erected  by 
him  upon  the  land  after  destruc- 
tion of  such  store  by  the  Boston 
fire  of  1872,  a  part  of  the  realty 
and  inuring  to  the  benefit  of  the 
lessee  during  the  term.  Rogers  v. 
Snow,  118  Mass.  118.  A  lease  for 
five  years  required  the  lessee  to 
erect  a  store  on  the  premises,  and 
to  pay,  besides  the  rent,  all  taxes 
ana  assessments,  with  clause  of  re- 
entry on  non-payment.  It  also 
provided  that  at  the  end  of  the 
term  the  lessors  should  take  the 
•tore  at  an  appraisal,  or  give  a 
kase  for  fi\Q  years  more  at  a  rent 
to  be  fixed  by  arbitrators.  At  the 
end  of  the  term  arbitrators  were 
cliosen  by  the  parties,  who  in- 
dorsed and  signed  on  the  lease  the 
foOowing :  "This  lease  is  renewed 
by  arbitration  for  the  term  of  five 
at  the  yearly  rent  of  $125, 
on  the  same  terms  as  the 


payttb 


first  five  years,  excepting  from  the 
operation  of  this  lease  any  assess- 
ment for  stone  pavements."  Held, 
as  against  the  lessee,  who  had 
entered  on  the  second  term,  a  good 
renewal  of  the  lease  upon  the  orig- 
inal terms,  with  the  exception 
made  by  the  arbitrators,  and  also 
of  the  provision  for  a  renewal, 
which  had  now  spent  its  force. 
Brand  v.  Frumveller,  82  Mich.  215. 
A  covenant  to  pay  for  buildings 
erected  by  the  tenant  during  the 
term,  does  not  entitle  the  tenant 
to  recover  for  repairs  or  improve- 
ments made  upon  old  buildings. 
Smith  v.  Cooley,  6  Daly  (N.  Y.  C. 
P. )  401 .  Where  a  lessor  was  bound 
by  his  lease  to  furnish,  at  his  ex- 
pense, the  necessary  power,  as  fur- 
nished at  the  execution  of  the 
lease,  for  the  lessee's  machinery  in 
the  demised  premises,  and  a  blast 
was  necessary  to  his  forges,  and 
was  actually  supplied  when  the 
lease  was  made,  and  for  several 
years  previously  from  machineir 
on  the  lessor's  premises, — Held, 
that  so  essential  an  incident  would 
be  considered  as  passing  by  the 
lease,  and  not  to  nave  been  held 
by  the  lessee,  under  a  mere  license, 
revocable  at  the  will  of  the  lessor. 
1875,  Thorp  V.  Field,  26  N.  J.  Eq.  82. 


816  BePAIBS.  [§  372. 

in  the  fifty  years  the  houses  should  be  so  repaired  as  to 
make  them  completely  and  substantially  as  good  as  new 
houses,  the  "occasion"  on  which  the  new  houses  were  to 
be  built  did  not  arise.'  A  lease  was  granted  of  a  piece 
of  land  with  two  unfinished  buildings  thereon,  and  the 
lessee  covenanted  to  complete  them  within  two  months, 
and  also  to  keep  them  in  repair  during  the  term,  and 
there  was  a  proviso  for  re-entry  on  breach  of  any  of  the 
covenants ;  the  two  buildings  were  never  finished,  and 
years  after  the  expiration  of  the  two  months  they  were 
much  dilapidated.  It  was  held,  that  a  person  to  whom 
the  reversion  was  assigned  long  after  the  expiration  of 
the  two  months  might  maintain  ejectment  for  the  sub- 
sequent non-repair.*  A  general  covenant  to  repair  and 
keep  in  repair  during  the  term,  includes  a  liability  to 
rebuilt  such  erections  as  may  be  destroyed  by  fire,  tempest, 
flood,  or  other  accidents  during  the  term.' 

Sec.  872.  Covenants  to  repair  after  notioe.— The  covenant 
to  repair  generally,  and  the  covenant  to  repair  within  a 
certain  time  after  notice,  are  generally  held  to  be  distinct 
and  independent  covenants ;  *  but  if  they  immediately  fol- 
low in  such  a  manner  that  they  must  he  joined  to  make 
the  sentence  complete^  they  are  construed  as  one  entire 
cownanty  and  the  latter  part  respecting  notice  is  held  to 
qualify  the  former :  *  as,  where  there  is  a  covenant  to 
repair  at  all  times,  when,  where,  and  as  often  as  occa- 
sion shall  require,  and,  at  the  farthest,  within  three 
months  after  notice  of  want  of  reparation.'  A  covenant 
to  repair  during  the  term  after  three  months'  notice,  and 
to  leave  the  premises  in  repair  at  the  end  of  the  term 
are  distinct  clauses  ;  and  therefore  notice  is  unnecessary 
to  sustain  an  action  for  not  leaving  in  repair  at  the  end 
of  the  term.  A  covenant  to  repair  runs  with  the  land, 
and  consequently  is  bindiijg,  not  only  upon  the  li 
but  also  upon  his  assignee  or  any  person  claiming  b] 

» Evelyn  v.Raddish,  7  Taunt.  411,  537  ;  Goatley  v.  Paine,  2 

*  Bennett  v.  Herring,  3  C.  B.  N.  520  ;  Morecraft  v.  Meuz,  1  C. 

S.  370.  846. 
»Weigallv.  Waters,  6  T.  R.  650.  »Horsefallv.Testar,7T^un< 

^  Bayiis  v.  LeGros,  4  C.  B.  N.  S.  « Slater  v.  Stone,  Cro.  J{ 


CHAP.  XXXV.]    Conditional  Covenants. 


8ir 


under,  or  through  him.'  This  rule  applies  to  an  assignee 
by  way  of  mortgage,*  or  to  an  equitable  assignee.' 
** Until  lately,'*  says  Mb.  Platt,*  "a  mere  depositary  of 
a  lease  by  way  of  mortgage^  whether  he  had  entered 
into  possession  of  the  premises  or  not,  was  compellable  to 
take  an  actual  assignment,  and  so  clothe  himself  with 
the  legal  estate  and  its  attendant  liabilities ;  *  but  the 
alarming  consequences  of  this  doctrine,  especially  to  the 
commercial  community,  who  are  in  the  habit  of  taking 
deposits  of  leases  as  securities  for  loans  coupled  with 
the  circumstances  of  its  being  discountenanced  by  the 
profession,  caused  the  point  to  be  reviewed ;  and  it  is 
now  determined  that  the  lessor  has  no  equity  to  compel 
the  depositary  to  take  an  assignment  of  the  lease,  or  the 
depositary  to  assign  it.*  Nor  will  the  court  compel  an 
equitable  assignee,  at  the  suit  of  the  lessor,  to  discover 
whether  the  lease  has  been  assigned  to  him,  and  enforce 
him  to  perform  it  in  specie."  The  plaintiff  is  left  to 
recover  at  law  as  well  as  he  can." 


Seo.  378.  Conditional  or  qualified  oovenants  to  repairy&c.— 
Where  a  lessee  covenanted  that/rom  and  after  the  amend- 
ment and  repair  of  the  demised  buildings,  (fee,  by  the 
lessor,  he  would  repair  and  sustain  them  during  the 
term,  and  at  the  end  thereof  leave  them  well  and  suffi- 
ciently repaired,  and  the  lessor  sued  him  for  non-repair  of 
a  dove-house,  which  at  the  commencement  of  the  term 
was  in  good  and  sufficient  repair ;  it  was  held,  after  ver- 


1  Caugham  v.  King,  Cro.  Car. 
221 ;  Shelby  v.  Heame,  6  Yerg. 
(Tenn.)  512 ;  Spencer's  Case,  5 
Coke,  16  a  ;  Keeling  v.  Morrice,  12 
Mod.  371 ;  Dean  &c.,  of  Windsor's 
Case,  5  Coke,  24  a;  Laugher  v. 
Williams,  1  Salk.  816 ;   Allen  v. 

Sulver,  3  Den.  (N. Y.)284.  The rea- 
^n  for  this  is,  that  the  covenant 
tfecf 8  the  estate  of  the  term  and 
^  the  reversion  in  the  hands  of 
Hbm  owner,  for  the  time  being.  If 
thi  charge  is  cast  upon  the  lessor, 
tB^  rent  is  the  greater ;  if  on  the 
lesaee,  he  pays  the  less  rent ;  and 
a9i|li  assignee  has  the  benefit,  it  ia 
bat  teasonable  that  he  should  be 
sttl^iOlMl^  the  charge,  Buckley  v. 
PerkTfmUk.  316,  and  an  assignee 


of  the  reversion  may  sue  upon  the 
covenant,  if  the  premises  continue 
ruinous  in  his  time,  although  they 
became  so  before  the  assignment. 
Mascal's  Case,  1  Leon,  62 ;  2  Piatt 
on  Leases,  184. 

«  Pelkington  v.  Shaller,  1  Eq.  Ca. 
Abr.  47,  pT.  6. 

•Wilson  V.  Leonard,  8  Beav. 
378 ;  Close  v.  Wilberforce,  1  id. 
112. 

«  2  Piatt  on  Leases,  184. 

*  Lucas  V.  Commerford,  1  Yes. 
235 ;  Flight  v.  Bentley,  7  Sim.  149, 

*Jenkms  v.  Portman,  1  Keen, 
435  ;  Moores  v.  Choat,  8  Sim.  508. 

'  Goddard  v.  Keate,  1  Vem.  87. 

^Copland  v.  Lapoite,  3  Ad.  & 
El.  517. 

52 


A 


818  BepaIBS.  [§  373. 

diet  for  the  plaintiff,  that  the  defendant's  covenant  was 
conditional  only,  and  that  no  action  could  be  maintained 
against  him  for  the  alleged  breach,  the  plaintiff  not  hav- 
ing first  amended  and  repaired  the  premises  pursuant  to 
the  lease. '  So,  where  a  lessee  agrees  to  keep  the  build- 
ings and  premises  in  repair,  the  same  being  first  ptU  into 
repair  by  the  lessor,  the  latter  words  create  a  covenant  on 
the  part  of  the  lessor  to  do  all  such  repairs,'  and  also  a 
condition  precedent,  and  until  the  lessor  has  put  all  the 
demised  premises  into  repair,  the  lessee  is  not  liable  for 
the  non-repair  of  any  part.'  So,  where  the  tenant  cove- 
nants to  repair,  the  landlord  ^^  finding  timber  suflBcient*^ 
for  the  reparations ;  the  landlord  cannot  maintain  an 
action  against  the  tenant  for  a  breach  of  the  covenant, 
without  alleging  that  he  did  find  sufficient  timber.  So, 
where  a  tenant  covenanted  to  repair  and  keep  the  build- 
ings on  the  premises  in  repair,  **  being  allowed  "  a  certain 
class  of  timber ;  it  was  held,  that  in  order  to  create  an 
obligation  on  the  tenant  to  repair,  the  landlord  must 
supply,  or  at  all  events  be  ready  and  willuig  to  supply, 
such  timber.*  But  where,  in  a  lease  for  lives,  the  lessee 
covenanted  that  he  ^^  would,  from  time  to  time,  and  at 
all  times,  during  the  estate  thereby  granted,  at  his  own 
proper  costs  and  charges,  well  and  sufficiently  repair, 
amend,  maintain,  uphold  and  keep  all  and  singular  the 
demised  premises  in  all  manner  of  needful  and  necessary 
reparations  whatsoever,  having  or  taking  in  and  upon  the 
premises  competent  and  sufficient  house-bote,  hedge-bote, 
fire-bote,  plough-bote  and  gate-bote  for  the  doing  thereof, 
without  committing  any  waste  or  spoil ; "  in  an  action 
by  the  lessor  for  not  repairing,  it  was  held,  that  the 
lessee's  covenant  to  repair  was  absolute,  and  that  the 
words  "having  or  taking,  &c.,"  "without  committi] 
waste  or  spoil,"  did  not  amount  to  a  condition  precede] 
that  there  should  be  a  sufficient  supply  of  that  kind 
timber  on  the  premises,  but  only  to  a  license  to  the  tena 
to  take  it  if  there  were,  for  repairs,  even  if  made  n< 

*  Cannock  v.  Jones,  8  Exch.  233 ;  « Thomas  v.  Cadwallader^Wj 

5  id.  718.  496  ;  cited  1  E.  &  E.  487. 

» Neale  v.  Ratcliflf,  15  Q.  B.  916.         *  Martyn  v.  Clue,  18  Q. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]     TjABIUTY  OF  LANDLORD. 


819 


sary  by  his  own  default,  without  being  liable  for  waste.* 
Where  a  lessee  covenants  to  complete  the  buildings  under 
the  direction  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  some  person  to  be 
named  by  the  lessor,  the  naming  of  such  person  is  a 
condition  precedent  to  the  performance  by  the  lessee  of 
his  covenant  to  complete  the  buildings.*  A  covenant  by 
the  lessee  to  redeUver  the  premises  in  as  good  condition 
as  they  are  when  he  received  them,  '^imavoidable  acci- 
dents and  the  usual  wear  and  tear  excepted,"  does  not 
oblige  him  to  rebuild  in  case  of  its  accidental  destruction 
by  fire ;'  nor  is  a  tenant  bound  to  rebuild  in  case  the 
buildings  are  destroyed  by  the  elements,  or  any  casualty, 
unless  there  is  an  express  covenant  to  repair,  &c. ;  and  a 
mere  provision  that  the  tenant  will  return  the  premises 
with  all  the  appurtenances,  does  not  amount  to  such  a 
covenant.* 

Sec.  374.  lilability  of  landlord  on  express  covenants  to 
repair.— A  landlord  may  bind  himself  to  do  all  or  any  of 
the  repairs  during  the  term  by  an  express  covenant  or 
promise  to  that  effect  in  the  lease  or  agreement ;  but  in 
the  absence  of  any  such  stipulation  he  is  not  liable  to  do 
any  repairs  whatever.*  Whatever  he  agrees  to  do  in  this 
respect  should  be  inserted  in  the  lease  or  agreement,'  as 
the  tenant  cannot  rely  upon  any  oral  promise  made  before 
or  after  the  lease  or  agreement  is  executed."  There  is  no 
impled  duty  in  the  owner  of  a  house  which  is  in  a  ruinous 
and  unsafe  condition  to  inform  a  proposed  tenant  that  it 
is  unfit  for  habitation,  and  no  action  will  lie  against  him 
for  an  omission  to  do  so,  in  the  absence  of  an  express 


1  Dean  and  C.  of  Bristol  t.  Jones, 

1  E.  &  E.  484. 

<  Hunt  T.  Bishop,  8  Ezch.  675  ; 

[unt  V.    Benaut,  9  Exch.    685 ; 

)mbe  V.  Greene,  11  M.  &  W. 

.    But  see  Cannock  v.  Jones,  8 

[ch,  288 ;  5  id.  718. 

'Howeth  y.  Anderson,  25  Tex. 

^  Maggort  y.  Hansberger,  8  Leigh 

» Arden  y.  Pullen,  10  M.  &  W. 
821 X  CJott  y.  Gandy,  5  E.  &  B.  845 ; 
i^aak%  Dennis,  1  E.  &  E.  474. 


•  Tidey  y.  MoUet,  16  C.  B.  N.  a 
298. 

^  Seago  y.  Deane,  4  Bing.  459 ; 
Haldane  y.  Newcomb,  12  W.  R. 
185 ;  Spreckels  y.  Sax,  1  E.  D.  S. 
(N.  Y.)  258 ;  Walker  y.  GUbert,  2 
Kobt.  (N.  y.)  214;  Douppe  y. 
Gamin,  82  How.  Pr.  (N.  Y.)  5; 
Proctor  y.  Keith,  12  Ky.  262; 
Gottsberger  y.  Radway,  2  Hilt.  (N. 
Y.  C.  P.)  842 ;  libbey  y.  Tilford, 
48  Me.  816. 


820 


Bepairs. 


[§874. 


warranty  or  active  deceit.^  Even  though  the  lessor  cov- 
enants to  do  repairs,  the  lessee  cannot  charge  him  with  a 
breach  of  such  covenant,  without  notice  of  the  repairs 
that  are  necessary,  because  the  lessor  is  not  on  the  spot, 
and  may  not  know  what  repairs  are  necessary ;  but  the 
lessor  may  charge  the  lessee  without  any  such  notice.* 
The  fact  that  a  landlord  voluntarily  goes  on  and  makes 
repairs,  does  not  raise  a  presumption  that  he  contracted  to 
repair.'  A  covenant  to  repair  binds  the  tenant  if  he  holds 
over  after  his  term  has  expired.  *  The  covenants  of  a  land- 
lord to  repair,  or  make  additions  to  the  premises,  are  sub- 
ordinate to  the  tenant's  covenant  to  pay  rent,  and  do  not 
defeat  the  rent  in  toto  unless  the  tenement  is  worthless 
for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  rented,  without  such 
repairs  and  additions.  But,  if  the  tenant  goes  into  posses- 
sion before  such  covenant  on  the  landlord's  part  is  per- 
formed, he  is  entitled  to  recover  the  damages  resulting  to 
him  therefrom,  and  may  recoup  the  same  against  the 
rent ;  or  where  the  statute  is  broad  enough  for  that 
purpose,  may  set  them  off  against  the  rent  and  recover 
the  balance  if  they  exceed  the  rent.*  Where  a  building 
is  occupied  by  several  tenants  and  the  landlord  exercises 
proper  care  in  the  construction  and  repair  of  the  several 
parts,  he  cannot  in  the  absence  of  notice  or  knowledge 
of  the  defects  be  held  responsible  for  injuries  result- 
ing to  any  of  the  other  tenants  from  the  improper 
or  negligent  use  of  the  premises  by  other  tenants  or  by 
strangers.      Thus,    in   a    Michigan   case,'    the    plaint- 


^  Keates  y.  Earl  of  Cadogan,  10 
C.  B.  591. 

*  Moore  V.  Clark,  5  Taunt.  90. 

«  Moore  v.  Webber,  71  Penn.  St. 
479,  and  the  fact  that  part  of  the 
building  is  taken  under  a  statute, 
and  the  lessor  receives  the  com- 
pensation therefor,  raises  no  such 
covenant  by  implication.  Praye  v, 
Bancroft,  112  Mass.  76. 

*  O'Leary  v.  Delany,  63  Me.  584. 

*  Prescott  V.  Otterstatter,  85 
Penn.  St.  534. 

*  Kenney  v.  Bams,  (Mich.)  11 
West  Rep.  490.  Handyside  v. 
Powers,  (Mass.)  5  N.  E.  Rep.  179  ; 
where  it  was  held  that  the  landlord 
could  not  be  held  liable  for  injuries 


to  a  person,  sustained  by  falling 
down  an  elevator  well,  the  door  (3 
which  was  left  unfastened  by  a 
tenant  who  had  surreptitiously 
obtained  a  key  to  the  lock  lead- 
ing to  the  elevator,  said  DEyENs, 
J. ,  *'  Without  considering  wheth< 
the  plaintiff  was  an  intrude 
or  licensee  in  entering  on 
premises,  we  do  not  find 
there  was  evidence  in  the  case , 
neglect  on  the  part  of  defen( 
The  door  to  the  elevator  had 
provided  with  a  lock,  had 
locked,  and  the  key  deposil 
defendant's  office.  This  was' 
only  key  known  by  defenc 
his  agent  to  exist,  and  it 


CHAP.  XXXV.]    Liability  op  Landlord.  821 

iffs  leased  the  ground  floor  and  basement  of  a  build- 
ing owned  by  the  defendant,  and  occupied  it  as  a  dry 
goods  store.  The  upper  stories  were  occupied  by  various 
tenants.  On  the  second  floor  there  was  a  hall  which  was 
leased  to  a  society  know  as  the  Eoyal  Templars.  There 
was  a  watercloset  on  the  second  floor,  which  was  leased 
with  the  hall  and  was  looked  after  and  taken  care  of  by 
a  janitor  employed  by  the  Eoyal  Templars.  The  water 
closet  was  also  by  agreement,  used  by  the  employes  of  a 
furniture  firm,  which  occupied  the  third  flxx)r.  The 
defendant  employed  a  man  by  the  name  of  Livingstone 
as  her  agent  for  the  leasing  and  management  of  the  build- 
ing. 

On  the  8th  day  of  April,  1886,  by  a  stoppage  of  the 
waste-pipe,  the  closet  overflowed,  and  the  water  soaked 
or  dripped  through  the  ceiling  upon  the  goods  of  plaintiffs, 
damaging  them.  They  brought  suit  for  the  damage, 
alleging  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  defendant  to  attend 
to  the  closet  and  keep  the  same  in  good  order,  so  that  no 
damage  might  happen  to  the  goods  of  the  plaintiffs,  and 
that  the  damage  was  done  by  the  neglect  of  the  defendant 
to  perform  this  duty — **by  reason  of  the  carelessness, 
negligence,  and  lack  of  attention"  on  the  part  of  said 
defendant. 

No  fault  in  the  original  construction  of  the  closet  was 
averred  in  the  declaration.  On  the  contrary,  it  was 
alleged  that  the  **  watercloset  was  so  connected  with  the 
public  sewerage  system  of  the  city  of  Detroit,  that,  when 
it  was  in  good  order,  the  refuse  and  waste  matter  depos- 
ited therein  passed  off  through  the  said  public  sewerage 
system." 

The  question  of  the  defective  construction  of  the  closet 
was  therefore  not  involved  in  the  case. 
I  The  evidence  on  the  part  of  the  plaintiffs  showed  that 
about  six  months  after  they  took  possession  of  the  prem- 

Ux  its  place  in  defendant's  office  door,  and  leaving  it  unlocked,  had 

aMr  the  accident.    There  was  evi-  been  the  cause  of  the  injury.    But 

^1^  that  a  key  had  been  procured  the  act  of  Kmg  in  obtaining  a  key 

'  ig,  and  used,   but  without  without  knowledge  of  defendant, 

sent  or  knowledge  of  de-  and   his  subsemient  carelessness, 

orhis  agent ;  and  that  the  cannot  be  attributed  to   defend- 

of  Sing  in  unlocking  the  ant." 


1 


822  RbpaiBS.  [§874 

ises  there  was  an  overflow  from  this  same  closet,  doing 
some  damage.  They  notified  livingstoiie  of  it,  and  he 
promised  to  have  the  matter  attended  to,  and  some 
plumbing  was  done  by  his  direction.  Seven  or  eight 
mopths  after  this  first  overfiow  there  was  another. 
Livingstone  was  again  notified,  and  promised  to  remedy 
it.  This  was  in  the  winter  of  1883  and  1884.  They  made 
no  fui'ther  complaint  about  the  closet  to  Livingstone 
until  after  the  overflow  upon  which  suit  was  brought ; 
nor  did  it  appear  that  they  had  any  cause  of  complaint. 

It  appeared  from  the  whole  testimony,  without  any 
dispute,  that  the  overflow  was  caused  by  an  improper 
usage  of  the  closet  by  some  one  not  known.  The  closet, 
as'found  by  the  plumber  on  the  morning  of  the  overflow, 
was  ^'stopped,  in  what  is  call^  the  trap,  or  goose-neck, 
with  paper."  The  valve  in  the  closet  was  out  of  order, 
so  that  the  water  ran  all  the  time,  and,  the  waste-pipe 
being  stopped  up,  it  ran  out  upon  the  floor.  The  valve 
was  kept  open  by  chips  in  back  of  it.  When  these  were 
taken  out,  the  valve  closed.  The  chief  obstruction  to  the 
waste-pipe  was  newspapers  used  in  the  closet.  If  medi- 
cated or  ^'  ordinary  watercloset  paper  had  been  used,  there 
would  have  been  no  danger  of  obstructions ;  the  only 
danger  comes  from  the  abuse." 

The  janitor  of  the  Eoyal  Templars  had  a  key  to  the 
closet.  He  was  last  inside  of  it  on  the  night  of  the  Tth 
of  April.  It  was  all  right  then.  He  locked  it  when  he 
came  away.  On  the  night  of  the  8th  he  did  not  open  the 
closet.  His  key  opened  the  door  at  the  outside  into  the 
main  entrance  to  the  hall.  He  carried  the  key  with  him 
all  the  time.  The  employees  of  the  furniture  store  had 
access  to  this  closet  by  a  separate  passage  leading  from 
the  furniture  rooms.  When  the  door  was  open  into  th< 
main  hall  to  the  building,  there  was  nothing  to  prev< 
persons  from  the  street  entering  and  using  the  cl< 
The  court  below  directed  a  verdict  for  the  defendant. 

Morse,  J.,  said  ''It  is  not  shown  that  the  defeni 
in  the  lease  to  the  plaintiffs,  covenanted  to  keep 
closet  or  any  part  of  the  premises  in  repair.    Yet 


CHAP.  xxxT.]    Liability  of  Landlord.  823 

stone,  her  agent,  as  shown  by  the  testimony,  did  repair 
the  closet  whenever  he  was  notified  that  any  trouble  with 
it  existed. 

But  this  overflow  of  water  was  not  caused  by  the  closet 
or  any  of  the  pipes  therein  being  out  of  repair.  The 
whole  difficulty,  leaving  out,  as  we  must,  the  question 
whether  the  closet  was  properly  constructed,  arose  from 
the  negligence  or  wanton  act  of  someone  in  stopping  up 
the  waste-pipe  and  leaving  the  valve  open. 

Livingstone,  the  agent,  or  Mrs.  Bams,  the  principal, 
had  no  care  over  or  custody  of  this  closet,  or  any  keys  to 
the  same.  It  was  under  the  control  of  the  Boyal  Tem- 
plars, who  employed  a  man  to  take  care  of  it  and  keep  it 
in  order.  No  one  else  had  access  to  it  without  their 
permission,  excepting  the  furniture  firm  who  also  had  a 
key  to  it.  The  stoppage  occurred  in  the  night,  after  the 
store  of  plaintiffs  was  closed,  and  presumably  late  in  the 
evening. 

We  do  not  see  how  the  defendant  can  be  made  liable 
for  these  damages.  Even  if  she  were  bound  by  the  cove- 
nants of  the  lease  to  plaintiffs  to  keep  the  premises  in 
repair,  of  which  there  is  no  evidence,  there  was  nothing 
out  of  repair  of  which  defendant  had  any  notice  or  was 
bound  to  take  notice.  By  a  temporary  filling  up  of  the 
waste-pipe  the  damage  was  occasioned. 

The  defendant  did  not  have  the  care  of  this  closet ;  ihe 
duty  of  keeping  it  clean  and  in  working  order,  when  in 
repair,  rested  upon  others.  She  or  her  agent  did  not 
know  of  this  stoppage,  causing  the  leak,  and  the  circumr 
stances  preclude  any  presumption  of  such  knowledge; 
and,  under  the  facts  shown,  she  was  not  bound  to  know 
of  this  obstruction.  It  was  not  her  duty  to  employ 
someone  night  and  day  to  watch  this  closet. 
•  It  would  be  unwarranted  to  find  that  she  was  guilty  of 
^egligence." 

'•  Where  the  landlord  covenants  to  keep  the  premises  in 
repair,  he  does  not  thereby  guarantee  that  they  shall 
iie*er  in  fact  be  out  of  repair,  and  he  cannot  be  held 
lia(%ior  an  injury  resulting  from  defects  which  would 


S24:  BepaIRS.  [§  374. 

not  have  been  discovered  by  him  by  the  exercise  of 
reasonable  diligence  in  ascertaining  what  repairs  are 
necessary.  Thus,  in  a  recent  New  Jersey  *  case  it  appeared 
that  in  July,  1883,  the  defendant  let  to  the  plaintiffs  for 
a  residence,  three  rooms  on  the  third  floor  of  No.  90 
Morton  Street,  Newark,  with  the  right  to  use  for  certain 
purposes  a  balcony  extending  along  the  rear  of  the  third 
story  of  Nos.  86,  88  and  90,  Morton  Street ;  that  the  land- 
lords agreed  to  attend  to  aU  repairs ;  that  the  plaintiffs 
occupied  the  premises  from  the  letting  until  December 
22,  1884,  when,  while  they  were  using  the  balcony,  to 
hang  out  clothes  (one  of  the  authorized  purposes)  the 
rail  of  the  balcony  broke  and  they  both  fell  to  the  ground, 
sustaining  the  injuries  for  which  this  suit  was  brought ; 
that  at  the  time  of  the  accident  the  rail  had  become  some- 
what rotten  and  the  nails  holding  it  were  somewhat 
rusted,  in  consequence  of  which  the  rail  gave  way  under 
the  strain  ;  and  that  the  plaintiffs  were  not  chargeable 
with  any  contributory  negligence. 

The  trial  justice  charged  the  jury  that  if  they  found 
that  the  landlords  had  contracted  to  make  repairs  to  the 
premises,  and  that  the  railing  was  at  the  time  of  the 
accident  in  an  unsafe  and  insecure  condition  for  the  pur- 
pose for  which  it  was  used,  then  a  prima  facte  case  for 
the  plaintiffs  was  shown. 

The  jury  found  in  favor  of  the  plaintiffs ;  upon  appeal 
Dixon,  J.,  said  :  The  charge  of  the  court  was,  in  effect, 
that  the  contract  of  the  landlords  to  make  repairs, 
to  attend  to  all  repairs,  was  equivalent  to  a  guaranty 
that  the  premises  should  not  become  unsafe  or  insecure 
through  lack  of  repair.  If  ignored,  any  inquiry  as  to 
whether  the  landlords  were  or  by  due  diligence  would 
have  been  apprised  that  repair  was  needed.  In  this 
respect  we  think  the  landlords'  duty  was  misinterpreted^ 

The  contract  did  not  require  that  the  premises  shoi 
be  prevented  from  getting  out  of  repair,  but  rather  impli^ 
that  they  would  be  likely  to  become  so.    Nor  did, 
expressly  provide  when,  in  such  case,  the  landlords  sh< 

»  Frank  v.  Ck)uradi,  (N.  Y.  Sup.      Leavitt  v.  Fletcher,  10  AU< 
a)  9  CentL   Rep.    679;  See  also      119;  Green  v.  Eads,  3,^ 


• 


.i  ■ 


CHAP.  XXXV.]     Liability  of  IjANDU>bi>.  825 

* 

restore  the  premises  to  good  condition ;  hence,  to  ascer- 
tain the  time  or  times  for  making  repairs,  we  must  invoke 
the  usual  legal  implication  (applicable  to  contracts  indef- 
inite as  to  the  time  of  performance),  that  they  must  be 
performed  with  reasonable  diligence  and  promptness. 
This  legal  rule,  applied  to  the  present  contract,  imposed 
upon  the  landlords  the  duty  of  properly  inspecting  the 
premises  and  of  making  such  repairs  as  a  due  inspection 
would  show  to  be  necessary.  But  it  cannot  be  stretched 
so  as  to  include  an  obligation  to  repair  what  a  reasonable 
examination  would  Tiot  discover  to  be  in  need  of  repair. 
Such  straining  would  deprive  the  rule  of  the  very  element 
which  makes  it  applicable  to  contracts  in  general,  the 
underlying  idea  of  reasonableness.  This  principle  does 
not  at  all  trench  upon  the  established  rule  of  the  common 
law :  that  express  covenants  bind  the  covenantors  to  do 
as  they  have  agreed  if  human  power  can  accomplish  it ; 
for  the  principle  does  not  touch  the  expressed  terms  of 
the  contract,  but  supplies  only  that  which  the  parties 
have  omitted  to  provide  for,  and  which  nevertheless  is 
requisite  to  render  their  verbal  stipulations  eflfectual.  A 
new  trial  was  granted,  to  enable  the  parties  to  have  the 
finding  of  the  jury  upon  the  question  whether  the  defend- 
ant would,  by  reasonable  diligence,  have  ascertained  that 
the  railing  of  the  balcony  needed  repairs. 

The  landlord  cannot  where  he  has  been  guilty  of  no 
fault  or  negligence  in  reference  thereto,  be  held  chargeable 
for  injuries  resulting  to  one  tenant  by  the  negligence  of 
another  tenant,  although  the  landlord  supplied  the 
instrumentality  through  the  negligent  use  of  which  the 
injury  resulted.  And,  although,  from  the  negligent  use 
of  such  instrumentality  by  one  tenant,  damage  to  other 
tenants  is  not  only  a  possible,  but  a  probable  consequence. 
It  would  be  absurd  to  say  that  a  landlord  who  has  piped 
H  building  for  gas,  which  is  dangerous  if  not  properly 
used,  is  responsible  to  one  tenant  for  the  consequences  of 
i1^  careless  or  improper  use  by  another  tenant ;  or,  having 
happught  water  into  the  building  in  the  usual  way,  and 
pB^Pj^Hfid  the  usual  instrumentalities  for  its  control,  and 
wttch,  if  l»operly  used  can  be  productive  of  no  ill  results. 


) 
\ 


826 


Repairs. 


[§  375- 


is  liable  to  one  tenant,  for  the  carelessness  of  another 
tenant  in  the  use  of  such  instrumentalities.  Such  a  rule, 
would  prevent  the  use  of  modem  improvements  in  tene- 
ment houses,  and  public  buildings,  and  would  deprive 
tenants  of  luxuries  which  are  now  generally  regarded 
not  only  as  necessary,  but  also,  especially  in  cities  and 
large  towns,  as  indispensable,  comfortable  enjoyment ; 
and  the  rule  may  be  said  to  be,  that  a  landlord  cannot  be 
held  chai^eable  for  the  negligence  of  one  of  his  tenants 
in  the  use  of  the  premises  or  of  any  of  the  instrumen- 
talities with  which  it  is  provided,  unless  some  fault  or 
negligence  upon  his  pait  has  conduced  to  the  production 
of  such  injurious  consequences.* 

Sec.  375.  To  what  lessor's  covenant  extends.— The  lessor's 
covenant  to  repair  extends  only  to  the  buildings  as  they 
wer^  when  leased^  and  if  the  tenant  afterwards  erects 
additions  thereto,  the  covenant  does  not  extend  to  them.* 

>  McCarthy  t.  York  Co.  Savings 
Bank,  74  Me.  315 ;  48  Am.  Rep. 
591 ;  Ditchett  v.  R.  R.  Co.  67  N.  Y. 
427 ;  Stewart  v.  Putnam,  127  Mass. 
408 ;  Mellen  v.  MarriU,  126  Mass. 
545 ;  Murray  t.  Richards.  1  Allen 
^fass.)  414 ;  Sattonstall  v.  Banker, 
8  Gray  (Mass.)  197;  Lowell  v. 
Spaul(mig,4Cush.  (Ma8s.)277 ;  Rich 
T.  BasterSeld,  4  C.  B.  788  ;Carstairs 
V.  Taylor,  L.  R.  6  Exchq.  217. 

« In  Leoder  v.  Kemp,  2  C.  &  P. 
675,  the  landlord  covenanted  to 
repair  and  rebuild.  The  building 
was  of  two  stories  only,  but  the 
tenant  added  a  third  story.  The 
building  was  destroyed  by  fire  and 
the  landlord  rebuilt  a  two  stor^ 
building.  The  court  held  that  this 
was  all  ne  was  bound  to  do.  **  It 
appears  to  me/'  said  Best,  C.  J., 
*'  tnat  the  landlord  is  to  rebuild 
only  what  he  let ;  for  a  landlord 
would  be  in  a  desperate  situation 
if  he  were  bound  to  rebuild  every- 
thing which  a  tenant  may  think 
proper  to  set  up.  He  might  be 
ruined  in  many  cases."  A  cove- 
nant to  repair,  either  on  the  part  of 
the  lessor  or  lessee,  extonds  onlv 
to  buildings  already  constructed, 
unless  otherwise  provided  in  the 
lease.  Thus,  *'a  lessor  let  three 
tenements  and  a  lot  adjoining 
thereto,"  and    the    lessee  cove- 


nanted *'  well  and  sufficiently  to 
pair,  sustain,  and  keep  the  said 
tenements  or  dwelling-houses,  field 
or  plot  of  ground  and  premises, 
ana  every  part  thereof,  as  well  in 
houses,  buildings,  walls,  hedges, 
ditohes,  fences,  gates,  as  in  all 
other  needful  and  necessary  rep- 
arations whatsoever,  when  and 
as  often  as  occasion  shall  require 
during  the  said  term,  and  at  the  end 
or  sooner  determination  thereof 
the  said  premises,  so  well  and  suf- 
ficiently repaired,  into  tiie  hands 
and  possession  of  the  said  lessors, 
peaceably  to  leave  and  yield  up." 
It  was  held  that  the  covenant 
did  not  extend  to  houses  after- 
ward built  in  the  field.  Cornish 
V.  Chefe,  8  H.  &  C.  446.  Where 
a  lease  contains  several  distinct 
and  independent  covenants,  a  re- 
coverv  in  a  former  action  for  a 
breach  of  one  of  them  is  no  bur 
to  an  action  for  a  breach  of  an- 
other. A  lessee's  covenant  in 
lease,  "to  keep  the  buildings  am 
fences  in  good  repair,  except  m 
ural  wear  and  tear,"  binds  nim 
rebuild  in  case  of  accidental 
struction  by  fire  or  othe: 
Mcintosh  V.  Lown,  49  Barb, 
Y.)  550;  Coward  v. 
R.,  2  C.  P.  158. 


CHAP,  xzxv.]        Lbssob's  Covenast.  827 

When  the  landlord  sells  the  pcGommy  and  contracts  with 
the  purchaser  to  impair  fhem  at  the  expiration  of  the  ten- 
sncjy  he  is  bound  to  repair  whenever  and  however  the 
tenancy  is  determined,  and  cannot  protect  himself  upon 
the  ground  that  the  term  of  the  tenant  has  not  expired 
by  limitation/  When  the  lessor  covenants  to  repair,  it  is 
his  duty  to  keep  the  floors  tight  if  they  were  so  origi- 
nally constructed,  or  if  the  lessee's  business  requires  it.' 
So,  generally,  where  a  lessor  lets  a  building  for  a  partic- 
ular purpose,  and  covenants  to  repair  it,  it  is  his  duty  to 
put  it  in  such  a  state  of  repair  as  the  business  requires. 
Thus,  where  a  lessor  leased  a  hotel,  and  covenanted  to 
keep  it  ^4n  good  necessary  repair,"  it  was  held  that  this 
covenant  obliged  him  to  make  and  to  maintain  the  prem- 
ises fit  for  use  as  a  hotel,  and  among  other  things  to  pro- 
vide new  chimney  flues,  if  necessary  to  carry  off  smoke 
and  gas  from  rooms  where  it  was  proper  to  have  fires.' 
Where  the  tenant  has  the  right  under  his  lease  to  deduct 
the  expense  of  repairs  from  the  rent,  he  cannot  claim 
compensation  by  way  of  damages  because  the  premises 
were  not  kept  in  repair,  unless  he  shows  that  the  lessor 
had  notice  of  the  necessity  for  repairs ;  *  nor  where  a  ten- 
ant has  covenanted  to  repair  can  he  excuse  compliance 
with  the  covenant  because  the  expenses  will  largely 
exceed  his  expectations  when  the  lease  was  made, 
because  of  latent  defects  in  the  building,  and  a  promise 
by  the  landlord  to  allow  him  some  deductions  from  the 
rent  on  that  account  is  without  consideration  and  not 
binding  upon  him."  If  the  lease  provides  that  the  lessee 
shall  take  the  premises  'Mn  the  condition  in  which  they 
now  are  and  leave  them  in  the  same  good  order  at  the 
end  of  the  term,"  the  lessee  is  not  liable  for  repairs  made 
by  the  landlord  without  his  request.'  A  provision  in  a 
lease  that  ^^  the  lessor  shall  not  be  hable  for  any  repairs 
^n  the  premises  during  the  term,  the  buildings  now  being 
in  perfect  order, "  has  reference  only  to  the  condition  of 

<  Ooodflon  V.  Qoldsznith,  2  C.  &  ^  Waloott  y.  Snlliyan,   6  Paige 

P.  m,  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  117. 

^«M  V.  Kelsey,  88  N.  T.  80.  "  Brvne  v.  Komaine,  2  Edw.  Ch. 

*jKn  T.  Bums,  85  N.  T.  269.  (N.  Y.)  445. 


T  V-  i'  ,«Sfe  •Wicker  v.  Lewis,  40  UL  251. 


..S 


31 


82S  BbPAIBS.  [§  876. 

the  buildings  as  edifices  in  perfect  repair,  and  not  to  the 
condition  of  the  surroundings,  or  the  purity  of  the  air 
in  the  vicinity  either  then  or  at  any  future  time.'  The 
fact  that  the  lessee  covenants  to  repair  do^  not  make 
hira  responsible  for  the  expense  of  i-epairs  made  by  the 
landlord,  even  though  the  landlord  made  the  repairs 
because  the  tenant  unreasonably  neglected  to  do  so.'  A 
party  leasing  premises  to  an  Odd  Fellows  lodge,  con- 
tracting in  the  instrument  that  they  shall  be  suitable  for 
the  purposes  of  the  lessee,  cannot  if  the  premises  are  not 
suitable,  nor  rendered  so  within  a  reasonable  time,  re> 
cover  rent  therefor ;  and  as  to  what  constitutes  a  reason- 
able time  the  jury  must  decide.' 

The  lessor  who  has  covenanted  to  repair  cannot  excuse 
the  non-performance  of  his  covenant  upon  the  ground 
that  the  tenant  has  been  guilty  of  n^ligence  or  want  of 
care.  The  tenant's  negligence  in  exercising  due  care  to 
prevent  injury  to  himself  from  the  lessor's  failure  to 
repmr,  may,  however,  be  considered  in  mitigation  of  the 
damages,  but  cannot  be  set  up  to  defeat  the  action.' 
Where  a  landlord  haa  covenanted  to  keep  the  roof  of  a 
leased  building  in  repair,  in  order  to  make  him  liable  for 
damages  sustained  because  of  its  disrepair,  the  tenant 
must  show  either  that  the  landlord  knew  of  the  defect, 
or  that  he  notified  him  thereof.* 

Sec.  376.  l,andlord'B  right  to  enter  to  iepair.~A  landlord 
has  no  right  to  enter  to  make  n 
has  covenanted  to  do  so,  unless  I 
the  lease  to  that  efifect,  or  the  U 
permit  him  to  do  so.'    But  asset 

'  Foster  t.  Peyser,  9  Cnah.  (Mass.)  term. 

343.  udice 

'Wicker  t.    Lewis,  40   HI.  251,  from 

'  Young  V.   CoUett,   Mich.   Sup.  occur 

Ct.,  Oct.  28,  1886.  But  i 

*FljTmv.Traak,H  Allen  (Mam.)  Sapei 

560.     In  Watson  v.  HootoD,  4  El.  ft  brei 

App.  294  ;  it  was  held  that  a  lessee  torep 

la  entitled  to  damages  to  improve-  as  in 

ments  and  repairs  upon  a  nouse,  P^^ 

arisingfrom  a  breach  of  the  lessor's  '  Tl 


rent  for  the  grater  put  of  the      557  j 


CHAP.  XXXV.]    Landlord  and  Tenant. 


829 


the  acquiescence  of  the  tenant ;  and  in  any  event,  no 
very  heavy  damages  would  be  imposed  upon  him  for  the 
trespass,  if  he  made  the  repairs  with  proper  care' and 
reasonable  despatch.'  If  the  tenant  refuses  to  permit 
the  landlord  to  enter  to  make  repairs,  he  cannot  main- 
tain an  action  for  a  breach  of  the  covenant  as  to  such 
repairs. 

Sec.  377.  What  tenant  most  do  to  oharge landlord.— Where 
the  landlord  has  contracted  to  repair  the  premises,  or 
keep  them  in  repair,  the  tenant  is  bound  to  give  him 
notice  to  make  them,'  and  if  he  neglects  to  give  such 
notice,  but  goes  on  and  makes  the  repairs,  they  are 
treated  as  gratuitous,  and  the  landlord  is  not  liable  there- 
for,* but  if,  after  giving  such  notice,  the  landlord 
neglects  unreasonably  to  make  the  repairs,  and  they  are 
necessary,  the  tenant  may  make  them,  and  deduct  the 
expense  thereof  from  the  rent  ;*  or  he  may  bring  an 

Bowland,  9  C.  A;  P.  278  ;  Neale  v. 
Wylie,  3  B.  &  C.  533.  The  right 
of  the  landlord,  during  the  ten- 
ancy, to  enter  and  make  such  per- 
manent repairs  as  are  essentifu  to 
prevent  waste  and  indispensable 
to  the  due  protection  of  his  rever- 
sionary interest,  extends  to  the 
putting  a  new  roof  upon  a  buUd- 
m^  leased,  to  prevent  it  ^oing  to 
nun.  But  where  a  house  is  in  the 
occupation  of  tenants  or  subten- 
ants, the  landlord  is  bound,  in  the 
exercise  of  this  right,  to  see  that 
all  reasonable  care  and  skill  is 
exercised  in  the  removal  of  the 
old  and  in  the  putting  on  of  the 
new  roof,  to  prevent  injury  by  the 
elements  to  those  who  are  in  the 
occupaticm  of  the  house.  Sulz- 
bacher  v.  Dickie,  51  How.  (N.  Y.) 
Pr.  500.  S.  P.  1874,  Glickauf  v. 
Maurer,  75  111.  289.  A  lease  pro- 
viding that  the  landlord  may,  at 
teasonable  hours  in  the  da^ime, 
cater  the  premises,  ta  examine  or 
to  make  such  repairs  and  altera- 
tions therein  as  shall  be  necessary 
liJP^ie  preservation  thereof,  or  of 
"Iding,  gives  a  clear  right 
Ofity  (in  case  the  excava- 
the  adjoining  property 
or  destruction  to 
[emises  leased), 
I.  and  shore-up 


and  strengthen  the  same,  by  run- 
ning large  pieces  of  timber  known 
as  "needles"  through  the  base- 
ment, to  support  the  floor  of  the 
store  occupied  by  the  tenants. 
And  the  landlord  is  not  liable  in 
damages  to  the  tenant  for  an  in- 
terruption of  his  business  during 
such  a  period  as  is  reasonably  re- 
quired to  do  the  work,*  White  v. 
Mealio,  87  N.  Y.  Superior  Ct.  72. 

«  Colley  V.  Steeton,  2  B.  &  C.  273. 

'  Favrot  v.  Mettler,  21  La.  An. 
220.  But  if  a  definite  time  within 
which  they  are  to  be  made  is 
agreed  upon,  no  such  notice  is 
necessary  after  the  time  has  passed. 
Gerzbek  v.  Lord,  83  N.  J.  L.  240 ; 
Makin  v.  Wilkinson,  L.  R.  6 
Exchq.  25 ;  Wolcott  v.  Sullivan,  0 
Paige  Ch.  (N.  Y.)  117 ;  Coope  v. 
England,  27  Md.  14;  Walker  v. 
Gilbert,  2  Robt.  (N.  Y.  Superior 
Ct.)  214.  If  the  landlord  has  cove- 
nanted to  repair,  he  is  entitled  to 
notice  that  the  premises  are  out  of 
repair,  before  he  can  be  made  lia- 
ble upon  his  covenant.  Thomas 
V.  Kingsland,  12  Daly  (N.  Y.  C.  P.) 
315 

« FatVot  V.  Mettler,  21  La.  An.  220. 

*  Westermeir  v.  Street,  21  La. 
An.  714 ;  Diggs  v.  Maury,  23  id. 
59  ;  Hexter  v.  Knox,  63  N.  Y.  561 ; 
Buck  V.  Rodgers,  39  Md.  322. 


\ 


830.  Bepahs.  [§  877. 

action  therefor,  but  the  declaration  should  aver  that  the 
landlord  had  notice  of  the  defects  and  of  the  plaintiflTs 
making  the  repairs  and  of  the  expense  thereof,  as  want 
of  repair  is  a  matter  about  which  the  landlord  is  not 
presumed  to  know  unless  the  defects  existed  at  the  time 
when  the  premises  were  rented."    Unless  the  landlord 
has  contracted  to  repair  he  is  under  no  obligation  to  do 
so,  even  though  the  premises  are  in  a  defective  condition 
when  leased,  as  there  is  no  implied  contract  that  the  prem- 
ises are  or  shall  be  tenantable ; '  and  if  a  tenant  goes  on  and 
makes  necessary  repairs  even,  he  cannot  recover  the 
expense  thereof  of  the  landlord,*  and  this  is  so  where  the 
tenant  has  stipulated  to  make  repairs  to  a  certain  amount, 
but  makes  them  in  excess  of  such  amount.    The  landlord 
is  not  liable  to  him  for  the  excess  above  what  he  contracted 
to  make.'    The  the  tenant  may,   as  previously  stated, 
where  the  landlord  has  covenanted  to  repair,  and  after 
notice  to  do  so  has  faUed  to  repair  within  a  reasonable 
time,  go  on  and  make  the  repairs  and  change  the  land- 
lord with  the  expense  thereof ;  but  he  is  not  bound  to  do 
so,  but  may  proceed  against  the  landlord  upon  his  cove- 
nent,  and  recover  as  dam^es  the  value  of  the  use  of  any 
portion  of  the  premises  for  the  purposes  for  which  he 
rented  them,  rendered  untenantable  because  of  the  land- 
lord's failure  to  make  repairs.*    If  the  landlord  covenants 
to  repair,  he  is  bound  to  keep  as  well  as  put  the  premises 
in  repair,  even  though  the  tenant  has  entered.'  or  even 
though  they  result  from  the  negl 
and  it  also  binds  him  to  rebuild  in 
destroyed  by  fire  or  other  casualty 
build  "  does  not  impose  upon  him 
ing  if  the  buildings  are  Bubsequ< 
must  make  suitable  repairs,  and  a 
is  to  be  ascertained  from  the  chai 
the  uses  to  which  it  is  to  be  devt 


'  Norfleetv.  CromweU,  W  N.  C.  1. 

'He 

'  Hester   t.   Knox,  ante.      Nor 

« Wi 

an  be  recover  for  permanent  re- 

-Flj 

aire.     Kline  v.  Jacobs,  68  Penn. 

S50. 

t.57. 

•L« 

■Bidaiev.  Keed.a-JInd.  fi-?9. 

(Mass. 

'  Benjamin  T.  Heeney,  51  IlL  432. 

•Co 

CHAP.  XXXV.]     Neglect  op  Landlobd. 


881 


position  in  trade,  or  socially.*  As  to  what  amounts  to 
disrepair,  it  may  be  said  that  any  defect  that  is  pro- 
ductive  of  injury,  or  discomfort,  or  that  detracts  from 
the  comfortable  enjoyment  of  the  premises  for  the 
purposes  for  which  they  were  hired,  comes  under 
this  head :  as  defective  flues,  broken  *  windows,  loose 
sashes,  broken  locks,  swollen  doors,  leaky  roofs, 
outer  doors  shrunk  so  as  to  let  in  wind  or 
water,  ricketty  floors,  stairs,  and  every  species  of 
defect  that  renders  the  use  of  the  premises  less  com- 
modious or  comfortable  than  they  would  be  if  in  such  a 
condition  as  it  is  reasonable  to  presume  the  parties 
intended  that  they  should  be.'  If  the  tenant's  business 
is  interrupted  while  the  landlord  is  repairing  with  reason- 
able despatch  he  can  recover  no  damages  therefor ;  ^  nor 
is  the  rent  suspended  during  the  period  that  the  landlord 
is  rebuilding  in  place  of  buildings  that  have  been  destroyed 
by  fire.*  If  the  landlord  fails  to  repair,  the  tenant  is  not 
absolved  from  rent,  but  must  take  his  remedy  upon  the 
covenant,'  or  he  may  recoup  his  damages  against  the 
rent.' 


Seo.  878.  Neglect  of  landlord,  under  obligation  to  repair, 
wiU  not  relieve  tenant  from,  liability  for  rent .  —Nothing  short 
of  an  actual  eviction  from  the  premises  by  the  landlord,  or 
through  his  agency,  or  by  title  paramount^  or  a  surrender 
of  the  premises  by  the  tenant,  and  their  acceptance  by  the 
landlord,  will,  at  the  common  law,  relieve  the  tenant 
from  his  liability  for  the  rent  for  the  full  term.'  There- 
fore it  follows  that  even  though  the  landlord  covenants  to 
repair  the  premises,  and  to  keep  them  in  repair,  his  failure 

>  Cohen  v.  Habenicht,  14  Rich. 

f.  C.)  Eq.  421. 
« Myers  v.  Bums,  85  N.  Y.  269. 


ihen  V.  Habenicht,  14  Rich. 

Eq.  421 ;   Black  v.  Ebner, 

544 ;  Flynn  y.  Trask,  ante. 

V.  McCarty,  4  E.  D.  S. 

P.)  249.    And  an  entry 

not  an  eviction,  even 

it  did  not  require 

made.    Peterson 

•r.  (Del.)  878. 

ante. 


•  Sutton  V.  Temple,  12  M.  &  W. 
62 ;  Surplice  v.  famsworth,  7.  M. 
&  G.  576. 

*  Black  V.  Ebner,  ante ;  Hol- 
brook  V.  Young,  108  Mass.  88. 

«  Harrison  v.  Lord  North,  1  Ch. 
Cas.  84 ;  Paradine  v.  Jones,  AUeyn, 
27.  Pabke,  B.,  in  Hart  v.  Wind- 
sor, 12  M.  &  W.  78.  As  to  what 
constitutes  an  eviction,  see  Chap- 
ter on  **  Eviction,"  pout. 


BXPAIBS. 


[§  878. 


'  This  doctrine  has  lon^  been 
mointaiiied,  and  in  Brooke^a  Abr. 
'*  Dette,"  fol.  220,  pi.  J8,  is  an  ac- 
count of  an  action  for  rent,  In 
which  the  tenant  plead  that  by  the 
custom    of  London    the    landlord 


habitation  ;  and  that,  before  the 
rent  accrued,  the  bouse,  b;  reason 

that  the  clefendant  could  notabide 
in  it,  and  that  the  defendant  there- 
upon requested  the  landlord  to 
amend  the  house,  and  he  would 
not,  whereupon  the  defendant  quit 
the  house.  The  court  held  that 
the  plea  was  bad.  and  constituted 
no  defence  to  the  action  for  the 
rent.  In  Mont  t.  Cooper,  Strange, 
70S,  the  leasee  covenanted  t«  re- 
pair the  premises,  casualties  hy 
Are  excepted.  The  premises  were 
destroTed  by  fire  during  the  term, 
and  the  landlord  refused  to  re- 
build. The  court  held  that  the  de- 
fendant was  nevertheless  liable 
for  the  rent  for  the  whole  term, 
and  could  not  offset  his  damages, 
bj  reason  of  the  failure  of  the 
landlord  to  rebuUd,  against  tlie 
rent,  and  the  case  previously  cited 
from  Alleyn,  27,  was  relief  upon 
by  the  court.  The  doctrine  of 
both  these  cases  was  approved  by 
Lord  JIansfikuj,  in  Shubrick  t, 
Salmon,  3  Burr.  1640.  See  Whit- 
beck  y.  Skinner.  7  Hill  (N.  Y.)  £~ 


principle 
Its  effect 


to  do  BO  affords  no  bar  to  an  action  for  the  rent. '  Formerly 
the  tenant  was  obliged  to  i-esort  to  his  action  for  a  breach 
of  the  covenant,*  and  such  is  still  the  rule  if  the  tenant 
claims  damages  in  excess  of  the  rent ;  but  if  he  is  satisfied 
merely  to  offset  the  one  against  the  other,  or  if  his  dama- 
ges are  less  than  the  rent,  he  may  now,  in  most  of  the 
States,  recoup  his  damages  against  the  rent ;  *  or  in  those 

inmte  consequence,  the  landJord'a 

right  thereto  continues,   althoug-h 

Uie  structures  may  be  destroyed, 

or  become  unfit  for  the  purposes 

for  which  they  were  leased  ;  or, 

indeed,    for    any    purpose.      The 

— '"  ""ple  is  apparently    harsh  in 

lect  upcm   the  tenant,  but 

theless  it  is  no  more  harsh 

its  operation  upon  him  than  a 

a  rule  would  be  upon  the 
Both  parties  are  pre- 
sumed to  know  that  buildings  are 
exposed  to  destruction  by  the  ele- 
ments. That  accidental  fires  may 
bum,  or  tempests,  floods  and  in- 
undations de^roy  them,  or  render 
them  valueless,  and  if  the  tenant 
does  not  dedre  to  take  the  risk 
incident  to  these  casualtiee,  it  is 
his  duty  to  provide  against  Bucb 
contingencies  in  the  lease,  and  fail- 
ing to  do  so,  his  liabihty  is  unques- 
tionable unless  the  statute  reheves 
bim  therefrom,  as  is  the  case  in 
Now  York  lAWB  of  1860,  Chap. 
8W.  page  592.  In  New  York,  prior 
to  the  adoption  of  this  statute,  the 
Wil- 


(N.  Y.) 
858  ;  Gates  v.  (Ireen,  4  Paige  Ch, 

(N.   Y.)  855 ;  Hallett  v.   Wrlie.  3 


In  the  New  York  cases  cited, 
it  was  held  tluit  while  the  failure 
of  the  landlord  to  repair  as  he  had 
covenanted  to  do  does  not  release 
the  tenant  from  the  payment  of 
the  rent,  yet  he  may  recoup  his 
damai^es  in  an  action  by  tlieland- 
iord  to  recdvertherent.  The  prin- 
ciple deducible  from  all  the  cases 
is,  that  the  rent  issues  out  of  the 
land  without  reference  to  the  sirac- 
(ures  upon  it ;  and  that,  as  a  legit- 


CHAP.  XXXV.]      Premises  Tenantable. 


833 


States  where  the  statute  is  hroad  enough  to  admit  of  it, 
may  enforce  his  damages  by  way  of  set-oflf,  and  in  the 
latter  case  may  recover  any  balance  that  he  ought  to  have 
by  way  of  damages  in  excess  of  the  rent/ 

Seo.  379.  No  implied  oovenanti^hat  premises  are,  or  shall 
remain,  flt  for  use  for  purposes  for  which  they  were  leased.— 

There  is  no  implied  contract  on  the  part  of  a  landlord  that 

the  leased  premises  are  tenantable/  or  that  they  shall 


which  he  was  entitled  to  recoup  |n 
a  suit  for  rent,  were  the  amount 
it  would  cost  to  put  the  bams  in 
repair,  and  not  the  detriment 
wJcdch  he  suffered  by  their  remain- 
ing out  of  repair  during  the  term. 
Dorwin  v.  Potter,  6  Den.  (N.  Y.) 
306.  In  an  action  of  covenant  by 
a  lessor  against  two  lessees,  for 
rent  due  upon  a  lease  containing  a 
covenant  on  the  part  of  the  lessor 
that  he  will  put  we  demisedprem- 
isee  in  repair,  the  plaintiff  will 
not  be  nonsuited  for  a  failure  to 
prove  that  the  premises  were  put 
m  repair,  before  xKDssession  was 
taken  under  the  lease,  nor  because 
it  appears  that  one  of  the  defend- 
ants never  went  into  possession 
with  the  other  lessee,  the  taking 
of  possession  by  one  of  the  lessees 
being  in  law  a  possession  by  both, 
and  a  waiver  of  the  condition 
precedent,  of  putting  the  premises 
in  repair,  and  the  fact  that  the 
premises  were  out  of  repair  being 
a  matter  of  defence,  to  oe  proved 
by  the  defendants.  Harger  v.  Ed- 
monds, 4  Barb.  (N.  Y.)  256.  Dam- 
ages occasioned  to  a  tenant  by 
great,  unnecessary,  and  tortious 
neghgence,  and  delay  of  the  land- 
l<9rd*s  servants  in  making  repairs 
upon  the  premises  during  the  term, 
9Zid  by  the  unworkmanlike  man- 
X9f  01  doing  the  work,  cannot  be 
ojlao^as  matter  of  recoupment  in 
W  Awon  by  the  landlord  for  the 
V.  Dresser,  2  Sandf . 
_J0. 
»y  im  idel  V.  Fink,  8  Bl.  App. 
.held  that  a  tenant  of  a 
Lot  hold  his  land- 
for  damages  by 
upon  him 
mce  of  an 
prem- 
uld 


paid  a  subtenant  because  of  dam- 
ages thus  caused,  there  being  no 
evidence  that  he  was  obhged  to 
pav  them.  A  lessor  whose  lease 
did  not  stipulate  that  he  should 
keep  the  premises  in  repair,  and 
who  removed  a  fence  at  a  point 
where  was  a  perpendicular  descent 
to  the  sidewalk,  was  held,  not  to 
be  liable  for  a  failure  to  rebuild 
the  fence  and,  a  priori,  not  for 
injuries  to  a  child,  five  years  old, 
of  a  subtenant,  from  falling  to  the 
sidewalk.  And  it  was  immaterial 
that  the  child's  father  had  former- 
ly been  a  tenant  of  the  lessor, 
reterson  v.  Smart,  70  Mo.  84. 

« Witty  V.  Matthews,  52  N.  Y. 
512;  Cowell  v.  Lumley,  39  Cal. 
151 :  2  Am.  Rep.  430 ;  Franklin 
V.  Brown,  53  N.  Y.  Superior  Ct. 
474;  Jaffe  v.  Hartean,  56  N.  Y. 
398;  Edwards  v.  N.  Y.  Central 
&  H.  R.  R.  R.  Co.,  98  N.  Y.  246 ; 
aeves  V.  Willoughby,  7  HiU  (N. 
Y.)  83 ;  Chadwick  v.  Woodward, 
13  Abb.  (N.  Y.)  12  Cal.  441 ;  Caul- 
son  V.  Whiting,  14  id.  60  ;  Sutphin 
V.  Seeboss,  14  id.  68 ;  Westlake  v. 
Degraw,  26  Wend.  (N.  Y.)  659; 
Mumford  v.  Brown,  6  Cow.  (N. 
Y.)  475;  Carson  v.  Godley,  26 
Penn.  St.  111.  In  Fisher  v.  Light- 
hall,  4  Mackay  (D.  C.)  82,  this  was 
^pUed  to  furnished  houses. 
Wnere  premises  are  let  for  a 
boarding  house,  there  is  no  im- 
plied warranty  that  they  are  or 
will  remain  fit  for  that  purpose, 
Samuel  v.  Scott,  18  Phila.  (Penn.) 
64.  Nor  in  the  lease  of  a  factory, 
is  there  an  imphed  warranty  as  to 
the  condition  or  capacity  of  the 
motive  power  or  machinery, 
Naumberg  v.  Young,  44  N.  J.  L. 
831;  Hart  V.  Windsor,  12  M.  &  W. 
68 ;  Sutton  v.  Temple,  12  id.  62. 
These  two  cases  overrule  the  doc- 
trine of  Collins  V.  Barrow,  1  M.  & 

63 


[§879. 

remain  tenantable  daring  the  term,  even  thongh  he 
stipulates  to  put  the  premises  in  repair  before  the  tenant 
enters,  but  does  not  contract  to  keep  them  in  repair. '  He 
is  not  bound  to  repair  unless  he  has  expressly  agreed  to 
do  so  in  the  lease,  or  the  contract  of  hiring;*  and  a 
promise  to  repair  made  after  the  lease  is  entered  into,  is 
a  mere  nudum  pactum,  and  no  liability  exists  for  a  failure 
on  his  part  to  make  such  repairs.*  Nor  is  there  any 
implied  covenant  on  his  part  that  the  premises  are  fit  for . 
the  purposes  for  which  they  were  let ; '  and  the  same  rule 


E.  113;  Bftlisbuty  v.  MamhaU,  4 
C.  &  P.  6S ;  Edwards  v.  Ethering- 
ton,  Kf.  &  H.  266,  and  eeaeuti&U; 

Siaiify  and  limit,  Smith  v,  Mara- 
e,  10  M.  &  W.  6,  if  they  do  not 
in  fact  OTerrule  its  doctrine  entire- 
ly. The  landlord  cannot  be 
treated  as  having  impliedly  covo' 
nanted  to  repair,  or  that  the  build- 
ing is  or  ehali  continue  to  be  fit 
for  the  purpoaee  for  which  it  was 
let.  RoDbins  v.  Uount,  4  SobL 
(N.  Y.  Supt,  Ct.)  668.  A  recital 
m  a  lease  that  the  leased  premises 
are  to  be  used  a«  a  "  boarding- 
houae,"  even  if  it  imphes  a  cove- 
nant that  the  premises  are  suitable 
for  occupation  as  a  boarding- 
bouae,  cannot  be  bo  extended  by 
implicatioa  as  to  apply  to  any  par- 
ticular description  of  boardma;- 
houses  not  expressly  designated  m 
the  lease.  Roosevelt  v.  Abbott,  3 
Bobt  (N.  T.  8.  C)  156.  Where  a 
mill,  -with  water  sufficient  to  run 
the  same,  is  leased,  the  lessor  is 
not  bound  either  to  keep  the  mill 
in  repair,  nor  to  keep  water 
enough  to  drive  the  machinery. 
But  Be  is  bound  to  let  the  tenant 
have  the  benefit  of  such  water  as 
will  go  to  the  mill,  and  if  he  wrong- 
fully diverts  or  wrtliliolds  it,  he  is 
liable  therefor.  In  other  words, 
he  is  not  liable  for  nonfeasance, 
but  is  liable  for  misfeasance. 
Horse  v.  Maddock,  IT  Me.  069. 
There  is  no  implied  contract  on 
the  part  of  a  lessor  that  there  is 
any  means  of  getting  access  to 
premises,  and,  unless  the  lessor  is 
guilty  of  fraud  in  inducing  the 
leeeee  to  believe  that  there  is  a 
road  or  other  feasible  means  of 
communication  with  the  premises. 
the  lease  is  not  invalidated  because 
there    is    none,     Handrahan    v. 


O'Began,  46  Iowa,  398.  The  rule 
is,  that  a  tenant  must  ascertain  at 
his  peril  whether  or  not  the  land 
is  accessible,  and  the  landlord  is 
not  guilty  of  fraud  if  he  fails  to 
appraise  the  tenant  that  there  is 
no  mode  of  communicating  wiHi 
tite  premises.  Handrahan  t. 
O'Began,  45  Iowa,  296. 

'Banks  v.  White,  t  Sneed 
(Tenn.)  618.  There  is  no  impbed 
covenant  that  the  building  will 
endure  during  the  entire  time. 
Arden  t.  PuUen,  10  H.  &  W.  831 ; 
Keates  v.  Earl  of  Cadogan.  10  C. 
B.  561 ;  Gott  v.  Candy.  3  E.  &  B, 
84S ;  Minor  y.  Shanou,  113  Haaa. 
4T7  ;  Button  v,  Qerrish,  9  Cush. 
(Mass.)  80 ;  Eoyce  v,  Guggenheiiu, 
106  Mass.  201 ;  Welles  v.  Castle,  3 
Gray  (Mass.)  828;  Foster  v.  Pey- 
ser, 9  Cush.  (Mass.)  343.  And 
this  is  held  to  be  the  rule  whether 
the  house  is  let  furnished  or  tm- 
fumished.  Fisher  t.  Lighthall,  4 
Mackav  (D.  C.)  82:   64  Am.  Ren. 


CHAP.  XSCXV.]       PrEMIBES  TEKA19TABLE. 


885 


applies  in  this  respect  whether  the  lease  relates  to  lands 
merely,  or  buildings. '  Nor  is  there  any  implied  condition 
that  buUdings  or  land  will  remain  fit  for  the  purposes  for 
which  they  were  leased ;  and  in  the  case  of  a  house  or 
other  building,  "  if  it  is  blown  down  or  destroyed  by  fire,' 


turned  out  that  the  pasture  was 
covered  with  some  poisonous  sub- 
stance that  poisoned  the  cattle,  and 
several  of  them  died.  The  defend- 
ant thereupon  took  his  cattle  away 
and  refused  to  occupy  the  pasture 
or  pay  the  rent.  It  appeared  that 
paint  had  been  strewed  over  the 
premises,  which  produced  the  ill 
results,  and  that  the  plaintiff  had 
no  knowled^  of  the  fact  at  the 
time  of  lettmg.  The  court  held 
that  the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to 
recover.  Lobd  Abinger,  C.  B.,  in 
the  course  of  an  able  opinion,  says : 
"  I  take  the  general  rule  of  law  to 
be,  that  if  a  person  contracts  for 
the  use  and  occupation  of  land  for 
a  specified  time,  and  at  a  specified 
rent,  he  is  bound  by  that  bargain, 
even  though  he  took  it  for  a  par- 
ticular purpose,  and  that  purpose 
be  not  attained.  Suppose,  for 
instance,  he  took  it  with  the  object 
of  making  a  handsome  income  out 
of  it,  as  a  farm ;  if  his  object  fail 
altogether,  is  it  to  be  said  that  he 
is  not  liable  for  anv  rent?  •  •  The 
general  rule  must  therefore  be,  that 
where  a  man  undertakes  to  pay  a 
specific  rent  for  a  piece  of  land  he 
is  Miged  to  pay  thai  rent  whether 
it  answer  thepurposefor  whu^  fie 
took  it  or  not.  Suppose  the  defend- 
ant had  put  into  tne  field  no  cattle 
MtM;  he  must  have  paid  his  rent, 
although,  in  one  sense,  he  had  no 
"^  teficial  occupation.  The  right 
the  landlord  to  the  rent  does 
depend  uiKin  that."  In  a  case 
]ea  by  the  same  court,  at  the 
time,  the  same  rule  was 
to  a  dwelling.  In  that 
) defendant,  to  a  declaration 
>n  a  lease  for  rent,  set 
(eace,  that  the  house  was 
him  for  a  dwelling- 
>  of  inhabiting 
before,  cmd  at 
^ent,  as  weU 
same,  it 
id  that 
it 


W* 


ha  ccnM 

lyy  reason  of  its' 


bugs,  and  that  in  consequence  of 
the  untenantable  condition  of  the 
house  he  quit  the  possession  of  the 
same  before  an^r  rent  became  due. 
The  defendant  insisted  that  in  a 
lease  of  a  dwelling  there  is  an 
implied  contract  that  it  is  fit  for 
habitation;  but  the  court  held 
otherwise,  Parke,  B.,  saying: 
'*  We  are  all  of  opinion  that  there 
b  no  contract,  still  less  a  condition, 
implied  by  law  on  the  demise  of 
real  property  only,  that  it  is  fit  for 
the  purpose  for  which  it  was  let. 
The  principles  of  the  common  law 
do  not  warrant  such  a  position ; 
and  though,  in  the  case  oi  a  dwel- 
ling-house, taken  for  habitation, 
there  is  no  apparent  injustice  in 
inferring  a  contract  of  this  nature, 
the  same  rule  must  apply  to  land 
taken  for  other  purposes— for  build- 
ing upon,  or  for  cultivation ;  and 
there  would  be  no  limit  to  the  con- 
sequences that  would  ensue. "  And 
the  same  principle  is  applied  in 
cases  of  a  verbal  lease  from  month 
to  month.  See  opinion  of  Smith, 
J.,  in  Laughin  v.  Kief,  Buffalo 
Superior  Ct.  Dec.  T.  1876,  briefiy 
reported,  vol.  15,  page  255,  Albany 
Law  Journal. 

»  Sutton  V.  Temple,  12  M.  &  W. 
62;  Hart  v.  Windsor,  12  id.  66. 
See  previous  note  for  a  full  resum6 
of  these  cases. 

*Monk  V.  Cooper,  2  Stra.  763; 
Balfour  v.  Weston,  1  T.  R.  810; 
Ainsley  v.  Butter,  cited  1 T.  R.  312 ; 
Linn  v.  Ross,  10  Ohio,  412 ;  Buss- 
man  y.  Ganster,  72  Penn.  St.  285 ; 
Willard  v.  Tillman,  19  Wend.  (N. 
Y.)  858 ;  Gates  v.  Green,  4  Puge 
Ch,  CS.  Y.)855;  Hallett  v.  WyHe, 
8  John.  (N.  Y.)  44 ;  Patterson  v. 
Ackerman,  1  Edw.  Ch,  (N.  Y.)  96 ; 
Cowell  V.  Lumley,  85  Cal.  151 ;  2 
Am.  Rep.  480;  Izon  v.  Gorton,  6 
Bing.  N.  C.  501 ;  Brown  v.  Quilter, 
Amb.  619;  Baker  v.  Haltpzaffell, 
4  Taimt.  45;  Sheets  v.  Selden,  7 
WaU.  (U.  S.)  423 ;  White  v.  Mal^n- 
eaux,  2  Ga.  126 ;  Beach  v.  Famsh, 
4  Cal.  849.    And  the  rent  may  be 


886  BepaISS.  [§  379. 

or  gained  upon  by  the  sea,'  or  tiie  occupation  is  ren- 
dered impracticable  by  the  king's  enemies  or  the  casualties 
of  war,"  is  swept  away  by  a  freshet,'"  the  estate  of  the 
lessee  continues,  and  he  is  liable  for  the  rent  thereof  for 
the  full  term.*  And  the  same  rule  prevails  when  build- 
ings become  untenantable  by  reason  of  inherent  defects 
therein,*  unless  the  landlord  has  been  guilty  of  fraud  or 

recorered  in  an  action  for  nse  and  *  Paradine  v.  Jaae,  AU^n,  36 ; 

occupation,  because  the  tenant  is  Coj  v.  Downie,  14  Fla.  644  ;  Bob- 

bcAted  as  being  in  the  occupancy  inson  v.  L'Engle,  13  id.  463. 

of  the  prenuBfiB  BO  long  as  his  inter-         *  Carter-  "^ ' —  ' 


eet  therein  pontinue    .  .     .  _.    ___.      ._, „__,  _. 

int«reet  is  not  determined  hj  the     482. 

destruction  of  the  buildings  b;  fire,         '  Baker  t.  Ealtpzoffell,  4  Taunt. 
this  mode  of  declaring  against  him      " 
is  proper.    Izon  v.  Gorton,  ant«. 
'  Upon  this  point,  Tindai,,  C.  J. ,  in  . 

Ui8  case  last  cited,  said  :  "  The  This  doctrine  is  well  illustrated  by 
Statute  no.  3,  c.  19,  enables  land-  a  case  recently  decided  by  the 
lords 'to  recover  a  reasonable  sat-  Special  Term  in  the  Fiist  Departs 
isf action  for  lands,  &c.,  held  or  ment  of  New  York.  The  Hartford 
occupied  by  the  defendant  in  an  &  N,  Y,  8,  B.  Co.  v.  The  H^or, 
action  on  tne  case  for  the  use  and  &c.,  of  New  York,  13  Hun  (N.  Y. 
occupation  of  what  was,  &c.,  held  S.  C.)  550.  In  tliAt  case  thf>  city 
or  enjoyed,'  from  which  it  seems  of  New  York  leased  a  wharf  to  the 
to  follow,  that  if  there  ia  an  actual     plaintiffs  for   the   period   of  t«n 

holding,  and  the  power  to  oceapr-     ' "--  '-^     '  "-    '"" 

and  enjoy  ia  given  by  the  landlon 
to  the  tenant,  so  far  as  depends  on 
the  landlord,  the  action  is  main- 
taiuable."  Robinson  t.  L'Gngte, 
13  Fla.  463. 

'  Tavener'a  Case,  Dyer,  SO  a. 
Where,  however,  the  land  is 
swept  away  or  gained  upon  by 
the  sea,  aa  to  that  so  swept 
away  or  gained  upon  by  the  sea 
the  rent  ceases,  because  as  to  that 
portion  of  the  estate  the  tenant 
ceases  to  have  any  interest,  and 
the  estate  of  the  latuUiyrd  therein 
also  ceases,  becaiise  it  becomes  a 
part  of  the  puMie  domain  by  the 
act  of  Ood.  7  Bacon's  Abr.  68  ! 
Bolle's  Abr.  S3B.  But  the  mere 
fact  that  the  land  is  permanently 
covered  with  freeh  water  does  ni^ 
excuse  the  tenant  from  rent,  be- 
cause the  estate  remains.  Boll's 
Abr.  230.  But  this  would  depend 
upon  the  question  whether  it  there- 
by became  a  part  of  a  fresh  water 
navigable  stream,  and  whether  the 
land,  by  the  law  of  the  State,  is 
treated  as  thereby  becoming  the 
property  of  tlie  State  or  as  still  be- 
ing the  property  of  the  landlord. 


CHAP.  XKXv.]    Premises  Tenahtable.  837 

improper  concealment,  or  there  has  heen  some  default  in 
respect  of  a  positive  duty  to  the  tenant  on  the  part  of  the 
landlord. 


nor  did  the  fact  that  the  defend-  The  plaintiff  having  stipulated  b 

ant  was  bound,  as  to  the  public,  repair  was  not  boimd  to  rebuild, 

to  keep  the  whajf  in  repair,  and  in  but  if  it  elected  to  do  bo  it  could 

a  safe  condition,  change  the  rela-  not  charge  the  defendant  'with  the 

tive  Itabilitiee  of  the  parties  under  expense,  because  it  wa&  a  toIuu- 

the    lease,   and   that  no  recoverj^  tary  act  on   its  part,   and,  as  no 

could  be  had  for  the  expense  of  the  duty  under  the  contract  existed  on 

repairs.      The    court    might   have  the  part  of  the  defendant  to  it  to 

gcme  further  and  held  tnat  there  rebuild,  or  could  be  implied  from 

could  be  no  recovery  in  any  event  their  relation,   it  was  remediless, 

for  the  expense  of  rebuildmg  the  See  also  Lovkrow  v.  Horgau,  68  N. 

wharf,  because  it  was  not  done  Y.  635 ;  Witty  v.  Matthews,  6S  id. 

wader  such  ciicumstaacea  tbat  any  S12, 


„_.!, 


PHHiWI 


mipi 


